Mr. Robert Rich His Second LETTERS FROM BARBADOS; Writ upon the occasion of
The QUAKERS Prevarication In the matter of the 30 l. sent to them in common
with their Brethren the other six Churches so termed by him.

With a PREFACE Extorted from R. B. Phil. to the said People.

Open rebuke is better then secret love. Prove. Rebuke a wise man, and he will
love thee. LONDON: Printed for the Author, in the Year MDCLXIX.

To my beloved friends separate from their brethren by the name of Quakers, R.
E. Ph. wishes better information, more humility, e love, together with a
renewed renovation of themselves in the will of God.
THese ensuing Letters of Mr. Robert Rich, though they have been long in my
hands, yet they have at length come forth to public view, more through your
default, then my either endeavor or desire. I have waited long, and hoped
much, that at length you would have come to a consideration of your miscarriage
in this matter, and made some acknowledgement to God, Mr. Rich, and indeed to
me, whom you know unanimous with him in this last, and only saving
dispensation of divine love and grace exhibited by and through him
irrespectively to all. But you above all, have not only rejected it, but
blasphemed, and spoken evil of it and him: showing your selves herein, contrary
unto all men, as the Apostle somewhere speaks of the perverse and obstinate
Jews, who rejected Jesus the common Savior of all men that believe in him.
Your s^ff rings indeed in the outward have been great, and you have hitherto,
as it were in your own belief, born away the Bell, and triumphed greatly over
all others: but the hour of your judgment is also now come, even as you have
feared (to my knowledge) it would also come upon you For what meant else your
unchristian and violent withstanding and rejecting that appearance of God in J.
N. J P. and many others, and now last of all in Mr. Rich, who have dug and
opened a well among you* you have in your pride res^sed to drink of, viz
another and a (...) dispensation: the dread of which has been long upon you;
and that for this only cause, because it is open to others, you the w^^^t of
m^n, in equality to your selves. What is this, but that of the (...)
indignation, that t^^k it ill at his fathers hands, that a prodigal (...) had
wasted all he had upon harlots, found upon his return better favor then he
did, that never offended him? This was the stumbling block of old, that the
worst of sinners, as Mary Magdalene, Zacheus, and Matthew the Publican, became
disciples of Jesus, when they that judged themselves the light of the world,
and the only men to be saved (as the Pharisees) stumbled and fell. I had
thought to have given you herein the history of your whole and best attainment,
where you begun, when you fell, and what will in God undoubtedly be the exit of
you, to wit, the same that has betide others, that boasted as much as you: for
you have but (as you think) run in a straight line, but still in the same path,
whose glory was, and yours is, the abhorrencie of certain outward forms and
ceremonies introduced of old by wiser men then your selves, to wit, the Elders
or Teachers of the people, for a manuduction to the holy understanding of the
heavenly things themselves, wherein and whereby Christianity was upheld in
great unity and glory for many hundreds of years, till there was a strife about
them, (among which contenders I am exceedingly afflicted that you are also as
out of due time found) all tending nothing or very little to amendment; yea,
the matter was and is made worse thereby: for from thence came wars and
horrible murders, persecutions, and devastations, and that on either hand.
Wherefore God from on high has, as heretofore, so at this present, out of
infinite grace and mercy re-visited the earth with his love, ( i.e. himself)
inviting all (by his sent-Ministers) to beat their swords into plowshares, and
their spears into pruning-books; that at length the earth may be redeemed from
under the curse, and bring forth no more such briers and thorns, but fruit to
the glory of God, and the salvation of men universal, which is manifest in the
love which is of God, and is God.

Extorted from your true friend and observer, R.B. Phil

Mr. John Raynes,
I Have lately received from you two Letters, dated the 3 of February, and 23
March, with Receipts under the hands of those who received from you the 2^0 l.
and that have undertook to distribute the same to the Poor amongst them. Also,
I take notice of the care and pains taken by your self, and the rest of my
friends, Mr. Blackbury, Mr. Bacon, and Mr. Rallinson, whom you write have much
assisted you in this Service of Love; to whom I return my most hearty thanks,
and hope to find such an opportunity, as I may make you some better
acknowledgement then by words only. In truth I intended you not altogether so
much trouble as I see you have put your selves (and others) unto, in asking and
taking Receipts from them. I only desired to know the names of those to whom
you gave the money, that so I might have the fairer opportunity to send them
what in writing I have already prepared. Yet when I consider what has since
happened between me and the people called Quakers, I am glad, for the Truths
sake, that you sent me their Receipt.

In yours of the 23 of March, I understand that the large Letter I writ to you
is put into Print, and do believe what you writ concerning the same, how that
you had no hand in printing of it, and that it was printed without your
consent, assent, or knowledge. And you, (...) sure, can bear me witness, that I
did never in the least intimate any such thing to you, (as the Lord knows I
never did to any one else) nor was it ever the intent of my heart, that such a
foolish private Letter should have come abroad to the public view of Ishmael,
that envious, scoffing, mocking generation, whose work it is to pervert and
misconstrue all that others say and do, though never so innocent. And (...)
foresaw what is come to pass, how that a publication thereof would expose me
(both by Professors and Profane) to much reproach and scorn: yet I have been by
none so shamefully vilified and abused, as by the people called Quakers, who
publicly accused me for putting that my Letter in print, and said I had
thereby blown a trumpet. To the truth of which I appeal to all men, that if I
have intimated the printing thereof to any one (my desire is) that such a one
would publish me to be a base deceitful l^ing person, and that the truth is not
found in me; or if the Quakers have herein falsely accused me, that the innocent
may henceforth go free, and the guilty bear their own shame. And as to their
accusation of calling Giles Calvert's wife Whore in that Letter; I suppose
every understanding Reader, free from prejudice, (and the Letter the same
printed which I writ; for as yet I have not seen the printed one) will soon see
that I intended her no evil in what I writ concerning her husband, whom I
compared to Rahab the harlot, for that likewise he did readily, with much
hazard and danger, receive, hide, and publish the spiers out of Truth and new
Light. And I farther declare to all, how that I never saw nor knew worse or
more evil by Mris Calvert, then by a child that is newly born into the world.
To the truth of which, I say (with St. Paul) Behold, before God I lie not:
which oath, asseveration, or protestation, I hope will persuade all rational
men and women, that I intended her no evil in what I writ, but rather love and
kindness to him and his, whom though dead and absent in body, yet I remember
(the spirit and principle that so acted him) with much respect and loving
kindness.

And seeing that Letter I writ to you in private is made public, I have thus
much to signify to the Quakers, as I have to all others that wonder at and
despise the same, That it is to them a call out of Egypt, inviting them and
entreating them to forsake the Garlic and Onions thereof, even all those dark
paths of enmity, falsehood, and persecution; that they would forbear any longer
to give the Innocent of their wormwood and gall to drink: rather, let them
study peace and quietness, and learn to love their enemies, yea if possible
turn (that which some account) evil into good, or at the least reward evil with
that which is good, and not pervert the words and actions of others (which are
honestly and innocently intended) to an evil and wrong sense. And I dare assure
them, that to follow this way and spirit of harmless love and kindness will
sooner bring them into the land of Canaan, viz. into peace and rest with that
of God in all his creation, then their high talk of infallibility and
self-perfect on shall do, or their saying (with the Pharisees of old) that God
is their father, whilst they are doing the devils work, and sound smiting,
tearing and devouring the innocent, their fellow servants. Assuredly, these
their high notions and lofty imaginations will no longer serve to hide them
from the wrath of the Lamb, who is now arising to take vengeance of all that
have had a hand in slaying him; for a separation is making between the pretions
and the vile, between him that serves God in newness of heart, in the upright
spirit of love in well doing, and those that serve and please themselves, a
Sect, a Party, or an Opinion only. And were not persecutors blind in heart,
and hardened, they would soon discern, how that love that thinks none ill,
gives no evil wrathful names, (especially to those they knew no evil by) as
Ranters, Whoremongers, Devils, etc. And that this is not the spirit of the
Lamb, but the Dragon that casts out his floods of enmity after the man-child
(the son of love) who surely must and will take the kingdom, and get the
victory over enmity, the worst and greatest enemy of mankind.

I also give you to understand, that lately I have received a Letter from Mr.
Rallinson, and one from Mr. Bacon, wherein I perceive there is somewhat of
disagreement concerning the dispose of the thirty pounds to the seventh Church
of the firstborn. For my own particular, I call God for a witness upon my
soul, that I intended nothing in my heart which might make the least division
amongst the people of God therein; it being a work which in truth tended in it
self to the gathering and uniting of all the seed of Jacob (dispersed and
scattered amongst the various constitutions of all outward Forms) into the new
Jerusalem, viz. the free grace and love of God, which appears to all men, and
comes down out of heaven adorned as a bride, to woo and win the souls and
spirits of men to entertain and embrace him who was, now is, and for ever the
universal spirit of Love and Right Reason, the true Elixir and Philosophers
Stone, that which turns all into its self, cements, unites, and reconciles all
the people of God into one principle of love, (the original center of all peace
and order) though (in names) never so much divided in the vast circumference of
all worldly and carnal Conformities.

However, I know, and have long seen, that offenses must and will be, and that
the woe is to them who are offended with what is just and innocent. For surely
this is the day of Jacobs troubles, wherein for the division of Reuben (the
first birth, which stands in uniformity to man in the things of God) there will
be great thoughts of heart. Insomuch that if any offense arise in this
particular, (the Lord knowing my innocence therein) makes me to say, Blessed
are ye that are not offended in me, or rather in what the Matthew. 12.31. and
13.47. Joh. 7.38 and 39. Isai. 8.14, etc. H s. 5. Romans 9 32. 1 Pet. 2.6, etc.
spirit of love works in man: for I see the Spirits leading is that stone and
rock of offense, at which many in Israel have stumbled, and (falling headlong
as Judas did, Acts 1.18.) are burst asunder, and all their bowels of love are
gushed out, and naught left them, save wrath and enmity against the innocent
brethren. This spurning and stumbling at the Cornerstone, (viz.) Gods Spirit
and Son in man, is the only ground of all these breakings and divisions which
at this day are amongst all sorts of professors: yea, the son and heir of
heaven, the light and truth in the inward parts, is become the gin and snare to
Israel after the flesh, who Joh. 16.2. Isai. 1.12. Mic. 6.8. Joh. 15.5.
think they do God good service, when they smite, backbite and devour the
innocent and upright in heart (as if to follow other men's light would save the
soul, rather then to follow the light of true Reason, and measure of God in
themselves; or as if any thing acted and done without the power of the Spirits
leading (in things spiritual) were acceptable to God the Father.) Now the true
cause of all that division, strife and persecution (in matters of Religion over
all Christendom) consists in this, that every man or Sect (who is not born
again of the immortal seed of Love) has a way and work of their own, Joh.
8.12. and 5 43. 2 Cor. 3 18. and 10.3, etc. Gal. 2.10
contrary to Christ Jesus, and the leadings of his Spirit; the maintenance of
which causes all that enmity and persecution amongst the professors of
Christianity: for whilst man abides in the light, law and love of God writ in
the heart, the new and living way, he grows up into the same image and
likeness, and is filled with that humility, joy, and charity, which works nor
thinks any evil of another: but when man leaves and forsakes Gods grace in
himself, (the which is sufficient to lead into the love of all truth) and by
his own industry partakes of the stolen waters of the harlot, (viz.) man's
inventions and teachings in things spiritual; he will then with all the
bitterness and violence of man, endeavor to defend this Idol, (read Ezekiel.
8.12.) as more affecting the work of his own hands, then respecting the Jer.
31.33 and 34 Ezekiel. 36.27. Mic 6.8. Joh. 19. and 16. Acts 20.32. 1 Cor. 12.7.
Ephesians. 2.5. to 11. and 4.7. Tit. 2.11. 2 Cor. 5.16. Joh. 6.63.
Rule which God has given him to walk by. And hence it is that one says I am
of Paul, another of Apollo, and a third of Peter, or of Christ after the flesh;
or after this or that man's opinion or interpretation of the letter of the
Scripture; as if Christianity stood in the names and persons of men, and not in
the power of the new birth and spirit that was in Christ Jesus. Read Romans 8.9,
etc. 2 Cor. 13.5. Behold, thus do National Churches and spiritless professors
gather together into outward, visible, carnal assemblies, heaping up to
themselves Doctors and Teachers, the best of whom are but Briers, and the most
upright among them but as a thorn-hedge, whose proper work is to vilify
others, to rend, tear, and devour all who (in the naked simplicity of their
hearts) endeavor to follow the Lord, that spirit of Love, as their only
Shepherd, Guide and Leader.

For this cause the Lord is coming out of his place, to punish the earthly
inhabitants of all formal Religion; and will surely divide the spoil with the
strong, and scatter the proud persecutors in their own imaginations. And
because he has made his grave with the wicked, and his witnesses for truth and
righteousness have been long trodden under foot, and numbered amongst
transgressors, (have been smitten and slain) not only at Jerusalem, by the
religious and self-righteous, but have been also crucified by the profane in
Sodom and Egypt. Read Rev. 11.8. Therefore is he now arising to dash the
potsherds of the earth one against another, brother against brother, one
against two, and two against three, till the earth have disclosed the blood she
has drunk, and the seed of God be recovered, (out of that reproach and shame
under which it has layn buried by the inveterate and implacable spirit of a
carnal formal Profession) yea, redeemed to walk in Gods way, which he by his
Spirit shall direct in every heart and conscience. For this I know and do
declare, that my God will not leave overturning, overturning, overturning, till
he comes who brings along with him truth and love to equity and righteousness,
whose right it is thus to rule and reign in the hearts and consciences of his
people, whose way shall be prosperous upon the earth, and unto whom is given
the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his
possession: he will save his people from their sins, and guide their feet into
the way of truth, peace and rest. Selah. Behold the Pro. 1.23. Isa. 59.21. Jo.
16.^^
Lamb of God, and King of Saints. Hallelujah. Now whilst these vessels of wrath
are pouring out, and this dispensation of vengeance lasts, I do not intend to
send what I have written to the seven Churches of Christendom, but rather shall
wait the Fathers pleasure, which I account the full measure of time, and
fittest season for every purpose. And because I see the Son of (God in) man is
coming forth to bruise (as with a rod of Iron) the unrighteous Nations, not to
bring peace, but a sword; I also, in obedience to the Fathers commands, have
sold my Coat, (made of good will to all, both persons and things) that I might
purchase a Sword, with which (contrary to my nature) I am constrained to plead
like a man of contention, against this proud, Pharisaical and perverse
generation, this Leviathan and crooked Serpent, in whose nostrils unless a hook
be put, would swallow not only the Rivers, but also the very Sea into himself,
viz. receive all, (though never so unclean in heart and spirit) if outwardly
they will but own him, receive his mark, and number of his name, (that is the
chief in every Sect) and walk in outward observation and show conformable to
them; who whilst they profess themselves free from sin, and boast of having
Abraham to their father, and being the only children of God, are
notwithstanding found bitter persecutors of the truth, and enemies to the
Unction, the Anointed One, in whomsoever he does appear; thereby rendering
themselves guilty of all that innocent blood which has been spilt, from the
blood of righteous Abel even unto this day; all which blood cries aloud for
vengeance upon the welfavoured harlot, (Mystery Babylon) who in the golded
cupe, and goodly show of an outward profession, has inwardly (with a bitter
ravening devouring spirit) made her self drunk with the blood of the Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus. Even so, Lord God Almighty (as she has done) give her blood
to drink, for she is worthy. Amen. Hallelujah.

Now what concerns the distribution of the thirty pounds to the seventh Church,
(if not already disposed of) my friend Mr. Bacon has remembered me of a way
(formerly the intent of my heart) which I hope will please you all, (viz.) to
give that money to those, who belong not to any of the first six Congregations,
but to such as are redeemed out of the evil of all Sects, Kindreds, Nations,
Tongues, and People; who have no visible Church or people to shelter under; who
have trodden the wine press of Gods wrath alone, and patiently suffered much
evil for their work of well-doing; who worship God in the sincere spirit of
love to truth and righteousness, and can call no man Father nor Master of their
faith, light and spirit, neither own any man their Minister or Teacher, save
the Spirit of the Father (the Christ of God) only; who have the Fathers Acts
10.34 and 35. Mat 5.44, etc. Luke 6.35.
mark in their forehead, can own all that fear God and love righteousness,
amongst Jews or Gentiles, Barbarians or Scychians, under any Sect or sort of
people whatsoever. To these, and such as these, I desire Mr. Blackbury, Mr.
Rallinson and Mr. Bacon to distribute that money in their hands.

Also, to this Tribe of Joseph I give a double portion; this, and that likewise
which is promised to be returned me from the Quakers: which last thirty pounds
when received, I desire may also be disposed of by Mr. Bacon, Mr. Rallinson,
and Mr. Blackbury, according to a List here enclosed, the which contains (as I
am informed) the names of some few outcasts from amongst the people called
Quakers, whom I dearly salute and own (as my brother Benjamin) bone of my bone,
and flesh of my flesh, whose body is not carnal, but (mighty through grace to
the pulling down of sin and wickedness in themselves) like unto his glorious
body; whose members are made of love to enemies; living stones, elect and
precious; (though rejected by men of all Sects, yet) these are the true Church
of God, and City of our King, who dwells, rules, and reigns in them.
Hallelujah.

You see, my dear friend and friends, that in stead of coming out of your debt,
I still run farther therein: which debt (in the day of recompense which is not
afar off) my God I hope will repay you manifold into your bosoms, even in this
life, and in the world to come peace and rest with us, even that peace which
this world can neither give nor take away, (viz.) life eternal, which is in the
Son of Gods free grace and love shed abroad in our hearts: a kingdom which
remains to all the heirs of salvation, from everlasting to everlasting.
Hallelujah.

Thus with my dear and hearty kind respects to your self, Mr. Blackbury, Mr.
Bacon, and Mr. Rallinson, I remain

Yours obliged to love and serve you, whilst Robert Rich.
Barb. the 13 August, 1668.
POSTSCRIPT.
Sir, I have three several times of late appeared in the Assembly of the
Quakers, where William Baily and his wife were chief in the Ministry. The
occasion that drew me thither, as also the entertainment amongst them, I have
thought meet here to insert, that the wise in heart may judge how much contrary
to the spirit of love and truth, they have appeared in all their dealings with
me. The first time I came amongst them was at William Plumlies, on the 4 of
June, not having for a long time before been at any of their Meetings: and
understanding that W. B. was expected amongst them, (with whose Writings
formerly I had great union) I was therefore now desirous to see him, also to
behold their order, and to know what manner of spirit moved upon the face of
their deep. After he had spoken a long while, I took liberty to speak a few
words; the sum of which was, That man lives not by words only. For which W. B.
condemned me as a babbler, and told me that I made merry over the witness, etc.
His wife also accused me, saying I had blown a trumpet in printing my Letter,
and that I had therein called a woman Whore, etc. There did W. B. also revile
me, alleging that I had ordered thirty pounds to be given to the poor of
their people, which he affirmed was not received by any of them; and that they
denied both me and my gift, etc. All which did fully manifest to me, that the
spirit of pride, enmity, disorder and falsehood was amongst them; which did
occasion the writing of this enclosed Letter, (as to W. B.) dated the 8 of
June, which I delivered him with my own hand, expecting an account of their
words and actions; but have received not so much as one word in answer
thereunto. Now whether they have done well, thus to condemn me for speaking the
truth, and for my gift of love to the poor of their people, I appeal to the
witness of God in all men to judge.

The second time I went amongst them, was at William Pearse house on the 18
June, at which time I produced their Receipt under the hands of John Bolton,
Amos Stoddart, and Ger. Roberts, for the thirty pounds they received of you: by
which it might appear that the said money was by them received, with a clear
intent to be disposed of to the poor amongst them, even as I had before
declared to W. B. Which thing he could not then deny, when I had shown the
Receipt under the hands of those persons, though with much obstinacy (and in
the face of his people) he had formerly asserted the contrary. Now as touching
the return of the money to my hand, (which they said was then in the hands of
Tho. Heart to repay unto me) I have this only to offer to the honest and
simple-hearted (viz) whether those three persons who say they received this
money as from me, to bestow amongst their poor, and yet notwithstanding decline
their engagements in the distribution, will not only render themselves ill
Stewards for their poor, but also justly fall under the imputation of the same
deceit and falsehood which W. B. has done, in alleging that they never
received it from me to that end and purpose; ye upon this very ground only
(that the money was sent to be returned me) W. B. and others of his disciples
(especially John Tod, more bold and sto^^ then his fellows) would violently
urge, and (by false reasoning) defend and maintain W. B. in the truth, and me
the only liar; whereas all that I said was, that they had received money, and
given their Receipt for the same; (both which W. B. formerly denied, and the
Receipt then shown fully proved.) And I never had so much as one word in
controversy with them about the return of the said money, but always when they
spoke thereof, declared my readiness to receive the same, as may appear in the
Postscript of my Letter to W. B. In which dispute I did not only see the
Serpents subtilty, in turning and twining to save his head from being found the
liar, but also plainly discerned the Scripture fulfilled upon them, which
says, Ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, he
is twofold more the child of hell then themselves, (or when they were one
amongst the Profane) not caring whom they slander, or what lies they tell, so
they may advance, strengthen and increase their Party and Sect; whose deceit
will the more fully appear by the following instance: for I lately spoke with
Tho. Heart, (since W. B. went off) and asked him whether he would pay me the
thirty pounds which W. B. declared openly was in his hands for that purpose:
unto which T. H. made me answer, that in truth he had no such money sent him,
nor had he order to pay the same; neither could he then inform me of any other
person that would pay me that money. By all which it will evidently appear,
that the spirit of deceit and falsehood is crept in and does inhabit amongst
this people, and that the pretense of this money being remitted, (on which they
grounded all their latter exaltations and accusations) was in it self a most
eminent and notorious falsehood.

The third and last time I came into their Assembly, was on the 25 of June, at
William Marshals. The cause of my coming then amongst them, was to carry a
printed paper written by William Baily, and entitled, A Testimony of Truth
against all sowers of dissension, strife and discord, etc. in which Paper I
perceived his spirit chiefly busied in bitter exclamations against John Perrot,
and all that owned him: in which Work I could see no other intent, then what G.
F. had in writing (so bitterly, and contrary to truth) against J.P's Book
called Unity and Amity, (viz.) then to sow the seeds of enmity, strife and
falsehood, to make parties, and gather together such as would assist him in the
war against the Lamb. The consideration of which, made me cry out within my
self, Oh how is the faithful city become a harlot! in it was once the seat of
judgment and righteousness, but now oppressers and murderers bear sway and
rule. For in truth, such is the nature of his violent proceedings against John
Perrot, proclaiming him worse then Cain and Judas, vilifying him with the
opprobrious attributes of Atheism and Ranterism, etc. yet has not so much as
manifested the least evil J. P. has said or done, for which he might deserve
this his severe judgment and condemnation. In which practice of cruelty, I
have considered W. B. as one standing in the Serpentine subtilty of the Scribes
and Pharisees, yea those bloody persecutors of the Primitive times, who used to
put the Christians into Bears skins, that the dogs might tear them with the
greater violence and fury. And whether this Paper (being written against a man
that is dead, and not in a capacity of vindicating his own innocence) has not
wrought the same effect upon those that are one with W. B. I leave to the light
of Right Reason in every man to judge. Certainly I have spoken with those that
have boldly censured J. P. for a wicked person, yet could render no other
reason thereof, but that W. B. (of whose honesty and integrity they had a very
great esteem) had so judged and condemned him. After long enquiry what the evil
contents were of that Paper which J. P. is said to have written, at length I
was given to understand, that it was a Letter written to Jeane Stocks whilst he
was a prisoner in Rome; the purport of which discourse is obedience to God in
all things, though he should (now) command what (once) he did to his servant
Hos. 1.
Hosea. And because formerly there has been much ado in words and writing
between G. F. and J. P. concerning this Paper, and other matters in difference
betwixt them, which (though yet lie hid in secret) possibly may shortly come
abroad to public view, that the truth of things may be seen, and fully
understood, whereat many have stumbled, yet know not at what; therefore shall
say little more at present concerning that matter; only that I have observed,
that such as J. P. J. N. etc. especially those that forsake father and mother,
(the Sect that nourished and brought them forth) to follow the Lord fully and
wholly, (as did Caleb, Joshua, and Luk 2.49. Mat. 9 34.
Jesus, etc.) not minding their own reputation or fame, nor loving their lives
unto the death; such, I say, have been accounted in all ages, by this
hypocritical, proud, self-righteous generation, as the worst of men, whom they
call Ranters, Atheists, Blasphemers, Devils, any thing, even all manner of
evil, so they may wound the truth, and slay the innocent defenders thereof,
whose harmless souls I see lying under the altar of truth, sorely oppressed for
their testimony thereunto, and crying out, How long, Lord God, holy and true,
ere thou do judge and revenge our blood! For whose elect sake, the God of my
salvation will suddenly arise, and then behold enmity, lies and falsehood etc.
(even all that one spirit of wickedness) will surely fly, hide it self, and
sink again into the bottomless pit, from whence it came. Even so let all thine
enemies perish, O Lord God everlasting.

At my first coming into this last meeting, W. B. (as at other times) did much
judge and condemn me in general terms. And when I was ready to depart, he
called me, saying, Rich (...); thou art a whoremonger, and have an adulterous
whoremongers spirit: and farther said, Although I neither know, nor yet have
heard any such thing concerning thee, yet nevertheless I am assured it is
truth, forasmuch as I have not been deceived in others, in such like cases. To
which accusation, judgment and condemnation of W. B. I say even what himself
says in his Paper against J. P. (and I am persuaded, with much more truth)
viz. that the worst of men (that ever I heard or read of) did never publish a
sentence more unjust and more unreasonable then this: yea, the very Heathen,
(that know not God) would surely blush to utter such a judgment of
condemnation against any man, without the least knowledge or other proof of
evil. And in case the Civil Magistrate should follow this example of W. B. and
take up such a principle or way of judgment, who is there (though never so
innocent) that could be secure in life, limb, or estate? And if the Lord should
stir up and harden the hearts of Magistrates to deal with Quakers, as W. B.
has done by me, to judge and condemn them as the worst of evil doers, without
more proof or evidence then evil surmise, or imagination only; would it not be
most just upon them? All which I return as their own money into their own
sacks, that they may see and consider, how unlike the spirit of the Quakers is,
to that which was in Christ Jesus, who refused to interfere or meddle with the
Magistrates work, whose kingdom is more spiritual, and of another nature then
to have to do with such carnal matters, though the greatest evidence did appear
that could be. (Read Joh. 8.3 to 11. Luke 12.13.) And Oh how blessed a thing it
were, if all sorts of men in their several stations, both as Magistrates and
Ministers, were true followers of Christ Jesus in this particular! how would it
ease and refresh the whole creation, which groans under the unnatural yoke of
that bondage which the hard impositions of men have put upon them! Let
therefore Caesar have what properly belongs to him, viz. the right of rule and
government in things Civil, in which (as good and wholesome Laws shall direct)
he may (and ought to be) a terror to the evil doer, and a praise, honourer and
advancer of them that do well. And let them that would be accounted the
Ministers of Christ, (under all sorts of Professions) not mingle with the
Magistrates Rule and Authority, nor call for his assistance, (for that is
Antichrist, whose weapons are Joh. 18.36. Luke 9.55, 56. Romans 8.6, 7. 2 Cor.
10.4, etc. Ephesians 6.12.
carnal in matters spiritual) but show forth their works in the spirit of love,
meekness, long-suffering, and patience, (the best and only motives to convince
the judgments and consciences of men) and having freely received of the grace
of God, let them freely give, and (not for filthy lucre) dispense the same to
others: knowing, that as necessity (in the Love) is laid upon them from the
Lord, so their reward is likewise to them from him, for their continual supply
and satisfaction, without any dependancie (either for honor or maintenance)
upon secular Powers and Governments. But on the contrary, while the Civil
Magistrate shall render himself so far subject to the commands of those who
(while they be esteemed Ministers of Christ) do yet notwithstanding aim at
worldly Estate and Preferment, yea Dominion and Supremacy over the Consciences
of all others, and shall (by their instigations) prescribe, impose and enforce
Rules of Worship in matters of Faith and Religion; he does herein not only
divest himself of that honor, peace and happiness which God has given him in
worldly affairs, but also becomes a prostitute to the end and services of
those, who would use his power to no other end but (in promoting their own
interest, honor, ease and plenty) to the vexation, grief and disturbance of
the rest of Gods creation. Oh how greatly for many generations has this one
Beast, and this one False Prophet riding him, disturbed, vexed and cursed Gods
creation! out of which Antichristian thraldom and abyss of misery, Good Lord
deliver it. Amen.

By what is written, you may see how this high and Luciferian people the
Quakers, who for their show and numbers have been as the Stars of heaven, and
who for their pride and enmity are now cast down; behold what clouds they are
without water, even wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever: whose fall is the riches of the world; insomuch that carnal
Whoremongers and Adulterers (over whom they have exalted themselves) shall
sooner repent, find mercy, and enter Gods Kingdom of grace, then this
spiritually adulterous proud generation, (that account so highly or themselves,
and to be the only children of the kingdom) who shall be sh^^ out. For though
many of them have been called, yet but very few have been found that chosen
generation, and Royal Priesthood, who offer up all their services in the
movings of the love of God, and who abide in that charity which neither sees,
nor knows, nor thinks evil of another, (who (...) judge and condemn
themselves) leaving all others to the righteous judgment of God, who assuredly
has, does, and will render to every man according to his work. So that the
first in profession are now become the last in possession of the Kingdom, which
stands not in words, nor yet in outward appearances, but in humility and love
unfeigned, yea, in righteousness, peace and joy,

In which for ever we do sit, and sing
Eternal Hallelujahs to our King.
A Letter written by Rob. Rich, to Will Baily and Mary Fisher called thy wife;
and to the rest of your hearers and followers, that so much judged and
condemned R. R. in your General assembly held the 4 June (which ye call the 4
Month) 1668.
HErewith I present you the Receipt given under the hands of John Bolton, Amos
Stoddart, and Gerrard Roberts, for the thirty pounds received by them, as from
me; which Receipt is expressed in these words following.

Received 9th 11th Month called January 1667. of Jo. Rayns of London, Merchant,
the sum of thirty pounds, by the order and appointment of Robert Rich of
Barbados senior, which he ordered to be despised of to the poor amongst us. We
say, Received by us

John Bolton, Amos Stoddart, Gerrard Roberts.

That thou William Baily may see and call to mind, how greatly ye reproached
me for my love to you, and with what boldness and confidence you defended a
most notorious evident falsehood, affirming with others in the face of a great
Congregation, that the money was not received by you, nor any whom ye owned for
good Friends and Quakers, for that they all denied both me and my gift: And
notwithstanding I told thee the names of those persons that had received the
money, (whom thou did own then for good Friends) yet still did aver, that
thou were sure they never received any money (as from me) to distribute amongst
them: And if I had any such Receipt, that it was or might be counterfeit and
forged: adding, that thou had spoken with those friends since my Letter was
out in Print, a little before thou leftest England; and were sure (as thou
say) that then they had not received it, neither would; and yet it does
appear by the Receipt to be received the 9th January, which was more then two
months before. Which confident assertion of thine was also seconded with this
solemn declaration, viz. that thou would disown all such, whosoever they
were, that should receive money from me to such an end, forasmuch as long since
I had been disowned amongst you. But what evil have I done in this thing? and
were it not much more just and reasonable, that they whom thou judge, should
witness against thee, and disown thee as an enemy to innocence, to truth, and
to the poor amongst you? So see what spirit acts you herein, and first learn to
judge thy self, before thou condemnest the innocent.

Now as touching the gift it self, although thy wife did much reproach me,
saying I had blown a Trumpet, in that I had printed my Letter, and had therein
called the wife of Giles Calvert Whore: also Tho. Rouse the elder said, he had
known me do many mad actions, yet none so foolish as this, to give away so much
money so vainly: and diverse others of your proselytes with the like or worse
imputations; which made me to cry out, saying, that many good works I had done
amongst you, and asked for which of them it was that you did now stone me. All
which I leave to the witness of God to judge between me and you concerning the
truth of these things.

And although Ignorance may have so far blinded your judgment, as to mistake
my charity; yet why your rash presumption or enmity should lead you so far, as
to make lies your refuge, I know no reason, unless because the spirit of truth
is departed from you, and an evil spirit from the Lord is come upon you; and
then I know you must act accordingly. As touching the receipt of the money by
these three persons, it is now verily believed by many of your own people, (to
whom I have since showed that Receipt) that the money is received by them, and
the Receipt true and honest: which makes me to wonder at what Tho. Heart
declared amongst you, viz. that he had grounds to believe the money was
received by friends, (as he called them) but did also believe they were
surprised therein. And how they came to be trappann'd into so great a snare, as
to give their Signal to a forgery, (as thou suggestest) I cannot imagine: but
of this I am most certain, that it has discovered a great deal of deceit and
falsehood, yea a bitter, lying, and persecuting proud spirit to inhabit your
tents; which Babylonish garment has long been seen to lie hid amongst that
tribe called the Ministry, the Teachers and Leaders of the Quakers; even such
spiritual wickedness, which if practiced amongst the Presbyterians,
Independants, or others, (whom ye disown, and can see in them nothing that is
good) they would abhor themselves therein; which you as with a whores forehead
boldly maintain and defend. You are, in truth, those which justify your selves
before men; but God knows your hearts, and the day is at hand, even at your
very door, which will discover, reveal and preach, as upon the house-tops, many
and great abominations, which yet lie hid amongst you; that so you may be
judged according to your deeds. In which day, all your smooth and gilded words
of light and love will not hide you; neither yet your flourishing profession,
and high esteem you have of your selves, and the low esteem you have of others,
will not cover you from being seen. The golden head of that Image whereof
others are the iron, lead and clay; yea, the very name in which ye have prayed
and prophesied, (when innocent) and in which you have cast out devils, and
wrought wonders, shall now reject you, saying, Depart from me, etc.

Indeed, I have long seen the abomination that makes desolate standing amongst
the Quakers, ever since that time, wherein G. F. did judge J. N. and invited
his friends so to do, without showing the least reason or ground of his
Censure; even as thou thy self have lately done in a printed paper writ against
J. P. Wherefore hear the word of the Lord ye rulers of Sodom, and people of
Gomorrha; it is this spirit that has encompassed your Jerusalem about as with
Armies, and is now in bondage with her children; by which we know that the
destruction thereof draws nigh. Finally, it is that spirit of wickedness in
the form of righteousness, that has already torn your crown from off your
head, and discovered your secret parts, so that the scab of contention and
strife is seen, which will never leave nor cease to divide you, till the name
of Quaker become a hiss and a scorn amongst the Nations. And you shall leave
your name for a curse to my chosen, (whom you have cursed) says the Lord God
everlasting, who will slay thee, and call his servants by another name, (it may
be Hallelujah) which you have so much defamed.)

And you that (for the vast numbers of your Tribes) have seemed to magnify
your selves in your increase of children; Woe be to you that now give suck, (and
take so much pains to add to your Sect) for behold, in one day loss of
children and widowhood shall come upon you: yea, a voice (as that in Ramah)
shall be heard among you, lamenting your children because they are not. Thus am
I clear from the blood of all men, in that I have not ceased both by words and
writing to forewarn of the coming of this Antichrist among the Quakers, who for
more then ten years last past have been that poor Ass speaking as with man's
voice, reproving and withstanding the madness of this lying, wrathful, bitter,
persecuting spirit; knowing right well when it entered, and you thereby came to
reject the Lord, that he should not reign over you by his Spirit of light and
love, but rather chose to your selves a King, like unto other Sects and
Nations, for to judge and rule you; who was not the Unction, nor the Anointed
of the Lord; nor yet the Olive, Fig, nor Vine, that could heal, rejoice, or
bind you up; but the Read Judge. 9th and Rev. 9th chap.
Bramble, and King of the bottomless pit, that shall so rend, tear and devour
you, till not one stone shall be left upon another, (which thing tell G. F.
that FOX your King.) Alas! what are all your smoothe words of light, love and
truth, whilst they spring from the root and spirit of Falsehood, envy and
bitterness? And what is it to speak with the tongue of men and angels, to have
the gift of prophecy, to open mysteries, or to have all faith that could
remove mountains, and have not love and charity, what will all this avail you?
Are you better herein then Balaam was? I tell you nay: for he knew as much as
you do, and was more honest and sincere; for he knew not only the difference
between the two seeds, (when his eyes were opened) which was blessed, and which
accursed; but was also well acquainted with the seed of God, its beginning,
progress and end; yea, and more, he (did not curse it, but) owned it, and would
speak nothing but truth; and what the Lord put in his mouth, that only would
he say; but ye utter lies and falsehood with great confidence against the
innocent, even what the devil suggesteth. Thus having lost your first love, and
forsaken the faith once delivered to the Saints; you are now like that evil
spirit cast out, running to and fro, walking through the dry places of your
Elders traditions, following the footsteps of Amalek the first of Nations,
those you call Good old Friends, seeking rest, but never shall find any, so
long as Balak and Balaam, that bitter spirit, leads to curse whom God will
surely bless, and bring over you; for ye must fall, and (with Haman, Saul, and
Herod) be ensnared and taken, even in the same pit of cruel deceit, which you
have dug for your innocent brethren: and herein (for some time) will the
faith and patience of the Saints be exercised.

You greatly cry out and call upon others to fear and dread the Lord, yet your
selves are so ignorant of that Lesson, that ye blindly run on to judge the
innocent, and condemn the truth; yea, to smite the apple of Gods eye, and
irreverently reach at the Signet on his right hand, by condemning and speaking
evil of the things you know not; which does sufficiently demonstrate, that you
are out of the pure fear, that keeps the heart clean from those abominations
into which you so easily run. For my part, (although my spirit is oftentimes
seized with a powerful, sweet, and awful enjoyment of Gods presence, yet) I am
not Romans 8.15. Gal. 4 6.
afraid of him (as when I was one with you) for I have not received the spirit
of bondage again to fear; but the spirit of peace and love, in which I receive
him as a Father, rejoicing at his approaches, and do not fear him as an enemy,
that would take advantage against me. I do well know the difference between the
seed of the bondwoman, and the free workings of grace; and what it is to act
toward God for fear of his wrath, plagues and judgments, (which thou
threatnest my death bed withal) and what it is to do the will of my Father as
my meat and drink: and long have I known a difference between the first and
second Covenant, betwixt those that think they can keep themselves in the light
and love of God, (which Peter presumed, as ye do; but fell most notoriously, as
ye have) and those that feel the Lord their Shepherd, and depend only upon him
for their daily food and sustenance; who rightly see their own weakness, and
can deny themselves, as not being able to watch one hour, neither preserve
themselves one minute in the love and favor of God: these, and such as these,
being horn again of the innocent seed of love, and that abiding in them, (and
not taken away from them, as it was from Read 2 Samuel 7.15. 1 John 3 and 9.
Saul) preserves from sin, and from falling away. Also I have knowns
dispensation of condemnation, which indeed is glorious; but there is a state of
jo^^fication, that exceeds in glory: under the former is comprehended Mount
Sinai, at the foot whereof I have formerly seen the Quakers and their Leaders,
standing with Moses after the flesh, filled with fear and trembling from the
presence of the Lord; which was a glorious administration: but the later shows
forth Mount Sion with its inhabitants, even the whole number of One hundred
forty and four thousand; those faithful, chosen and sealed ones, who stand
before the Lord in his presence, rejoicing, and (without fear) singing the song
of M ses and the Lamb, Hallelujahs; who witness full redemption by his blood,
life and spirit, out of all evil Kindreds, Nations, Tongues and People:
children that cannot lie, neither faisly accuse and persecute the innocent. In
the first, the heirs differ nothing from servants, though lords of all, while
they lie under the hard imposition of tutors and governors, such as thou thy
self art, which enjoin to dread and fear the Lord, to watch, and to keep to the
light: a li^^^ your selves are out of; else why were ye so angry with me, for
saying the Lord was my keeper? You are those that bind heavy burdens upon
others, which in the least you will not bear your selves. Neither will ye
judge, condemn and deny your selves, that you might so enter the kingdom of
grace; nor yet suffer others, that would, ^o enter, who are poor and naked,
hungry and thirsty, without money or desert. But the second Covenant speaks
otherwise, ( Read Isai. 55.1. Joh. 7.37 Rev. 22.17
Ho, every one that will, let him come) and is established upon better
promises. He that knows the Spirits meaning, let him read Jer. 31.33, etc. 2 Samuel 7.15. Isa. 54.10, 11. and 59.21. Psalm. 89.33. 1 John 2.27. Rev. 21.3, etc.
to the 8. and has a more sure foundation then man's self-righteousness, viz.
the eternal Word of grace, faith, and love shed abroad in our hearts, the seal
of our sonship; having Christ Jesus in us, our joy, our crown and glory, even
the full assurance of that perfect love which casts out fear: and those that
are here, will need no other tutor nor teacher, save Love only; and having
passed from the voice of that trumpet, and sound of words, under which ye are
held, whether that of the letters teaching, or that of man's preaching; let
Sinai therefore quake, and the earth be removed, let the mountains melt at his
presence, yet we will not fear: for God is in the midst of us as a King, and
mighty man of arms, that teaches our hands to war, and our fingers to fight;
the terror of whose presence is our comfort and preservation. Let the
hypocrites in Sion fear and he afraid: we are not come to that mountain that
might not be touched, where horror, fear and trembling is felt; but to the
mountain of Gods love and free grace, the new Jerusalem, and City of joy,
peace and rest, whose walls are salvation, and whose gates are made of praises
and Hallelujahs; yea, to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men
made perfect: and this I clearly see to be a state, dispensation, and a kingdom
yet to come with thee, and many more who are so hotly contending for the body
of Moses, striving about some carnal fleshly appearance, some bodily exercise,
or outward observation, that profits not: and while you are busied about
these things, the evil is still over your hearts, and the great and weighty
matters of the Law neglected: insomuch that the power of love, which leads into
peace, unity and amity with God, and all that is good in his creation, ye are
strange rs unto. And all your meetings, worships and services, all your
holiness, knowledge, and righteousness, being void of charity, (and your hands
full of the blood of the innocent) what is it all worth? is it better then the
cutting off a dogs neck, or slaying of a man?

By all this that has been spoken, it is evident in what state you at present
stand, and that there is much more attainable, which you are yet ignorant of:
for there are three estates or stages, by which God does lead his people into
peace and rest, besides the state of the Heathen that know not God;
notwithstanding he in them lives, moves, and is their being, viz. Sinai and the
Law, Golgotha and the Cross, Jerusalem above and the crown.

In the first, you have been and still are exercised under fear, dread and
horror, being bound to strict observations, thereby working out your salvation
with fear and trembling; all which the Son of man also fulfilled in the days of
his flesh, as being born under the Law, and learning obedience by the things he
suffered: and thus far you stand with him in your earthly testimony.

The second is a state of death, (into which as yet you are not baptized) not
having learned to Read Mark 10.18, 21, 22. Joh 5.30 and 8. and 28. Phil. 2.7.
Heb. 5.2, 3. 1 Cor. 15.28. Rev. 22.3, 4, 5.
deny and condemn your selves, nor are you ceased from all your own works as he
did from his; not crucified with Christ, nor dead with the Lord, which is more
then to put off the body of sin, or to account our own righteousness as filthy
and menstruous; but even the innocence and righteousness of the Son, the seed
of the promise must be offered up, and nailed to the Cross, for this only God
accepts, and in whom he is always well pleased. (Read Joh. 3.3, 13. Ephesians.
2.14, 16, etc. and 4.24. Col. 3.10. Heb. 9.15.) This mediation or middle state
(may truly be called Purgatory, or Limbo Patrum) through which (self-denial,
and following Christ in us) all that attain to blessedness must needs enter and
pass: so they come to receive the better resurrection. (Read Genesis 22.16. Mat.
19.21, 29. Luke 14.14. 1 Cor. 15.24. Heb. 11.35.) This death, self-denial and
purgation, but very few amongst you can witness, who while ye exalt your selves
in your outward carnal privileges, and the blamelesness of your Legal
righteousness, cannot Read Mat. 19.20, 22. Phil. 3.3 to the 11.
resign into death, and account all your excellency as loss and dung in
comparison of the Spirit of Free grace, and the leadings thereof. Neither have
I seen many amongst you (besides J. N. and J. P.) who by their fellowship with
Christ in his death have denied themselves, and made themselves of no
reputation, that so they might obtain the best resurrection amongst their
innocent brethren, whom ye have slain, and buried (as ye did them) under great
reproach and shame, for their subjection and obedience to the Father of lights
and spirits; which resurrection having attained, they shall receive a name
better then that of sons and daughters. Thus the first are become the last, and
the last the first. Go humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that in
due time he may exalt you into the number of that Name (of love, the highest
power) to which every knee must bow.

The third, last, and most excellent estate, is to be risen with Christ Jesus,
and to sit down in the new Jerusalem with him in the heavenly places, the
everlasting Sabbath of rest, which is a kingdom that cannot be shaken,
eternally in the heavens; the which remains, when the old passes away; a fixed
and sure habitation, whose inhabitants are ever singing praises, and drinking
new wine in the Fathers kingdom, where all old things are passed away, and all
things anew brautified with the Spirits leading, and nothing represented in the
oldness of the letter. And such a people there are in this present world, even
as he is in heaven. (Read and understand Matthew. 5.14. 1 Pet. 2.9. Joh. 14 18. 1
Cor. 2.16. and 15.48 2 Cor. 5.17. and 6.16. Ephesians. 1.3 and 2.6. and 14. and 16.4
24. Phil. 2.5. Col. 2.12. and 3.1 Heb. 2 11. and 12.22, etc. 1 John 4 17.)
Behold, we shut not our gates at all by day (fearing no spirituals) nor have we
any night (as the Prophets had) for the Lord God is risen in us, a shield, and
a sun which no more goes down; for Christ being once dead, and risen again,
dies no more, but leads captivity captive, giving up all to the free grace and
leadings of the Father, where death and hell is swallowed up in victory, that
the eternal principle of love may be all in all. Hallelujah. Go ye, and learn
what this means; then will you come to see, that to be a Christian indeed is
a very high calling, not made by a carnal commandment, nor outward observation,
writ, or ceremony of man's institution whatsoever; no, not by the washing away
of the filth of the flesh, nor yet by breaking of carnal bread: nothing less
makes a Christian, then the power of an endless life, the bread from heaven,
the indwelling of Gods most blessed spirit of grace, his Son, in whom Abraham,
Mary, and all the faithful in every Nation, Sect and People are blessed. Read
Genesis 22 3. Judge. 5.24. Psalm. 51.10. and 72 27. Isa. 65.17. Mal. 3.12. Luk 1.42,
48. Romans 8 9, etc. Gal. 3 9, 16.) creating in them new hearts, and begetting
the answer of a pure conscience toward God, in a virtuous life, and innocent,
harmless, loving conversation toward men (as well to a foe, as to a friend;
and to the Mat. 5.39.44, 45. Luke 6.35, etc. Psalm. 68.18.
evil, as to the good) this principle of Love (only) is that which makes a
true Christian; and he that has not this Spirit of Christ Jesus in him
abiding, to rule and guide, is but a mere Heathen, yea a Reprobate to every
good work. (Read, and understand Romans 8.9. etc. 2 Cor. 13 5. 1 John 2 6.) For
except Christ Jesus, that Spirit, work all our works in us and for us; nothing
we do without him, will find acceptance with God the Father: no, though we
give our bodies to be burnt, and all our goods to seed the poor, from a spirit
of self-endedness, to exalt, gratify, or please our selves or others, (not
having in us love and charity, the only begotten of the Father, and express
image of his person) all is nothing. And doubtless many Heathens, and
Roman-like spirits, have and may suffer from a wrathful principle, (as some
preach Christ of envy, and for to defend their own Way and Worship) with as
much boldness, zeal and resolution, as ye can do. Wherefore look to the root
that leads you either to do or to suffer, and earnestly pray and seek for that
best and most excellent love and charity, that you may have enough thereof to
serve in the time of need, and to carry you through that wilderness and sore
famine which is seen coming upon you and all flesh: that if it be the will of
God you must suffer, you may so do as Christians, (with joy and patience) for
well doing, and not as busybodies in other men's matters, nor yet as smiters,
nor false accusers of the innocent, neither as despisers and revilers of others
more just and righteous then your selves.

Had you been baptized with this spirit of love that thinks none ill, you would
not have so much condemned me for an innocent word, for calling (as Geo:
Forster said) one of my friends by way of salute (long since at the Bridge)
Rascal; at which he took no offense, neither would G. F. have done, had not he
looked out with an evil eye. For it is a word I daily use to sucking children,
and am not convinced of the least evil therein: nor would I have you ignorant,
how that words and works are either good or bad from the principle or spirit
from whence they flow and proceed. He that from the root of Read Mat. 5.20, 22.
and 12.34. and 18.9. with 1 John 3 5. Hos 1 2.
enmity speaks a word against his brother (mark) is a manslayer, yea a
murderer, and is in danger of hellfire. Whereas Abraham offering to slay his
innocent and only begotten son, from a principle of love and obedience, had a
great recompense of reward. Wherefore look to the root and principle that leads
you; first make the tree good. For after this manner is the ax now laid to the
root of every rotten heart, which will hew and cut you down (ye whited walls,
ye painted sepulchers) who thus make a man an offender for a word.

And when you had for a long time judged and condemned me as one guilty of all
manner of evil in general, but proving not so much as one particular; indeed
accusing me of many things, as being a proud person, a wine-bibber, and a
friend of public sinners; things wherein the witness of God did not at all
condemn me: which made me cry out, that it was a small matter for me to be
judged by man in those things wherein I was justified of the Lord. Thus your
forefathers having called the good man of the house, Mark 3.30. Joh. 7.38, 39
( viz. the Spirits leading) Beelzebub, it matters not what you call them of
his household. You are indeed those that judge according to outward appearance:
but I judge no man so, neither in meat, drink, nor apparel. For I am satisfied,
that one man may be much prouder in Sackcloth, then another that wears Velvet
and Satin: and I know every creature of God to be good, being received with
humility and thanksgiving. Which made me again cry out, saying, Judge your
selves, condemn your selves, who so easily can see and epsy out a moat in
another eye, but not the beam in your own. This counsel also ye rejected
against your selves, calling it deceit and a lie; which made me to say this
Scripture was also fulfilled in your ears, which says, The time shall come,
that they will not endure sound doctrine. And why were ye so angry with me for
saying, that man did not live by words only, but by the Word of grace and love
shed abroad in our hearts, the bread of life, which sustains the soul in peace
and rest? This likewise ye called deceit* and denied my voice therein: after
which I called you friends; at the which you were exceeding wroth, crying out
against my deceit therein, and asking me how I could call you friends. To when
I replied, that in truth I had unity with those that could love their enemies,
as with him that called Judas friend. Thus I return you these things, as your
own money into your own sacks, that you may see and consider what manner of
spirit it is which leads you into these and suchlike ways and practices: and
till I hear of thy and your public repentance, as you have publicly appeared
against the truth, and the innocent defenders thereof, I shall esteem you no
better then Judas, or as infi else and heathens, that have denied the truth and
faith once delivered to the Saints; which to maintain, some have hazarded the
loss of all things, yea suffe ed great shame and reproach amongst you. But
blessed be God, that which ye intended for evil against me, that has the Lord
my God turned unto good: for which my soul does bless and magnify his Name,
and for ever give thanks, even whilst I am, and when I am no more

Robert Rich.
8 June 1668.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Am told by some of your peope (to whom I have showed the Receipt) that the
30 l. received by you from me is again returned, but thou say it never was
received at all; and the^^ say, If it be not returned, it shall be. Thus is
Babel built amongst you, and the city of the Quakers become confusion. For my
part, if it be not received kept, and distributed amongst the poor of your
people, in and by the same spirit of saving kindness I gave it, and that you
think good to return it to me; I shall not refuse to receive it again; and not
doubt of finding those, in ^e worthy then your selves (though in the highways
and hedges, scratcht, (...) and cast out by you) (...) kindness will accept,
receive, and make use of the same, and not so reproachfully despise me for my
love as you have done.


