THE English Orator OR Rhetorical Descants By way of DECLAMATION Upon some
notable THEMES BOTH Historical and Philosophical.

In Two Parts.

LONDON, Printed for Obadiah Blagrave at the Sign of the Bear in St. Paul's
Church yard, 1680.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Francis Leigh Knight, of Wickham in Kent.
Honored Sir,
THe first Prospect of your Person, methoughts, presented me with such a
Landscape of Candor and Ingenuity, of such sweetness of Disposition and native
Goodness, as that I presently began not only to admire the Sc^^e of your
Accomplishments, but passionately to be ravished with the Love of them. The
secret charms of I know not what Excellency (Ethics her self cannot give it a
name) that runs through and adorns the whole frame and course of your Life and
Being, did so captivate and affect me, as that I wished I might be so happy as
to enjoy the Mercy of your Worthy Acquaintance; and to live under the influence
of so much Virtue, I wished I might be blessed with an opportunity of expressing
the Religion of that Homage and Service, which I owe to you; and of presenting
you with somewhat as a Pledge and Emblem of the profoundest Esteem, and most
devout Affection I bear toward you: And indeed Providence has been so
propitious as to answer my desires, in occasionally fixing me sometimes near
you, and in placing me within the Verge of that Paradise, which your Presence
Consecrates where ever it is; so that I have often been ennobled, nay almost
deified in the Elisium of your Company, have become learned by your Converse,
have grown Prudent by your Example, have been maintained at your Table, have
been feasted with Civilities both from your Person and Fortune, and have
enjoyed the Favors of all your circumstances and capacities; For which I
return you an Eternity of Thanks. Neither am I unsuccesseful in my second
Prayers, Fortune having put into mine hands an opportunity, whereby I am
capacitated to put somewhat into yours; I mean this inconsiderable trifle,
which I do not Dedicate as a Present to requite you, but rather as a Toy to
play withal, and to divert you. I hope you will pardon the Solecism, and
Impropriety of the Gift, for I must confess I am sensible of mine Error in
Prefacing with so stately a Frontispeice so mean an Edifice; I mean in
prefixing your name to so poor a Pamphlet, your more curious Ingenuity, large
Capacity, and universal Accomplishments in more solid Learning, I know deserve
a treatment of the Quintensence and Elixirs of choicer Muses: I am not
ignorant, that knotty Maxims of Policy, subtleties of Government, and Intrigues
of State; a mystery in Divinity, and sublimer Speculations are more suitable
Entertainments to the Acuteness of your Parts, the Swiftness of your
Apprehension and Penetration of your Judgment; But when I consider that you
have advanced so far in all Are and Science, as that the utmost of my Studies
cannot contribute one thought to further your Progress. I say, seeing I cannot
inform you, hubmly crave leave with these Toys to recreate you. They were the
Spawn and Issue of some spare hours, and are fit only for the Entertainment of
idle time; it is not handsome nor modish for me to commend them; only thus much
I think I may safely say, if you are inclined to sleep, their lulling Quality
will be Poppy to your temples, and may procure a nod as soon perhaps, as the
greatest Narcotick, which if it does effect, it will do you a kindness, in
removing you from the noise of a tumultuous world, and in relieving you with
the ease and softness of a silent slumber. I now withdraw from your presence to
prevent the creation of a further trouble. All that I desire, is a Candid
acceptance of what is here tendered; which if you shall graciously receive as a
mere testimony of my grateful respects for all Favors, without any further
design on your Worth and Goodness, I am at the height of mine Ambition, and
have obtained the end of my present Addresses. I am

Honored Sir Your most Humbly Devoted Servant William Richards.
Helmdon.
THE Preface TO THE READER.
I Present thee (most Courteous Reader!) with a Manual of Thoughts on
Miscellaneous Subjects. They were hatched in the retirements of a Country Cell,
and now fly abroad into the world, not so much to boast the paint of their
Plumes and Elegancy of their dress, as the newness of their garb and habit,
wherein they appear; there being nothing extant of this Nature in English, we
being wholly destitute of Declamations in our Language. I must confess there
can be no great want, or thirst of Oratory, as long as Quintilian and Seneca
among the Ancients; Putean, Ferrarius, Gardener and others of a later date,
have obliged the world with such Eloquent Streams; But yet their Rhetoric
flowing in a Latin Channel, all are not capable of drinking in their Current.
But this Tractate is calculated for Readers of a lower rank, and yet affords
brisk Entertainment for those of an higher. It Is written in a modern Style, and
is exactly composed after the same model as usually harangues of this nature
are now adays. The first Part are flourishes on certain Passages, which occur
in History; some of which Fancy has adorned with her Conceits on both sides,
others on one side, she has left untouched and naked: The latter are
Meditations on several Questions in Ethics, Politics and Natural Philosophy,
as I occasionally pop't upon them, and they have pleased my Genius. If what I
have garnisht them with, please your palate, the Kind Acceptance of this first
dish, will encourage me to treat you with a second Course.

W. R.

THE English Orator.
DECLAM. I. A certain Damsel reduced to want, sells her Hair to relieve her in
her Poverty.
IF no reproach can fully the brightness, nor eclipse the glory of shining
Virtue; if the calumny that persecutes a famous Exploit, add to the Praise of
him that achieved it, Then our Virgin amongst the distracting cares of
pinching Poverty, congratulates the censure of that action, by which she showed
her self more than Woman. 'Twould have made the Modesty of a Maid to Blush, so
publicly to be exposed to the view of the world, but that she is inflamed with
that sacred Ardor, which is kindled in the Breast of pious Matrons, when
concerned and zealous for the injured Fame of their traduced Innocence.

On her own accord she sues for Judgment, not as if conscious to her self, she
did at all fear, least silence should speak her guilty; But that she might
publicly wipe off all Aspersions, and might comfortably enjoy her Accusation:
she had no need of an Advocate to defend the sale of her comely tresses, her
hard Fortune was plea sufficient, and she is abundantly protected by her chaste
Integrity.

This wretched Damsel in this sad condition could neither hope for Hatred, nor
expect Envy; she supposed her miseries a charm against the malignity of the
severest Fortune, and her obscurity a sanctuary against any harm; and therefore
does at once both wonder, and grieve too, that she is summoned to a Tribunal;
as if she were encircled with a Crown of Happiness, or were an object worthy of
Spleen and Malice. This poor Girl implores your pity, both on her slender
Estate and her Baldness too; which was not caused by slothful age, or feeble
lust, but was inflicted upon her by ravenous hunger and the merciless tyranny
of cruel destiny, she was distressed in her infancy, and felt the rigor of
Fortune in her very cradle; where she seemed at once with the same cry both to
deprecate her nakedness and lament it too.

Her miseries increased as she grew in years; and Poverty (as it were) was
equally adult with her person too. What should this Virgin do so miserably
involved in so great Evils? Her extremity render her labor and industry vain
and fruitless; and such a Lent of fasting had whither'd the Spring of her
blooming youth into the Autumnal decays of wrinckled age. After she had a long
time striven, and all in vain, with these her stubborn and obstinate troubles.
At length she finds out some little redress for all her grievance, and an
innocent remedy for her urgent necessity; she cuts off her locks to supply her
wants. And indeed in so pressing a calamity, she was glad to find any thing
that was vendible, any thing that could refresh the languors, and strengthen
the weakness of her feeble limbs, and by a short truce prevent the invasion of
approaching death. If it be lawful with any price to bribe off destruction, and
with all arts imaginable to purchase the comforts of present life, Then, why is
this Damsel censured for a little deferring her fatal blow, and for redeeming
with spoils of her own body the delights and Pleasures of a few days. Although
loss of Hair is an unhandsome defect in the female Sex, yet where is the woman,
that studies her dress, or regards gallantry amidst the dubious concerns of an
uncertain life, and the expected horrors of almost present death? Affected
neatness and curiosity of attire, is quite neglected, when the pale fiend
advances forward, in a frightful garb of his own terrors darting himself in a
glance or look. Want of Hair is far more tolerable than want of Bread; and
Baldness to be preferred before Hunger, and the continual languors of a starved
carcass. It Is far more pleasant to have no Hair than to dye by degrees, and to
perish insensibly by piecemeal, and tediously to depart, and (as it were)
after repeated Funerals to breath her last. Though a naked head in a wench is
scandalous, yet why should disgraces vex her? It Is Revenge enough to see her
pale, and to hear the accents of her mournful groans.

Suffer therefore this unhappy Virgin to enjoy the benefit of her baldness, and
let her live in her own punishment. See! The woods are deprived of their leaves
and ornaments, and the Dryades suffer (as it were) an annual baldness for the
better increase of their inward vigor, and that under the pretense and show of
age, they may resume and flourish in a fresher verdure, and boast the elegance
and flower of their retriv'd youth; she cares not for Deformity, Infamy, nor
her Religion neither, so long as hunger (like an Enemy) forrages within making
men Cannibals to themselves, and (O horrible!) devouring the prey of their own
members. When Famine had added terror to her eyes, and you might have
contemplated her stiff joints, and bloodless cheeks, you would have stood
amazed at the sight of this Ghost of a carcass; especially to have seen, amidst
the ugly shapes, and figures of death, the dischevell'd wantonness of her loose
tresses, nourisht by the horror and dread of Fate, and produced by squallid
Contagion and Putrefaction.

We have here an excellent Example of rare Prudence, and an admirable pattern
of singular Virtue. Behold! an unhappy Lass amids the Inconveniences of a
Cottage, and other hardships of an adverse Fortune despises the blandishments,
and flatteries of the world; nay more, contemns that, which either Hunger or
Want ought to have desired, she suffered that which the women of Aquileia had
done before her, who amidst the ravenings of War, and Famine, pol'd their
heads, not because grief or despair, but danger commands them to make halry
bowstrings.

Our poor Girl has suffered war, has endured famine, yet has returned with
equal Victory: If therefore you will still go on to condemn her baldness, why
do you not condemn her chastity too? and censure the Emblem of the greatest
Modesty? she could not behold her deformity with a greater dislike than her
attempted Virginity; and a solicitation to dishonesty was in her Judgment
capital. She shaves her head, sells her hair, lest her poverty should tempt her
to become a prostitute; and so by the damage of her beauty prevents her infamy;
Pardon therefore the fall and loss of those locks, which if kept any longer,
had proved fatal to her Virtue! Pardon that she sold them, which was not so
much to prolong her life, as before a Tribubunal to give the reason of that her
Action. She humbly implores you, to let her enjoy the innocence of her
calamity, and also the comforts of Poverty, Baldness, and Chastity.

DECLAM. II. Against the Girl that cut off her Hair to relieve her want.
I Pray do not think that I being a young man do willingly accuse this fair
Maid, who besides is young and tender, and had she not lost her Hair is a
beauty too. There lies a necessity upon me of undertaking this ungrateful
Province. Behold this wretched young wench every way surrounded with the
greatest extremity! It Is true indeed, she is sufficiently embellished with the
endowments of nature, but poorly furnished (God wot) with the gifts of Fortune;
being far better adorned with beauty, than enrich't with an Estate; she has a
chest indeed, but small and empty. But though Fortune heaps no gold in her
coffer, yet Nature has shed it upon her Hair. But see! at length this blind
Goddess sends her gifts, but I fear on hooks, and so baits the Damsel with her
deceitful presents. The silly Girl receives with one hand the boons of Fortune,
and bestows with the other the goods of Nature; she takes the money, and gives
her hair.

But (alas!) of how little value are these dangling tresses, those superfluous
threads of her troubled head, if compared with the omnipotence of sacred gold?
'Twas this opinion that deceived the Virgin into such deformity, which she had
rather richly endure with money, than poorly without it to enjoy her beauty
entire: and her charms inviolable; as if one and the same could not be fair and
needy; and as if the features of a woman were not a richer dowry, than Attalick
wealth. Beauty does that in the softer sex, which valor does in the stronger;
and as this does ennoble the base, and advance them to a pitch of dignity and
honor, so that does raise the mean, and recommend them to the embraces of
Kings and Princes. How vile therefore and what a nothing is a little modicum, a
parcel of money, if standing in competition with the Divinity of beauty! This
unfortunate Lass has made such a swop as Glaucus in Homer, who changed away
his gold foolishly for brass, and may deservedly be styled the very Proverb of
stupidity.

But consider, (I pray) urgent necessity did press upon her: The reward of her
hands could hardly defend her from the injuries of cold and hunger; labor and
diligence was all her possession, and her whole revenue. But who diminishes
that true wealth far to be preferred above Persian riches? But what hurt is
there in a shaven crown, though there is no money given for the filth and
excrements of a nasty head? We confess our hair to be nothing else but the
scurff and dregs of a cribrous head, stretched and extended into slender
threads; but the more vile the materials, the more admirable and exquisite the
skill and workmanship. The excellency of these above other locks does evidently
appear from the very desires of him that buys them, which were greedy and
pecuniary. Behold! how importunate his petitions! How vehement his wishes! and
how eagerly does he long for the possession of them? For this very reason (O
besieged Virgin!) because he is so instant, deny his request; for if fictitious
cruck's add such a grace to other heads what glories and prettinesses must
these scatter upon her neck, being never transplanted from their native soil,
nor ever deprived of their natural elegance.

On this thy crime do thou thy self pass sentence (O most indiscreet Virgin!)
Thou can not be acquitted by thy self thy Judge. The richer metal of thy
golden hair thou have changed, and truck't for viler silver, and ha^ delivered
that to the buyer, which might have been a credit and an ornament to the seller
-- Beware therefore for the future of thine own glass; For that which even now
did please thee with the lovely reflection of thy flattered Image now
affright's thee with the mormo's, and represented horrors of thine ugly
shapes: neither is there any reason why thou should expect a milder doom from
our tribunal, whose candor, smiles, and expanded brow, your filthy baldness
has terrified and converted into contracted frowns.

DECLAM. III. Tiberius did well, in forbidding the Kindred of those that were
Condemned to Lament and Mourn.
IF the sacredness of Laws ought to be kept and preserved inviolable; and if a
domestic conspirator is more dangerous than a foreign invader, then wicked
sighs breathed out for criminals, are to be accused as guilty, and mourning
weeds presage as much the fate of the mourner, as the death of him for whom he
griev's. Certainly the Emperor did well consult the good of his Citizens who
forbad and condemned both the rebellion, and impiety of those groans and tears
that were both uttered and shed at a wicked funeral. That conspiracy ought to
be buried in the deepest silence, which, with a clamorous grief would recall the
soul of an expiring Tyrant, repair the decays of wasted strength, and with a
new life restore fresh and more vigorous treacheries. It had been noble and
generous at the death of a Captain, though an enemy, to perform such funeral
rites; which his soldiers would have celebrated with solemn pomp. Thus in vain
the Hero of old breathed his soul into his gasping companion, in vain he
embraced him, closed his eyes, and in vain he imbibed his last breath: But when
a villain dies, let his neighbor fear, nay let his unhappy issue too, to suck
and receive his last spirit, lest the wretch should bequeath in the legacy of a
sob his crimes and should pant slaughter, and so after death live in his
kindred still a murderer; as mad dogs by biting and hags by kissing instill
their poisons, and leave a deadly dart on their friends lips. Hence often it is
that an innocent son possessing the soul of his damned father, inherits his
vices and his punishments too.

The Deities would have us dumb and silent who with secret darts do scatter
death, forbidding all noise, but their own thunder, and seeing no body that is
guilty dies lamented by his neighbor, we must obey Fate; Thus one being
smitten, the prudent herd consulting its safety, deny's a refuge to the wounded
Deer, and willingly comply's with the expert Archer to prevent the slaughter of
more sacrifices.

Grief trickling from Parents in such liberal showers, seems to suspect the
integrity of the Judge, and to accuse the magistrate of injustice too, whilst
he is thought to be corrupt, and his power criminal. And indeed, well may such
tears affright, and terrify, which do patronize wickedness, and it is Authors
too. Though they distill silently, and in their first drops discover only but
feeble angers, but at length, when floods shall meet with floods, and Blasts of
sighs are opposed by blasts, then the deluge of sorrow swells into complaints,
and boils, and ferments into impotent revenge. The aspect of these mourners
grow fierce and cruel, who execute with their looks, and murder the assertors
of their own right. After such mild severity, and so calm a storm, let it shame
the Citizens to weep more! let them blush to grieve for dying treachery, and
let not the outcry of a conclamation, but more pleasant noises attend the
hearse! If a doleful mother always pregnant with a vicious brood, should still
deplore her nefarious offspring, in vain are prisons, and tribunals; where the
Hypocrisy of grief, and counterfeit lamentations corrupt the fidelity and
integrity both of Judge and witness; and so the guilty enjoy their suffrages,
and so numerous Patrons of vice do expiate the crime.

If guilt be in so great esteem, let the Guard be armed from a full prison, and
let the weeping City reduced and profligated by a rebellious Citizen, feel
those treacheries, of which the lamented villains were the Authors! and let it
deplore the loss of its robust vigor so plainly enfeebled by their strength;
Thus the swift Heart is grieved at his horns, when their unprofitable weight
does hinder flight, and when the useless burden of his branching head shall
expose him as a prey to the cruel hunter. The condition of the Republic was
more prosperous, and flourishing after the slaughter of these Citizens; For
whilst friends do torment, and joyfully punish malefactors, the old contagion
begins to languish, and that pristine fury dispersed amongst many dies and
determines in the author only: But if turgent sorrow shall improve the
fertility of growing impiety, and the poison that is nourish't in one member
does not only infect a single man, but corrupt also the whole alliance, then
the compassionate Father in vain laments his conscious grief, the Mother in
vain repents of her unjust sorrow and that she has thus polluted her innocent
tears, which deserve to be punished, not for her own, but only for the guilt of
her condemned son. And thus, whilst the same crime has made them all equal,
and they are as much allied by vice, as blood, let the whole family be accused,
and the whole progeny be condemned! let no solemn honors confiscate with his
heritage attend his hearse; no funeral rites grace and adorn his profane pile!
Let not his condemned ashes enjoy the repose of a quiet Urn! Let his carcass
lie unburied, that as well dead as alive he may suffer punishment.

DECLAM. IV. The Carthaginians did very ill, in crucifying a Captain
unadvisedly waging war, though he returned with Victory.
THough a reverent esteem is to be shown to Laws, and the sanctions of the
Country are not to be despised, yet it is unjust (methinks) to condemn to the
cross this Captain, who so unwillingly did violate but one of these, and that
merely to defend the City, and all things besides, from the violence and injury
of a furious enemy. Lawgivers know not what a day may bring forth; their
Constitutions and Decrees must give place a little when occasion shall require,
the Prudence of the General is disregarded; lest, if the Magistrate should by a
Gibbet deterr the Soldiers from conquering against their orders, they should
so much fear capital punishment, as not to endeavor the safety of the
Republic. How does this Captain fluctuate, afflicted with the dubious fate of
Metius, being on all sides distracted by instant death! If he should be
conquered, he becomes a sacrifice to the insolence of his enemy; and so ruin
and destruction must needs befall him; but if he triumphs, the cross, a gibbet,
and a more ignoble fate attends him. However he had rather try the clemency of
noted Carthage, than expose himself, his Country, to the cruelty of a
Victorious, and odious Nation. He hoped that his good success might have easily
atton'd for the envy of the fact, and that it would not have been so ungrateful
to Carthage; in regard he had been so adventageous to it. He fights therefore
and overcomes, and by the votes of the Carthaginians he is adjudged to the
cross. A man certainly most worthy of life, who for the public good made
himself obnoxious to so severe a death.

But what unjust cruelty is this, to hurry a Conqueror spared by the tempest
of war and arms, to a punishment more barbarous than his enemies sword? He that
contrary to the Laws, and with suspense of success, or unfortunately joins
battle, let him endure the deserved smart of his own rashness; but whosoever
inflicts penance on a Conqueror, whose war both the favor of the Gods, and the
event do allow of, he both disquiets and accuses Heaven. By what an unhappy
kindness of the fates has our captain survived the battle, to be reserved a
victime for the ignominious cross! He might have fell (being conquered) by the
revenge of his enemies, without the crime of a guilty Judge. But whilst by the
unjust suffrages of the Citizens he is punished with a gibbet and disgraced
too; the life of the Conqueror, and the justice of the Country go both to
wrack.

So falls our Captain, as famous for the merit of his excellent valor, as
remarkable for the disgrace of an ungrateful City; who, that he might render
Carthage victorious, was not startled at the danger, either of field or
tribunal, but twice hazarded his life, and had twice conquered, if the
Carthaginians had not been more obdurate than his enemies soldiers. He died
not being overpowered in battle, neither through his own miscarrage or default
of Fortune, his punishment is aggravated by the unworthiness of it, for he is
adjudged by them to death, to whom by his victory he gave life.

This great Severity may be thought the greatest Justice; which though it may
be defended perhaps by Law, yet not in Equity. What if the Captain being
assured of Victory did not expect the commands of his Country? An Enemy may be
conquered before it can be determined by the Senate, whether a General shall
fight or not. The Fate of this Officer is very deplorable, who might be
compelled by the Laws to be conquered, but could not overcome securely against
them. But the sense of the Law is to be regarded, and not the terms. The
Carthaginians forbad their Generals to fight against the Orders and
Constitutions of their Country, because Captains, especially young ones, are
inflamed with a desire of Renown and Victory, and oftentimes run upon an
engagement rashly, so that the Strength and Prosperity of the Republic is much
abated, and the Glory of their Nation obscured by the fatal overthrow of their
defeated Army.

But our Captain, wise and prudent, as well as valiant, knew he should conquer
before he sought; neither is it to be doubted, but that the Lawgivers
themselves, if they had been present at the War, and had understood the
conveniences of Fighting would have advised to them an Encounter. How unjust
therefore is it to condemn that, which, if present, they had approved of; and
that too after the Victory was won, and Trophies raised through the Conduct and
Valor of this wise Captain! -- Certainly there is reason to suspect that the
Carthaginians did not so much take ill the violation of the Law, as they envyed
the Honors and Triumphs of the Victor; and therefore censured him to so
shameful a death. His doom was barbarous and cruel, and if after the dangers of
War the Citizens shall thus at home threaten the cross to their victorious
Captains, they may deservedly fear, least hereafter they should want men to
defend their Country.

DECLAM. V. Whether Codrus did well in devoting himself to destruction, and
losing both his Life and Liberty for the safety of his Country.
Against Codrus.
SEeing there is no Happiness to a people, but what depends on the Counsel and
Valor of a prudent Prince, He therefore that throws away his life for his
Countries good, seems not so much to prevent it is misery, as to increase and
hasten its approaching Ruin. For after the decease of a valiant Emperor who
dares not assault a people wretched, and without a head? Who dares not provoke
them being destitute, and void of Strength? Who hopes not to subdue them, and
to raise Trophies to himself from their Spoils, seeing they are without
Counsel, which is a stronger fortress aginst their Enemy, than Bulwarks and
Castles.

The sudden death of Codrus might perhaps remove from his Country some present
calamity; it might perhaps disperse an imminent Storm. But (alas!) to what
Evils is it left exposed, now he is gone, who could alone preserve it who
whilst he lived was its only safeguard? There is no Law observed now the
Emperor is dead. The distracted People sheath their swords in their own
bowels, and by mutual slaughters bring that destruction upon themselves, which
was forbidden by the Oracle to fall upon the Peleponensiaus. No Homage, and
Obedience is paid to Governors, the Subject has shaken off the yoke from his
neck, and every miscreant lays unjust claim to that Empire, which was left by
the Princes voluntary death -- Thus (O Codrus!) have thou involved others in
thine own Ruin, and thy Death has been more pernicious to thy Country than
ever could thy Life be, which was so odious (as thou thought) to the
Athenians. But yet 'twas so dear to the Gods, as that thine Enemies were
commanded not to deprive thee of it, or to dip their swords in thy precious
gore. But thou disdainst so kind a Favor, and by fighting (like the Giants)
against Heaven, have exposed thy self to an ignominious Death. For Codrus did
not Heroically in the Field discomfit his Enemy with a threatening look, neither
shining in Armor, or besmeared with Blood, did he breath his last, but deludes
his Enemy with a disguise in the habit of a poor man, and does spontaneously
embrace a degenerous Death.

Seeing he undertook such great things for his Country, he (without doubt)
proposed to himself great Rewards; such as should purchase him an eternal name,
and transmit his Fame to future Ages. But who will lament his immature Fate,
whereas the Ruin of the Republic is to be more deplored? What Subject will
sing his Encomiums, seeing he has deceivep not only his Enemies, but his
Friends too? His Fate is deplorable on both sides, seeing by his death the
Garland is won, and the Empire is destroyed. Thou wast inflamed (O Codrus!)
with too great a Devotion and Zeal for thy Country, who wast so forgetful of
thy Life and Liberty, and dids't so contemn the Care of the Gods. If the former
course of thy Life was just, yet now thou have committed an heinous Crime, thus
by offering violence to Nature, and exercising Tyranny over thy self, Let not
Nature be thus violated!

Codrus has lost his golden Liberty, to free his Country from filthy Bondage;
has laid down his Life to give it continuance, and to rescue it from Death;
But how can it survive, and live, when he is dead, who by his Valor alone did
preserve and defend it, and who (whilst in Being) was both the Delight and
Orna^ent of the People. He had more prudently consulted the Athenians good, if
he had still reigned, and if the Enemy had not killed the Prince, but the
People, and brought them to so sad and fatal an end.

Thus lived this stout Hero, who might lawfully support the sinking state,
might punish the pride of his triumphant Enemies, might with his Life and
Valor (seeing he could purchase Victory by his own Blood) have animated and
encouraged the conquered Athenians, and repaied their slaughter again with
ruin. For it is not the part of a Valiant Captain to yield at the first wound,
but obstinately to pursue flying Victory, and with a pertinacious resolution,
solicit adverse and reluctant Fortune; and as it were extort violently from
the Gods the Palm of Victory.

Codrus by his signal Piety to his Country, has through his Death purchased to
the Athenians Victory and Safety; But yet he had showed himself more wise, and
valiant, if escaping but one, though unhappy battle, he at length by a more
prosperous event of War, had made himself Victorious, and his Country too.

DECLAM. VI. Whether Paulus Emilius did well, who, utterly desparing of the
Safety of the Republic, rush't wilsully into the Battle, and caused his own
Death.
AFter so unfortunate a management of Affairs, after so cruel a slaughter of
his Soldiers, and the total overthrow of his whole Army. Can Aemilius (do you
think) live an ignoble Life? Do you believe I can endure Hannibal flushed with
Victory, and triumphing over a routed Consul? Seeing my Soldiers are so
ambitious of the glory of Valor, that when their Strength fails, and their
hands are unprofitable, they had rather expose their heads to the Conquerours
weapons than decline a Fight, as if they would hinder Victory, when they cannot
conquer: Seeing my Common Soldiers give so excellent a specimen of Roman
Courage, shall Paulus their General basely fly? Seeing my stout Cavalry
protected me in the Battle, and so bravely fell in the hot dispute, shall I
basely survive them, and run to Rome? And there (like Women and Children)
lament the Ruin of the State which I had so illy defended? Shall I only shed
tears for my Country, whilst you faithful Souls pour out no less than your
last Breath? Rather let mine Enemy slice me into a thousand pieces, and spill
my very heart-blood; that the Citizens may know, that I contemn Death with the
same Courage, as I did formerly their unjust Reproaches, and let the Conqueror
Hannibal understand, that we have yielded to him in Fortune only, but not in
Valor. I fear not to be censured Rash and Furious, and too unadvised in my
Actions, for what do I desire that seems so unreasonable? Seeing I cannot live
without Reproach, and Envy, I only seek an honest Death.

You all know in my former Consulship, when things were better with me than
now, how I scarce escaped with my Life from the Popular Tumult; And what do you
think the displeased People will do in so great a Desolation and Slaughter of
their Soldiers? But why do I mention things of so long a date? In this present
Consulship the ungrateful Citizens did upbraid with Sloth and Cowardice,
though by my Care and Counsel, I diverted this Plague that hung over their
heads, and rescued my men from the jaws of their Enemies by detecting their
Treacheries. What a man have I showed my self in this Battle, who have fought
illy, and (seeing I durst not die) who have fled more basely? Fancy me leading,
like Cattle, the remainder (if there be any left) of my rallied Army, through
unwayed Mountains, and Summer Thickets! Fancy us to fly (like Hearts) and to be
stunned with the noise of our close Pursuers! Fancy us entering the City
overwhelmed with grief, and their Sorrow to swell at our Approaches! I am not
to be carried there (after the Roman manner) in a Triumphant Chariot; And
indeed, I know not the use of such a Chariot, unless to carry me to the utmost
limits and bounds of the Earth, whither the name of Hannibal, the Report of
this Overthrow, and the Execrations of the City cannot reach.

Methinks I see the Patrons, and the Clients mixed together, and all in Public!
Methinks I see the wretched Matrons running on all sides to the Hallowed
Temples, and sweep the Altars with disheveled Tresses! We hear nothing but the
Howlings and Lamentations of the Citizens; nothing but the complaints of them
that weep. In vain they do now implore my Aid; now they curse that unhappy
General. Methinks, I hear the enraged Multitude railing against me in such
language; Give me my Children! Restore my Parents! Return my Soldiers, who may
defend the walls! All which Clamor is an harsher sound than noise of the
treacherous Carthaginians, that assanlted us in the Rear, than the groans of
Soldiers beset with Enemies, than the dismal voice of Hannibal, whereby he
pronounced to his Soldiers certain Victory.

But though things are grievous, yet if they benefit my Country, I can bravely
bear them. I could wish to live though in Disgrace and Infamy, if thereby I
could any wise advantage the Republic. But what profit can accrue to you from
the single Valor of one, and he but a private person? Where else can I have
another Army? With what Courage will Soldiers fight under so unhappy a
Captain? Surely they will find a more prosperous General. Why being a Coward do
I live so long? unless it be to see another Consul subduing those Enemies that
conquered me, or to see the demolish't walls of Rome; the former will reflect
upon his Name, the latter injurious to his Piety; but a glorious death will
deliver from the Infamy of both.

I will follow you (O my Soldiers!) and with you will I die, and (what pleases
me most) I will dye in the Battle. Neither will I perish by every obvious and
feeble hand. I will break my way through the thickest ranks, and through the
midst of mine Enemies weapons will I smite Hannibal. And (my dear
Fellow Soldiers!) I will appease your Ghosts, either with the Victors gore, or
else sacrifice mine own, and so, shall I escape Contumelies, and Reproaches,
and shall wash away mine Ignominy with mine own Blood.

DECLAM. VII. Whether Tullus Hostilius did well, who first taught the Romans
the Art of War? Aff.
I Am persuaded you marvel that I being in a Gown, should take upon me the
defense of Arms: But I do not personate the Soldier, but act the Orator; and
why such wondering at my undertaking? Seeing I am only about to defend that,
which both protects me and the Republic too. 'Twas War that laid the
Foundation of the Commonwealth, and 'twas War that raised it to such a pitch of
Glory. In vain the Warlick God of Rome had in stolen Embraces begat Romulus:
unless the Youth by traduction had his Fathers Spirit. In vain had Numa taught
them facred Rites, and holy Cercmonies, unless Hostilius by his Arms had
protected his Religion and sacred worship of the Immortal Deities. Jupiter
himself is of no esteem without his thunder, and disarmed Apollo appears
ridiculous.

Rome the Mistres of the whole world, merely flourish't by the help of Mars;
and has raised eternal Monuments and Trophies of Valor; whereas other Nations
have lived ingloriosly without Arms. Not the least spark of Roman Prowess had
appeared, if Hostilius had not instituted Martial Discipline. It Is true, War
does sometimes rage amongst harmless People, and those must needs be subdued,
who cannot with Arms assert their Right. You would not have your Country the
Scene of War, but how can you expect a Freedom from the same, when every member
of the State wages an intestine War against it self? I mean the mutual
conflicts of disagreeing Passions; and (if we believe Philosophy) we had not
lived unless sprung from the Quarrels of the jarring Elements, neither can we
die unless dissolved by the Discord of our first Principles.

Is Martial Discipline ungrateful to your ears? And must this Art worthy of
Eternity, be utterly abolish't, without which, Domitian could not so much as
kill a Fly? Perhaps you dread a Warlike Death? as if Soldiers so well
acquainted with it, did not know how best to suffer it, as if they did not
understand what themselvers were, who behold Death daily triumphing over dead
bodies; so that we may say (what some of Philosphy) that the Military Art is
the Meditation of Death Hostilius did not institute it by Man's Advice, but by
the Counsel of the Gods. For there was in the world such softness of Spirit and
effeminacy of Mind, that the Art of War was given from above to prevent the
degeneracy of the Masculine Sex. Jupiter himself had had a Squob upon the earth
as well as Vulcan, unless Mars and Victoria had come to assist him against the
Giants. And do you not yet esteem Gradivus for a Deity? Is his a fictitious
Godhead, when Emperors his Adorers are esteemed Deities? Do you thus requite
him? If this be the case? Away (ye Philosophers!) with your Heroical Virtue!
Away with thy sacred Buckler (O Rome!) dropped from above as a proof of its
Divinity! Away with the feigned Gods of the Poets! and with Jupiter himself!
Let Heaven fall!

But I fear, lest, if I am too tedious, the Tribune will inflict upon me a
Military Mulct. I have sounded a Retract: And if you think I have not defended
Hostilius well enough (like an Orator) with my Tongue, I am ready to fight for
him (like a Soldier) with my Sword.

DECLAM. VIII. Whether Horatius is guilty of Death, who killed his Sister for
weeping at the sight of the Spoils he took from her Paramour? Aff.
CEase to wonder that I dare appear against and accuse Horatius, whom the
Romans have acquitted; and unworthily Crowned with triumphant Laurel! Behold!
the man besmeared with his Brothers blood, and being not content with one
Impiety, he goes on to propogate unexpiable crimes. Thou wretched Villain!
Whither did thy Fury hurry thee, thus to revenge the tears of thy Sister dropped
at the hearse of her deceased Sweetheart, thus, not to suffer her to enjoy her
Lover nor to lament him neither? It had been more becoming thy self a Roman, to
grieve that he happened to be an Enemy, and that 'twas thy misfortune to shed
his Blood, and that thy respect to thy Country had so surpassed thy Kindness to
thy Family and Sister. Love and Mildness are natural to Women; and therefore
not to be removed with Sword and Violence. Thou wast content not with the
Victory obtained over the Curiatii, but thou ventest thy rage upon Female
Innocence, and levels thy Malice at thine own Sister.

O Horrid Wickedness! worthy the memory of future ages. For who but this
Horatius (like a fierce Lion from his prey) would have returned from the
slaughter of his murdered Brother, and not yet glutted with Blood, would sheath
his Sword in a woman's Bowels? What have ye done (O Romans!) in acquitting a
person both guilty of Parracide, and Ingratitude too? How can you endure that
such a miscreant should live within the Consines of your Empire? Thou (O
impious Rome!) who have filled the World with War and Ruin, and contemnest the
Deities with reproachful threats; Thou (I say) at length art justly punished,
and deservedly suffers the thunder of the Gods, and the Frowns of Heaven. Thy
Foundation was laid in gore, and thy Deeds are Bloody, and thy Offspring
Vicious and debaucht. Why do thou glory in such lewd Actions? And why do
thou not punish this Murderer amongst the most flagitious Malefactors? If we
should ransack the Corners of the whole world, we shall never find an Example,
that can parallel the Ingratitude, and the savage Barbarity of cruel Horatius;
who offering his vanquished Enemies, to his Angry, and injured Country, has
committed an heinous Fact, and has fully'd his name with perpetual Infamy, in
spilling the Blood of his Sister for a sacrifice to his Fury. Nero and Caligula
those monstrous Parricides of that age deserve not so much the names of Apes,
and Vipers, as he to be branded with Eternal Ingratitude.

If (according to the saying of that noble Roman) it is more honorable to save
one Citizen from death than to slay a thousand Enemies, of what horrid Villainy
then is he guilty, who after a signal Victory has inhumanly destroyed a poor
woman, and toolt away the Life of one, for whom he had done well, if he had
resigned his own? What if full of Fury, he came laden with the Spoils of his
conquered Enemy? What if his Sword was still died with the tincture of their
Blood, yet the Inhumanity and Brutishness of the Action deserv's no mercy?
Should he travel the Universe, he would scarcely find a Patron of his
wickedness.

DECLAM. IX. Horatius vindicated.
I Wonder with what face ye Romans dare condemn Horatius, who rescued even now
from Fire and Sword not only your Republic but your Lives too, who has
snatched them from the jaws of death, and safely preserved them. Ungrateful
Rome! How he has deserved so ill at thine hands, as thou should thus destroy
him? It Is a bloody Crime to kill him, to whom thou art more obliged than to thy
Father Romulus; For he only drew the bare model of the City, but the other
secured it when Populous with Inhabitants, when crowded with People, and surely
it is better not to be, than to be a Slave.

But why is he come to this? what fault is there in him, besides his Indulgence
(if that be a Crime) to his dear Sister? who was the only cause, that she
should enjoy, being dead in the shades below, that Sweetheart, whom she could
not obtain alive on Earth above. But if he did it out of mere Revenge, then
this is as commendable as the former Action, and there is more of Glory, more
of Horatius in this, than there is in that; For his noble Spirit scorned that a
Roman Lady, and his Kinswoman too, should with improper tears, and unseasonable
grief so servilely lament the death of his Enemy. He would not have the very
Sex to want its Praise; and so great was his Zeal and Affection to his Country,
as that he would not spare his offending Sister. But if none of all her
Virtues, and Deserts can wipe off the guilt, or make an Atonement for this
Crime; yet pardon (I beseech you) her for her Fathers sake^ Pity and behold him
with much Clemency; he will scarce survive after this great Disgrace, and thus
you will kill two Noble Romans with one blow.

But consider I pray. His provocation to the Fact extenuates the Guilt: For
seeing your selves, your Fortunes, and all that you have you owe to his Valor,
that unhappy Woman by her impertinent grief, seems to prefer the safety of the
Enemy, before her Fathers, or her Countries welfare; and appears to be troubled
at nothing else, but that the Third did not perish with the two other Brothers.
Rome may shortly want another preserver, for the Albanes are a free People,
never under Subjection, and therefore it is doubtful, whether they will keep their
League, and endure your Government, utterly disregarding their own Liberty: And
then Horatius may be as useful, as he was before; and that Army which sent back
their Legions untouched, and triumphant to Rome, may again most wonderfully
defend you, and strike a terror into all your Enemies: For without doubt where
ever is this other Genius of our Commonwealth there will be the Fates of the
Albans. For our valiant Captain has destroyed their Forces with his own hand.

But now if a Fathers Prayers and a Fathers Tears, if a Victory purchased by
himself alone; If Innocence and the Danger of an ensuing War cannot wash off,
and Expiate this Crime; Go on then with your rash Judgment! Punish with death
this execellent Citizen! Condemn (if you please) stout Horatius; but consider
withal your Strength is weakened, your Sinews are cut, and that Rome will fall
with it is brave Captain.

DECLAM. X. Zopyrus cunningly commanded his body to be torn, and wounded, that
he might betray, by the Stratagem, the City of Babylon to King Darius.
For Zopyrus.
THough it may seem unjust to lay down our Lives for the public good, because
repugnant to Nature, and inconsistent with the Cowardice of timorous men; yet
there is nothing certainly more noble and glorious, than after the Virtuous
course of an honest Life to resign our breath, and all for the Safety of our
King, and Country. Now this Zopyrus that so injured his body to betray the
City, is as commendable as he, who falls a sacrifice for the Kindomes glory;
For he did not die with Infamy and Disgrace, but lived not only to the Honor
of his Country, but to the Reproach of his Enemies, and to his own credit and
reputation. If the welfare of the Public had required his Life, he would have
laid aside Mortality, and have put off his body as willingly and as readily, as
he had deformed it. And thus Zopyrus devotes himself to ruin for the safety of
his Country. And how much better is it to deface the Beauty, to tear the Limbs,
and to rage with Cruelty on the parts of his Body, than to melt down his
Strength and exhaust his Spirits by Softness and Luxury, and so to ruinate the
whole Structure.

Who more worthy than Zopyrus? Who more to be beloved? who to adorn his Country
with Peace and Glory, has represented himself an ugly Spectacle. Whosoever
dispraises him does in effect commend the Timorous, and Slothful, and hints
this as his Disgrace, that he had profusely spoiled the Sweetness of his
Aspect, the Charms of his Face, and wasted prodigally his very Blood for his
Country, and shows he had rather the Desolation of the Public, than the Ruin
and Destruction of one private Feature. He has survived long enough, who has
lived to the Public; and his days are not to be accounted short, who is
registered in the Monuments of Immortal Fame.

It Is an unworthy Age that preferrs Beauty before Valor, and that is much
displeased that the Country owes its Defense to Scarrs and Wounds. Behold
Zopyrus grasping Victory with his own hands! See the demolisht Walls! the burnt
Houses, and the whole City of Babylon lying wast and razed! and those things
that were in vain attempted by the Strength of thousands, are now effected by
the Arm and Policy of one Man! Go on brave Captain with thy undaunted Valor!
Despise the reproaches of malevolent tongues! And big with Renown, the Reward
of thy Deserts, be thou a Monument of Valor, and an unimitable Pattern to
succeeding Ages!

DECLAM. XI. Against Zopyrus.
IF Zopyrus had well weighed and considered of those exquisite pains, which he
so miserably suffered in his tortured Body, certainly he would never have
exercised such Cruelty on his innocent Members, and by an unhappy Stratagem,
have wounded his Enemy through his own Bowels. He had better have killed
himself outright, than thus to besmear himself infamously with Blood, and to
inflict upon himself those dolorous Torments, which make him weary of his life,
and to covet death.

Though he was so sturdy as a little to endure the sharp penance of his
slashed limbs, yet he unwillingly suffered that ugly Deformity, which made him
horrible to others, and a wretched Spectacle to his own self. The squallid
Complexion of his crimson Face was so far from pleasing, that it terrified
Darius; and if he affrighted the King, for whose Glory and Honor he endured the
Penance, how much more lothsom was he to others, who may justly doubt whether
he be a man or Fury? For the loss of his Lips, Nose, and Ears make him rather
resemble the Picture of a Monster, than the Shape of a man; For his cheeks are
besmeared with a ghastly die, his eyes are glutted with the Streams of his own
Blood; and he that should triumph and boast in shedding his Enemies, by an
unhappy Error, spills, and wallows in his own gore.

But now he deservedly feels the smart of those Punishments he inflicted upon
himself; he affects not the sweetness of refreshing odours: but is sad and
melancholy amidst the scents and breath of perfumed Roses; his ears are stopped,
and hears not the voice of charming Eloquence; his mouth is crammed, and utters
no Oratory, but remains silent; so that every one does injure, and affront
Zopyrus, and vex his sores with new wounds.

Thy Case is sad Zopyrus! what is there that can delight thee in the whole
world? All men hate thee, and all fear thee: wherefore think thy self scorned
and odious, and see (if thou have got any eyes) thy maimed Limbs, and lament
the Defects of thy crippled Body: But this is thy only comfort, thy necessity
(according to thy deserts) of suffering these things. But now, if the want of
these Members make him so dreadful a Spectacle in the sight of others, how
frightful and cruel must he seem to his own self! For who would lick his own
Blood? who but a mad man, would with voluntary stripes chastise himself? In
this he appears more bloody than a Butcher, who, though he slays the beast, yet
spares himself; But he after he had wreak'd his Spite, and rage on his
Enemies, he executes his Tyranny upon his own self, and that not so much out of
a Concern or Affection for the Public, as to discover his Cruelty and Madness,
for which he is rather to be punished than commended. And what reason is there,
why he should not suffer, unless because he cannot endure enough? For his
members already have been so forely handled, that no cuts, and slashes, no
pungency can be added to his former dolors; unless all his Pains be wholly
swallowed up by the sting of death; wherefore without doubt, he had never
committed so heinous a Fact, unless encouraged by the hope of a prosperous
Fortune. But we do not see that Darius advanced him; and indeed neither did he
deserve Promotion; for he might have showed his Zeal and his Courage for his
King and his Country many other ways, and those more proper for, or becoming a
man. But that which increases the Absurdity of the Action was, he stained his
hands in needless Blood, which neither the time nor necessity did require of
him; for neither thy Country nor thy self (Zopyrus!) were in any danger; and
Darius, without thine assistance, could have either contemned Babylon, or else
have conquered it. What if the City had been overcome? What if thy Persia had
been laid wast? Thou could not have died more miserably, than thou did now;
For thou have so hackt and hewed thy manlike Face, and so basely spoiled thy
handsome Limbs, that I question whether the Enemy could have mangled thee more.
To conclude, I prithee (Zopyrus!) be sensible, by thy loss, of thy great Folly,
and wish for (though too late) and prefer thy Safety before a Victory.

DECLAM. XII. Brutus perceiving that his Sons endeavored the Restoration of
Kings among the Romans, dragged them into the Forum, and before the whole
Assembly caused them to be scourged with Rods, and afterward cut off their
Heads.
For Brutus.
SEeing the first Age of Rome was so miserably spent under the cruel Tyranny of
seven Kings, and because the City in its Infancy was so oppressed as to be ready
to expire in its very Cradle, I Will be hanged, if ever the Romans are Lords of
the Earth, or if the City be ever Empress of the whole World, I dare warrant
that the Scepter shall never any more be swayed by Tyrants, and that
extinguished Monarchy shall never be revived, so as to involve us again in
another Bondage. The people of Rome have found by Experience that Kings are not
only proud by Name, but by Nature too; and that they have infringed the
Liberties, and Privileges of the Public; and that though they were valiant,
yet they did not so much protect by their Courage as destroy their Subjects. I
cannot relate without Dread and Horror, how often Tarquin has drawn his Sword
against the City, how often he has more raged in Peace, than in times of War,
that he might see the gaspings, and distorted looks of dying men; that he might
hear the sighs and groans, and the sad complaints of the miserable.

Whosoever wishes a new Succession to this last of Kings, he is worthy to
suffer all manner of Thraldom, he is sit to be the first Instance of his
Cruelty; and let him endure a Tyrant in his very Father. If such Princes as
these are fit to rule, let your old distemper return again; if you delight in
new Fury, and in a fresh disease, then let Kings be restored again. But if a
Consular Government excel a Kingly, which does not only punish the Murderers of
the Citizens, but takes care for, and defends the Liberty of the City, then let
Monarchy die with Tarquin; and let not one Tyrant rule with a milder
Government, but let more Nobles consult and act for the good of the Public:
let them defend the City as well from Domestic Confusions, as Foreign
Invasions; and seeingboth the Consuls have Power and Command over one City, and
that but a little one, let them conquer the Nations over which they preside;
let them make their Enemies and Captives become their Citizens, and all the
Provinces of Italy to become Roman.

A single Monarch being hardly enough for one Scepter never by Conquest
enlarged his Dominions, but suspecting the Fidelity of his People, he is wont
to rule in Poverty, and Want, by reason of his oppression, whereby he uses to
defend his Territories; and he weakens his Subjects to prevent their revenge.
Various Slaughters suffered not Rome to grow to the state of Manhood; nor was
it safe for the Kings that the Romans should wax old, lest any by their Deserts
should aim at the Kingdom; so that Punishments and Torments were inflicted to
suppress the growth of flourishing Virtue. Thus the People under a Roman King
obeyed a Tyrant: no man lived securely, but whosoever was suspected, though
harmless, was condemned to death, and whosoever lamented the Innocent, was
punished as Guilty.

But now the Consuls emulating each others Virtue, make Laws for themselves, as
well as for the People; and defend with their own the Roman Liberty. One cannot
so much oppress, but the other is as ready to redress their Grievance: neither
can they vex the Republic with private Animosity; but they must turn their
Fury upon their own selves. And thus the haughty Lion affrights with a noise
the common Herd, and preys only upon little Flocks, but when he has in view
another Lion, he is struck dumb, and silent; and they both disdain the
neglected Cattle, but both emulous and jealous of each others Honor, and
neither brooking the equality of a Rival, do engage mutually, and terrify no
more the despised droves, but exert their Fury upon, and seek to devour their
own selves.

If this Consular Government please the Senate, then these Roman Youths may not
by Force subvert it without Punishment. They seem to undermine the City, to
affect the Kingdom, and to revoke themselves instead of Kings. These Younkers
certainly aspire too high, who take up arms against the Fathers, Consuls, and
established Laws of Rome. Professed Enemies, that dare do any thing, never
strike at the Form of Government. Every Nation may (as it pleases) Dispose of
its people and may restrain them by what ties it lists; and Cities at Emnity
do not give Laws to themselves, nor do they foment civil Broils among their
Citizens or embroil their Citizens in civil wats.

Seeing therefore the Government of the Consuls is either to be established by
the death of the Conspirators, or to be abrogated for the future by a free
Remission, the most just Brutus did justly condemn his Sons for the Liberties
of his Country, and for the Privileges of Rome; And that he might not survive
a childless Parent, he the Assertor and Father of the Laws has translated into
his own Family, and has adopted the Citizens in the room of his Sons.

DECLAM. XIII.
Against Brutus.
AFter the Foundation of the Empire laid in Blood, and such a continual
succession of horrid Cruelty (as if it was just, that as Rome in her Infancy
consecrated her future Grandeur by so a Barbarous a Crime, so she should defend
her Safety by repeated Slaughters, and Patricidial Murders maintaining thereby
the limits of her Power) I say, after the frequent Violations of the Laws of
Nature, and the exile and banishment of proscribed Humanity, or Prescription of
exiled and discarded Humanity; It Is no wonder that Brutus should exert his rage
on his own flesh, and more Cruel than Indians (who only devour their dead
Friends) should wreak his Fury upon his own Bowels. He slays his own sons,
those dear Pledges of himself, because he would not favor the private ties of
Affinity: But let him satisfy his Fury so savagely, and that he may be a
safeguard to Rome, let him be fierce and inhumane.

Cease (ye Romans) by the help of the Gods to reduce and subdue foreign
Nations, seeing Rome by her shedding blood, and by her flagitious Crimes, has
given a specimen of her future Impiety; and Brutus the Assertor, and Patron of
Rome, having left his Enemies, prosecutes with Hatred his own Sons, and
triumphing at home in a bloody Victory, is become a Conqueror within his own
house. Let not the Deities hope any more for their wonted Flames, nor for the
solemn Pomp of former Victims, seeing Brutus spared not his very Household Gods;
whilst he equally forgets both his Piety, and his Sons; by the death of his
offspring he shows himself to be but a cruel Parent, by whose blood he has
purchased an ill gotten Liberty -- After such great Specimens of an ambitious
Spirit, and Crimes successfully committed against the Republic, he now
attempts a greater wickedness, and that such an one, which cannot be expiated
by any Sacrifice. For having got the Empire, and by the death of the Kings,
having obtained his desire, he does now beging to wanton in Cruelty, and being
backed with Power, does more violently rage. His Sons, that resist his growing
Tyranny, he prosecutes with a cruel affection and strikes them through with
darts of Love, and (like a swelling deluge checked by violence) he invades them
presently with a double force, and lets them fall as victims, for the defense,
and safeguard of the new Empire.

Most unhappy Young Men! whose Valor alone has made them miserable! who have
done nothing worthy of death, unless it be Capital, to resist the unjust Pride
of their Father, and to defend Rome from the Treacheries of Brutus. Things are
come now to that pass, that there is need both of the Pious and Valiant to
restore the Republic; For what could they do else? if they had not offended
against Brutus, they had sinned (which had been worse) against the Gods and
Country too. A crime is to be chosen, about which they did not long
deliberate. The vainer name of a Father could not affright them, nor the
reverence of a Parent deter them; For let him be no longer a Father of
Children, if he will be no more a Parent of his Country. The Young Men had a
natural Veneration for Majesty, and therefore respect and honor the Kings, and
defend their Prerogatives to their last breath.

The City was so oppressed with Cruelty, and so bloody with the slaughter of
murdered Citizens, that the Gods themselves could hardly relieve it without
exposing themselves to death and danger. But Brutus hastens to his Sons with
the greatest Zeal, and at once does use both Prayers and Threats, he sooths
them up with winning Insinuations, he accosts them with language as soft as
deceitful. He objects unto them the Honor, Glory, and Allurements of Empire,
the great Pleasure, and Privilege of Governing: But our Young Men oppose, and
embrace not this wheedling Courtship, whose Fidelity is not to be shaken,
either by Price or Pleasure, no not by death it self, and therefore the cruel
Father advances himself to the highest pitch of Fury and Impiety, and by the
dismal Tragedy of his Sons, sacrifices to the Liberty of his Country; that
those whom he could not provoke by his Ambition and Tyranny, he might at least
overcome by Death and Envy: Thus whilst he has beheaded his Sons, and
endeavors to spill his own blood, he does not only lose the Reputation of being
Humane, but buries his name in silence and oblivion. He deprives himself of the
comfort of Posterity, and of that Immortality which is for ever propagated by a
dear offspring.

DECLAM. XIV. When a certain City was daily harassed by continual War, the
Citizens at length decreed among themselves to demolish the golden Statue of
the Emperor, to coin money for their subport, and maintenance.
For the Citizens.
IF you know not the greatness of Imperial Majesty, and how much to be defended
by the Lives and Estates of Loyal Subjects; I say, if you do not any otherwise
understand it, yet from hence you may learn, namely, that the Glory of the
whole Empire depends upon the Safety of the Emperor, and as often as War shall
require, Subjects (like Bulls to Jove) must fall victims to their Prince: Then
certainly it is no such great matter to expend a little Gold (otherwise
unprofitable unless in War) for the Honor of the King, for the defense of the
City, Palace, nay of Majesty too. Nothing could be thought on more noble and
more redounding to the Honor of the Emperor, or give a greater Proof of a
Deity, than that Golden Statue pulled down and demolisht in the defense of the
City. If the Imperial Image could so protect the weak Citizens, and (by I know
not what Charm) shows that it can effect somewhat that is August and
Magnificent, if the Royal Essigies could assright Enemies, could stretch out
its Fatal Arms, and kill those with the Cruelty of a Look, whom it cannot
wound with its extended hands, I say, if the mere Figure could do this, what
shall we think then of the real person, whose Statue could drive away his
approaching Enemies? Let it therefore be domolisht, and by its fall, let it
prove that there is nothing belongs to an Emperor, but what is Divine.

We read that the Statue of Scipio did protect the Italians from the
Carthaginians; and that his Relics and Ashes were as useful to Rome, as the
living General. We know that an Enchantress can wound a man merely by waxen
Images; and at once can hurt the Original and the Copy too; can strike the
Image, and hit by Sympathy the Man too; so that, it is not so great a matter for
the Imperial Statue to effect these things, seeing waxen Puppets have something
of Life in them, and become Arbiters of Life and Death. Behold the misery of
the poor City! Contemplate the sad Looks, hollow Cheeks, the paleness of the
Inhabitants at the thoughts, either of present Danger, or fearful expectation
of future Death! Both the Subjects and the Statue are all like to perish, and
like to be involved in the same ruin. But is it not best to preserve them to
secure the Citizens, the walls of the Emperor, and lastly, to protect the
Emperor himself, and all by the destruction of one Statue? For it is easy
after a Conquest, to erect, and raise new Images, and new Statues, and those
greater; and with the Relics of this gold, after Fights and Overthrows, to
make an absolute Image and consecrate it to Caesar.

Let the golden Statue and the sacred Image be quite defaced, that it may be
restored and raised more August and Divine: we do not envy the Emperor that
piece of Divinity, as to be absent, unarmed, invisible, and yet by this Art to
be present at his Battles, to stir up the feeble Citizens, whereby he shows
himself not so much to be an Emperor, as a God.

Though it is an heinous crime to violate any thing, that (for their noble
exploits) is consecrated and devoted to the memory of our Ancestors, yet seeing
neither the Peace of Countries can be enjoyed without Arms, nor Arms be
procured without Pay, it may not seem a wonder, if we endeavor by our honest
Ingenuity, to free our selves from foreign Invasion, and restore our selves to
our fotmer Liberty, and ancient Glory. Ingenuous Spirits are ashamed to be put
under, and to submit their neeks to the Tyranny of a Yoke, and to become
Tributaries to those whom we have freed from ruin and the jaws of Death;
therefore we thought it good, rewards adding Courage to Soldiers to scrape off
the gold from the Imperial Statues, and to coin it into money, and that not to
defend our selves only, but the Gods too: For we were reduced to that
extremity, that unless we had laid out our money and care for the Safety of the
Country, we had certainly perished and been destroyed by them; The Temples had
been robbed of their Gods, and the Deities been deprived of their Temples too;
they had condemned us to hard and miserable Bondage, and that which went
nearest to us, they would have shackled our Hands with unwonted chains. But by
this our Trick, we have prevented our Enemies from sacking Rome, and have
triumphed over those who would have conquered us, and that which makes us more
Noble and Happy, we have not flincht from our first Enterprise, but have
stoutly resisted their fierce On-sets, and have subdued our cruel Enemies, and
that with our Ancient, and truly Roman Valor; and have put their necks
impatient of Bondage under our yoke, and (the Gods favoring our Cause) we have
wholly routed them, and reduced them.

Behold our Enemies enraged with grief, do liment and howl at their miserable
Fate! and curse our Valor, and good Fortune too! Behold on the contrary us
walking in State and Pomp! we are received with public acclamations, and the
Gods have congratulated our fresh Victory, and thank us, for preserving them
untoucht and safe! with what Solemnity will our Triumph be celebrated in
Pompey's Theater? with what joy and shoutings are Trophies erected in Honor of
our Victory? with what care is the Gold and Silver restored to their respective
Statues? and the People of Rome are so far from derogating from, or eclipsing
their Splendour, that they take care to preserve them and to adorn and gild them
with greater Curiosity.

Rome being secure from and having lost its Rivals, and the Gods being free
from all Fear, let us not withdraw from Tumults, and betake our selves to ease
and quiet! Let the City enjoy her former Beauty, and Magnificence; and let the
Roman People display their wonted Glory! Let the Soldiers boast of their
wounds and scars, and let them esteem them their most honorable Badges, and
Ornaments of their Bodies.

DECLAM XV. Against the Citizens.
REligion is preserved inviolable among all Nations, and there is no Villainy so
extreme, no Impiety so cruel, as to allow of, and favor horrid Sacrilege. A
very Enemy himself (though never so much incensed) would scarce suffer the
sacred Temples, and the Monuments of our Ancestors to be profaned and spoiled.
But (ye Romans!) ye have laid aside all Conscience and Religion in so basely
demolishing the Representative of the Emperor, which you ought to have
protected with all your Strength, and with as great care as the Prince himself.
Besides there was no need of committing so great a Crime, for the Desolations
of War threatening Poverty, and the grim Aspect of approaching Death, ought to
have animated them and increased their Courage in the Defense of their Liberty
and Country, and of their own safety, and of their Princes too.

O most earthly and sordid Souls! who breaking the Laws, and contemning and
despising both Gods and Men, have thus villanously profaned most sacred
Majesty (little less to be adored than a Deity it self) so that the Gods are
unsafe, and Jove justly fears, lest you vile Miscreants (like Dyonisius the
Tyrant) should presume to pull his golden Beard. If you could no otherwise have
defeated your Enemies Army, you had better have embraced an honest Death, than
to endure a Life so scandalous, and stained with so horrid a Crime; it had been
better to have been oppressed with Poverty and Bondage, than so ignominiously to
live; and to purchase your Liberty at the price of your Innocence. What
sacrifice can atone for this fact? Ye have (O ye Romans!) by throwing down the
Monument of the Emperor, made an attempt on his sacred Person, and so are
guilty of High Treason.

We do too much indulge the Parricides in suffering them to be openly and
publicly defended, whom the Gods would have punish and slain too; For the
appeasing of whose Anger the whole Religion of the City can scarce suffice:
Because if we rightly consider their Losses, we shall find somewhat which
besides War, and a Siege, we ought to deplore; somewhat that is sad and
Tragical, which cannot at all be ascribed to an Enemy; For behold here are
Citizens, who have added this impious Cruelty to all our miseries, that we seem
merely to be supported by the Benefit of our Sacrilege, and midst the Terrors
and Hardships of War and Hunger, to dare to abuse the Emperor, i. e. to
profane, violate, and contemn the Gods themselves. If an Enemy had done this
we had hoped for a Victime, and would have made them by their Fall to have
expiated and atoned for their Guilt. But now with what Hope? with the
Assistance of what Deity can we take up Arms? for we have lost our Courage,
because our Innocence, and (which is more) our Emperor too. Our Enemies
rejoice, and begin their Triumph from our Crimes. The wicked Citizens boast as
if they had defeated Hunger and their Enemies by their horrid Sacrilege; and
indeed so they have; for the Heinousness of the Fact had scared them with i^
Horror, and put them to Flight, unles^ its Blackness had recalled them and
move^ them to Revenge, and so made them wit^ a double Fury fall upon the
Sacrilegious and exert their Rage upon them. If despair should make us Conquer,
yet we should blush to enter the City, and be ashamed to visit those sacred
Temples, whose Holiness, we have polluted with our unhallowed hands.

Behold how these Pious Inhabitants have preserved their unhappy City! They
have go^ their sustenance by Sacrilege, by which we are fed for sacrifice,
though a whole City is not Victim enough for such a Guilt, where the Gods, the
Emperor, nay our Enemies are to be atoned, and satisfied. We do not complain
of trivial matters; nor are we content with a single Grief; but we lament the
Condition of the whole City, which these Villainous Parricides have distracted,
wasted, and spoiled in the Emperor: For after they had defiled themselves with
this black Crime, they propagated the Contagion to the Vulgar, that every one
might bear the proper Guilt of his own Sacrilege: It grieves us to think how
with a ravenous mouth we devoured the dismal Gates, and how greedily we
swallowed even the horrid ^mpiety. We ow to the Citizens that we ^ive, that we
can courageously behold the horror of the Fact, and so great an Instance of
Cruelty. You thank them for restoring your decayed Strength, for arming you
with your Emperor, and making that a Prey to the Enemy, which they themselves
adored whilst in the Temple. They have spoiled the tutelar Deity, more
venerable than Hunger; they have spoiled the Emperor, more August than the
Image. They have spoiled that, which standing, we might have lived innocently,
even in the ruin of the City. If a Conqueror had entered, we might have been
secure; For the sacred Majesty of such a Statue would either have extorted
Religion from them, or if they have none, 'twill teach them some. But our Grief
has overcome our Hopes, and we have defiled our miseries, and (which is the
last that belongs to the miserable) we have lost Pity.

DECLAM. XVI. Manlius Torquatus to maintain the Discipline of his Camp, killed
his own Son.
For Manlius.
I Am not Ignorant with what Prejudice I stand here before you in the behalf of
Manlius; For I fear that these sad, and harsh Commands will be very ungrateful
to your tender ears, which yet are wholesome for my Son, who either by Fate, or
through Shame of declining Battle, was driven into the body of his thickest
Enemies, and (as it happened) proved Victor: But he, whom no Law or Edict
either of Father or Consul could keep from rashly breaking his rank and order,
is to be restrained by the Sword. Let not Martial Discipline be corrupted by
one ill Example lest the whole Army suffer through Default of one.

Our Manlius aimed at something to be done, more August and Glorious than the
soft Effeminacies of fond Parents; His Passion was more strong and severe than
to defend and patronize his Bowels, his Offspring in so great a Wickedness.
It Is Inhuman and horrid to hate his Issue, but yet to spare such a Son is worse
than Hatred: the Law and Republic cannot be so satisfied; Let the Son suffer
for his rashness, rather than the Commonwealth rue for the wicked Indulgence
of his Father. What People did ever more religiously preserve Martial
Discipline than the Romans? To whom warfare was far more ancient than Parents
or Children; whose well ordered Troops have advanced them from nothing to the
Dominion of the whole world; neither can the Roman Glory be Eclipsed, nor the
wide Empire of the Victorious, Shrink or Decay, unless this strong tie, or
Union of distant Colonies be dissolved by Effeminacy, Lust or Luxury; whilst
with a well disciplined Army (like a well fortified City) they did repel the
Onset of their invading Enemies, they always returned with Triumphant Eagles;
But whilst the Son of Manlius, breaking his ranks, obtains the Victory, he
departs only not conquered.

You have here (most equal Judges) Manlius acting the part, not so much of a
stout and valiant General, as of a solicitous, and careful Parent, nor more
commendable for his Justice than his singular Clemency, who even consulted the
good of the Republic though 'twas to his own damage. He thought it far better
to be the Lord of the Country, than to be called the Father of so stubborn a
Son; neither did he study only the good of his Country, but of himself too; and
whilst he punished his Son with death for declining the Commands of his Father,
he preferred an honest Reputation before an infamous Offspring; and seeing he
could not beget an Heir equal to his Parent, he would have none survive that is
unlike so great a Captain.

But Torquatus lives still, and as long as Martial Discipline, and Laws of
Camps do flourish, Manlius the Patron of Arms will survive and never fall or
decline, but with the very Standards: seeing he smote with the Ax his only Son,
he has vindicated his name from devouring obscurity. Thus he has prolonged
his Life by dying, and surviving himself, has 'een by mortality made himself
Immortal; And so aged Valor withstanding the Teeth of Time and Rottenness,
has transmitted him to Posterity without an Heir.

DECLAM. XVII. Whether it is lawful to use Persian Pomp in the midst of War?
Aff.
Why should I doubt, I know no reason but that only seems unlawful (
Persian-like) to grow rich. We adore a Penurious and a hard Fortune, and lament
the loss of a golden Age, not so much because we are Vicious, as because we are
Beggars; yea our minds are so impoverisht (necessity causes such a degeneracy)
that we cannot conceive the Splendour of the Persian Equipage. It becomes the
Lords of the Earth thus richly to fight; That Magnisicence is honest, and those
Ornaments glorious, which are only the rewards of Sweat and Valor. Persicus
described with his Sword the whole Universe, and commenced Geographer by his
own Victories; he understood Bactria from a Cloak, and the Sogdiani from an
Helmet; his Steed has been laden with Spoils of several Nations, and why then
should he not proudly prance, who has dared to fight for his Harness, and
Trappings, and who will level the Mountains, and lay flat with the ground his
Enemies too, that he might vex his crest with their weighty Jewels?

That Pomp does justly excuse Pride, and is neither vain, nor ridiculous, which
is the reward of ancient Valor, and is a spur to new. Those who are afraid of
Ghosts and Goblins, who cannot undauntedly contemn the Fates, nor dare provoke
death: Let them combat in squallid weeds, and mournful dress: But those that
are of an approved Valor, and who draw Fortune after them bound in chains, to
whom it is the same to war and triumph, why is it not lawful for them to breath
perfumes, to shine with Oils and Balsomes, and to enjoy the Testivity of a
crowned brow, and to use in War all the Pompous Luxury that attends a Victory?

Let the rude vulgar contemn that which is noble and gallant, as if Robes of
Kings and Triumphal Garments must declare the Mind to be Proud and Soft: we
have often seen Virtue (I know not by what unhappiness) half clad in tattered
weeds, and scarcely covered without a Figure: But as if vile raiment were a
Virtue it self, it will be a Reproach to the deserving to be richly attired;
neither is he thought worthy of Praise, who dies for his Country, if he
sacrifice himself with well ordered Hair, and if by chance an importunate Hero
should with a trim aspect put to flight his Enemies, the austere Laws would
condemn him as though still drunk with Victory. When Rome was reduced to so
great extremity as wholly to despair of its sinking Empire, when the Sinews of
War began to crack, and the Strength of the Republic began to languish, and
Roman Valor could atchieve no more, the Senators did not take Sanctuary in
Forts and Garrisons, nor did fly to Arms, but adorned themselves with their
Robes and Purple; whose Senatorian Pomp representing the Sages as so many Gods,
did strike such a reverence into the amazed Enemy, that ceasing to resist, and
awed with the Religion of the solemn Spectacle they began to fear, retreat, and
worship. What need we care? If adverse Fortune befalls us, we shall die in the
same gallantry, wherein we fought, and to the Angry Deities fall crowned
sacrifices: But if our success be prosperous, that will give credit and
reputation, and recommend the Honesty, Virtue of our Magnificence, and will
vindicate the lawfulness of our censured Glory.

DECLAM. XVIII. Whether Philostratus did well, who, to make Death Familiar,
lived in a Tomb seven years?
Against Philostratus.
WHen I contemplate nothing but the noisome ruins of dead Men, and am
conversant only amongst Vaults and Sepulchers, I seem already sentenced, and
adjudged to death, having no other company in my squalid solitute, but the
Society of Monuments and learned Marbles. I am encompassed on every side with
gaping Tombs, but they are not vocal; for amongst the Histories and Epitaphs of
famous Heroes, you will find a silence as deep, as the dismal Cell wherein they
are cloistered. Here you may see the Urn of a Commander adorned with Poetry,
and Laurel too; but as speechless as the heaps of his Enemies over which he
triumphed; There you may read inscriptions as durable as the stone on which
they are written, and which are sacred to the memory of a voluble Orator, whose
mouth now is fuller of dust, than it is of Eloquence; and he that even now was
begirt with a ring of living Admirers, now stands surrounded with the dumb
Attendance of breathless Images.

It is reported that the Statue of Memnon, saluted by the rays of the rising
Sun, became vocal, as if the dead Image was Ambitious to proclaim the approach
of so great a Deity, and as if that Musical God that found out Harmony, had
been the Author, and Inventor of sounds too. But we need not the Influence of a
propitious Heaven, here you may behold a Monument never saluted or seen by the
Sun, and within it a Philosopher (like a certain Oracle) uttering speeches
darker than the Cavern wherein he lies: For our Philostratus inhabits at once
both his Study and Sepulcher too: He reads melancholy volumes that treat of
death, and meditates of certain I know not what trivial notions, and invokes
the Fiend with as fervent Zeal, as the warmer Poet his beloved Muse. But oh!
Philostratus! we have heard some times that the Muses can inspire, but never
knew before that death could dictate. Away with those solemn thoughts about
your latter end! Fly swifter than Fate from the Putrid rumes of filthy
Carcases, and keep thy self as safe from these as thou would from Death! For
within the narrow confinement of this sordid Cave, there is nothing lives,
besides thee and worms: The Air is infected with Stench and Rottenness, and the
place is infested with naught but Horror; with the deformed Shapes of Ghosts
and Goblins.

It Is true, we read of the Vestal Virgins, that being once deflowered they were
interred alive, and were condemned to the perpetual darkness of a dismal Den;
and so extinguished at once both the Flame of their Life and Lamp too. But if
thou (Philostratus!) lie hid any longer in the Cloisters of thy Tomb, we will
suppose thee as criminal as the Guilty Nuns, and think the Austerity of thy
Life to be not so much thy choice, as thy Penance. What Pleasure lies hid in
the obscurity of a charnel House? Wanton Lovers affect the night, that they may
act in darkness; But behold! all things are unfit for lascivious Embraces, all
as cold as the Marble under which they lie; no kisses to be gathered, but from
mouldred Lips, or from the Fragments that are left by glutted Worms.

Behold thy Companions in thy gloomy Cave! Here are the Legs, and Arms; the
Ribs and Thighs of thy scattered Ancestors, as void of Life as they are of
Flesh; There lies a Head, which robbed of its Beauty and Brains too, is a lively
Image of that death thou adorest; behold the sockets of their extinguished eyes!
See the ruins of a nibled nose, as if devouring Venus had been preying upon
the dead, as well as the riots, and feasts on the living.

What heinous crime have thou committed, that thou alone thouldst live amidst
the corruption of rotten Carcases; and inflict upon thy self that Punishment,
which the greatest Tyrants do on their worst Enemies i. e. join thy self alive
to dead Bodies? But thou (O Nero!) in the mean time deservest Praises, as great
as the Universe, which thou rulest, who after a cowardly and ungrateful Revolt
of thy Soldiers, and their Reproaches, more intolerable than their Crime,
did deny to go quick into the Earth, and wast content to rest under a little
spot, who had the possession of the whole globe: It becomes thee who have
subdued the world under thy Feet, to die standing, and thou, who did contemn
in thy looks and language the Bowels of thy dear Agrippina, would easily
despise the viler Entrails of thy common Mother.

It Is the Part of a Valiant, and Heroic Spirit, even against Fate it self, to
level at those, who sit triumphantly, out of the reach of darts, in the
Victorious Chariot, and to fear no more deaths blunter darts, than the keener
steel of their Enemies. Vain are the Terrors of that petulant Fate, which in
this only differs from a smooth Chameleon, that the latter is supported by the
Attraction of Air, the former by the surreption of another breath: There is no
reason therefore, (Philostratus!) to spend seven years in a Tomb, the better to
overcome a momentary death. The Destinies are Sisters, and weak in Sex, and
infirm too; and their Instruments are softer, than the wool they spin; what!
does a Distaff, a Thread, and Scissars affright thee? These are the Toies, not
of Men, but Women; and are as harmless, as the soft smooth Fingers, by which
they are managed, Physicians tell us, that decayed Nature is repaired again in
the space of seven years, and that men are oftener clad with new Flesh, than new
Garments; which if it be true, we believe thou livedst (Philostratus!) not that
thou might die, but that thou might retrieve thy Youth, and that the whole
bulk of thy Body (like the Hairs and Nails of other men) might be revived, and
flourish with new Life. But beware, lest whilst thou lurkest in this gloomy
shade, the Fates should think thee already dead, and so should lose the
expected approach of the desired Destinies, because already buried.

Seeing therefore, Thou have such an earnest desire to know death, leave this
dormitory, and betake thy self to Mars's Field; and there thou may see the
Soldiers brandishing a Sword and Death in the same hand, which as swift as
arrows, peirces the breast of stout Champions, and purpled with gore,
Victoriously triumphs over prostrate Captives! Think and meditate on divine
Brutus, who with a careless Gallantry discoursed with Specter, as with his
familiar Friends. But if these Martial Camps, more dreadful with Horror, than
Throngs of Men, do not please thee; F! to the mournful, yet lascivious tents of
Venus, and there behold Virgins (like Basilisks) kill with the artillery of
their Looks, shooting from their eyes glances keener than the shafts of their
Enemies; For a deep furrow of a contracted Brow strikes a greater Terror than
thy Sepulcher, and one tirannical Aversion of a disdainful Eye, scatters
Darkness as blind as the God of Love. There you may hear fruitless groans
equalling the Torments of a neglected Passion; and such blustering sighs, as if
they would blow out those Flames, which they so violently fan; There you may
see tears flow from a disconsolate Lover in such a deluge, as if they would
extinguish those fires, which first caused them. Behold the Heart and Entrails
so scrocht and burnt, that you would think their Breasts not so much the Fence
or Guard, as the Urn of their Bowels.

In these places, that Fate, which thou so desire, thou may with the same
labor both seek, and enjoy, and (like buried Lamps) may find in the open air
that death, which thou could not obtain in thy closer grave. This we think
(Philostratus!) to be a Prodigy greater than thy Life, that whereas the names
of others do still survive because they are in Tombs, thine lives because thou
wast a Sepulcher; and that Immortality, which others acquire by courting Fame,
thou have puchas't by desiring death.

DECLAM. XIX. Whether Cimon did well, who for the more sumptuous Interment of
his Father sold both his Liberty and Himself too.
'TWas wisely ordained by our Ancestors, that as men, whilst alive, should be
honored with the Tribute of observance and respect, so when dead, should be
attended with the Ceremonies of a decent Funeral. Certainly a very commendable,
and a most human Custom, whereby Men excel other Animals, who know no other
Rites of Burial, than the Solemnity of being devoured by other Beasts, and who
have no other Tombs, than the living Sepulchers of their Fellow Creatures. But
Humane Nature abhors the Brutishness of such Obsequies; for a savage Conqueror
seeing the field bestrewed with arms and scattered limbs, bedews his garland
and sheds tears at the thoughts of his bloody Victory, and indulges his Enemies
the civil pomp of an handsome Interment. Death puts a period to the most
barbarous Cruelty, which never raves beyond the Fatal Stroke. Caesar wept at
the Hearse and pitied the Fate of slain Pompey, whom when alive he persecuted
with the greatest Fury, and with all the Methods and Arts of Ruin.

How unhumane is that Country, which suffers even Strangers to lie unburied!
How much more therefore ought we to Honor with a Sepulcher a Citizen a
Kinsman! But how great an impiety to leave a Parent exposed to the open air! He
is unworthy of his own life, that celebrates not with cost his Fathers death:
Can a Son be excessive in kindness so to his Parent? for whom not only his
Wealth and Liberty, but let him expend his very Life too. He can give nothing
to him, but what he derived from him. Is he only obliged to reverence his
Parents, whilst alive? Must he contemn and spurn at them, when dead? whom Death
among the Ancients did seem to consecrate, and whose Monuments were had in
great Veneration. This our Heir therefore, whose Breast was inflamed with a
Pious Ardor toward his Father, will not have him lie without a Sepulcher, and
scorns that he should have no other Grave but a Prison, and therefore for the
Magnificence of his Funeral, he sells his Liberty and himself too.

We have here a rare Example of unusual Piety, and of a Filial Care! Cimon
showed himself a loving Son to his Father, when alive, and a Pious one, when he
was dead. He imposed voluntarily on himself the Yoke of Slavery, that his
Father might have a Monument; and lost his Freedom, that he might enjoy the
Privilege of the dead: He thought with himself, if his Father should want a
Sepulcher, his name would quickly find one, and the Glory thereof be soon
buried in Oblivion. Degenerous Posterity would lose the Example of so exellent
Virtue, unless his Memory was committed to the faithful Custody of Eternal
Marble, upon which his noble Exploits being engraven, would give duration to
himself and to his Tomb too. He consulted both his own Fame and the Honor of
his Father, who adorned his Hearse with such Solemnity. What renown has he
purchased, who by his own Liberty has set free his imprisoned Father, and that
he should not want a gilded Tomb, He himself was the price of the noble
Sepulcher.

DECLAM. XX. Cardan a Philosopher, and an Astrologer, having foretold the day
of his Death, to fulfill his Prediction, and to save his credit, he starved
himself with Hunger.
UNhappy Cardan! whose Reputation is either hazarded, or his Life exposed to
Danger! The greatness of thy Spirit cannot brook the want of the one, nor
humane Nature endure the loss of the other. But oh the Vanity of that Name,
which Wickedness and Impiety do alone perpetuate, and whose everlasting Memory
derives its Immortality from a death attended with so much Infamy! But pardon
me most learned Ashes, and most unhappy Relics! We dare not summon so great a
Ghost, nor accuse the deceased of such a Crime. Thou have obeyed the Imperious
Motions of the Heavens, and the cruel necessity of the harder Fates. Cardan's
Art is greater than Cardan; and cannot be eluded by the Endeavors of
Misterious Philosophy. But what? He that can master his Affections and nearer
charms, which scorch't and captivated other Mortals, does he now yield to the
distant, and straggling Stars? Those Stars (I say) which, (unless antiquity be
deceived) are much inferior to our Humane Nature, and are compelled by it? How
much more happily by the Flight of Birds, or Entrails of Beasts, might he have
foretold the Event of things, and the hidden Treacheries and secret Stratagems
of his Enemies!

There are some things the Gods envy the knowledge of to Mankind, and would
have them chastely buried, and to lie hid in their first causes; least they
should be profaned and violated by too bold a research; supposing it to be the
greatest piece of Learning to understand the revolution of Times and Festivals,
wherein it may appease the displeased Deities, and humbly offer Incense to the
Celestial Empire. How much prying Mortals have been punished, and chastized
for their too much Curiosity, the waters made infamous by a premature and
unexpected Fate, and Vesuvius celebrated for the Death of Pliny, do abundantly
declare. But if it be a fault to dive and search into the first Principles and
Motions of things; If it be criminal to fly to the utmost Spears, and to know
more than vulgar Capacities, why was man endowed with reason? why does that
Particle of Divine Air animate a Being, that moulders and languisheth with
Sloth, and Negligence, but that it climbs up to the Stars, and visits the seat
of its first Original? Why is the Face of Nature not always the same, but
various, sometimes famous for the clearness of its operations, and sometimes
venerable for its misterious workings? Why is it thus? but that it may exercise
the activity of the vigilant Soul, and that there may be more matter for its
contemplation? She is not satisfied (like the Body) with the delicacies of a
treatment, nor with all the Luxury of the Fruitful Seas, or Teeming Earth. She
delights not (like that) in such narrow Confinements, who feels not the bounds
of an embracing Ocean, but rows about into unknown tracts with a boundless
Freedom. How does she soar aloft, big with scorn of this Inferior World? Not
wearied with the difficulties of its cragged ways, how does it imitate the
incessant motion of the first Heaven?

Most cruel Toil! we reach the Heavens with our Folly; and neglecting those
things, which are the only support of the more solid Felicity of our Lives, we
are distracted with the Images and Shadows of vainer Phantasms. To these we pay
our more frequent devotions, and to these we offer our daily Homage, till tired
at length with the ungrateful Journey, like the waves, a long time tossed with
tedious Storms, we are wearied and languish, and are quite spent into Peace and
Calmness. We are more affected with the narrow precincts of a little Village,
more delighted with illiterate Ease, and a private Retirement, than with our
former pale Endeavors, and with our traversing the Universe, when with a
sacrilegious and bold Industry we wandered further than Hercules Pillars, and
went beyond the bounds as well of Modesty, as Nature.

From no other Fountain flowed our Cardans premature death, hastened, to wit,
by pertinacious Industry, and an indefatigable Soul; which although Fatal to
its Master, yet grateful Posterity will never mention without the highest
Encomiums; and though far from Superstition, it raise no Altars to his Merits,
yet will enroll him amongst Heroes, and advance him to the highest pitch of
Mortals Ambition. Let others reproach his sudden Fate, and abrupt Funeral,
Cardan dies through no other, but his own wickedness; and in vain had he
desired in the Inhumane Get, or Venetian assassine, a more cruel mind to
ascertain his Prediction; neither could he have found one more kindly cruel, as
to free the Philosopher from infamous suicide; and Posterity would not have
pardoned the Crime, if committed by any other hand beside his own, which though
it did most unhappily obey his Master in his Death, yet has made amends for
the Injury by his learned Pen.

But oh! the various Fluctuations of the Soul! This miserable man knows not
what rock to cling to; at the same moment, he does both at once determine, and
yet doubt to die. This Procrastination of his Destiny, argues a timerousness
not becoming Cardan, and he had died more gloriously stabbed with a Sword, than
starved by Famine. But this may be said in Favor of the Deceased, that he
yielded up the Ghost with an undaunted Courage; and whilst others oppressed
with Penury, and grinding Necessity, breath out a faint and languid Spirit, he
neglects his sustenance, and yields to Fate. He underwent not the Destiny of
Petrius, and Renowned Cato, who enjoyed the Felicity of a sudden End, but
satisfied the cruel Command of his Governor, whilst he determined to perish
gently by little and little, and not surrendering to the Fates, but after a long
siege, he truly perceives himself to die -- And least he should be unhappy in
his Death, Let him enjoy for me a silent Urn and peaceable Ashes! Let the Stars
be propitious, whose influence he asserted even with his Life and Blood! Nor
let the Arts be silent of him, who was their great Patron and Protector.

DECLAM. XXI. Alexander, being saluted the Son of Jupiter Hammon, and thereupon
arrogating to Himself Divine Worship, is accused of Pride by his Soldiers.
He defends himself.
SEeing I have exposed my self (O ye Macedonians!) to so many dangers in your
behalf, seeing I have preserved you safe from the Injuries and Violence both of
waters, and Enemies, at Granicum, Cilicia and Arbela, seeing I have stoutly
maintained the Honor and Glory of the renowned Macedons, and have added, by my
Victories, the subdued world to your Empire; I had thought, after such Divine
Testimonies of my Courage you would have subscribed to mine Opinion, and would
have affectionately embraced me like some sacred Buckler, that had dropped from
Heaven. But to Crown me with Divine Honors, I perceive, is not agreeable to
your Customs; you therefore belch out your Reproaches against me, devote me to
the shades, though every one of my Achievements speak me not so much a Man as
a God; A Deity (I say) in regard I never had a repulse, nay Fortune her self,
though obstinate, durst never contradict me.

How often have I, undaunted, rendered my self obnoxious to certain Perils? and
with an Invincible Courage, have (in spite of the Fates) restored the
tottering, chance of War? That I have triumph't over that sickle Goddess, that
I have trampled under feet the ravenous Destinies, and that I am the only
Monarch of the Universe, the Gods and you do well enough understand; that
Jupiter Hammon has rewarded my Deserts with Immortality, and acknowledged me
his Son, you sufficiently know, and it is needless to tell you; why do you not
therefore, with bended knees, adore as a Deity my Divine Majesty? why do you
not believe Hammon, whose credit to this very day remains inviolable? Do
Oracles utter Lies? Do you think me unworthy of the Society of the Gods? What?
have not my conquering Arms advanced me above the ordinary pitch of Mankind?
Have they not made me equal to Hercules and Bacchus.

Observe, (O ye ungrateful Macedonians!) Is it nothing that I have trodden so
much snow, that I have passed over so many impetuous Rivers, and traveled over
so many frozen mountains, which (if you believe Fame) have daunted Hercules,
who had not Courage enough to attempt them? I forbear to mention Victories and
Triumphs; I speak not of subdued Kingdoms and Empires, which were not so much
as known by him, much less subverted by his prowess. I have razed Thebes
without War or Blood, and my very Name has struck such a Terror into Greece,
that it offered me a golden Crown of Victory, and has chosen me her Captain.
My stupendous Glory will not be confined within the narrow limits of the
Macedonian Kingdom, but revolving in my mind the whole Universe, to make way
for my future greatness, I have landed a few men in Asia, and at Granicus have
quelled my most dreadful Enemy with a great slaughter; have reduced Lidia,
Ionia, and Phrygia, and made them submit to my Power.

Finally, having overcome and broken through all opposition, I came to Issus,
where with repeated Victories, I discomfited Darius the Potent King of Persia
with his numerous Army. Afterward it came into my mind, or I recounted how many
slain I sent in one day to the shades below, insomuch that Charon confessed
that his own boat was not sufficient, but that there was need of a whole navy
of Ships for Transportation. And to omit my achievements at Tire, and Arbela,
and an infinite more in other places, I arrived a Conqueror at the Indian
Ocean, and made that a bound both at once to my conquests and the whole world;
and put to slight their wounded Elephants, and made King Parus my miserable
Captive. Passing the River Tanais, I have destroyed the fierce Seythians with a
great slaughter: and the rock Aornon, whose craggy difficulty forced Hercules
from a siege, I alone have attempted, have climbed it and conquered, and have
raised my Trophies and Eternal monuments beyond the bounds of Father Bacchus.

Finally, returning from Memphis, the whole world being at Peace, I made mine
address according to the Custom of my Country to the Oracle of Jupiter Hamon,
where I was joyfully received, and with the gratulations of the whole company
of Priests; nay, Jove himself, the Father both of Men and Gods, descended from
his studded Throne of Emrald, and saluted me as I approach't him; and after
much complement exchanged on both sides, He adopted me to be his Son, and
commanded you to adore your King, and to worship him with Divine Honors.

But you neither hearken to his Commands, nor will believe that I am enrolled
among the Gods. And your Envy does daily more increase against me, because I
hate not Jove, by whose Oracle I am pronounced a God. Are the answers of the
Deities in my Power? He proffered me the Name of a Son. I wish you would believe
me a God, that so you might atone and appease the displeased Deities, and
reward your King with Immortality and Glory; by whose warlike Prowess
triumphant Greece has been raised to the highest pitch of Felicity -- But
though now you think it much to bow your Heads to my Deity, yet I fancy when I
shall be translated to Heaven you will not deny me Divine Honor, and as soon as
you perceive your base Ingratitude, whom now you hate, being present with you,
you will lament and grieve for, when I am snatched from you, and will perform
due Honor, and Reverence to my Ghost and Ashes.

DECLAM XXII. -- For Fear of Death, It Is madness to resign our Breath.
He is neither Patient nor Valiant, who amidst the Tumult and Fury of War,
cares not to die by the Sword of his Enemy, but covets to fall by his own Hand,
he is to himself an Enemy, and to his Enemy a Friend; he is kind to them, and
to himself a Tyrant. If when prosperous success, shall crown our Endeavors,
Life is so much esteemed midst the pomp of Victory, that there is scarce matter
for our Triumph, or time to admire, or adore our selves; Methinks it is strange,
after one frown of Adverse Fortune, one blow of an incensed Enemy, so to be
weary of our Breath, as not only to avoid and shun our Adversary, but to run
from our lives as a more cruel Enemy.

By doing thus, we both astonish Nature and Heaven too; who are not only Rebels
to our selves, but ungrateful to it, and are Usurpers too. For if we take away
our lives with those darts, which Nature has given for the defense of them, we
make her to act in vain, and violate the sacred Institutions, and Laws of the
Destinies. It Is not Glory, nor Valor; Honor nor Prowess to yield to so easy
a Death, and whilst we spill our Blood against the Deities not enough
propitious, we seek to revenge our selves of Heaven, and not of our Enemy. This
Villainy, officious Fame will transmit to Posterity. Such a crime argues
Degeneracy of Spirit; and it is not Valor but Fear overcomes us; so that our
Bodies can hardly endure savage Tyranny, because our Souls are weak and stupid.
Signal Valor must be as hard as Adamant, and have a Breast an Anvil to all
miseries, which (like the invincible Palm Tree) must triumphantly rise against
all Pressures.

Far be it that our Enemy should glory in our overthrow without a wound or
conflict! Far be it that his Sword (like the Basilisk) should shoot forth Death
on a mee^ Spectator! Nothing can be desired worse than Death: but now if Death
be a reward, we must break our way through our Enemies Breasts, and because
there is not room for Flight on Earth, we will pursue our Foe (as Brutus the
Adulterer) to the Shades below. But perhaps he is not so furious as to be a
Tormentor rather than a Commander: But if nothing can quench his thirst, but a
draught of Blood, we must imitate the Example of the Roman Senate, not to
desire Death, or fear it. When our Enemies approach, having adorned our selves
with Pomp and Splendour, let us expire in state: And if we can suffer the Fatal
stroke with an undaunted Spirit, let us not for shame be afraid of Enemy or
Bondage, as if more cruel than Death. Let us not free our selves from prison by
our own wounds, we will not purchase so inglorious a Refuge at such a rate; nor
so obscurely descend to the Ghosts below; we will rather wholly be involved in
chains. A Soldier shall load our Ambitious hands with such Bracelets. It Is no
disgrace for such great Bodies to be lead Captive. We are of more worth than to
become a triumphant Feast for the Furies. We will not submit our selves to a
Martial, but bow our necks to a Marriage yoke, desiring to lie imprisoned in
more noble Embraces. We blush not (being subdued) to be carried Appendages to
the proud Chariot. We will not imitate Demosthenes, or Varus: Far be it from us
to follow such degenerous Commanders. But thou Claesia! the wonder and glory of
Rome: shall be our pattern, we will cross (like thee) not only over Acheron,
but our Country River. For amidst storms and tempestuous Troubles, Valor
breaks forth with a brighter Luster; so that if Heaven, Earth, and Air, should
conspire against us, we will stand unaffrighted at such great ruin. Such
Prowess if it cannot invite, yet shall scare our Enemies into Kindness and
Clemency. If they will not commiserate our sad condition, let them be more
sparing of their brandish't weapons, But if they are ashamed to put them into a
dry Scabbard, and have a mind to lodge their Artillery in the quiver of our
pierced Breasts, let us fly enraged to the Infernal Lake, that not only our
Foes, but Furies themselves may be struck with Fear and Consternation. What
Immortal Glory will accrue by this? we are as Famous in our Death, as Valiant
in our Life. And although we are dead, yet perpetual Trophies shall preserve us
alive; and though no one will lament and bemoan our so unhappy Fate, yet
Posterity will pay everlasting Homage and Eternal Veneration to our Tomb and
Sepulcher.

DECLAM. XXIII. It Is better to travel abroad, than to tarry at home.
I Blush to see such a ring of Philosophers, and so many pale Students always
plodding, and poring upon their Books. We ought surely to engage our selves in
a more profitable Employ, and not to be confined in a narrower Study, than the
whole World. He is truly a Scholar, who is versed in the Volumn of the
Universe, as who does not so much read of Nature, as contemplate, and study
Nature her self. Those are but low and mean Spirits, who breath at home, and
cling so fast to their Native Soil. The Diviner Soul, mindful of its
Extraction, and Birth above, imitates Heaven, and delights in motion. Behold
the Stars, how they wheel about with unwearied Courses! How does the Sea
fluctuate with a restless wave? and (unless Copernicus had a whimsy) the Earth
turns round, and is troubled with a Vertigo.

And do we not yet travel? Behold the Aspect of every thing invites you abroad!
especially that verdant Tempe, and the embroidered Elisium of the newborn
Spring! And who is he, unless condemned to the settle in chimny corner, that
will not run to the joyful Nativity of the Infant-year, and gratify his senses
with the blooming Blandishments of the pleasant Fields? What disgrace does
attend the Household Deities? But if you take a voyage from home, here you are
saluted with the proud height of Alps and Pyramids, there you meet with the
prodigious Fabric of a burly Colosse; on this side a Landscape adorned with
Cities, on that a Prospect shaded with Groves; one very side surrounded with
new worlds, and encompassed with the Luxury of diverse objects; so that your
divided Senses turn doubtful Sceptricks, being distracted with the variety of
fresh Spectacles, and register the remembrance of their past Pleasure. From
whence proceed your Famous Wits? From whence arises Dignity, and Honor? Who
was ever eminent or advanced from smoke? or who was ever made immortal by a
Domestic Jove? with whom, whosoever through Sloth converses and dwells, the
Glory of his Fame will daily fade, his Sanguine Cheerfulness will be Phlegin
and Dullness, his brisker Heats will cool and die, his Vigor Faint, his Life is
Death, and his Name buried in silence and oblivion.

How many have there been (as experience tells us) who have come into the world
dull, and stupid, and condemned by Nature to the profane Rabble, whom an
ingenious search into Foreign Parts ( Prometheus-like) has animated and
enlivened with new Fires, and has (as it were) made and framed them of new
mould, has refined them into Stars, and made them glorious Luminaries to
dispel the darkness of the cloudy Age? Again, how many are there of quicker
parts, who though coaeval with Nestor within their private walls, yet have at
length expired Fools and Idiots.

And what? Do we not travel yet? Why are we enlightened with two eyes? Why are
we fork't, and branch't into two legs? what did Nature mean to distinguish man
into so many Senses, and almost crowned him with Immortality? Why did she fix
the mountains, pour out the Sea? Why did she embellish and bespangle the world
with such Star-like Spectacles? It Is strange! What was her intent? Far be it,
that we should thus defraud our Nature and Genius, that such Divinity should
lurk and be concealed in a Chimnycorner, and should die, and expire in a cloud
of Smoke! Every thing in the world is an Emblem of Travel: For what else are
the Motions of the Stars, the Flights of Clouds, the Career of the Sun, and the
Course of the Moon, the Fall of Waters, the gliding of Rivers, the Frisking of
Beasts and Swimming of Fishes, in woods and streams; I say, what else are all
these, but representations of travel, and a waifaring Life? But to come a
litter closer: seeing these kind Invitations do but little move you, we will
slatter you into travel with more winning insinuations, and shall give you a
Prospect of that pleasing Variety, of those ravishing Delights, which feed the
Curiosity of an inquisitive Traveller; and they are such, which captivate the
wandering Senses with such powerful charms, that whom they cannot persuade, by a
gentle violence, they will draw abroad.

Here (believe me) are to be seen such alluring objects, which will even tire
the multitudinous sight, and the visive faculty of all-eyed Argus; which once
being veiwed, make us ready to wish to be perpetual Spectators with an
alternate eye. There are odors which feed you with their breath: here dainties,
which you cannot so much as look on with idle Lips, on every side do occur such
potent delights, such prevalent entertainments, that a Sceptick cannot question
their command they have over us.

But now such is the unhappy condition of homebred Clowns, that nothing is the
object of their Senses, but what is ordinary and familiar; They see nothing
strange and rare; what they do to day, that they do to morrow, and every day;
and what they see now, does accur always; Let us not therefore, as if unlawful
to exceed the bounds of our Native Soil, end our days on the same spot, whereon
we began them, and so expect death under the same Climat, wherein we received
our life. What matter is it what ground we tread? what Air we breath in, or in
what Region we behold the Sun. That public Exchequer of Light does scatter his
Treasure to all alike; it every where glides the same Heaven; we are in all
places refresh't by the same Air, and wheresoever our Souls are solicited and
treated by new Spectacles, they can only discover diverse Scituations, but not
another Earth: Let us not therefore, as if born and condemned to one corner of
the Globe, breath our last, within the same walls we received our first; for he
that lies hid at home does not live but is buried in his house, whose closet is
his Sepulcher, upon which you may inscribe this Epitaph, (hic situs est) here
he is laid. But (thou most noble Youth!) whom Arts have inspired with a freer
Genius, who art as willing to traverse the world as well with thy feet, as to
rove about it in thy active mind; Fly! Begone! thou can not be safer in thine
own house! Fancy the Universe to be thy Lycaeum, and the several Regions the
Authentic manuscripts of the old stagyrite, all which having run over, thou will at length become a true stagyrite. Visit the amphibious Provinces of the
Dutch Otters, those Citizens of the Sea, who are less acquainted with their
own, than with other Nations, and who have a Country where they have no Land.
Or if thou had rather, go see and consult the Britains separated and divorced
from the whole world, whom you will find encompassed with the embraces of the
Sea, which is not so much their Prison as Defense, who are not its Captives,
but Lords over it; For there is no tract of the Earth untrodden by the Britain,
no creek of the Ocean, but he has sailed in it. There is nothing distant or
hard to him; there is nothing, but what he has either overcome or seen; has
measured by his travels, France, and Italy; Spain and Germany; Asia and Africa,
and has taken a journey to unknown Parts. Some have so curiously pried into
the Northern Regions, as that they have left the Sun and Light behind them, and
have followed so far the direction and conduct of the Polar-Star, till 'twas no
longer their Guide, but a Companion in their Progress. Others not less scorch't
with heat, than these were benumbed with cold, have advanced so far into
Southern Climates, as to have seen the chambers of the rising Sun, and viewed
the cradle of the Infant-morn; where kinder Phoebus sheds not his rays on the
Heavens only, but munificently gildes the Earth too, in whose bosom you may
find mountains of gold without a fiction, and such heaps of jewels, which are
only vile through their great Plenty. Let us not therefore always devote our
selves to the idle Muses, nor dote on the Sophisms of knotty Sciences; Let us
not, cloystered in our Studies, perpetually be enslaved to the Liberal Arts;
seeing the utmost pitch of our Endeavors and Sweat are subtle Niceties, empty
Notions, solemn Trifles, and learned Nothings. Let us no longer so curiously
search after their abstracted subtleties, nor hunt any more after their
fugitive inventions; But laying aside all laborious contemplations, let us
measure in our progress the dimensions of the globe! let us reach its bounds,
and wander as far as the remotest Antipodes! let our eyes rove with their
wanton glances, let our noses imbibe the fragrant breath of refreshing odours;
and let us treat our palats with the magnificent Festivity of rich Viands! let
the whole troop or brigade of our Senses travel; and we being surrounded with a
guard of their pleasures, here let us view the sweet perfumes of Tmolus, there
go see the scents of Thessalian Fields! Now let us go visit the golden strand
of yellow Tagus, and the precious streams of rich Pactolus; anon enjoy the
ravishing Felicities of happy Arabia, and the delicious Prodigalities of the
luxurious Indies! nay, have at the wanton Treasures of the whole Universe,
which if I should attempt to describe to you in bare words, 'twould be as great
a Solecism, as to make an Oration to your eyes, or to declaim and harangue to
your noses; I shall therefore wave the travel of our Senses, and shall omit
that fertile pregnancy so big with Delights, which are wont to ravish those
noble Sentinels of our Souls, I mean our Senses, whenever they travel.

And what do you say now? do these things speak but coldly? we will urge the
matter home, and press it further. Go too! prepare your selves, and behold the
dangers of a domestic Education.

What do men do within their private Habitations? they sit still; Oh sad! How
often do we see those homebred Rusticks buried in Sloth, and wallowing in
Intemperance! How frequently drowned in a deluge of Liquors, who overwhelmed in
Lethe, do breath out their immoderate Souls in a mortal dream! whereas the
lively and moving Spirits, do by their Sobriety obtain of the Destinies a
longer thread, who indulging their Senses a pleasant variety of grateful
objects, become eminent and conspicuous, famous and illustrious, and (to speak
more gloriously) mortal Deities, famous and conspicuous? why such you may find
amongst the Household Gods; For they have their wonders and spectacles worthy
your sight; For what else are those luxurious spend-Thrifts, who make
themselves old, even before their youth, who wast their Patrimony in unlawful
loves, always quarelling for new Misses; who in their Minority are ripe for
Hell, and provoke and invite unwilling death before their time.

Let us rejoice, and triumph! let us elevate our Spirits! Forsake the
chimny-corner, abandon Sloth! let us rise, walk, and be traveling! Our will
commands us; Pleasure desires us; our hands and feet importune us; at home
dangers affright us, abroad spectacles invite us. Rejoice, and triumph!

Has nature chained us to one clod? Has it condemned us to one corner? shall
we lead our lives within the narrow precincts of a few miles? shall we grow old
in the confines of one cottage? where we lived, shall we there die? I bear
about me but six ounces of dust, which I owe to our common mother (for the
Chemistry of Cardan found no more in the ashes of a calcined body) and what
matter is it, where my Tabernacle is dissolved, and where I pay so small a
debt? at home through Luxury and delights we grow effeminate, and are melted
and dissolved through domestic softness.

Let us away then to the frozen pool; and let us admire orbicular surrounding
amphitheatrical shadows of the remote Amphiscii! The acute Mathematicians
measure the Earth with grains, and weigh it with ounces; they will tell you the
number of the dust of the Earth, and compute the quantity of the drops of the
Sea: the vastness of the former, and the wideness of the latter they will
contract and crowd into the narrow compass of little maps; where the Turkish
Empire is comprised in a blot, and the large Danow represented by the
slenderness of a thin line. Would you hold and grasp Nature abridg'd in the
compass of your hand? why Hondius has framed most exactly such artificial
worlds, that you may compass the Universe with the length of your fingers, and
go beyond Drake with your extended Palm.

But what do men at home? they drink and swill: Here the gluttony of Apicius,
there the softness of Sardanapalus: here prodigal wretches consume and wast
their dwindled Fortunes, there Gormondizers bury their Patrimonies in the gulf
of Luxury; here beardless youth devoted to Bacchus, there riper age martyrs to
Venus; some born in a richer dirt, and more prodigal soil, are enslaved to the
Fortune of an uncertain die! others more covetous, and adoring gold, fleece the
poor, and defraud the needy, and with winged speed, fly to the commission of
all Evil.

And do not all these things previal yet? behold the notable Example of great
Alexander! from whence (most worthy Hero!) had thou thy wit and parts? what
Pallas (as I may say) I want a word) did Parnassate thy Soul with such Learning
and Virtue? what was it placed thee, being greater than all Encomium, and
enrolled thee among the Gods? did not thy viewing in travel, Cities and
Countries? let me ask ye (O ye famous worthies, Hercules, Cato, Cicero, Plato
and Caesar!) how did ye become so glorious? though you are dead, yet your
Example speaks: 'twas your Familiarity with foreign Parts, that transmits your
renown to succeeding Ages. I could cite infinite others both of former and
present times: but I cannot omit the never dying, or deathless memory of Queen
Elizabeth, whose happy Virginity fruitful in Dominions (though not in Children)
has Christened Regions with her Name and Religion; has planted Colonies in a
new world, and has removed England into the distant Continent. What shall I
say of him, whom I will not call the Envy, but the wonder and amazement as well
of Ancient as Modern Conquerors; who, Companion to the Sun, has compassed the
world with that daily travellor; who has laid open and discovered the hinges
of the Universe, and to whom we are so much indebted for the knowledge of
Nature, as to the famous Stagyrite, its chiefest Secretary.

But to conclude, and that our Oration need not want authority, behold! it
boasts of Kings and Nobles; amongst whom let us fix upon our Famous Charles of
blessed memory, who was both a Guide and Example to foreign travel, who though
much admired by his own Country, yet returned more conspicuous by his Spanish
Accomplishments, and Foreign Acquilitions.

DECLAM. XXIV. Against traveling abroad, etc.
THere is nothing which we cannot both sooner and safer acquire by the motion
of our eye at home, than by the weary steps of our feet abroad. How many rare
ingenious persons has a foreign Sky unhappily transformed into beastly
monster? They have returned only with humane aspect, and like the Olympic
Joves mentioned in the Poet, have appeared glorious with their golden heads,
but are mean and fordid with their dirty bodies; like Colossaean Images they
ravish without with the pleasant Hypocrisy of charming colors, but within
terrify and affright with the ugly shape of an Ape or Serpent. They are more
nice and effeminate than Sardanapalus, who are softened by Venery into
putrefaction; whose excess and debauchery has non-pluss'd Bacchus, and has
drank dry even the God of Tipple. There is no unheard of Villainy, which they
have not either done or thought of. Behold! what aching heads? what swollen, puffed
up, Boreas-like, cheeks! what dull and heavy eyes! what tottering feet! how
often do they disgorge up their Souls amidst their intemperate cups? and are
buried with the Solemnities of drunken Bromius? 'Twas travel that brought us
this vice, and the Dutch good-fellow-ship has taught us Drunkenness.

Whence comes it that our Femasculine Matrons, our English Sirens are so
ingenuous for Pride, who place not an hair without advice, but call a Court for
the disposing of every lock, who dispense not a nod without Counsel, whose eyes
glance not without an Edict, and whose feet do move in exact measure. How do
they counterfeit Nature; who so drench their looks in oils, and washings, that
they lose their faces and complections in their gally-pots; they so glitter in
their filks, and are so critically attired in so exact a dress, as if they
would break the eyes of every Spectator. From whence such petulant, and
sparkling eyes? Certainly Pride taught this vice of traveling, and we may
thank haughty Italy for these prodigies and crimes against Nature. How often do
we feel France in our bones? and how often find Paris on our bodies, which
sometimes does oppress with a fashion, and sometimes punish.

Let every one breath in the Air, wherein he was born! and let him not with
weary steps seek those things under another Sun, which he enjoys under his own!
our Lares tell us there is nothing more pernicious to good manners, than
distant visits of foreign Cities: there is none but brings home or commends
some vice or other. Ambassadors seldom return with the same humors they
exported abroad; they barter fashions, and are laden home with exotic customs.
Cato and Laelius can scarce keep themselves from being corrupted and debauched;
against whom the most ununiform rabble have prepared Circaean cups to
extoxicate them.

A just man, tenax propositi, worships and adores his domestic Joves; and, if
we are wise, let us love, our Muses, and go no further than this our Parnassus!
it is wisdom to keep in our present Mansion: for what is more unworthy a
prudent man than to endure patiently the dust and Sun, for many years in the
acquisition of that, which one single Paragraph, one single Page will teach him
in one hour.

The Schools are open, and Library public: here you read with tears of the
rubbish and ashes of ruined Troy, of Priamus wanting a funeral Pile. Here you
may read in classick History of Mausolaums and Pyramids; of Colossus, and
Hercules Pillars, and whatsoever is celebrated by the voice of Fame.

THE Second Part.
DECLAM. I. Whether Virtues are implanted in man by Nature? Affirmed.
WHen we wander with our eyes through the dubious varieties of distracting
Nature, and when we behold the roof of the world so richly bespangled with
posies of Stars, that flame above, and the floor of the same, so luxuriously
decked with Asterisms of Flowers that twinckle beneath, or when we see as it
were the flowery Pavement of Heaven bestrew'd with Stars, and the Starry
Firmament of the Earth studded with Flowers, when we view the Universe on this
side bright, and arraied in Flame; on that side dark, and veild with Shade;
here gilded with the radiancy of a glorious Sun; there ^ullied with the horror
of an Eclipsing Cloud; I say when we have a Prospect of these things, nothing
is the object of our sight, but wonders, and such prodigies that surpass all
humane Invention. And as we admire the Landscape of the bigger world, so are we
stricken with an equal amazement at the sight of the less, I mean the
stupendous Fabric of mortal man. See! with what a lofty Person and Majestic
Stature does he shoot upward, whereas grovelling Animals are prone downwards!
what Skill and Mechanism does his very Model declare? what excellent
contrivance is legible in his contexture? what curiosity of Art does the least
Atom boast! with what a grace does Beauty, that Empress of his forehead,
command and sway? how are his cheeks enflamed with the blushing Oriency of a
purple die? What sparklings in his eyes! what roses in his lips! what driven
Snow adorns his neck? what comeliness and feature lie scattered midst the
excellent proportions of every Limb? Lastly, what rays of Divinity do shine
from his head?

If we contemplate the Elegancy of this Fabric, and the most accurate Industry
of Nature in this Structure; if we consider the Pillan of this Royal Palace,
and the Butteresses that support the vast bulk of this proud Edefice if we
observe the Courts without and the Closets within, the perplexed Labyrinths and
intricate Mazes of winding Arteries, and the marvelous Luxuriency into
sprouting nerves when we reflect (I say) on these things we must needs be
astonished, and cannot but exclaim with Zoroaster of old, O man the Miracle of
daring Nature! Admiration it sel^ is delighted with this Spectacle, and Nature
her self is intoxicated with her own work.

And as she has blessed the Body with such excellencies, so might she have
furnished the Soul with the like Endowments, in respect of whom, Heaven it self
is worthless, and to whom the whole world gives place, and veils its bonnet:
but the Immortal Gods have denied Nature so great a Boon, least too impudently
she should boast that she is born a Goddess. If such a constellation of Virtues
should club at the Nativity of a poor Mortal, certainly Man must be reckoned,
if not in the same rank with, yet in the next form to the Eternal Deities, from
whom they differ (according to Pliny) in Immortality only.

But however, let us not vilify and disparage the gifts of Nature, who has
been very bountiful and obliging to us; the has instil'd into us the
Principles of Goodness, and has put it into our power (if we will) to be
Virtuous. The Callous Farmer plows up a grave in his Mother Earth, and buries
his Corn in the Bowels of our common Parent; but if the ungrateful Soil shall
devour the Seed, and deny a Resurrection, or an expected Harvest, the fault is
not in the Husbandman, but in the barren ground. Nature has scattered in us
seeds of Virtues, but if there shall follow no crop it is not Nature, but we are
unprofitable. But if it had pleased the Immortal Gods to have crowned men with
Virtue, without Labor, then there had been reason why Nature should be blamed,
and not man, and we might have justly complained, that she is so cruel a
Stepmother as to bring us into the world polluted with Vice and utterly
destitute of all Virtue; but seeing Heaven sells all things to Mortals for
Sweat and Labor, and Virtues are the products of Study and Industry, and not
the (...) of mere Nature: men have no reason (...) that she is so hard and
cruel. In all (...) there are some glimmering hopes, which ^^^ing they die with
age, it is manifest therefore Nature was not defective, but that care was
wanting. Let us not accuse Nature of Impotency, who though pregnant with
Virtue, yet brings it not forth, for that is beyond her Strength and Power, nor
(which is a more just complaint) let us indict her of Impiety, who is always a
cherisher of Mankind.

It Is true, one man excels another in the acuteness of his Faculties, yet our
common Parent has not so disinherited any man of Ingenuity, as to leave him
destiture of all inward Accomplishments. Some she has produced ripe for
knowledge, who ( Papirius like) are capable in minority of Court Emploiments;
but others must be anvill'd, and as it were be manufactured by Discipline to be
made fit for Improvements. She has not (as the Stoics fondly dream) so
cleared the passage to Virtue, as that a man may arrive to it without Labor.
Some certain colors a fleece easily imbibes, others (unless incorporated as it
were into its very substance) it will hardly receive; thus humane Souls
sometimes unfledged, and in their Infancy, hasten to be endowed with Maxims of
Prudence, and sometimes arrive to Dotage before they can attain to Knowledge. An
happy Education, and early Instruction will much conduce to the fashioning of
our Manners, and the morning of our days blushing with the tincture of wise
Precepts, will have a good insluence in the ordering our Conversation, for they
sooner reach the top, who sweating in the ascent, are elevated by the strength
of supporting hands; But however, the way that leads to Wisdom and Virtue, is
not block't up from any man; besides, that Power of working, which Nature has
implanted in every man, like an indulgent Parent, she has blessed Mortals with
another Faculty, which disposes to the Exertion of that Power, which some call
Potentia secunda; but I rather name it an Inclination or Genius; for we usually
say that every man of his own Nature and Genius is prone and has a propensity
to this or that. Such Dispositions and Genius's are inbred in us, but lame and
imperfect, yet so, as that by Execise and Industry they may be much improved;
Nature has not prescribed such narrow limits to man's advancement, but that he
may rise from one degree of Eminency and be installed in another, so that a
common Soldier may have the preferment of a General, and private men may soar
to the Dignity of Kings and Emperors; thus the Soul is not confined within
such strait bounds, as to remain always the same she is by Nature, but may
refine her Being, and enlarge her self by Study and Industry. The Genius
therefore, and disposition of every man must be tenderly cherish't, and be
cultivated by Art, that Virtue may blossom from the first Principles, and
Elements of Nature. A Soldier armed with Courage, and actuated with the Spirit
of Valor and Gallantry, whose undaunted Breast knows no retreat, if his stout
Bravery be sharpened by conflicts, and is daily conversant in the storms of
War, he must needs be Victorious, and a man of conduct, he must needs
understand the Stratagems of his Adversary, and at his Pleasure returns with
Spils from his Enemy; but if at the sight of Battalions, his Magnimity shall
dwindle into Sloth and Cowardice, he adorns his Flight, but not the War; and
destroys with fear the natural briskness of his steely temper, which Labor
and Hardship had fermented into Stoutness and Heroic Resolution. Thus the
seeds and sparks of Virtue that lie buried in our Souls, unless actuated and
enlivened by Study and Industry, will certainly wither and vanish into nothing;
but if manured by Labor they will daily sprout and shoot up into maturity.
Though Virtue receive some imperfect blushes and hints from Nature, yet it is
perfected by Documents, and sage Instructions. All our Counsels and Endeavors
tend only to repair the ruins of Nature, all Art and Discipline would supply
its defects; for Instructions would be superfluous, if Nature were sufficient.
Dust and Sun are the forerunners, and the Preface to the Palm of Victory. The
best things are besieged with the greatest difficulties, and as not Riches, so
neither do Virtues pop upon the Slothful and Idle. They grow on a Precipice,
and whosoever will gather them, with much Sweat and Panting must reach after
them.

DECLAM. II. Whether Nobility is Natural or Hereditary, and propagated by
Traduction to Posterity? Denied.
WHat? honor a native ornament? I pray tell me, what have Mortals e're
received from Nature besides to Live and to Die? It Is true, she has given them
a ductile Being, to be spun and wire-drawn into a few years, has granted them
a little dawning and morn of Life, but (alas!) it will quickly determine in a
twilight, and night of Death. What? do our Peers owe their Titles to
Nativities, and their Badges to the Midwifery of a filly woman? can sacred
Purple, the ensign of their Honor, be fitted and adapted to a poor Infant? is
it enough to ennoble one to have been born into the world, to have cried, and
to have seen one day? what therefore does it avail a man to orerun the world,
and to measure it with the Geography of his Arms and Triumphs, and to pant and
breath out his great Soul midst the thickest of his Enemies, if Nobility be
natural, and not to be ascribed to the merits of Virtue? as if Alexander was
not honorable enough by his universal Conquest without being the Brat of his
fire Philip; and as if it was more credit to Hereules to be Jupiters Bastard,
and to be the offspring of the womb of impure Alemena, than to have underwent
such famous and renowned Labors.

Why such diligence in the tedious exercise of severe Virtue? why such waiting
and attendance on the pale Muses? who will not laugh at Cato's Stoicism, at the
lamp of Epicietus? who will not deride the whole learned world, is Nobility
sprung from Nature? and is not the Product of Wit, of Parts, of Virtue and good
manners? let a man's conversation be Vicious and his life profligate; let his
Intellectuals be stupid even to a Prodigy and a Proverb; let nothing be
handsome and comely in his Body; nothing Mercurial, and aerie in his Soul, yet
Nobility shall be listed among crimes, where to live and to be, is enough to
dub one honorable without conversation and living well; where Extraction, and
not Learning; where Blood, and not Virtue, creates a Gentleman.

But what is this Gentile Blood? tell me I pray you, whose Ancestors are
supposed to have instilled into your veins a more noble gore. All Blood is of
the same color; and if some does boast a purer die, it is not Nobility but
Health and Constitution that gave the tincture. The Phisician in Phlebotomy
cannot distinguish betwixt the Generous Stream, and the Plebeian Flood. What?
Is the Blood a juice of an higher rank? and are the other Humors inferior and
common? why do you not esteem ingenious Melancholy? Martial Choler, and light
Phlegm? If Honor is in the Blood, what is more refined than the Liquor that
flows in vulgar veins? on whose skins dwells the whiteness of driven Snow, on
whose cheeks sits the Vermilion of a modest blush, and through whose whole
bodies is spread a Sanguine Complexion. In the Field of Mars, the King and the
Subject, the General and common Soldier fall with an equal Fate, but with
different Glory, shall I think the latter spilt more ignoble Blood for his
Country, than did the former? he is a wretch, who esteems not the least ounce
as dear to himself, as does the great Caesar.

But admit, that Nobility does lodge in the Blood, yet it is but a little that
flows within the narrow channels of our Veins and Arteries. But this Gentile
Plurisie seems at length to sink, and what? is there any thing besides Blood
and Spirit that can conduce to Nobility? not Illustrious Titles, which are
easily comprised in a few letters, and can soon be pronounced by a little
breath; not much money, for he is not Eques, whosoever is Auratus; not
magnificent Structures, for we are covered with the roof of Heaven and with
infinite Stars; nor the tedious Genealogy of an ancient Family; For trace thy
Pedigree beyond Ducaleon and the Arcades, and take in the Aristotelean Eternity
of the world to boot, proceed ad infinitum in the Series of thy Ancestry, at
length thine antiquated and obsolete Nobility will be drained to its dregs and
to the least drop of Gentile Blood. An ingenuous Nature is ashamed to rake for
Honor in the Urns and Ashes of his Forefathers. 'Twas not Hereditary Dignity
of his Stock and Lineage that adorned Tully; he rose from nothing, whom if any
should disenrol from the list of Heroes, he deserves not only the Fury of my
Speech, but the Satyrs and Scorpions of his Roman Eloquence.

What a small matter is it to be born of Nobles? worms and flies, the vilest
Insects, that are either the errors or spot of wanton Nature, claim an
Alliance to the glorious Heavens, and derive their Pedigree from the Sun and
Stars. Nobility streaming to a long Posterity (like waters, wandering too far
from their Source) degenerate from the worth of their famous Ancestors, do (as
it were) fall quite from the purity of their Crystal Spring.

But whom, do you think, I esteem Noble? certainly him that is ingenuously
born, and as ingenuously bred, that is tinctured with Learning, and tempered
with Virtue: him, who is the golden boy of smiling Fortune, that widely differs
from the bragging rabble, which by no other title can pretend to Nobility, quam
Natura Coccino et Castoreo.

DECLAM. III. Whether to live with a Friend is a thing much to be desired? No.
BE gone (O my Friends) I desire not so much your sight as absence, and had
rather enjoy your room than company. I am willing sometimes to be divorced from
you, neither do I covet always to live with you; for friendship that is
always conversant in my presence becomes almost hatred, grows slender,
disdainful, and is very haughty. You cannot be ignorant, what Flames of
contention are usually kindled, and attend that Amity, which is supported and
maintained by mutual aspect, and how often it is offended with trivial things.
Those whom we have passionately loved, and whose sweet Society have
importunately desired, as not only Friends but Brothers and Children, and (if
there be any thing more dear) the very Deity it self of Friendship, even these
(I say) we wish to be absent, if they hinder our Studies and obstruct our
business; O what fervent Zeal is there to be found in Love? what jars in
Wedlock! what sighs and tears, what complaints and suspicions 'twixt jealous
Paramours! what civil Wars, I will not say betwixt Masters and Servants,
betwixt Brothers and Sisters, Children and Parents, Parents and Children! what
Indignation is stirred in them against their Offspring, who whilst they desire
to be good, look on them as bad; and so do as it were after a manner hate them,
whilst they do most affectionately love them. Come we now to the sacred name of
Friendship, which being derived from Love cannot be conceived to exist or be
without that Passion. But what difference in the lives and actions of Friends
though they agree in their Ends? how do they clash in their Opinions, Advices,
and Counsels! what conflicts about Religion and sacred things? whereas in
absence no contests and bickerings, no gall and bitterness, nothing pungent and
afflicting, besides desires, and yet these longings have a relish of Sweetness
and Delight.

Tell me (O my Pamphilus) why amongst the many wishes of men, the chiefest of
their desires is the fruition of their Friend, why do they covet his Society
under the same roof? is it because distance of place makes Friendship languish
and is remoteness the bane of all Fidelity? does the aspect of thy Friend shed^
complacency and a quietness into thy Soul? and art thou but half thy self in
his absence? but if a Friend may be possessed not only naturally, but civilly
too; how can absence hinder him from sitting and walking, from railing and
jesting, from seriously discoursing and conversing with thee? sometimes a
Friend is not discerned, but when he is absent. A glu^ of Friendship is
nauseous and insipid, but a^ appetite after it gives a relish to its taste;
wherefore if the great Masters of Love prescribe an intermission of enjoyment
as very expedient for Paramours, whose whole pleasure is in presence, why is
not an interregnun of fruition as convenient for Friends, in whose Virtue all
delight is placed, and is not any way incommoded by absence, in regard it is
every where present. I know not whether Epicurus was at Athens, or else where,
when writing to his Friend, he bid him do all things as if Epicurus saw him.
But certainly Annaeus was in Campania, when speaking to his Lucilius, living in
Sicily by letters, he exhorts him to study, sup, and to walk with him, which
things he could not perform, unless he act them on the Scene of Fancy without
the help and ministry of Coporal Organs. But perhaps thine eyes anxiously
desire thy Friend when absent: it is true, somewhat is withdrawn from thy sight
by absence, but nothing from thy mind; no nor from thine eyes neither, if it be
a true, firm, and well established Union.

For Cicero in an Epistle to his Friend Balbus sighting in France under the
Command of Caesar, tells us that he saw him not only in his mind, but with his
eyes too; which if it be so, tell me (my good Fellow!) why can thou not both
hear thine absent Friend and see him too? unless your sight is more quick and
ready at a lascivious cast, than at a Virtuous glance, and you esteem sound
more honorable, than chaste Love, which no distance or force can obstruct or
hinder -- If we should behold nothing, but what is directly before us and
confronts our sight, and only present objects should delight and please us,
then our vision must needs be narrow, and all our Enjoiments very scanty; then
farewell all joys of mental operations, and the complacency that we find in
severe Speculations.

Do not therefore rack thy self with the thoughts of thine absend Friend! do
not resent his departure heinously! he that has learned to bear the death of
his Friend, will never be concerned, or flinch at his absence. If thou only
considerest of this in Friendship, that its Foundation is perpetual, firm and
stable, then Death it self can take nothing from thee. Have thou never heard
how Laelius in Tully comforted himself? how does his dear Scipir live with him?
how does the Fame and Virtue of his deceased Friend survive and flourish, and
shall never be blotted out of the register of his memory? do not therefore
yield to thy desires, but embrace thy Friend in Idea and Contemplation, whom
neither Death nor Absence can take from thee! lament not the departure of thy
sweet Associate; for this bitter absence will sweeren, and render more Inscious
his desired presence.

DECLAM. IV. Whether Friendship is the burden of Virtue? No.
I Cannot think Love to be so degenerous a Passion as to spring only from
servile Blood. What are those Friendships and Caresses, those delicate
Blandishments and soft Sportings? what are those chaste Graces, fa^etious
Delights, and pleasant hours it usually affords? I Will be hanged if Love be
nothing but a sweet Servitude. What Dialogues and Embraces? what Gifts and
presents? what acceptable Pledges of reciprocal Affections? and what? are all
these only the mutual offices of Bondage and Slavery? certainly we rather may
exclaim, O the delicious tenor of a joyful Life! O infinite Bliss and
Happiness! I should be apt to think Jove himself Hypochondriack and Melancholy,
and not sufficiently happy in his ravishing Elisium, if he should always be
contemplative, and not sometimes recreate himself and dally in the Society of
Gods and Goddesses. The most affectionate breasts of the most Amorous Turtles
do sometimes boil and ferment with anger, and are infested with the storms of
unkind Brawls. The Crystal Serenity of the smiling Heavens is darkened with the
tears of a frowning Sky; and the brightness of the Sun is benighted with the
horror of obscuring Clouds: thus Friendship may be eclipsed, but not
extinguished, may sink into a swoon and fall away, but not quite into an
Apostacy and utterly die. He is a most delicate Lover, who cannot endure the
froth of raging Language, which when the estuation of the blood grows calm,
and abates, vanishes with the choler that first caused it. The commands of my
Friend I obey, his advice I follow, his persuasions I yield to, his affections
I prove, his jests I laugh at, and care not a fig for his anger, and yet I do
nothing whereby I may be thought to serve him, but rather to love him; nothing
by the Fatal necessity and constraint of bondage, but by Friendly Counsel, and
the sweetest Sympathy of most obliging Lovers. I fear not the frowns of the
angry Heavens, not a deluge of waters, nor Hurrican's of winds, no nor death it
self, if Friendship require it: for to love is so far from being base and
servile, that it is a thing most excellent, generous and noble. It is but a
small matter to breath out ones Soul (that indivisible Particle of Divinity and
little gasp of vital Air) and to shed a few ounces of Blood in the behalf of a
man's Friend: in the mean time let the Envious wretch be rackt and tortured,
till he sob from his Skeleton his blew Ghost, scarce worthy of these shades to
which it is damned; I say, let him smart with anguish, to whom to love, is not
so much a slavery as a torment, pain and misery! let proud Mortals swell with
loftiness, let them huff and be supercilious, who trample on all that are
beneath their Orb, and with whom to love is mean and sordid! let the morose
Anchoret be eternally damned to the solitude of his Cell, to whom Friendship is
not servile but superfluous, and who thinks to love is the only property of
wanton women.

DECLAM. V. Whether we may guess at a Man's Manners by his garb and habit?
Farewell all joys! and whatsoever pleasures the Soul found in secrets, be gone
and vanish! for our privacies now are prostitute and common, and those things
which were only manifest to Mathematicians and Astrologers, are now published to
every one by informing gestures, and the Rabble may be now of our Privy
Counsel. Every limb is become vocal, and not only false construction and
incongruity of words, but a Solecism in our clothes is to be feared too. O vain
and foolish dread! does Nature so despise her work, as that when she gave men
Malice, she would not give them a secret too? and seeing she has made our
Errors natural, and imposed upon us a necessity of offending, what? does she so
much imitate Juno's Tyranny, as to commit us to the rout, more glazed with eyes
than centocular Argus? Certainly she consults better the good of Mankind, and
has not so far gratified Momus in his design, as that whatsoever is transacted
in the inmost recesses and retirements of the Soul, should be publicly legible
on the frontispeice of the Face. I appeal to the delicate and soft Alcibiades's
of this age, whose smoother brow, and unruffled aspect, the learned civility of
whose clothes and garments, have always pleaded for the tumults of the mind,
and for the unruly crowd of their impetuous affections. I should ascribe his
faults to the necessity of Fate, who discovers them to the world by his gate
and mien. Let every man choose what gestures he please to be his Advocate; and
there is scarce any one so wretchedly guilty, as to want the defense, and
Apology of his Body. The Elegance of Greece has commended the ruder Barbarisms
of monstrous Africa; and seeing various humors are oftentimes couched, and lie
hid under the same shape and visage, the Judgment of Spectators must needs be
uncertain, and the Station of Spies be treacherous and deceitful. How have the
Fires of Love raged and preyed on men's breasts within, and yet that burning
Aetna has made no change or breach on the face without; so that Cupids flames
(like subtle lightning) have dissolved the mettle and has left the Scabbard
whole and inviolable! how often has the wantonness of Venus been sporting in
the veins, when the Severity of Mars has sat on the brow, whose objurgatory
looks have been so tetrical, as that they personate Cato, though Maudlin drunk.
Those excellent Creatures, which (like so many Pictures) Nature has drawn for
the diversion of Man, that ugly Viper has animated them to their ruin, and
those charms, that flatter into expectation of a delicate Hellen, cheats with
the enjoyment of a lewd Lucretia.

Who would expect such rare jewels from Aesop or a Gold-finder? or who looks
for Majesty from Vespasium? they vizard themselves in countenances unlike
themselves, so that you discover, or read nothing in the face but what is
vulgar; for their Souls not regarding the Nobility of their Extraction, dwell
in counterfeit Mansions below their Dignity, as Galba's Ingenuity had but a bad
lodging. The Soul does so withdraw it self from the sight of men, and enjoys
the secrecy of so private a retirement, as that no wit can torture it into the
confession of its Nature, which is a mystery, and a riddle that lies hid from
all Men. What therefore? is it condemned to solitude! should it never lay open,
and display it self; there have been gestures, and postures of Body, whereby
the mind was wont (as it were) to speak and to show it self, and to shine (as
it were) with certain rays, and to render it self conspicuous to the eyes of
others: But (O sad!) they were all so counterfeit and feigned, that after the
disguises of such fictitious looks, and so many vizors of lying aspects, who
but a Priamus, or a man prodigal of his Faith can believe any more? one acts a
Mimick, another a Player. All men imitate and personate all things; and those
gestures which were only promoted by Natures dictates, are now inculcated, and
taught by the rules of Art. We have proved our selves the genuine offspring of
our true Father, and are capable of a Metamorphosis; so that if an Alemena be
to be won, we are presently Amphitruo'd, who cannot imitate a Philosopher in
the words of Hercules? who cannot make his breast as immovable as a Rock? and
his Soul as Stoical as any Picture? What Socratick Catamite, and filthy
Miscreant cannot blush at the name of fulsome Vice? and cannot devoutly defend
the cause of distressed and exiled Virtue, so as to be thought a cherisher and
patron of Goodness; and not only the charms and beauty of lovely Virtue, and
the calmer smoothness of gentle Manners, but (like turning Scenes) can
represent the deformities of ugly Vice, and the rougher turbulencies of unruly
Affections; can at their pleasure be transported with Love or Anger, Joy or
Hatred, and whatsoever Passions are created by Nature, the same they can
personate and feign by Flattery. How often do we meet with humble Servants, and
yet the number of our Family is not yet increased? how do they invade us with
insinuations of sapple cringes, with elaborate Phrase, and with the
protestations of almost a swearing countenance, so that nothing less can be
expected than a transfusion of themselvees into our very bosoms, and a close
mixture and marriage of our Souls. Behold the Parasite! how he struts abroad!
who being well furnished with his garbs, exposes to sale his various postures,
and with some importunity demands what is it you would have? If his Friend weep, he
sheds a tear; if he says he is hot, he presently sweats; he mingles his smiles
with his laughter, and trembles and shakes with his fears. Not the twins of
Hippocrates are more alike. They are always moved by the same Passions, and
(like certain jewels) oftentimes languish with each others disease. They are
sick and well in the jucture. He is very obsequious to every nod, and reflects
(like a looking glass) and represents to thee the image of thine own self. Thus
his tears stand Sentinel, and his gestures (if commanded) are ready upon the
guard to make a Sally. Perhaps in minority, when the Soul lived under a
Democracie of Passions, nor had sworn allegiance to the Government of Reason,
then restless commotions and an inundation of Licentiousness overflowed all
things; But now Reason is in the throne, and has obtained the Empire, such
Liberty and Exorbitance will soon vanish; the Affections are subdued, and
Nature her self is almost become a trophie; both looks and gestures are charmed
to a compliance with all occasions; neither can we sooner be transformed by
Circe, than by Reason. Whatsoever whirlwinds do bluster in the Soul, whatsoever
storms do roar, yet the mouth breaths a Zephyrus and softer gales, and if
reason require it, an enraged Soul will not so much even as threaten a damage.
I appeal to those unhappy wretches, whom the pleasant cruelty of their Prince
(like the dangerous calm of a flattering Sea) as often as it would involve the
miserable in destruction, compels the unhappy to feign themselves blessed, and
to hide the clowdiness of their Souls and their sorrows within, with serenity
of their aspects and joy without. Thus sick and sad, as if they had eaten
Sardoan roots, they laugh on the confines and threshold of death; and so every
man defends himself by the conspiracy of his countenance, and at Rome they owe
to their faces their life and safety.

It Is happily contrived by Nature, that the whole bulk of our affections can be
suppressed by reason, that we can check them when we please, and sometimes (as we
list) may loosen their reins; and may restrain some within the limits of our
breast, and discover those on our foreheads, which the occasion shall require.
If we should commit our selves wholly to their guidance, and altogether be
obedient to their commands, into what Precipices would they hurl us: they would
certainly betray us into all dangers, and whilst they furiously rage like so
many Aeoli (those Subjects of the air) they would utterly take from us the Sea
and the Earth, nay and Heaven too. But the delicate Matrons of this age have
prudently been aware of this Evil, who call a Committee about the accurate
disposing of each single hair, and dispense not a nod without Counsel, they
suffer not the petulancy of a rolling eye, unless made authentic and warranted
by a public Edict; nor do they budge a foot without meascure; they counterfeit
Nature, and are so besmeared and plaistered with Ointment and Pomatum, that the
face seeks for it self and cannot find it. Let them be guilty of what fault
they will, I am sure they grow not pale at any crime; but are fortified (as it
were) with a brazen wall, and remain imperious even to the eyes of Linx.

Neither is the passage more easy into a Courtiers breast, who does so wholly
devote himself to the humor of the times, as that he almost forgets his proper
Genius: it is not Nature and Inclination but Custom that suggests his apparel
and gesture; both Tyrium and Trojan are clad alike without any distinction, and
when they walk they move so with the same Soul, that you would think them
poppets. But there is a vain sort of men of a severe brow, who condemn these
persons of Folly, and brand the whole Court with the same Infamy; and indeed
justly, if we lived in Plato's Commonwealth, or under Vtopian Government; But
we must consult, the age, and our present customs. No man safely strives
against the stream, and he does too haughtily despise the present times, who
scruples with a blush, and is ashamed to be mad. He may depart the world, whose
Virtues would keep him from its Customs and Fashions.

Who will hereafter declare his guess? who will suffer his Judgment to be
deceived again? now dissimulation triumphs, and has conquered and possesses
the whole world. Now every one counterfeits what gesture he pleases, every one
wears what habit he will, and there are many ignorant Souls in a learned habit,
and many (as I may say) ungownd minds in that long robe. Who will not therefore
always confess his ignorance? who will not blush to own that he knows any
thing? by a certain Law we know not these things, and seeing we are forbidden
by Nature to understand, it is not so much our crime to be ignorant as it is our
duty; neither is it so much obedience, as necessity.

DECLAM. VI. Whether Aristotle did well in censuring that saying of Bias the
Philosopher [Love as if you was about to Hate] No.
IF the Friendship of the Peripateticks was as safe and secure, as it is
pleasant and delightful, I am persuaded 'twould be as much in public like
other Virtues, as it is now private and solitary; for what Felicity does it
create to humane Souls? behold! the same desires and humors do lodge only in
different breasts! an accessory Consciousness to every secret, and dialogues
interwoven with mingled Souls, do ravish and delight with such bewitching
transports, as that not only the weak and silly, but even men prudent and
severe are captivated by its charm.

But there are so many coverts and retirements in humane breasts, and it is so
unsafe a thing to confide in any man, that I know not whether the Friendship of
Aristotle, consisting of the innocent simplicity of a mutual Passion, and of an
universal exchange of all Affections, I say I know not whether it is rather an
Infirmity, than a Virtue, and not so much our comfort as our ruin; for we that
live in Tiberius's days must Christen dissimulation with the name of Virtue,
and so to act the parts of Friendship, as not utterly to forget our Prudence.
For there are some that have a subtle knack in counterfeiting Vice and feigning
Virtue, that have a disposition changeable into every Affection, and smoothly
sliding into the Souls of men, endeavor to pry out and find their guilt; and
in this they abuse the name of Friendship, that they are always feared, but
never loved.

There are others, who are never more to be dreaded, than when they laugh, who
never lay aside the disguise of Severity, but when it is expedient; whose clowdy
brows never clear up into a serenity of smiles, unless they can gain by such
calm Sunshine; wherefore least our Innocence should be trap'd in such snares,
it may be very convenient to think of a storm in the midst of a calm, and to
embrace the advice of the sage Philosopher, who bids us [Love so as if we were
about to Hate] men slowly complain of those things, which have befa^n them
through their own default, and Folly is attended with this evil, it always
upbraids; therefore least Temerity with its [I had not thought] should rather
be a Torment, than an Enjoiment, and more grieve than comfort us; I fancy it
the wisest, and the safest piece of Dotage so to temper our Love, as to savor
more of Judgment, than Affection, and so to deal and canton our persons to
others, as to reserve a portion for our own selves, whether we consider men
themselves, or the danger of the thing it self. It Is scarce so pleasant to find
a Friend, as it is miserable to be deceived in him. If we contemplate the
several ages of men, we shall find that Minority and Rawness excludes Children
from the Solemnity of so sacred a league, and not so much Peevishness and
Morosity, as Covetousness debars and keeps off the Aged; they mind nothing but
wealth, they negotiate in Friendship and gain by their traffic, and love not
any man, but when it costs them nothing. I would willingly admit men into the
most inward retirements and recesses of Friendship, if they would either love
more or be less wise; for as Affection abates as the Judgment increases, thus
youthful heats cool at maturity; and though the fervor and violence of their
Passions suffer young men to enter into the embraces of Friendship, yet heady
Rashness and an unweary dispensation of their Affections, will drive them from
those sacred ^les, and things acted with heat and violence are not so firm and
stable, as those, that are done with deliberation of a mature Judgment:
Juvenile Affections have shorter periods, whose impetuous boilings will easily
ferment themselves into a sudden calm; they are for the most part charmed with
the likeness of Pleasures, and are rather jocund among themselves than
passionate, as Geminus and Sejanus were mutual Friends in Luxury and Softness.

Thus are men's ages besieged on all sides with these difficulties, and if we
shall further consider the manners of men, which they have framed to
themselves, we shall easily perceive there is a great necessity of believing
our selves, and of not confiding in any body else.

The first sort of men that occurr are those, who as often as we meet with them,
rise up upon their legs, and by the pleasantness of their gestures are
dissolved and melted almost into kisses and embraces; they are ready to skip
out of themselves, neither complain they of Injuries received from those they
love. Nothing fitter for Society, than these men, if we were born for nothing,
but to sleep and revel. They have somewhat of a jovial Gaiety, an allowable
Innocence in him, who is permitted either to play the fool, or madman; for he
must be either the one or the other, who does so lavishly congratulate, and is
so profuse in his fawnings.

But there are others in the second place, who have more sober Affections, and
have a kindness for all, proportioning themselves to every one by weight and
measure: their discourse is obliging, and their deportment insinuating, neither
their aspect Satirical, nor language severe; they speak Panegyricks, and dare
not discharge a jest even against the most enormous crime. Nothing fitter for
civilities than such Natures, they are obsequious to every man, and being
averse to quarrelling are Enemies to no one; they never sport or toy with their
Wits, but are so solicitous and careful about their Gall, that they are
altogether void of, and are without Salt -- But give me a Friend with whom I
may display the Urbanities of a jocund humor, and beguile the tediousness of
the hours with the pinquunt facetiousness of smart Jests: but however in regard
they are harmless, such dispositions may please whether amongst Friends or
Enemies; but because they study to deserve and caresse so coldly; as that they
neither love nor are beloved, and as they have most delicate ears, so the
unhappy event of one cruel joke, will scare them out of Company.

There is a third sort of people, who voluntarily exclude themselves from the
precincts of Friendship, whilst they only speak for fear of others, and if they
accost any one, seem rather to commit theft, than to weave ^ Dialogue: they
discourse softly History and Annals, and whisper Edicts and Acts of Parliament,
and (like Cinna in the Epigram) they commend the Prince in your ear, they
praise the invention of letters, and the acrimonious moisture of tart Citron,
and (if possible) without voice, or Books, would rather show what they would
have, than speak it: and these are so suspicious, that they are scarce secure
even from themselves; because truth loves to be seen and seeks no corners, I am
apt to believe therefore that there is no sound Affection in such private
tempers; they are silly wasps of mankind, who from every Company suck poison.

There are opposite to these other Persons, who are as free and open, as they
were private and reserved men of a crystal and transparent breast, who have
cribrous sides, and are full of chinks, from whom whatsoever is put in, either
through the easiness of Nature, or softness of Humor, does leak out. Who or
what these persons are, not Apollo himself, with his whole quire of Muses can
declare unto us; they have an Extempore way of living, neither do they perform
those things they thought on, but those, which they have popt on; and act not
so much by consideration as chance, and if they offend, it is rather out of
weakness than choice, out of infirmity rather than Judgment: and (like Fabius
in Livy) are rather inconstant in good than diligent in evil. And as they are
wild and talkative, so they often discover some grains of salt, some Specimens
of Ingenuity, which are rather the Products of the Madness of their Brain, than
of the Acuteness and Easiness of their Wits. Somewhat of kin to these are
those, who are inspired with Eloquence only at Feasts and taverns, who never
clear up into laughter, but when they sup abroad. These seem to be born on
purpose for Saturnalia? they spend their time in much Festivity, but withal
they live in jolly Gluttony. No man begins a story more happily, or commends
the treatment more lavishly. What news? he receives at the gates original
Rumors, neither need any one tell him the portents of a Comet, or in what
breast the Spaniard will sheath his sword: But if these persons are driven out
of the road of their common discourse, then their fluency engendered at other
men's trenchers forsakes and leaves them, and then they begin to be tedious, who
only maintain their tongues in obedience to their bellies; and now amidst such
infinite variety of Humors and Tempers, who dare unbutton his Breast, and
unbosome his Soul, and lay himself naked to the conscience of every man? who
would not be censured and accused for Temerity, whom the Perfidiousness of
others should thus unwarily overwhelm? though fortunate and happy Love has
blessed thee with a Friend free from these Evils so common to Mortals, one in
thy Opinion fit for the mysteries and secrecies of private Counsels, yet thou
know not what a day may bring forth: there are vicissitudes in Love, Truces
and Enmities, Wars and Peace, and though the wounds of offended Majesty may be
sometimes healed; yet they so close as to leave a scar behind them, as a
monument of the Injury; so that there may still remain a jarring Harmony, and
grudges more dangerous, than open Animosities. A fracture in a joint will
hardly be set, and abreach in an Union so close and intimate will be scarcely
soder'd. Fraternal hatred is become a Proverb, and it is a Maxim, that most
implacable Emnities are betwixt those of a blood.

Thus you see it is not safe to be too much a companion, but sometimes
destructive; for who is there that understands men, and who is a sagacious
diver into humane Souls? I say amidst the insinuating caresses and
blandishments of Lovers, as exchanged hands, mutual Embraces, and reciprocal
Sighs, Protestations and Oaths, who dare, I say, rather promise or assure
himself of Fidelity, than deceit and snares? certainly more innocent and
harmless Souls have been often circumvented by specious pretenses and
appearances of Affection, and such impostures are so much the more rife, by how
much the more securely they can cheat and cozen. Who would have thought any
Treachery lurk't under that vizard of Friendship between Firmius Catus and his
dear Libo, who was his Associate in Luxury, Debt and Lust too? who would have
suspected Falsehood in the Familiarity between Lactiaris and Sabinus? Love and
Affection the most simple things in the world are both ensnared, and Libo and
Sejanus are destroyed by those from whom they expected the greatest Safety.
Wicked Latiares occur every where, who after the greatest Profession of the
sincerest Love do entrap Mortals in their unwary discourses; they are the worst
kind of Enemies, for whom we cannot be prepared in War, and against whom we
cannot be secure in Peace; vomica and carcinomata humani generis born only for
the public evil, worthy to sail in Trajans boat, being Piacular victims of
intestine Wars, Slaughters, Desolations, and seeing they are hated as much by
them, whom they prosit, as by those whom they accuse, let them suffer
punishment with the same pain, they procure it. Men can never be cautious
enough at all times; and I fear a man can never be suspicious enough about
their Examples, from whose end there can never be faithful security.

DECLAM. VII. Whether the decay and Periods of Empires are to be ascribed to
Fate?
WHat? when Fortune suspends the guidance of the world, does it then begin to
shake and totter? Is the Universe Governed by the Fortuitous turnings and
temerarious courses of blind chance? it is unseasonable impiety that disturbs
and tortures Epicurus his Ghost; we follow not the conduct of the Heavens,
neither do we lead our lives according to the Government of the Stars. All
things are established in certain Periods, and we are all ruled by the
preordain'd Counsels of impendent Fates. Behold! the Funerals and remaining
Ashes of the chiefest Monarchies! a purple'd Emperor crowded into the
narrowness of a little Urn! see! the posthumor rubbish of mouldred Cities, and
the noisome carcases of numerous Armies! one hour will sacrifice a thousand
Myriads to the shades below. See! this is the ratified decree of the stubborn
Destinies.

He that in the volumes of the Heavens has read the Nativities of Kingdoms,
and has consulted the Stars, midwifeing it at the Birth of an Infant Empire, I
say, such a man may by a certain Augury foretell the Fatal Period of a dying
Nation as well as if he had studied the dismal Annals of the cruel Fates, or as
if the Gods had informed him by the Embassy of their Agent, I mean their
Mercury. When a Comet slames with its direful beams, and when the Deities have
set up their funeral Torches, who suspects not the death of a King at hand?
surely they kindle those blazing Lamps to discover the untrodden way of Princes
to Bliss, or rather they are Festival Lights, Solemn Bon-fires, made by the
Gods to congratulate their Instalment into their pleasant Paradise.

There is nothing in the world more august than Majesty; it is a personated
Deity, and is inscribed with Divinity. How sacred is that head that supports a
Crown! how holy that Person that is attired with reverend and modest Purple? yet
those that celebrate magnificent Nativities, and more solemn Obsequies, tell
us, that even Caesar's themselves are born and die as we do; Nature has made
them of nobler mould, but yet one spark of a Fever, one dram of Poison will
soon dispatch them from the Elements, and send them on an Errand into another
world. How slippery is the top of fickle Fortune! how steep and declining is
Honors Precipice? how whirling and unsteady are the Pinnacles and Battlements
of Potent Empires! The haughty Sun that now culminates in the Zenith with his
whole Orb of Light, after a few minutes declines toward his western Grave; and
the Lamps of Heaven are all kindled to inflame the magnificence of his Funeral;
and thus the constitutions of Empires are brittle and uncertain. An ambitious
cloud through the propitious serenity of a smiling day, aspires aloft, and
climbs the air, which being disquieted and tossed by the ruder winds, melts into
tears, and weeps it self down into the lower Region; and such is the downsal of
the greatest Dignity.

Fancy Alexander the Lord of the Earth, and the universal Monarch of all
Nature; I say, Fancy him on a Throne begirt with a ring of numerous Guards;
Fancy the whole race of mankind to be listed into one Macedonian Army! and then
I pray, what rustic Deity can be so uncivil as to dethrone the King, to
uncrown his brow without incurring the guilt of horrid Treason? yet after all
this Pomp, after a few years he yields to Fate, at the dissolution of whose
Empire, are born many petty Principalities, as the Stars do appear and rise at
the Suns Funeral. Why should I mention the Tragical Catastrophe's of expiring
Kingdoms. The whole Universe hastens and inclines to the West, and we, whom
Nature has reserved to the last twilight of the setting world, I say, we must
undergo the extreme vicissitudes of all things, when the Universal contexture
shall be all unravelled, and the series of time shall have run to its last
sand. I wonder at the quietness of Students in so great a whirlwind and hurry
of Business, who despise the Vanities and Trifles of Wealth and Honors, and
enquire not so much as what the world is doing without their Studies.

DECLAM. VIII. Unity does preserve a City.
SO Divine are the advantages, so charming the Beauties, and so prevalent the
Power and Force of Unity, that it is the very Life and Soul, the very Flame and
Spirit that actuates, that gives briskness to every thing. If all Strife was
condemned to the shades below, and this kinder Deity would converse with men
here in this light above, I know not what golden ages, what pleasant Elisium's
'twould procure to Mortals, nay (to speak more boldly) an Eternal world, but as
the Philosopher tells us, if the Sun should be buried in an Eclipse, and be
exiled from his Orb, the day would be extinguish't, and die into darkness, and
the obscure Globe of the widdowed Moon would fly and vanish into winds and
showers: and thus, if concord should be banished from this Sublunary Scene, and
Friendship ostracism'd out of this inferior world, and the golden chain of
Unity should be unlink't and broken; how soon would this beauteous contexture
be all unravelled into its first Chaos, the unpropt Heavens would want an
Atlas; Kingdoms would moulder into dust and rubbish; and Princes vanish into
air and shades; there would be either no Empires at all, or very vain ones like
heads in Pictures without brains. In vain would the Heavens slatter themselves
with the hopes of a long duration of inviolable Stars and uncorrupted ages, if
they did not harmoniously accord within themselves, and all discord being
divore'd of the wrangling Qualities, if by a happy marriage they were not
united to their matter and among themselves too.

The daily dissolution we see in things, and their continual hastening to their
last period, proceeds merely from Strifes and Contests. The Elements do
mutually engage at cuffs, and as it were studiously bent on each others ruin,
do box it stoutly till death do part them. Neither can we mortals boast a
greater Safety, who through Wars and Contentions do rush upon our Fate with
winged speed. Death would every where be esteemed but a Fable and Phantasm, a
very valn and trivial Deity, if men would accord within themselves, and enter
into a strict League of mutual Charity. For no life so happy or (as if emulous
of Heaven) comes nearer the Nature of the Gods above, than where there is a
recipocal Harmony of wills and desires, and (if possible) a mixture of Souls.
The most impregnable Bulworks, nay the Sinews of a Nation, even money it self,
cannot so fortify a City, as the mutual Kindness, and Love of Citizens. No
engines whatsoever, nay the tutelar Deities themselves cannot be Talismans
sufficient for the defense of that place, which is not blessed with the sacred
Genius of Unanimity. For how does it lie open even to an unarmed man, when
fermenting and boiling with intestine fends it contends against it self, and is
its own Enemy! to how great dangers both of Rocks and Waves is that vessel
exposed, which amidst bussling storms and the gaping Ocean (as it were for the
pastime of the winds) is distracted with the contrary violence of diverse
pilots! and certainly to no less hazards is obnoxious that City, whose
Inhabitants disagreeing among themselves, and being of various tempers, do
exchange their Peace and Quiet for bloody brawls and inhumane Slaughters. That,
either shelves and quick sands, this, either its self, or its Enemies will
overwhelm with ruin. As a dismal instance of this sad Event, I appeal to that
fortified City of Regium, so besieged on all sides with strength and Bulworks,
that it stood impregnable against all invasion, and bafled the assaults even of
the God of war: But when once it began to groan under intestine Animosities,
with what winged speed did it ^lie to ruin, and how soon did it drop into dust
and rubbish? how many Ghosts did the civil Wars dismiss to the shades below!
how did they tire the Destinies with repeated Funerals! and weary the boat of
re^^less Charon? and at last, with what Facility did the besieged, their
strength being most decayed by a long League, I say, how soon did they raze the
City, and drew about it their hostile plow? and therefore (O Rome!) not an Army
of mountains can promise thee unshaken walls, or a safe Capitol, so long as thou
framest to thy self Trojan horses, whilst Private Catilines with fire and sword
invade the Senate.

There is no speedier way to Spoils and Trophies, than when (Swords and Souls
as it were conspiring) all men level at the same end. Nothing sooner blocks up
the passage of an invading Enemy, than twisted Counsels and breasts united in
one common Harmony. Not numerous Xerxes, a General more formidable than any
Encelladus, at whose sight the very Sun absconded and Nature tottered, whose
Army sip't up the Ocean, and whose Arrows Heaven; I say, this terrible Warrior
could not one jot prevail, either with fire or sword, against united Greece;
for that all commanding Diety, Love, soon scattered his Forces better than the
strength of any Engine. What unprofitable darts did that grim aspect of war
shoot and level? how was the sword brandish't in vain? neither could any Arm,
or the God of war himself do any thing.

Let us reflect on our age, and take a survey of this Kingdom! what serene
days have we enjoyed here! how, to the envy of ages and nations, without camp
or sword, has our Britain flourish't! and I hope will for ever enjoy an
undisturbed peace! we congratulate our Unity, Peace, Laws, Judges, Flamines,
Temples, Cities, Academies, and whatsoever is sacred or august in this our
England. What Elegancies are legible and inscribed on the fabric of the body?
what charms are conspicuous in each part, and what Divinities are scattered in
every member! how in vain does the Dotage of the year discover its horyness in
Ice and Frosts, and with what fruitless flames do the Stars burn; seeing it can
establish to it self an amicable concord, and harmonious temper; whereas let
but the disagreeing Principles of things contend and squobble, and how swiftly
do they hasten to their ruin?

Thus Cities grow, and great wealth is preserved, and a little increased by
Concord; but Discord diminishes the most pompous riches, and utterly razeth
the most opulent Towns. Those things are most durable, which are most one and
united; and all things covet an Eternity, and are ambitious of Immortality.
Thus stones stick most closely in their several Parts; water crowds into a
globe least it should perish by division; if any thick body be laid upon it, it
is advanced upward, and (I know not by what instinct) preserves it in an
abiding state, in regard the parts will not be separated from their parts; for
all separation is fatal to things that are alike. Particles of water falling on
the pavement of a smooth table, appear and show themselves tumid and globular,
neither will be demolish't into flatness by the shaken board. But if other
portions of the Element be added to them, then one drop has a mind to, and
defires another, and then they are as it were immediately married and mutually
incorporated, assisting each other against the hostilities of the air, and the
violence of the surface on which they fell, least they should be destroyed by
them. All which do as it were with a vocal stilness whisper and suggest and as
so many mute Doctors do proclaim by their filence, what a guard inviolable
Concord and Unity uniterrupted by Strifes and emulous of Eternity has indulged
to Nature.

But now, if Nations owe their Cities, (those Souls of Kingdoms) and Scepters
to Love and Amity, and are more safely begirt with a guard of hearts, than of
swords or hands, or if these sublunary things in the absence of this Deity,
should be presently involved in a sudden destruction, neither Nature her self,
nor the World, no, nor the Deities themselves could prorogue their Eternity: If
this is the happyest boon and the safest benefit that Nature ever bestowed on
mankind, I wish all things lucky and prosperous to all men; and it is the sum of
my desires that this our Parnassus may eternally flourish with the beauteous
harmony of Counsels, Arts and Souls; and above all names, thrice holy be to us
that innocent and propitious Genius of Unity and Concord; but as for Strife and
Discord, let them for ever be condemned to the lower Regions, and be a vexation
to the Furies amongst which they were bred! let Envy be banished to the infernal
shades whose poisonous Nature blasts by infection its neighbors Fame, least it
should survive and increase its leaness. Be gone all ye clamorous detractors
with your virulent tongues, who are armed with the points and stings of Satyrs,
or pointed with the stings of Satyrs, whose weapons are tincttur'd with the
blood of Vipers; who never think themselves more content and quiet, than when
they wrangle and brawl with the greatest disquietude! let fraternal Animosities
die and vanish! let it be no longer proverbial that most implacable Enmity
arises from blood! let us not, as if born so many Catilines against our Rome
promote domestic fewds, or civil discord, but let all our Studies, Muses,
Souls and desires conspire in this one thing, that these our mansions may ever
enjoy the blessing of peace to the increase of Piety, Concord, Virtue and Unity.

DECLAM. IX. Whether the Senses can err, or be deceived, when conversant about
their proper objects? Affirmed.
HOw is humane Understanding inwrapt in darkness? how is that Diviner fragment
of a Rational Soul benighted as it were in the mists of Error! that offspring
of Jove that constitutes men, nay Dignifies them with the Essence almost of
Gods, I say, how is it invelop'd in clouds of Ignorance! the too frequent
infirmities and failures of crazed and distempr'd heads, and that variety of
danger to which every year, age, and lives of all men are casually exposed, are
too ample demonstrations of this truth.

Behold! A description of an Epicure.
here is one born for the Luxury of a banquet! see! another. Sardanapalus, whose
very Nature is calulated for a festival entertainment. He Deifies a Kitchen,
and adores the ingenuity of a pallatable dish, and is prostrate to a table
groaning under the varieties of Ambrosian delicacies. He looks upon that to be
the flower of being, and as it were the Life and Soul of Life, which lies
melted and dissolved in the midst of Junkets even to the nauseating of the
plenty of loathed dainties. He never thinks he fares deliciously unless his
riot does invert the season, and he crown his goblet with winter Roses; unless
Falernian dissolve the Summer Snow in his cup of Pearl, and a strange Fowl of
an unknown sky, or an exotic Fish of a foreign shore are the constant messes
of his curious meals. He increases the thirsty Avarice of his silver dropsy
with golden naps, being laborious even beyond Cleanthes for self and money. He
fancies to himself I know not what kind of Chimecal happiness to arise even
from his very pockets, and had rather be a Craesus or a Midas, than a Saturn or
a Jove in their respective Heavens.

He loves to be seen in a crowd or throng, and then thinks he most happily sets
up his plumes, when his sweaty singers are hoop'd with a Summer ring.

When born on six men's shoulders (on both sides
The curtains tuck't up, windows open) rides
Lolling Mecaenas like --
Every wish aims at Empire, and he is highly smitten with and dotes on
Monarchy. Whilst his Soul is involved in clouds of Error, it is a very ill
Judge of things, wherefore he, ambitiously breathing after that Fortune, which
the higher it is, it is the more unstable, and through the anger of the Fates
sinks and falls with a greater ruin.

So purblind are the minds and understandings of men, that it oftentimes
embraces falsities for truths, and (whilst we too silly do follow its guidance
and conduct) it does varnish, and adulterate evil into good; wherewith we are
not only unwarily deceived, but sometimes ensnared into our own ruin; and can
by no means promise the rays of the Moon and Stars to be kept inviolable, if a
bolder cloud and impudent darkness should invade the Sun; neither can it be
hoped that those streams should be clear and crystal, which derive a
filthiness from the very Fountain.

The Will seems to be darkened by the borrowed errors of the Understanding; if
therefore these endowments of Immortality, these almost Godlike Powers of the
Soul, the Mind and Will, have their failures, false Images and representations
of things, we should much offend in ascribing so great a certainty to outward
senses, which we have in common with brutes. These guards or sentinels are so
far from being acute anddextrous, that their deceptions equal them, and they
are guilty of as many Errors as they have Objects. Thus the Stars to the
bleerey'd are as so many Giants, and the Moon seems less than every wheel. I
shall not insist on fantastic Meteors, which having no existence, are only
splendid and gaudy apparitions; thus sweets are bitter to the Feverish Palate.
Here is one tickled with the harmony of the Spheres, and there is one offended
with the fragrancy of a Rose. The Errors of the Senses are so frequent and
familiar, that it is not worth while to insist any longer upon them.

DECLAM. X. Whether Monarchy be the best Form of Government.
SIlence! what confused Noise and Tumult is this? How great a concourse of
clamorous People! Can we tell what they say, or wherefore they are come
together? They cannot tell themselves. Liberty, Liberty they cry, and they say,
they are come to choose their Governors. Let them set their hearts at rest, and
calmly depart; their Governor is not now to be chosen, since God and Nature,
and Law Natural are before hand with them, who have unanimously appointed them
a Government under one Sovereign Governor, whom they call a Monarch: For who
brought in other Forms, Aristocracy or Democracy; Let them look back into the
Originals of Rule and Government, trace the History of their Ancestors, when
the world was not so mad and tumultuous? Do we find Anarchy in the first Ages?
Any Field-meetings and tumultuous Inundations of People, which, their banks
being broken, furiously drive on and bear all before them? Did God and Nature
so ill provide for the world, that they left them at any time without
Government, that men must shift for themselves and be their own Providers of so
great a Blessing.

It Is true, if Mankind had grown out of the Earth like Mushrooms, or spawned
into the world at one instant, if they had been transformed from Emmets to
Myrmidons, or like Frogs and Todpoles, (the only Aborigenes that I know,) had
been conceived by the slime of Nile, and from thence, peopled the world, they
might then have muttered something of choosing a Governor, if a People in the
State of a Natural Barbarity and savage life can attain to so much sound reason
and good insight in Morals as to call for Order and Government, which I much
question, since civil Education is one of the benefits of Government: as for
Experience, there can be none in our case.

No, Principio rerum, says the Historian, Gentium Nationumque imperium penes
Reges erat. At the beginning the world knew none but Monarchy. Omnes antiquae
gentes Regibus quondam paruere, says the Orator. Not only the East and South
Asia and Egypt, but even Italy, Greece, and the territories thereof, which in
after ages admitted Democracy, or Aristocratical mixtures, such as Argos,
Athens, Sicyon, Lacedemon, were at first governed by Kings, whose names are
still preserved in History. For so it is, if we run back the scries of the
Generations of the world, as far as the clew will guide us, we shall find that
Government was first founded in Families, which multiplying into Tribes, became
Townships, then Cities, whence their Dominion growing considerable, discovered
to their Neighbors their way of Government, which was by their Natural Prince.

Where then is the Noise? the Liberty that they so cry up, what would they have
when they say they are freeborn? they do not intend, sure, to do what they
list; For if Monarchical Power, as all civil, yea and barbarous Nations
confess, is founded in Paternal Power, then it is clear from God and Natures
Law, that no man can say, he is freeborn from Government, since it is his
Governor, who begat him.

Hence the Divine Command, which knew how to express it self, by honoring our
Father and Mother, secures Obedience to their Prince, being literally true in
Adam, Noah, Abraham, Israel, that they were Fathers and Princes of their People.

And that the Commonalty may learn what share they had then in Election of
their Governor, the firstborn, by his Primogeniture, his unquestionable
Right, succeeded.

This is the Government, which God and Nature has appointed; All other
Governments are Sophistical, forced devices of Politic unpolitique men, lame
and imperfect and spurious Models, scarce to be called by the beauteous name of
Government, but as they resemble the feature and lineaments of Monarchy. I know
the unhappy conceptions of the inconsiderable Vulgar, who (for want of
Education and better Principles) look upon their supreme Governor, as a
Nuisance to mankind, a person only of an exalted Fortune, living at his ease and
splendour (which if they were anatomized, we should find they grudge to all, but
themselves) Careless in the mean time of the Law, and the Commonwealth, with
Power to oppress, not to Protect.

But this is a false Character, unreasonably made up by the Envious observers
of the failures of the person, who never counterpoise them with the unspeakable
benefits we enjoy under Him. The beholder was in the shade and dark side of the
Piece: Let him suffer himself to stand in the true light, and he shall discern
better Features.

Consider Him, with me, as the Sacred Fountain of JUSTICE, a Word not to be
writ but in Capital Letters, engraven in a Memory of Marble: Consider Him as
the great Soul of the LAW, the Rule and Standard of Justice, and like the Soul,
(for that also is a Monarch and has its jurisdiction) exercising vital acts
through all, even the remotest parts of his territories, in every Borough,
Village, Hamlet, by his inferior Courts and Officers, without which there is
no Life in the Body, no Liberty, no Safety, no Right, nothing that is dear to
us shall be enjoyed, nothing that is due to us shall be recovered; All that I
am or have shall be at the mercy of another; my estate, whether left me by my
Ancestors, or dear gotten by indefatigable industry, carried away without
remorse; my Cattle driven off my ground, Herbage trod to dirt, Corn fields
fired, my Children spirited away, Wife ravished from my arms, my own person
dogged and waylaid by treacherous miscreants, and for a fatal conclusion of all
mischiefs, barbarously murdered; my carcass in the mean while bleeding for a
Coroner, only my Soul scapes away to complain of the murder.

So that without the Law, I should not live in a Tub, with the Philosopher, but
in a Mortar, where every Man may pound me; besides that even my fears would
daily kill me, as in a distressed vessel in a very tempestuous Sea, men dye
every minute, and their hearts sink a thousand times before the vessel is
foundred.

How blessed a thing is Government, which staves off all these injuries from
us? and forbids them under such severe penalties which none but mad men will
incur? How blessed a thing is Law, which brings Safety into the world, and
Innocence, the Parent of Safety, under whose protection I enjoy my unconfined
Liberty, my house is not my prison but my castle, the highway is my rode, the
neighbor meadows are my walks, and the whole land is my market.

These things considered, it is mere stupidity not to think of a Governor with
honor, and mention him with respect, the Monarch I mean, if Kings prove to be
the ancient form, to Them we are obliged for the establishing these Laws, and
to none before them.

Where are the Republicans then, is not our Monarchy a Commonwealth?
Ingratitude it self cannot deny it? The other Names of Commonwealth
counterdistinct to a Kingdom, are but a cheat; a delusion of the people with an
ambiguous word; for a Commonwealth truly so called, is really found in the
Regal Government, as is evident by the Family, its first rudiment, where the
Laws of the master of the house provide for the common good, even for the
Servants themselves, according to their Station. But it is true, as it happens in
Families, so we often see it in Kingdoms, men are weary of their services and
Freedoms too, when they cannot mend themselves.

For the establishing of Monarchy therefore, let all Patrons of Aristocracie
and Democracy know, there are and ought to be many Governors subordinate, yet
Sovereignty is settled in one. One, I say, to avoid division, therefore hateful
because it obstructs the common good, proves the bane of Governor and People;
Just as if you divide the Natural Body, it perishes; yea one Limb severed from
the whole, keeps no life after; but endangers the rest. Not a poor worm divided
can subsist, its severed pieces may make a show of life and struggle for a
while, but they never unite again, an Army divided needs no other foe, it
countermines and dissipates it self.

Trace we therefore the Footsteps of Divine and Humane Wisdom, and we shall
find by way of prevention, one Head in the Natural Body, and one Head in the
Politic, one Paterfamilias, one Husband, one Prince, one General, one Pilot.
What is the Lion in the Forest but the Prince of his territories, the Master
Be (King or Queen we will not dispute) but the Monarch of the hive, the Sun in
the Firmament, the Governor, the leader, the Choragus of all the Stars. God
has made Monarchy to flare in our eyes, in Heaven it self, there is One
Chieftain, and how much more ought there to be on earth, seeing in earth, we
have many giddy Planets, who will go direct and retrograde and how they please.

May we not add, the Lord of the Universe is but One, nay, that his perfection
lies in that he is but One, two chiefs are as absurd as two infinites,
certainly all Majesty is seated in Unity, Divided Government makes no show,
there is Majesty in the prospect of a vast mountain, and none in a hundred
molehils.

And what news is it to tell the world, even from that one head of the
antiquity of Monarchy, that the Earthly Monarch is constituted by the Heavenly,
ordained to be his Deputy, a Viceroy to him, reigning in his stead? Weak
People, God help us, we are not willing our duty should be demonstrated to us,
we would have all obligation to be at pleasure and indifferent, but yet it is
this Divine Deputation which only exalts and sets him on his true base,
ennobles the Governor, not his Person or his Nature (for with the poor
rusticks leave, he is a man like us) but his Relation to that Sovereign Power,
far above all Principality, whose very adumbrations require our honor,
subjection being due to his Institutions,

And least the Republican should plead ignorance, let us show him how this
Relation is made known, more especially in Successive, the only true Monarchy:
Even by that very Succession, when Heaven is pleased to commend to us a Prince
descended of Princes, and that by an Immemorial descent, willing to signalize a
Family and perpetuate the stream of Blood Royal from age to age; Beside
Personal Majesty, not assumed, but inherent, Royal Clemency, Gracious and
Peaceable Temper, to which we must add a Testimony from Heaven, Miraculous
gifts of Healing entailed upon the Blood: So is the Lions Prerogative
manifested by his pace and aspect, and the presidence of the Be by his size
and wing.

So that we ought to hear no more of that infidel objection, That the King is
but One, and therefore cannot be greater than his thousands of his People: the
answer is bold to say, He stands for GOD; so that though he is One, he is found
in the place of millions, and according to true Arithmetic, if we try
numeration aright, he is of more value then the subsequent numbers.

Let the King therefore be chief in Gods name, and then view his lovely train
of Nobles, Dukes, Earls, Viscounts, Marquesses, Barons, Knights, Judges,
Gentry, to take no notice of the Ecclesiastical state, How transporting is the
prospect, how beautiful and stately is the enclosure, a Garden decked with
flowers Imperial, distributed in their Beds, where by the variety of their
Colors, in field ARgent, Or, Gules, Verl, they delight and distract the eye
(while we the poor commons are the humble Grass-plots of the place) All with
the Heliotrope, worshipping the Sovereign, who gives life and spirit to us by
day, and refreshes us with his dews by night.

What of this have we in a Democracy; Go to the Roman; First, a goodly pair of
Confuls, then two or three hundred Patricians, over them a Censor to take their
names, yea and estates too; a Praetor, a Tribune two or three or more according
as they can speed in the scuffle of Elections, a Scavenger Aedile etc.

We will not anatomize the Belgie Estates, nor yet the Venetian Optimacy, we
hear of the number of their Clarissimo's: All that we say is, they have a blot
in their Escocheon, a great diminution of Honor on this very account of the
plurality of Governors. It Is more honorable to be governed by One, more
honorable both to Governor, and Subject also; the first, that a Monarch is more
Noble then any, appears by this, that He to whom singly the whole is committed,
is more Honored than those Many to whom it is jointly entrusted, as clear, as
that the Whole is greater than the Part, so that is dispatched. More honorable
even for the Subject, the People governed; for thereby they get the name of a
peaceable, tractable, wise and intelligent people, who, come the worst that can
be imagined (and whatsoever can be imagined, will be objected by turbulent
persons) had rather suffer ill than act it, rather wait upon the will of
Heaven, than throw themselves into hurry and confusion, Confusion being a
plague not to be found in Hell it self, not to be looked upon without horror by
all who have known or heard of its dismal acts on the late English Pharsalia,
an infatuation greater then any other, which can befall a People, greater then
Lunacie, Mania, or whatever species there are of distracted wits, in a
miserable, merciless People. A Clarissimo is an honorable person perhaps, in
his own precinct, but abroad, he is to seek. A person loyal to his Prince is
honored wheresoever he comes, all foreigners do welcome him to their coasts.
For the world has no notion of that Honor, which men cut out to themselves,
pitiful glowworms, who shine by night, rotten sticks that look illustriously,
but in a blind corner. So of old the ignoble Romans having excluded their King,
degraded their Nation, (a just punishment for all such hotheaded Innovators;
whose Honor spreads no further then their Arms would hew their way) being
therefore, no question, assaulted by Kings and Princes, Pyrrhus, Mithridates,
etc. and because they could not brook the so prosperous increase of so
contemptible a government.

For let me ask them, why, I pray, two Consuls? Rome was not founded by two
Consuls, Cannot the same power which founded it, preserve it? why must
authority be broken, piecemeal, which as all other good things, are best,
Entire: In all Fractures, something must needs fall to the ground, some minute
parts, at least. Two heads are better than one in Counsel, not in Government,
we plead not for a head without eyes, Counsel overthrows not Monarchy, but
establishes it, though by the way it is observed also, that Counsel, if too
numerous, is inconvenient for resolution, as multiplicity of Commentators
obscure the text.

To proceed, Two heads are unnatural, a monstrous Government, an Amphibaena in
Politiques; therefore monstrous, because they take it to be a Serpent with two
heads, discharging poison at both orifices; nor can Two be one politic head
so easily, there are difficulties in the Politic as in the Natural Union. For
what if Appius Coecus thinks himself as wise as Voluminous, etc. who shall
moderate or reconcile? There wants a third Consul. Or if one excel the other,
then we are reduced to one Consul, the other is a very Bibulus. See what a task
you wise men of Rome have set your selves! you must find Two of the same age,
and the same prudence: (sooner shall the Egyptians find a successor to their
strangely marked Apis) or else have One Consul still, for the Junior, in
manners, must hearken to the Senior, compliment him so far, and the inferior
Family give way to the Colleague of the noblest Extraction.

Oh! but now they are free from Tyranny and a single Person. Alas! Two are but
one degree removed from Tyranny, and two may agree to be Tyrants, (why not?) as
well as thirty! we have heard of thirty Tyrants in Greek story. What remedy
have you? Oh for that trick they shall be elected annually, they shall hold
their Dignity but for a year. Mark the fears and jealousies of People with
their new devise; the Administration of a Consulate must be annual, least they
should design to retrieve Monarchy; so have I seen watch and ward observed in a
house to keep possession against the true Owner: Lo the difference of Monarchy
from other Governments! behold and love it, for if Fears and Jealousies may be
created sometimes under it, other Governments are merely founded upon them;
whilst Monarchy alone is founded upon Law Natural, Age, Authority, Love,
Prudence, etc.

Take the Venetian State, behold the Italian jealousies, not of their Wives,
but of their Governors, the grand Duke must not budge out of Town without the
leave of the Senate, O pitiful grand Duke! O pitiful Venetians! For if the Duke
should once go out of Town, the Ducal Coronet blossoms into a Crown: and call
you This, Liberty? he lives in Slavery, who lives in perpetual fears, a very
Gyrus and Geta, who always dreads his Masters coming. Nor let any man tell me
this Estate has lasted a great while, What is inferred from thence? Nothing of
Nature or right Reason in it, it is a forced Government still, wherefore it is
wonderful it has lasted so long, (it is true) because things against Nature use
to have a shorter period.

Now admit that annual Government were not founded in fears and jealousies, yet
still in a Sovereign it is unreasonable and ridiculous; unreasonable, because all
Government requires Use and Experience, besides Authority, to answer that
infinite dispatch that is expected, but an annual Magistracy is confined to so
short a term, that the Governor scarce learns how to behave himself, till he is
ready to lay it down. All the benefit is, that the annual administration is
very convenient for Chronology indeed, but the same convenience would be
greater, if they were stated yet shorter: let the Consuls therefore be chosen
to hold a month, or as the Decemviri were to rule in turn for a day -- It Is All
Boyes-play, Picture and Pageant, Princes of Revels, and Lords of a May time,
rather than Government in earnest intended.

Nor do we intend to say that Monarchy is more excellent on the account of its
Antiquity, but also for its intrinsic perfection, the most sufficient and
responsible to all intents and purposes which brought Government at first into
the world. I have said it is the Government solely intended by Nature, it cannot
be denied but it is the Standard of all the rest; for in Aristocracy and
Democracy all plurality of votes effect nothing but by virtue of the single
Form. They must be of One head and one mind, as if One single person, else they
can determine nothing. Now seeing a nemine contradicente is seldom seen, they
must be concluded by the major part, which major part rightly apprehended, is
the spurious Monarch, an Individual multiplied, though but One in it self, or
rather the many playing Mercuries part to the Auditors, while all wise men know
there is but one Sosia.

And what can be required at the hands of Government which is not here found?
Justice, we have it in Monarchy: for Kings and Judges of old were the same
persons. Honor we have it in Monarchy; Liberty, yea even Liberty, as I shall
show, we have it in Monarchy; Safety from civil discords and seditions, we find
in Monarchy: Safety from Enemies abroad; who must go in and out before us but
the Monarch? And this the Antimonarchists could never wipe off; Three hundred
heads in time of exigency, in time of war, are feign to have recourse to a
single person; the Romans not long after their Regifugium, (that they might see
that their Rebellion was senseless, when they stood in need of the Government,
which they had lately expelled) were forced to pitch upon a General, whom they
called indeed a Dictator, to blind poor people, when none could be more
absolute King than he.

Here is the trial of Government, as of the Pilot in a storm; In a calm we may
have Liberty -- to fish, if we please, but in a Storm we must receive the word
of Command. Was it ever heard of in the world, that an Army was led by a
Committee, to march up before their Divisions, and menace death to the opposer?
O Alas poor souls! they must in their Rank, observe the Right hand Man; and so
seeming Commanders, are, indeed Common Soldiers: as soon shall so many Ganders
marching before their Divisions be terrible to the Foe.

Yet this is not All: without Monarchy they cannot so much as raise an Army,
for, the Enemy being at door; To see the ill luck of it, when the Consul
musters, and the Tribune disbands as fast, they must choose a Dictator to make a
muster.

You will say this is pro tempore only; But what will be said, if all new Forms
and Models return at last to their old Monarchs, as the River will run in its
own alveus. I must not here recount, what Piques and Stratagems there are or
have been laid against Venice, much less will I divine how near our unhappy
Neighbors are to their Reduction, to de united, not against, but under their
Head: All the world knows, that the Roman State, of Royal became Popular, and
at last Imperial.

Here we should be Injurious to the Auditors, if they be not Reminded, That
those who have been zealous in violating Monarchy, have commonly given the
world sad warning by their remarkable Exit. Not one of them who assassined
Caesar, which came not to a violent end, and the surly ill principled Family of
Bruti show that this is Heavens perpetual Method; since Caesar's assassinate was
slain in battle by Octavius, as, four hundred years before, his Ancestor was
slain by Aruns, to teach us, that if we list not to be ruled by the Public,
the Indignation of Heaven will commissionate a private hand to order us; where
the Seepter will not sway, the Sword must. And who can forget the Dire, but
most just Fate, of our late Regicides, who deserved to be pitied, but that some
others do more deserve it, I mean such as will not take warning from their
lamentable period. Never shall I wonder, if a dry Gallows frighteth not a
Thief, when Exenteration and Quartering deter not a Traitor; From such a
tender Conscience Heaven deliver us.

Yea, but to be free from Tyranny and Arbitrary Rule of a single Person, who
often invades Liberty, and Property; violates the Privileges of the Subject,
is not this desirable? Under Monarchy we suffer in our Estates; Taxes,
Subsidies drain our purses, and after too great evacuation, leave them gasping
for life; whereas under Democracy the People shall be Princes, and in what
Government there is, we all shall have a share.

Can this in our case be pleaded still, notwithstanding what has been just now
delivered; I had thought the hints of an Ignominious deserved death should
fright us from these abortive dangerous Fancies. I answer fairly, Give me a
free Republic with all my heart, where I may be free from Slavery and Treason
too, where I may be free, Body and Soul, from the foul blot of Rebellion. The
name of Rebel cates into and cankers the flesh, beside it sticks like a curse
to the race and line of the attempter; Incest, Blasphemy, Parricide, Sacriledg,
four foul offenses; but Rebellion, so soul it is, involves Three of them.

Again, let the Objectors Prudence consider not only the Present, but something
of the Future, Who knows what will be after him? we have said and seen with
thanks to Heaven, that a banished Prince may return again: In thy Behavior to
the Public have regard say I to thy own Posterity: thou shall live but thy
while; leave thy Children thy own and thy Princes blessing; thy Deeds and
Writings perhaps will not secure thy Estate to thy Heirs, unless thou draw up
an Act of Oblivion, which since thou can not do, let thy Heirs have no
occasion for it. They who need it for their babes, must, when they dye, pray
that the Prince may never be restored, that Right may never take place, which
beside the fruitlesness of the wish, how conducible it is to those, who commend
themselves to another world, Let any sober man judge.

As for Tyranny, and Arbitrary Power, Who will give us the definition of a
Tyrant? it is more easy to asperse, than define. Every charge against a
Governor will not amount to Tyranny, as neither every indictment of the Subject
will come up to Treason. He who calls a Prince a Tyrant calls him Monster,
murders, buries, yea stakes his body; for None is a Tyrant, but he who in
spite of all Natural or Divine Laws, does what he pleases; Unless you can
insert that killing clause of felonious Indictment, viz. Having not the fear of
God before his eyes, you are no Subject, but a Viper, and deserve to be trod
on, after you have hissed and shown your teeth. In the vastness of
administration, it is a miracle, if there be no failures: In the receipt of a
sum of thousands, there may be one or two less current pieces without the
reproach, I hope, of Thievery or Cheat. How many times does Innocence it self
(to say nothing of unavoidable Oversight) in a Governor, suffer as grievously
as wilful Malice? Even Lycurgus, it is a shame to hear it, was affronted, pelted
with stones, and driven from his Kingdom: History rings how just he was, and
yet how savagely used. And so it is fresh in our memories, how the meekest and
most innocent of all Princes was stabbed by the vulgar, by the inscription of
ultimus Tyrannorum. Naughty men calumniate strongly for their own ends, cry out
upon One to set up an hundred Tyrants: Besides that many administrations of
Government may be pretended to be Arbitrary, not because they are so, but
because they are less usual, according to some emergencies extraordinary. Some
wise men say that in all Supremacy, there must be some use of unconfined and
arbitrary Power, which they prove by the confession and practice of the People,
where they arrogate Supremacy; but if This be too high or harsh a string for
us, then we say, whatever Tyranny or arbitrary Power signifies, it is a
refractary Spirit to cry out upon the best Form, for the apprehensions of those
abuses, which have been found in their own tumults and new Models. Cade and
Tyler of old, as He who made the filthy rhyme to Magna Charta, were rascally
Tyrants. Arbitrary Government by Arms, Rumps, and Committees; most men, who
either love the Republic or their own Estates, do dread the return of such
confounded Republiques. To speak what I think, if we search the wound to the
bottom, it is an impatiency of all Government, Divine though it be, in an
untutored selfish people, that makes them so free in aspersing our Governors;
such who have been bred to understand nothing so much as their private
interest, instead of good manners or Religion it self.

As to our Liberty, we have already said, that just Liberty is not invaded, for
unjust and unnatural, why is it desired? what Man, who is truly man, dare stand
by the wild notion of the vulgar Liberty? let loose the Felons then, and the
Madmen, the Prisons and Bedlam be broke open in the name of Liberty; And let
no man be bound, (That suits finely indeed, To be bound) no not to their good
Behavior. Let all young men, Apprentices, command their Indentures, and
renounce or cancel their oaths of faithful service. Let the Tenants deny
Service to their Landlords, for a Landlord is but a linch of Tyranny, and
what is Rent, but an exaction of Tribute? by Nature we are all as good, one as
another, and as free: let us remove therefore all encroachments (to speak out)
of the Rich upon the meaner sort, and let Right be done, that is, let no great
One run away with All, and an Hundred have just nothing: Let a through
reformation and restitution be made of our ancient Liberty, and let Estates and
Fortunes be sweetly levelled, for Government is a yoke; do our Lords think to
make Brutes of us? This is the sense not only of the Roman Slaves, and Imperial
Boors, who break out into seditions at every opportunity, but of the poorer
sort among our selves; See we the necessity of Government / for who can
out-vote them, who have most voices? It is expedient therefore for them to be
instructed, that Levelling is Confusion, neither has Nature made all equal,
witness the difference of Ages, Statures, Beauties, Parts or Gifts of the Mind.
Government is as necessary as Breathing, it is called a yoke, but an easy one,
(and so we may call our garments, if we please, because they are just fit to
our bodies and keep them from growing out of shape.) Religion is also called a
yoke, and I hope, we are not weary of that. Add, that Liberty is a Faculty of
operating according to our Station: We illustrate it by the Members of the
Body, who in their Stations have their Freedoms and their Privileges also, but
yet exactly keep due order; the Foot may draw on a neat pantofle; the Hand put
on a fine perfumed Cordovan; the Foot may walk forward, backward, Stand, Caper,
Dance; the Hand may Give, Take, Exercise it self to work or play, But neither
may the Hand assassine the Face, or pull out the Eye, nor may one Foot kick
against the other. No man has Liberty to forget himself; Vulgar people, like
little Children, think their Liberty is infringed, when the troth is, they are
blessed with Government; so did I reckon, when I was a Child, that I was in
Prison when I was in my good Fathers house, because He pleased to restrain me
from some licenciousness, which was indulged in other children: Attend, my dear
Countrymen, if I had enjoyed my Liberty, I had been undone; I see now that my
Fathers restraint was for my good: Liberty is good, but we must not surfeit
upon it, a convenient Dose is very proper.

This being observed, I dare boldly say, there is no true Liberty, such as
consists with Natural Order, but under Monarchy. We have branched out its
Subordinations (as the Natural Body shoots it self into Limbs) from the
Sovereign to the Pesant; As then it is in the Natural Body, the Foot cannot
Petition to have the arm lopt off, and set it self in its room; so neither can
the Pesant on pretense of Liberty challenge the Coat of a Gentleman; nor every
Gentleman expect a Patent to be a Baron, In other Commonwealths its called
Liberty; It is monstrous deformity or dislocation of Members, where the Leg
grows out of the Armpit and its proud of the preferment. But as proud as it is,
it is a foul spectacle and the true Augurs will tell you such monstrous
Governments ought to be abolished.

Taxes and Tallage are the easiest part of the objection, since Nature requires
it, and all Religion allows it is due, every Profession demands a Fee, every
Office its Salary; It Is only Rusticks, and want of breeding, who attaint the
Priest, the Lawyer, the Physician, for a covetous Generation, while they only
expect their Dues: Governors are Ministers attending continually upon the
discharge of their Office; And must only they be unpaid for their attendance?
your Coachman and water-man must be considered for their attendance; Bees have
more justice, who maintain their Master at the charge of the Hive. If God had
made the Governors Immortal, He, nor They would have expected Subsidy, but
seeing the Prince partakes of the Common Nature, it is barbarously sad to starve
Him, and tends to naught, but the change of Government; as they, who lie before
a City in hope to famish it, seek to master it.

Now to all experience is it contrary to hope for redress from contribution
under a Democracy, the Romans cessed the people to purpose, and spared not,
they knew the Estates of each Citizen, and they made use of them. It would do
one good to consider how free our Neighbor Escates are from Assessements and
Taxes, or to remember brave Olivers ninety thousand pound, with an additament
of thirty thousand more to make it up 120000 lib. per mensem; Pay your excise
for shame, O ye well wishers to Democracy, and mutter not at a round
Assessment, for our blessed Democracy brought these knacks into England, and
Let it not be said that these Oppressions are no pressures, when laid on us by
Ignoble Usurpers, but only then, are intolerable, when called for by our
Natural Prince; when we will mutter and mutter, fume and smother, till we break
out into a flame, and depopulate our Native Country, rather than pay a six
pence Ship-mony -- Oh how long shall we be called an unruly People, who love
our Prince, and yet sell him for six pence? When shall we wipe off the
reproach, so long thrown in our faces, that the King of England is a King of
Furies, Rex Caco D -- My heart is not hard enough to speak out the word; Whence
comes this foul Stigma, upon us? From the Stars? as Mr. Camden has it, or the
Temper of our Island? or is it a National Corruption drawn from our Saxon
Ancestors, (since the Britains are of better principles) or were we taught it
by those Birds of Prey, those Families, (whose Gentry I question not) who came
in with the Conqueror, with this noble Resolulution, to get what they could,
and to part with as little as may be. Whencesoever it is, we shall never be
Queen of Islands, till we have laid by such low Spirited principles, and
studied our good name by more noble, more magnify Resolutions.

To conclude, the Last is the most honest plea of all, viz. that under
Democracy we shall have each of us a share in the Government, Every man shall
take his turn; for Monarchy seems a Monopoly of Authority, but we desire a
Free-Trade, in such Merchandise, many Families will be the better, when the
Monopoly is divided, as Alexanders Empire upon his death made several petty
Princes: So it is we would be All Paramount; It Is a very loving proposition, and
it will please our Wives be sure: But this is but a dream, a device to possess
peoples heads to fool them into turbulency; For Government is no Frolic, no
ridiculous sport at Questions and Commands, where the Servant takes his turn of
a Mock-King, and commands all the House; but Government is a most serious
constitution to profit, not to please all; implanted in Nature, and Conscience,
and hence is it, that in that very sportive way, where a Servant is King, he
cannot command his Master in all instances of Obedience requirable without
egregious Impudence.

No, no; People are to be governed: Not an Army, or a Family, or any multitude
can govern it self, they may wish their own conservation and welfare, but they
understand not the means conducing thereto. Every member of the Army agrees in
Victory or common Safety desired; but the Methods, the Intrigues and Stratagems
how to expedite the Whole from this danger, or make them Masters of that
advantage, These are Arcana, which the private Soldier does not comprehend;
Some shrewd pates there may be among the Country Buskins, and greater
Pretenders within the City-Walls, but he would not deserve well of his Majesty,
who shall advise him to search the Coffee-Assemblies for Privy Counselors. Let
them be wise, but with submission and a hearty belief that there are many in
Place, wiser than themselves: Have thou Sense and Sagacity, be thankful; but
thou have no obligation to be Proud; I will allow thee to be wiser than the
Multitude, I find it by thy discourse; but if thou art wiser than the Many,
confess then with me that the Multitude ought not to govern.

I count them well employed that Religiously inquire into the reasons of Divine
Sanctions, of whom at present I would gladly know, wherefore Heaven was pleased
to ordein Successive Monarchies and not Elective. Surely beside the prevention
of factious Field-meetings on the Peoples part, and crafty ambitious practices
of the competitors side: He did not reckon the People under their pretended
state of Liberty, to be competent Electors of their Princes: the Votes of a
Commonalty can do much, yet it is still questionable, whether any voting
themselves to be wise and prudent, can effectually make them such. So
irrational is the claim of choosing their Sovereign, when they have neither
Power nor Skill to entitle them to it: For if they had power, it would yet be
an offense, not to call in wiser than themselves to their assistance: As the
wife, though she has unquestionable power, to choose her Husband,
transgresses the rule, if she hearkeneth not to the advice of her Parents. For
how easy is the People, how ductile, hammered to all dimensions, and degrees
of tenuitie, a cunning Sophister can lead them with a twined thread of
Rhetoric, to be Pompeians to day, and Caesarians to morrow. So tottering, and
so unballasted are their Judgments, that they turn with every tide, and comply
with the wantonness of the wave, if any wind be stirring. Intoxicated with
false principles, (and such it is easy to infuse,) they will meet in great
bodies, as if acted by Divine instinct: So will minute Fishes meeting in shoals
overturn a Navy; and an Army of Grasshoppers blast and burn up all that is
goodly in the Land. They say they are Freeborn, but they are kin to him, who
would sell his Birthright; for Beef and Country Ale will marshal a Province.
You may discover their Character by their abilities in Spirituals: One paultry
lying Spirit will found a numerous new Sect, which will stand at defiance with
Humanity it self: But if some men will strive to forget their most amiable duty
of Allegiance, or, in spite of Conscience, throw it off, we shall hope still,
that Monarchy will perpetually flow with the largest streams of time, that the
English Roses will never be blasted in these our gardens: That the Royal
Thistle shall avenge it self upon all unhallowed fingers, that the Genius of
the Nation, the Bent of our Gentry, the Sublimity of our Peers, the Learning,
Principles, and Spirit of our Clergy, I may add, the Flower of London its noble
City and Lieutenancy, beside the Dignity of our Island, the Fame of our
Ancestors (and what can I say more? except I should add the Decree of Heaven,
of which I hope these are no contemptible arguments) will appear against all
restless designs of ignoble Republics, wherever contrived at Club or
Coffee-meeting, and that the public shouts of England and Dominion of Wales
upon every occasion shall by ringing their Loyal Ejaculations make Holy Day in
the Air, while Heavens applauding, and the Earth dancing a Saraband, the
Mountains shall answer the voices of Man, Woman and Child with the dutiful
thundering rebound of, God save the KING.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 164. line 12. inconsiderate. p. 169. l. 8. Substitutions. p. 170. l. 15.
Verd. 172. l. 16. ^^le and p. 174. Syrus.

Books sold by Obadiah Blagrave at the Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard, viz.
DR. Gell on the New Testament, in Folio. Phillips English Dictionary,
explaining all hard English words, in Folio. price 12 s. Smiths Christians
Religions Appeal against the Scepticks of this Age, in Folio, price 12 s.
Parthanissa, a Romance, in Folio. Pharamand, all twelve parts, in Folio, price
1. l. Saunders Physiognomy and Chyromancy Metoposupany, explaining the moles of
the body, of dreams etc. in Folio. price 12. s. Bromes Britannia being a large
description of England with Maps of the Country Seldens Mare Clausum,
concerning the Right and Dominion of the Sea, in Folio. Cockers large Copy Book
in Folio, price 2. s. 6. d. Stapletons translation of Juvenal, in Folio.
Williams perfect Statesman, in Folio. A Satyr against Hipocrites in Quarto.
Complete Clerk and Scriveners Guide, in Quarto. Stubs directions for Blood
letting, in Quarto. Bishop Sandersons Life, with diverse Cases of Conscience.
Elton on the ten Commandments, Lords prayer and Creed St. Clement's Epistles
translated out of the Greek. A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions by Sir
William Pit.

