Tractatum hunc cui titulus The Anatomy of the BRAIN; Dignum Judicamus qui
Imprimatur,

Thomas Burwell, Praeses. Samuel Collins, Censore. Fred. Slare, Censore.
William Dawes, Censore. Tancred Robinson Censore.

Dat. ex Aedibus Collegii in Comitiis Censor. Sept. 7. 1694
THE ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN. Containing its Mechanism and Physiology; Together
with some New Discoveries and Corrections OF Ancient and Modern Authors Upon
that SUBJECT.

To which is annexed a particular Account of ANIMAL FUNCTIONS AND Muscular
Motion.

The Whole illustrated with Elegant Sculptures after the life.

By H. RIDLEY, Coll. Med. Land. Soc.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith and Benj. Walford, Printers to the Royal
Society, at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1695.

Spectatissimo Doctissimoque Viro D. D. JOHANNI LAWSON Collegii Regalis
Medicorum London. Presidi Dignissimo SOCIIS, Et inter eosspeciatim CENSORIBUS
Vel eo nomine Clarissimis SAMUELI COLLINS, RICHARDO TORLESS, EDVARDO TYSON,
MARTINO LISTER.
NECNON D. D. Electoribus Meritissimis Omnibus and Singulis.

Tam prae Universally Exquisita sua eruditione, quam Artis Apollineae Praxi
faelicissima long Celeberrimis CAETERIS Denique, Egregiis Viris Inclytissimae
hujus Societatis ascriptis Paginas has eorum jussu in lucem prodeuntes, Honoris
and Obsequii Ergo quam Hamillime Ossert, H. R.

THE PREFACE TO THE Reader.
THAT Reason which, upon first thoughts, seemed of most force to dissuade me
from engaging my self upon the Subject I have made choice of in these few
following Sheets, (which was, its having been already undertaken by two so
eminent Persons, as the late Willis, and the present Vieussenius) upon second
became the greatest motives to it. Seeing that even after the best Proofs they
have either of them been able to give of Skill or Industry upon this Subject,
there has yet escaped undiscovered both a great deal of the Materials which
Nature is wont to furnish for the framing of Parts, and Contrivance too in
ranging of them, in order to bring about that great design of making them all
contribute their share to the conservation of the whole.

The truth of this becoming still more evident whilst I became more conversant
in Dissection, after some time, put me upon an endeavor, by a deeper Scrutiny,
to discover something more than what as yet had come to light: and this I
undertook so much the more vigorously, as by how much I reckoned it more
preferrable to contribute my Mite toward the perfecting of a Work already so
happily begun and successfully carried on, than to break the Ice only (the
common Fate of the first attempt) of another. With what success I have done it
the Reader must be Judge.

Through the whole description of Parts I have offered nothing but Matter of
Fact, and have taken all possible care to avoid being imposed upon my self, by
making Experiments in proportion to my Doubts. Some of them have been upon
Subjects in their natural, some in their morbid estate, some upon those of
Untimely Death; and on those last sometimes whilst the natural Fluids remained
in their proper Vessels, though after a preternatural manner occasioned by
Strangulation, sometimes when in the room thereof, other Bodies have been
introduced by Injection, as Tinged Wax and Mercury, the first of which by its
consistence chiefly, the other by its permanent nature and color, contribute
mightily toward bringing to view the most minute ramifications of Vessels, and
secretest recesses of Nature.

By this various disposition of the Subject it is that so great Difficulties
are overcome in search after Truth, many things appearing oftentimes very plain
in one state, which either lay concealed, or seemed otherwise modified in any
of the other.

The Figures were delineated by the hand of that Complete Anatomist Mr. Cowper
the Surgeon, whose great Skill in Dissection renders that Talent so fortunate
both to himself and his Friends: and how exactly that Work is performed, I
submit to the Severest Censure of any who will be at the pains to compare any
of the Cuts to the life.

What I have said upon the Physiologia, in relation to Nutrition and Muscular
Motion, depends on Microscopical Observations; and as to the Postulatum on
which they both depend, though at first sight it may appear surprising, yet I
am confident it will become far less so to those who have been acquainted with
what has been said of the Vascular Compages of Plants by Malpighius and Grew,
and of several other Subjects by Lewenhoeck.

And to conclude, I must confess I have been the better satisfied with it my
self, since I met with some Passages in the Works of those learned
Micrographists Dr. Power, and of Mr. Hook, relating to this Subject, in which
last, the medium made use of for solution of that famous Phenomenon of that
Plants contraction at the first appulse of Touch from external Objects, as well
as the manner of its acting, is the same with that made use of here as a
Postulatum, upon which the whole of what is said about Muscular Motion is
built: Although at the same time I am sensible it is not so applied in that place
by the aforesaid Author, whose opinion in reference to Muscular Motion (being
the same with that of Dr. Mayow already taken notice of in the following
Sheets) is expressly otherwise in the account lie gives of those natural
Hygrometers the Beards of Wild Oats, of all the sorts of Cranes Bills and Cats
Guts, conformable to the manner of Nature's acting on which, in order to make
them proper Indexes of the various Changes of Weather ( viz, by wreathing and
unwreathing) he supposes that to be of Muscular Motion.

I have quoted Authors, not out of ostentation, but both for their Truth and
Errors, to the end that at the same time we may see it reasonable and
convenient to read all they say, we may be rendered cautious how we believe;
and to put us in mind, that as we sind something done to our hands by those who
have gone before, there is reason we should do something for those who are to
come after.

THE INTRODUCTION.
HOwsoever the Controversy may stand amongst Learned Men, about the Method and
Order which Nature makes use of in the framing the different Parts of Animals,
especially as to precedence of Time, some of them supposing a rudimentary
delineation, or pre-existence of the whole, which, at the Ingenious Bruner has
rightly observed, must necessarily imply an actual existence of the whole Race
of Mankind at once, either in the Testicle or Ovarium of Eve, according to the
Learned Harvey, Malpighius, Swammardam, etc. or in that of Adam, according to
Lewenhoeck, Dr. Garden, and several others, and consequently must needs also
infer an extinction of the same Progeny, as soon as the number of those humane
Germens or Animalcles shall be exhausted; others a gradual formation of parts,
one after another, by an intestine motion begun and carried on from the time of
coition, by the subtle matter in the Cicatricula of the Egg: I see m reason to
make my self a Party on either side at this time, seeing the fineness of
structure and dignity of functions are sufficient to give preference to one
above another, and to render it more worthy of a particular consideration. And
this part I take to be the Brain, the delicacy of whose structure is such, that
with no little resemblance to its divine Author, whilst it gives us the
greatest and clearest discoveries of other things, lies most concealed it self.

And seeing all that Mystic Knowledge, which in ancient times, in the eyes
especially of the Vulgar, appeared mere Necromancy or Witchcraft, as well as
all the Curious Discoveries of more modern Ages upon the whole subject of
Nature, now going under the more familiar and proper term of Refined Sense, or
Philosophy, has been merely owing to a more acurate knowledge of the parts and
modification of Matter, I see not any more likely way of conquering the
difficulties yet behind upon any particular subject, than the endeavoring
after a further and more nice scrutiny into it by such means and experiments as
serve to bring its most minute parts and texture under the test of Sense, which
so assisted, does the same office to the discerning faculty at good artificial
Glasses do to it, bringing the Object and Judgment to such a nearness, that
even the first Link of the Chain becomes discernable, and the mechanical
proceedings of Nature so highly instructive to the Understanding, in its
finding out and assigning proper Causes to Effects much more obvious and
intelligible.

I shall therefore treat this Noble Part after the aforesaid manner, with all
the Justice I can, leaving those invisible, and almost divine things called
Animal Spirits, to be treated of more at large, by those more illuminated
Philosophers, who see best when their Eyes are put, and content my self with
making an inquiry into, and giving a description of whatsoever upon this
Subject, by Dissection, shall offer it self as an Object of our Senses.

THE ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN.
CHAP. 1. Of the Anatomy of the Brain.
THE topmost part or Olla of the Cranium being removed, the first part of the
Brain that comes in view is the Dura Matter, which, with the subjacent Pia
Matter, is accounted only an improper part of the Brain, strictly so called,
however of great use in many respects to it.

It Is by Spigelius and other Anatomists reckoned, and I think not undeservedly,
the thickest and hardest Membrane of the whole Body, enclosing the whole Brain,
properly so called, somewhat losely, sticking almost inseparably to the Basis
of the Cranium, and to the top and sides, under the Coronal, Sagittal, and
Lamdocid Sutures, very fast by the Sinus's whose description will come in
another place.

In some places of the upper part of the Cranium, which on each side of the
Sagittal Suture or Vertex are called Ossa Bregmatis, it adheres not to the
Bone, notwithstanding the positive Opinion of Van Roonhuyse, Roonh. p. 149.
in his Leiter to Du Foy, to the contrary, who for that very reason would fain
take away in a great measure the use of the Trepan and Trefoyne, and altogether
the use of the Instrument called Decussorium, which skilful Surgeons do often
make use of to make room for the discharge of subsided matter below the
fractur'd place in many Accidents of the Brain.

It Is very discernably double, as Columbus and several others formerly, Col. p.
348
and Vieussenius lately, have observed, having very strong and large Fibers on
the inside, but very small, Vienss. p. 3.
and hardly visible, on that side next the Skull; as appeared to me, after
having first let it lie a little time in bolling or at least very scalding
Water.

But as to the distribution of the double sort of Fibers on each side this
Membrane, I could not by any means find them agreeing with the description
Vieussenius has given of them, as running in an oblique semicircular manner,
externally from before backwards, and in the same figure internally from behind
forwards; but far otherwise, on the inside, where they are very strong, they
seem manifestly to have three originals from the top part of the Processus
Falcatus, before, behind, and in its middle; those before running in a curved
manner backwards, half the length, and a great width of the Dura Matter, and
those behind running after the same manner forwardly with this difference, that
a great number of them bend soon after their rise from that process in a kind
of a semilunary way to it again a little on this side the rise of the middle
Series of Fibers, others of them making a bigger arch after having stretched
themselves wider upon the Dura Matter, bend back again to, and terminate in the
Falx a little beyond the rise of the aforesaid middle Series of Fibers.

Those from the middle part of the Falx run backwardly, but less curved than
the rest, terminating as the Fibers which arise backwardly do, at some distance
from the Process in the inward Superficies of the Dura Matter.

As to those belonging to the exernal side or second Lamina of the Dura Matter,
they are extreme small and obscure, running from behind forwards.

Besides these, there are no less remarkable ones belonging to the Falx it
self, of two sorts of Orders, the one running straight about half the length of
it, on its upper part, from before backwards, the other transverse, from the
inferior or fifth Sinus to the superior or third, on the hinder part of the
Process, and are most conspicuous there, as the other are toward its foremost
part.

As to the Use of those Fibers, it may be remembered that this Membrane consists
of two Lamina's, between which the Veins which reduce the Blood from the
Arteries, which furnish the whole Brain with it, run for some space after the
manner of the Ureters in the Bladder, in large Trunks, before they enter the
Sinus; so that the Fibrous Constitution of this Membrane here, where the
Bloodvessels are largest (together with the curved entrance of them into the
Sinus, especially in an erect position of the Body) do the office of Valves,
support the weight, and promote the ascent of the Blood. But that which is most
considerable, is this, That if the inward Lamina of this part, which makes the
inferior and lateral part of the Sinus, was not in some measure furnished with
additional strength on this side suitable to that which it has on the other,
by reason of its cohesion to the Skull, the Blood which is continually running
through it with no small rapidity, especially in great plenitude of the Vessels
or preternatural Ebulitions, would frequently burst out, or at least cause such
distentions as could not but be very injurious to a part so very exquisitely
sensible; yet notwithstanding, though Nature seems plainly to have made a double
provision against such Accidents, by the transverse Ligaments within the Sinus,
and these strong and numerous Fibers without, I have rarely opened any
strangled Body, where some such Rupture, or at least Distention, has not
happened.

This Membrane has plenty of Nerves from the foremost Branch of the fifth
Pair, and is thereby made very sensible, so that from any molestation given it
by the ill Crasis or undue motion of the Blood, it becomes accordingly
affected. And as the various distribution of Fibers before described serve in a
natural estate to give a kind of springiness to the Vessels, whose Coats are
extended by the Blood as they run between the Laminae of this Membrane, to the
end the same may be the more readily circulated through them; so in a
preternatural estate, no doubt, they are subject to Spasms, which may retard
the course of the Blood in such sort, that in some kind of violent Headachs,
where the Membrane is affected through overfulness of Blood, and particularly
in those which are wont to proceed from Vapors (so called) or Convulsive
Motions of Nervous parts, we often observe a fixed ruddiness in the Face,
attended with a kind of stiffness and soreness in the Eyes, proceeding
doubtless from a stagnation in some measure of the Humors in those parts,
through the too slow passage of them into the reductory Vessels or Sinus's. And
to this preternatural affection of the Sinus's may certainly many other ill
Symptoms of the Brain be imputed, and not to any irregular Syslole and Diastole
of the Membrane it self, occasioned through any convulsive or paralytical state
thereof, as that curious Speculatist Dr. Mayow has affirmed, Mayow. Tr. 4. p.
49.
seeing not any living Dissection has ever been found to give Authority to any
such Hypothesis.

The First Process of the Dura Matter.
It has two Processes, the first of which arises from that part of the Os
Ethmoeides, called Crista Galli, and is extended from thence backwards, as far
as the concourse of the four greater Sinus's commonly called Torcular
Herophili, in the figure of a Sicle, whence it has that denomination of Falx,
and by reason of the strict connection it has by certain Membranous Fibers with
the Cranium in those places which are immediately under the Sutures, and with
the Brain it self, by the intervention of the Pia Matter, (to which it is joined
both by the intervention of large Blood Vessels, propagated thence to the
longitudinal and lateral Sinus's, and certain carnous Adnascencies, as it
descends down betwixt the two Hemispheres of the Brain, and afterward at its
approach to the back of the Corpus Callosum, (over which that Membrance is
loosely expanded) both by continuity of its Membranous Substance and
Ramifications of Blood Vessels, terminating in the fifth Sinus, at the bottom
of the Process, so that in a Diseased Brain I once saw it drawn up the length
of an Inch from the said Corpus Callosum, in the exact form of a membranous
thin Production, continued to the fifth Sinus running at the bottom of this
Process,) it keeps the Brain suspended in such a natural conformation, that it
needs not, to that internal part by the Ancients called Fornix, nor that by
Vieussenius of late subslituted in the room of it, called Corpus Callosum, for
its support.

Another Use it has is, partly to defend the Cerebellum from Compression, to
which, by its connection with the Galli Crista, it does not a little contribute,
but chiefly the two Hemispheres of the Brain from the like Injury from each
other, upon its various position in Sleep or otherwise; and therefore is
wanting in many other Creatures, as Calves, Sheep, etc. which not only Sleep
less, but for the most part in a less injurious posture.

The Second Process of the Dura Matter.
The second is that which arising so forwardly as from the hindermost Process of
the Wedglike Bone, which composes the back and uppermost part only of the Sella
Equina; it passes up betwixt the Cerebrum and Cerebellum, all the way adhering
to the internal Eminencies of the Ossa Petrosa to the lateral Sinus's, by which
means not only the Cerebellum immediately, as is commonly observed, but
consequently all the Parts from the beginning of the fourth Sinus, or the
Glandula Pinealis, to the last Foramen of the Skull, (viz.) the Caudex
Medullaris, with its Appendices the Nates and Testes, (which being placed upon
the upper part of the Medulla Oblongata, make a sort of an Isthmus betwixt the
Cerebrum and Cerebellum) together with the Nerves proceeding out of it, are
defended from the injurious pressure of the hinder Limbs of the Brain.

CHAP. II. Of the Pia Matter.
THE Second Integument of the Brain, commonly called Pia or Tenuis Matter, by
Galen and many others, Choroeides, from its likeness in substance and
ramification of Blood Vessels to that Membrane of the Secondines called
Chorion, with much more reason than Vesalius, on behalf of the Plexus
Choroeides it self advances against it; was by all the Ancients looked upon as
its only other Integument, being a very thin and pellucid Membrane, co-extended
with the Brain it self, not only in its outward but inward structure too, as
likewise through all its Plicatures, Interstices, and Cavities, even over the
Corpus Callosum it self, though loosely, as has been already observed,
notwithstanding the great Vesalius affirms the contrary: Ves^al. p. 778. par. 2.
Which Membrane also a chance cut in pareing the toppart of the Brain down to
the lateral Ventricles with a Razor, in a Body I lately had, gave me an
opportunity of showing as fair in those Ventricles as the largest Membrane of
the whole Body, to several who stood by, nowithstanding Molinetti, Mol. p. 7^.
who laughs at all that pretend to have found any such thing, affirms the
contrary.

But this is to be inquired for either in recent Bodies, or such who have
before death been, through some Diseases, filled with extravasated Serum, as
Dropsies, Stoppage of Urine, some sort of Apoplexies, or the like: That way
which in want of the other opportunities discovers it best, is the separating
the Septum Lucidum near to its rise, which is just from the Fornix, where it
arises from its two Roots, near to which place the Medulla of the Brain begins
to advance into the Corpora Striata; for from thence for above half way of its
passage backward toward the hinder limbs of the Brain, it continues hollow,
and, I am apt to think, is but a Duplicature of this part, though it may be
somewhat medullary, and therefore, by reason of its transparency, has the Name
of Septum Lucidum.

This Opinion of the Ancients, of its being the only other, and that a single
Integument of the Brain, was equally received for Truth by the late two learned
and curious Anatomists Willis and Vieussenius, together with all the other
modern Writers, except Bidloo and Bohn, both which affirm, Bid. Tab. 8 f. 5, g.
Bohn p. 333
they have found another distinct membranous Integument of the Brain coming
betwixt the other outward Dura, and inward Pia Matter, the one three hours, the
other fifteen days after death; and by them both reckoned the original of the
second proper Integument of the Spinal Marrow which Tulpius first discovered,
Tulp. cent. 1 obs. 29. Vienssen. p. 143. par. 2.
and Vieussenius supposes to be a Duplicature of the Pia Matter in that part
only.

Now, that there was a middle Membrane in some parts of the Brain, and
particularly at the Basis of the Cerebellum, from whence it is continued down to
the Spinal Marrow, constituting the second proper Integument of that part as
aforementioned, I had long since-observed; but whether it be another absolute
distinct Membrane from that other subjacent one, by the aforesaid Authors
properly named the Pia Matter, and common to the Spinal Marrow with the Brain it
self, like as is this other second middle one too, or only one and the same
Membrane double, as consisting of two Lamina's, may well be doubted of.

Wherefore, for satisfaction concerning this difficulty, I have lately made the
strictest enquiry possible, and that in a subject most likely to afford a
decision in such a Controversy, and this was an Human Brain extremely
hydropical, where there was no Cavity or Interstice, without abundance of Water
extravasated, insomuch that where ever, according to the natural construction
of Parts, there was any larger than ordinary duplicature of this Membrane, as
there are at the end of the Calamus Scriptorius, betwixt the superincumbent
Cerebellum and Medulla Spinalis, in the Isthmus or space betwixt the Cerebrum
and Cerebellum, upon the Processes called Nates and Testes, in the depressed
part also of the Brain, between the beginning of the Annular Process, and the
first appearance or coming out of the Olfactory Nerves, by Vesalius taken
notice of and called a Process of the Pia Matter, Visal. p. 794
there was found a great deal of Water distending this Duplicature much beyond
its natural limits; so that by way of consequence, if these Cavities were only
Interstices of two different Membranes distinctly investing the Brain, and not
a Duplicature only of one and the same, the Water would then probably have
insinuated it self betwixt them, and made them to have appeared far different
from what they did, agreeable to what it has often been found to do in some
Dropsies of the Belly, where the Water has been found so to have divided or
parted the double Membrane of that Region called Peritoneum, as to have
rendered it capable of containing the quantity of fifteen Gallons of Water, and
upon a discharge of the same after death, by cutting the external Lamina of
that Membrane, the other inward one being yet (unknown to the Dissecter) left
whole, to have imposed upon the Spectators, and those very sagacious ones, so
as that at first sight, till after having recollected themselves, Job Mei^r.
Obs. 52.
and divided the other second Lamina too, they thought the Bowels of this part
to have been wanting; but contrary to this Event, in this Subject I found this
Membrane entire, and free from any divulsion throughout its whole
circumference, excepting the places before taken notice of. However, supposing
the like conformation here in this with the Membranes of the other parts, I
attempted to divide it, and did so successfully in many parts of it, but most
readily in the beginning of the superficial Plicatures of the cortical part of
the Brain, where there are naturally small Interstices, betwixt which many of
the Blood Vessels creep into and immerge themselves in the cortical and
medullary parts thereof: So that I think there cannot remain any further
scruple of its being only a double, and not two distinct Membranes of the Brain.

Bidloo very truly observes this first or middle Membrane, by him so called, by
me only the first, or one Lamina of a double Membrane, to be thinner than the
Dura Matter above it, and thicker than the other Membrane or Lamina under it;
which last most properly it is that insinuates it self through all the close
Plicatures of the Brain, and that, as by frequent inspection I have often
observed, not in a continuous, but rather retiform contexture, and so, by such
as love hard words, or terms of Art, may be called after the same name of that
Membrane investing the crystalline Humor of the Eye, Arachnoeides.

The Advantages accrueing to the whole through such a disposition of this part,
as has already been observed, are very considerable, inasmuch as that thereby
first of all it becomes not only an Integument of enclosure, on behalf of the
Brain, and the Blood Vessels belonging to it in general, but of expansion for
Strength too, where the peculiar structure of Parts, in such places as were
before mentioned, require it.

As to the first, the Brain is not only kept more warm, close, and compact, and
better defended on its depending part from the asperity of the Bone it lies
upon, but the Vessels hereby more strongly supported, and it self secured from
being broken or torn, whilst between its duplicature they climb up into the
Brain, whose delicate tender Fibers must otherwise of necessity have suffered
violence by the largeness and pulsation of the Arteries, together with the
weight of them, and the other reductory Vessel, from which the Sinus's meet
them.

Nextly, as it is an Integument of Expansion in the places before mentioned,
that tender small part the Infundibulum, where it quits the Brain, in order to
its passage into the Glandula Pituitaria, by the circumtension of this outward
Lamina, is fortified upon any violent Accident from disruption, and the Brain
and Medulla Oblongata, in those places where they are only loosely contiguous,
are better preserved in their natural due connection; all which Advantages,
inasmuch as they may more reasonably be ascribed to one double Membrane than
two single ones, though of the like strength when joined fast together, may not
unreasonably be thought to argue for the duplicature of this Membrane
exclusively, to the introduction of a third or new one.

Lastly, as to what concerns the Glandes and Plexus's which Dr. Willis affirms
to be scattered all over this Membrane; as to the former, Will. p. 26. col. 1.
I could never see them, but I have seen the external Superficies of the
cortical part of the Brain, in strangled Bodies, appear glandulous very
plainly, through this transparent Integument, which upon bare inspection,
without further enquiry, might easily impose upon the less cautious Spectator.

As to the latter, the Plexus's, and distribution of Blood Vessels from them,
after a separation of the serous gross part of the Blood in the aforementioned
supposed Glandules, (according to that learned person's conjecture) into the
substance of the Brain, in order to produce the finer Animal Spirits; I cannot
but look upon it altogether conjectural, till such time as not only the
Glandes, but their excretory Ducts also, together with the Emunctories where
the supposed excrementitious Juice is eliminated, (lymphatick or reductory
Glandes (if they could be found) never having been by Nature designed to any
such use) be first discovered.

Blood Vessels of the Pia Matter.
This Membrane has Blood Vessels of two sorts.

Of the first are these properly belonging to the Brain it self, which, as it
has already been observed, it does as it were conduct through its Duplicature,
in their passage allowing them thereby the opportunity of growing extremely
fine, after many serpentine twinings toward their capillary Extremities,
before they are protended into the Brain it self, Bid. Tab. 8. f. 5. l. M
and those are chiefly spread all-along upon the under or second Lamina of this
Membrane. Ib. l. G.


The second are those which belong to this part it self, for its own
nourishment, and these I found upon diligent inspection, whilst I separated its
second Lamina spread plentifully upon the inside of the outermost or first
Lamina, and both these you will find very well delineated in the places quoted
in Bidloo.

This Duplicature is also very plainly communicated to all the Nerves both
within and without the Cranium, making by its outward Lamina a second
Integument under the first from the Dura Matter to the whole ^asciculus of
Nerves, and a third by its inward Lamina, which yields an involucrum or
covering to each single Fibrilla, which collectively make up the whole Nervous
Body it self, through the admirable fineness of which Membrane investing those
medullary Fibrils, altogether insensible of themselves, it happens there is
such a nimble consent betwixt part and part, and betwixt all and the Brain it
self.

CHAP. III. Of the Vessels belonging to the Brain in general.
THE Vessels belonging to this part in common with the rest of the Body, though
in reality but one continued Canal variously modified, yet, through the
diversity of Fluids they contain, go commonly under the denomination of
Arteries, Veins, Sinus's, and Lymphaeducts, and not without good reason,
perhaps, the Nerves may be in some sense of the same kind too.

The two first of these may, with relation to their different distribution, be
deservedly considered in a twofold respect, either as they belong to the first
Integument of the Brain, or the Brain, properly so called, it self.

The Arteries therefore belonging to this part called Dura Matter, or first
Integument, are three fair Branches on each side.

The first and foremost of which are sent out from the Carotid Artery, whilst
it remains in the fourth hole of the Cranium, FIG. 2. hh.
and are propagated chiefly through the foremost part of the bottom of the Dura
Matter, as in the Figure delineated, but greatly mistaken by Dr. Willis, Willis
p. 2. col. 2. wepf. p. 10^ par. 2.
perhaps taking it upon trust from Wepfer, equally with himself therein
mistaken; who describes it for a small branch of the Carotid Artery, that runs
betwixt the two first Lobes of the Brain, which instead of coming out of the
Bone of the Forehead, as he would have it, goes into it without lending any
branches to this Membrane at all, being truly delineated and described by the
aforementioned accurate Vieussenius. Vieuss. Tab. 17. dd, bb. p. 32. par. 4.
Wepf. p. 101


And that this Artery was not only mistaken by, but unknown to the aforesaid
Wepfer, is plain, seeing he says, that from the very styliform Process, where
the Carotid Artery does indeed enter the long Canal, to the place where it
perforates the Dura Matter to enter the Brain, there is not one Branch sent out
from it; which Error, by injecting with Wax, which keeps longer in, and shows
the Vessels much better than small tinged Liquors, had very easily been avoided.

The second Branch of Arteries ascend into the Dura Matter by the sixth hole of
the Cranium, FIG. 2. ll.
together with a Branch of the internal Jugular Vein, and are dispersed
laterally all over the forepart of this Membrane, as far as the very Sinus
Longitudinalis, (which nevertheless it enters not, as there will be occasion to
take notice of hereafter) as in the Figure delineated.

The third Branch of Arteries climb into the Dura Matter by the eighth hole of
the Calvaria, together with a small reductory Branch of the Vertebral Vein,
FIG. 2. kk.
where the lateral Sinus's enter the internal Jugular (which occasioned the
Ingenious Highmore erroneously to believe it entered the very lateral Sinus it
self) and the eighth pair of Nerves pass out of the Cranium, Highmore, p. 206.
par. 1.
which passage of this Artery is not hitherto described by any that I know of;
neither have I ever seen it figured, Vieuss. tab. 1 kk.
but in Vieussenius's first Cut, and there but very faintly.

It arises from the external Branches of the Vertebral Artery, Vieuss. tab. 8.
f. i. c. Barthol. p. 431. par. ul^.
according to Vieussenius, but Bartholine makes it to be a slip of the Carotid
Artery, calling it the lesser Branch thereof; wherein he is mistaken.

The Veins of the Dura Matter.
As to the Veins, Riol. p. 252 par. 2. Will. p. 2. col. 2. par. 6.
Riolane, and after him Willis, seems to say this Membrane has none; for though
the latter has this obscure expression of them, Tam crebris Venarum
propaginibus quam Arteriarum nusquam consita est; speaking of the Crassa
Meninx, by which we might guess he thought it had some, Will. p. 22. col. 1.
par. 4.
yet in another place he plainly substitutes the Sinus's for the reductory
Vessels, as well on behalf of this Membrane as the Brain it self; as appears
plain enough in the Page noted.

Vieussenius indeed allows Veins to this part, and says, Vieuss. p. 31 par. 3.
they all-along accompany the Arteries, and afterward terminate, according to
Veslingus, Vesling. p. 210. Vieuss. p. 4. par. 2.
in the internal Jugular; yet in another place he says, some of the Venal
Branches discharge the Blood into the Sinus Longitudinalis. Which last is a
flat contradiction to the place foregoing, inasmuch as in that he says, they
accompany the Arteries all-along after the same manner of distribution or
ramification; which, if so, who sees not that they must needs grow capillary
toward the Sinus, and consequently be incapable of reducing the Blood into
them, all reductory Vessels being always capillary in the place from which, and
not to which, they bring that which they contain.

Now therefore, neither what the one nor the other says can possibly be true;
for, as to the former the learned Dr. Willis, if his Assertion was good, it
must of necessity follow, that all the Arteries dispersed through this Membrane
must terminate in some of the Sinus's, otherwise there will want a reductory
Vessel; the first of which is contrary to ocular demonstration, the last to
common reason.

As to Vieussenius the latter, besides what has been already said against him,
if what he says in the place aforecited be true, that the Veins of the Dura
Matter run concomitantly along with the Arteries, then they must of necessity
answer the ends of other Veins throughout the whole Body, in reducing the Blood
adduced by the Arteries, unless the Arteries they accompany discharge their
Blood into the Sinusses, (which, as hereafter shall be shown, they plainly do
not) for otherwise, seeing they both grow capillary in their ascent from the
Basis of the Cranium, they must necessarily be both adductory Vessels, than
which, by the Laws of Circulation, there can be no greater an Absurdity.

Wepfer not knowing of these Veins, was forced to think, and consequently to
affirm, That the Arteries leave the Dura Matter in their extremities, and
terminate in the Pia Matter, and so have their Blood reduced by the Veins there;
but this is evidently not so to the Eye of any who heedfully separates this
Membrane from the other.

Before therefore I proceed to the description of the Blood Vessels belonging
to the Brain it self, which by the exactness of method I ought to do, I hope it
may be pardonable, if I make a short enquiry after the unaccustomed
distribution of Blood Vessels Nature has furnished the Brain in general with,
and the Reasons of its procedure therein.

The Truth then concerning this affair, is, That contrary to what has hitherto
been observed, the Blood Vessels belonging to this part in general, as has
already been observed, are of two sorts, the one belonging to the Brain it
self, the other to its outmost Integuments.

Now, as to the first, it is observable, that the Veins enter not the Brain, nor
run concomitantly, like as in other parts of the Body, with the Arteries, (the
carotid entering at the fourth hole in the Basis of the Skull, and the internal
Jugular at the eighth; the Vertebral Artery at the last and largest hole of the
Skull, and the Vertebral Vein at the ninth (which Vieussenius mistakenly calls
the tenth) through which it runs into the internal Jugular, Vie^ssen. p. 163.
par. 3.
at that Veins entrance into the round hole at the bottom of the Skull, under
the Styliform Process, where the Sinus Lateralis meets it) where after having
advanced into certain venous productions called Sinus's, they descend from
thence in large Trunks, growing capillary all-along in their passage till they
meet the Extremities of the Arteries, and are indeed no other than mere
Branches of the Sinus's, and consequently I look upon the Sinus's themselves no
other than large Veins.

The common reason all modern Authors give for this different distribution of
Blood Vessels belonging to the Brain, from the other parts of the Body, is,
that it may receive an equal warmth at the top as at the bottom, as being
thereby very much assisted in the production of Animal Spirits in an equal
proportion all over; and that it is so may very well be granted: but, that
Nature had yet another provident Intention, will be as evident, if we consider,
that if the Veins had ascended with the Arteries through the holes in the bottom
of the Cranium, upon all great Ebulitions of the Blood, the pulsation of the
Arteries would in that Stricture of the Vessels made by the Bone, of necessity
hinder the freedom of its return by the Veins, and consequently occasion a
stagnation of Blood through the whole Brain, to the utter subversion of all its
faculties, nothing being more certain, than that upon any considerable
abatement of circulation there presently happens by way of restagnation, a
secession of the watery and thin from the more gross and red part of the Blood.

The other way of the Veins entering the Brain ( viz. those appertaining to its
outward Integument, one at the sixth hole of the Basis of the Cranium, the
other at the eighth, as aforesaid) is, their ascent with the Arteries after a
quite different manner from the former, even to their capillary Extremities; a
manifest indication that they serve for the reduction of so much Blood from the
Dura Matter as the aforesaid sort of Vessels, the Arteries, have brought
thither; and although by reason of their smallness Nature seems not to have
been so sollicitous in avoiding the Inconvenience supposed to have followed,
upon the Artery's entering the same hole with the Veins, taken notice of in the
preceding Case, where they are very large, and consequently the Effect might
prove much more injurious, yet Nature has not been wanting in providing a
Remedy against it; as will plainly appear in the following Pages.

From this manner of their entering the Brain at the same inlet of the Skull
with the Arteries, may, for ought I know, be very rationally accounted for that
violent troublesome Noise which many, in Distempers arising from the
turgescency of the Blood, causing a preternatural beating of the Arteries, do
so much complain of; a Symptom happening from the Stricture before mentioned
which the unyielding circumference of the Bone occasions upon the different
Blood Vessels entering at one and the same Foramen, to which effect also the
nearness of the Os Petrosum, through which the Hearing Nerves do pass to this
hole, which is in that part of the Wedglike Bone that joins to, or is
conterminous with it, does not a little contribute.

To the same cause, in some measure doubtless, may be ascribed the frequent
Headachs happening in Fevers, the Artery then so swelling and compressing the
Vein against the edges of the Bone, that the Blood cannot be returned back
through it in a due proportion, and consequently by its stagnation the Membrane
becomes inflamed and painful.

So that conformable to what has already been taken notice of concerning the
wise contrivance of Nature, in ordering the different distribution of the
Blood Vessels, so as to avoid the Inconveniences which might accrue to the
Brain by compression of the reductory Vessels, occasioned through their
entrance at one and the same hole with the Arteries; it seems very much worth
our observing, that besides the Veins of the Dura Matter, which enter the
Cranium together with the Arteries, as has before been mentioned, there are
also several others belonging to this Membrane, having their rise at, and their
descent after a very remarkable manner, from a Vein hereafter to be described
on each side of the Longitudinal Sinus, as you may see in the Figure, FIG. 4.
dd, nn, etc.
and consequently must grow capillary in their descent down from it, after a
quite contrary manner to the other; and these do visibly inosculate with some
of the Extremities of the aforesaid capillary Arteries, after the same manner
as those larger Veins belonging to the Pia Matter do with the Arteries belonging
to the Brain and it, by which means it so falls out, that a considerable part
of that Blood brought up by the Meninx Arteries, is carried back by these
Veins, to the end that, especially in all preternatural swelling of the Blood,
the inconvenience of Compression and all its ill consequences happening, by
reason of an overfulness of these Vessels, may be in a great measure avoided.

CHAP. IV. Of the Veins belonging to the Brain it self.
AFTER this short digression, by order of Method, the Blood Vessels belonging
properly to the Brain it self, fall under consideration.

The curious Anatomist Malpighius, Malp. de Cereb. p. 6. par. 2. De Cort.
Cereb. p 81 par. 2.
in his Letter to Fracassatus, says, they bear a third proportion to those of
the whole Body; and for what reason, seeing, seeing the part it self bears not
the same proportion to the whole, it is so, it will be worth our while to
enquire hereafter.

These are either Arteries or Veins. The former go under the name of Carotid
and Vertebral.

The first of which, after a curved passage (which is very well expressed in a
Fig. Willis p. 29. Fig. 1.
of Dr. Willis) from the place where it begins to enter the Basis of the
Cranium (which is from the Styliform Process of the Os Petrosum) to the place
where, on the inside, they pass through the Dura Matter, and ascend into the
Brain, (which is at the foremost internal Process of the Os Cuneiforme) there
is very near an inch and an half distance. I say, after this crooked passage
into the Brain, they are propagated quite through its substance, having first
divested themselves of that thick Coat borrowed of the Dura Matter during their
stay in the passage aforementioned; but not without the mediation or
intervention of the Pia Matter, which Membrane all the Branches of the
aforesaid, as well as the Vertebral Artery, more or less first prop themselves
upon, before they enter on and disperse themselves through the substance of the
Brain it self, and is very finely expressed in a Cut of Placentinus, Sig. p.
179 Mol. p. 77. Marchetti, p. 191. par. 5.
at the end of Spigelius; insomuch that Molinetti (with whom also agrees
Marchetti) looks upon it as only a production of those numerous Vessels;
whereas all those little ramifications both of the Carotid and Vertebral
Arteries, viz. those: from the carotid Artery, which as soon as it gets through
the Dura Matter, and parts with its borrowed Coat, are sent to the Vieussen. p.
35. par. 1. p 34. par. 6.
Infundibulum, Tab. 17. c c.
Olfactory, and Ib. g g.
Optic Nerves, together with those other of the Vertebral Artery which
accompany pany the Vicussen. p. 35. par. 1.
third, Ibid.
fourth, Tab. 17. p p. 35. par. 1.
fifth, Tab. 17. TT. Tab. 4.
sixth, h. p. 35. par. 1.
seventh, Tab. 17. Fig. 2. Tab. 4. h h.
eighth, Ib. Fig. 2.
ninth, and Tab. 4. h h.
tenth pairs of Nerves, inasmuch as they enter not the Brain it self, are
altogether exempt from that Membrane; any of which now-mention'd Blood Vessels
you either find delineated in Vieussenius's 17th Table, or mentioned in some
other place of his Book, by those Directions here placed in the margin; all
which, though existent in Nature, are nevertheless there painted too stiff and
formal (I am afraid by guess) inasmuch as that without an injection of Mercury
(except those two which belong to the Olfactory and Optic Nerves) they do
rarely come to sight in any form at all, Wax being over gross a body to enter
such minute Vessels as those are; whereas by an injection with Mercury I find
scarce any Nerves but what has some such small ramifications of Blood Vessels
in them.

To go about to describe distinctly the whole ramification of Arteries through
this part, which as was before noted, is here more remarkable for number and
size than in any other part of the Body, would not only be to do what in a
great measure has been already done by Vieussenius, in his sixth Chapter, but
seem to have also in it much more of oftentation than use.

I shall therefore only take notice of such propagations of them, as are either
remarkable for magnitude, some curiosity of Structure, or useful design of
Nature.

And of this sort may well be esteemed the Vertebral Artery, next after the
Carotid, which has already been described, as entering the Brain at the last
and largest Foramen of the Skull, contrary to what Dr. Willis, Willis, p. 29.
col. 1. par. 2.
and before him Wepfer, affirms, coming thither on each side out of the hole in
the transverse Process of the first Vertebra of the Neck, after a very
remarkable curved manner, as you see in the Figure, Fio. 1. E^
(and by no means like to the delineation and description given by Dr. Lower
and Dr. Willis,) ascending laterally upon the Medulla Oblongata as far as the
beginning of the Processus Annularis, where they meet together in one single
Trunk continuing so the length thereof, Vieussen. Tab. 4. bb.
by Vieussenius called Arteria Cervicalis, after which they either send forth
two Branches, or receive two from the carotid Artery, by means whereof there is
a communication betwixt these two large Blood Vessels, and that of great use
and benefit to the Brain, for by this means it happens, that if even three of
the four great Arteries which furnish this part with Blood, were totally
obstructed, there would yet be a way left for a competent supply from the other
unobstructed fourth. These I call the Communicant branches, very ill pointed in
Bidloo's ninth Table, but very well in Vieussenius's fourth; as may plainly
appear here in the Figure taken exactly from Nature it self. FIG. I. dd


The structure and sinallness of these Arteries seem to suggest two, yet
further, provident Intentions of Nature.

The first is the same it has expressed in several other places, as in the
ascent of the Blood by the Carotid Arteries, both which enter the Brain in a
crooked line, the first at the fourth hole of the Basis of the Skull, the
second from the hole in the transverse process of the first Vertebra of the
Neck, after the manner already in both places described. So in the like manner
here, by the narrowness of these Branches, the Blood is in a great measure
retarded in its motion to the carotid Artery, and by consequence to the Brain
it self, which, for Reasons hereafter to be given in describing the Sinus's,
would otherwise be in great danger of being overflowed with extravasated and
restagnant Blood.

The second is, a forcing the Blood more plentifully into the Spinal Artery,
with which, though through the conical structure of the Arteries in common it
cannot be altogether unfurnished, yet by its perfectly-reflexed position, would
have it very scantily, were it not that by reason of the narrowness of the
aforesaid Communicant-branches betwixt the two great Arteries, the Blood was
driven back in a sort of a retrograde motion.

It Is true, there is a conformation of Arteries something like this, though not
altogether in the mammary and epigastrick Branches; but it is worth noting, that
in both these places the main Artery from which these Branches spring is much
more taper or conical, Ibid. p. c c
and the succeeding exporting Vessels far less both in number and size than
those of the carotid Artery here, whose foremost and hinder lateral
ramifications between the Lobes of the Brain, bear an over-proportion to the
Trunks from whence they come, and consequently must, according to the aforesaid
observation of Malpighius,) in his Letter to Fracassatus, receive the blood
brought thither far more freely and plentifully.

Besides, the Cervical Artery here is so far from being Conical, that being
made up of two vertebral Arteries joining together, it is much wider than
either of them single, as appears plainly in the Figure, FIG. 1. g.
and consequently would have carried away the Blood forwardly from the Spinal
Artery more freely, had not Nature ordered the Structure of Vessels after
another manner here than it does in other parts of the Body, where there is not
the same necessity of contrivance.

One more Branch I take leave to mention only upon the score of its never
hitherto having been taken notice of by any, and that is a small Artery attended
with a Vein passing through the lateral part of the Os Cuneiforme, (which
constitutes the back part of the Orbite of the Eye, just under a very little
Process of that Bone, (which either by reason of its size has escaped being
seen, or inconsiderable use, was never before, as far as I know, thought worth
the mentioning;) and this, upon raising the fore Lobes of the Brain, offers it
self to the Eye of any heedful Observer.

CHAP. V. Of the Sinus's belonging to the Brain.
A Third sort of Vessels offer themselves next to our consideration, under the
general name of Sinus's.

These formerly were reckoned only four, to which Vesalius added a fifth at the
bottom of the Falx, Vesal. p. 758 Fig. 3. F.
by him only called a Vein, which though frequently found, yet in some Subjects
is wanting. Bourd. p. 105. par. 2.
Bourdon mentions two more at the bottom of each side the side the second
Process of the Dura Matter, under the lateral ones, which I never saw but once,
and I am apt to think with Vieussenius, are most commonly wanting.

Vieussenius describes four more, Vieuss. p. 6. par. 5. Fall. tom. 1. p 114.
Vid. Vid. p. 117. cap. 10. p 310. cap. 11.
which I find long before taken notice of, and exactly described by Falloppius,
and after him, though but rudely, by that laborious Collector Vidus Vidius.

I think I can show one more, but be their number what it will, I judge it
reasonable to look upon them no other than Veins, whether we consider them in
respect to either Office or Structure. All the business is, to consider and
show for what end they appear as such large Channels into which all the Veins
of the Brain, like so many small Rivulets after an unusual manner do empty
themselves; and that I will endeavor to do after having first shown their
several respective situations.

The first two are called Laterales, FIG 4. BB.
which run within a strong duplicature of the hinder Process of the Dura Matter,
down upon the Os Occipitale over the Cerebellum, till in their further descent,
after a tortuous manner, upon the lower production of the Ossa Petrosa they
wind under them in order to their passage out of the Cranium at the eighth
hole, FIG. 2. CC.
common to the eighth pair of Nerves going out, Ibid. bb.
the third Branch of Arteries belonging to the Dura Matter, and the internal
Jugular coming in, which is through two round bony Cells in the Os Petrosa,
Ibid. L.
just under the Styloeid Processes into the internal Jugular Vein, into which,
together with the Vertebral, all the rest of the Veins and Sinus's belonging to
the Brain discharge the refluent Blood.

The next is called the third or longitudinal one, FIG. 4. AA, etc.
from its rise at the bony Process called Crista Galli, and progress the whole
length of the Brain to the hinder and somewhat declining part of the occipital
Bone, where it seems to be cleft into the two lateral ones.

Into this third Sinus not only the internal Veins of the Brain it self are
inserted, but also some of those belonging to its outward Integuments, which
Falloppius first, Fallop. tom. 1. p. 82. par. 3 Vitus. p. 10. par. 2. Weps. p
42. par 2.
one of the Luminaries of Anatomy, observed; and after him Vieussenius, which
are by Wepfer mistakenly taken for Arteries, who nevertheless, for ought I
know, may be in the right, in assigning the overcloseness of the Pores of the
Cranium (by what Accident soever happening) through which the refluent Blood is
transmitted to the Sinus, for a frequent cause of inveterate obstinate Headachs.

The fourth, FIG. 4. C.
which from its situation may not improperly be called the Internal Sinus,
comes from the under part of the falcated Process, at that point where it
becomes continuous to the second Process of the Dura Matter, Ibid. II.
and a large double Vein belonging to the Plexus Choroeides, together with the
fifth Sinus, Ibid. K.
(when there is one) enters it at an Interstice made between the end of the
Corpus Callosum, the Nates, Testes and Cerebellum, from whence having first
passed over the Cerebellum, it at last arrives with the other three at that
place of union, which from its Author has ever since retained the Name of
Torcular Herophili. Ibid g.


The four others of Falloppius and Vidus Vidius, or Vieussenius, by this last
called Superiores and Inferiores, the dd first two of which being longer and
narrower, are called Superiores, are on the Basis of the Brain FIG. 2. dd.
, arise, according to him, from the Receptacula Sellae Aequinae, by the same
Author so named, (hereafter to be described, though more truly, from the ee
circular Sinus, Ibid. EE
as I hope in its place to make appear, running down from thence upon the
internal Process of the Os Petrosum, and terminating in the Sinus Laterales,
where they begin to be declive and l tortuous in their passage to the internal
Jugular. Ibid. l.


The other two, called ee Inferiores, Ibid. ee.
which are much shorter and wider than the others, descend from the same place
as the former, between the Os Petrosum and Occipitale, down to the aforesaid
eighth hole of the Cranium, where the Jugulars come up into the Brain, and end
there.

Another I discovered by having first injected the Veins with Wax running round
the Pituitary Gland on its upper side forwardly within a duplicature of the
Dura Matter, backwardly between the Dura Matter and Pia Matter, there somewhat
loosely stretched over the subjacent Gland it self, and laterally in a sort of
a Canal made up of the Dura Matter above, and the carotid Artery on each outside
of the Gland, which by being tasten'd to the Dura Matter above, and below at the
Basis of the Skull too, leaves only a little Interstice betwixt it self and the
Gland, thereby constituting a Cavity communicating with the two forementioned
forward and backward ones, from whence the abovementioned four small Sinus's do
descend, by a visible continuity, on each side from a little beneath the hinder
Process of the Sella Turcica: FIG. 2. EE
and this from its Figure may not unfitly be called the Circular Sinus.

Vieussnius, it may be, saw some part of this Sinus where the other four small
ones enter it, which is at the hindermost part of his Receptacula Sellae
Equinae lateribus adjacentia, so called, and from thence thought those
Receptacles to communicate with and to be capable of performing the office he
assigns them, ( viz.) of bringing back Blood from the nourishment of the
subjacent Bone called Cuneiforme, together with the Water separated from the
Pituitary Gland, into these four inferior Sinus's.

Now, as concerning these Receptacles of his, it is certain that they are not
any where existent in Human Brains, (according to the description he gives of
them in the place here noted) seeing both the third, fourth, Page 16.
two foremost Branches of the fifth, as well as its third hindermost one,
together with the sixth pair of Nerves, do not only run out of the Brain
enclosed in so many distinct little Capsula's or Coverings made of the Dura
Matter, during their passage through that part of the Basis of the Cranium by
him called Receptacula, etc. but even the whole Dura Matter, together with its
Membranous Productions constituting the aforesaid Coverings of those Nerves, in
that place sticks close to the Basis of the subjacent Bone, (viz.) the External
Process of the Os Cuneiforme, on its under side, and to the Carotid Artery
(which also both above and below (as was before noted) by its borrowed coat
sticks close to the Dura Matter,) on that side toward the aforesaid Gland,
leaving no room at all for either Blood or Serum to be contained there, as he
would have it; though in the same place which he describes for his Receptacles I
have in several injected Bodies observed two very fair and large Veins, one
coming into the Cranium at the second Foramen from the Orbit of the Eye, (and
possibly may be a Reductory Vessel to that part) and so climbs up on the side
of the lateral Process of the Wedglike Bone, almost up to the Circular Sinus;
the other at the fifth Foramen, which climbs up upon the same Bone till it meet
and joins with the other, from whence they make one short Branch, which enters
the Circular Sinus very near the place where the two other inferior ones on
each side descend down from it; which if they should chance to be cut by
accident in any enquiry made into that part, might cause an appearance of
Blood, and thereby become an occasion of the aforesaid erroneous Hypothesis.

Neither is it possible (granting there were any such Receptacles as he
mentions) they should serve to the end he assigns, Vituss. p. 55
seeing the Glandula Pituitaria is on all sides enclosed by both the Dura and
Pia Matter; which first (notwithstanding what he says to the contrary) is on all
sides of this Gland of a very strong and equal thickness; yea, in that very
part where (as has been before taken notice of) there is a kind of a Chase
made by a certain duplicature of the Dura Matter, constituting the foremost part
of the Circular Sinus.

And if this also was granted, yet would the manner he describes of the Serum
or Water getting into these Receptacles (which is by transcolation) render his
Supposition very unprobable, seeing it is by no means conformable to the Custom
of Nature in all other parts of the Body that Arteries should depose a Serum,
or any thing else but Blood, (except what goes for Nourishment to the Part it
self) in any Part, without being furnished either with its Excretory or
Secretory Ductus, neither of which was ever pretended to have been found here.

And as a through confirmation of all this, said in opposition to the aforesaid
Hypothesis, I shall only add this, and conclude, that in several Injections
made use of in order to find out the use of Parts, I never found one drop of
the tinged Liquors on that side of the Carotid Artery, where he has made the
situation of these Receptacles.

The use of this Circular Sinus is in common with the rest to reduce Blood
returning from all the adjacent parts, as the Pituitary Gland, the Wedglike
Bone also, and it may be from the Rete Mirabile, which in Brutes is very large,
and therefore seems to require the Service of this Sinus, either mediately or
immediately, for reducing a share of its Blood, seeing the Glandula Pituitaria
appears no where furnished with Veins terminating any where else sufficient to
carry off the refluent Blood from this Plexus, notwithstanding Vieussenius
says on the contrary it has no Veins, and therefore is forced to have
recourse to those small Branches of Veins which accompany the Branches sent out
by the carotid Artery, before it perforate the Dura Matter, with the Optic
Nerves, or those which go to the Gangliforme Plexus of the fifth Nerve, or
those coming out of the Wedglike Bone, for reductory Vessels to this Part; but
with what probability I know not.

CHAP. VI. Of the Motion of the Brain and Sinus's.
TO these Sinus's, especially the Longitudinalis, and by way of consequence to
the Lateralis also, most if not all the Ancients, as well as Moderns too,
particularly Willis and Vieussenius, Vitussen. p. 14. par. 3.
have unanimously ascribed Pulsation, after the manner of Arteries, by reason
of some Arteries (as they thought) from the Dura Matter terminating in them: of
the truth whereof being somewhat doubtful, I resolved to make use of such an
Experiment as might remove all future Scruples, and most satisfactorily put an
end to the Controversy; which was as follows.

I took off the upper part of the Skull of a Dog alive, by which means the Dura
Matter with its third Longitudinal Sinus lay bare to the Eye and Touch, to
neither of which Senses, at first, either any beating of the Membrane in
general, or of the Sinus, was the least discernable. After some pause, by
chance the Sinus it self, which I designed to have opened with a Lancet, being
touched with a cauterizing Iron (which in making the Experiment there was
occasion to make use of) poured out the Blood very violently, and at first
without any very remarkable pulsation, but alter some time discernable enough,
both as to the Blood and Membrane too.

I cut this Sinus through almost the length of it, to see whether any Arteries
(whereof many, according to Vieussenius, which was also long before affirmed,
and that upon Experience too, by the learned Wepfer, did terminate in it, and
so occasion its beating, Wepf. p 116 par. 1.
) would discover themselves by throwing out their salient Blood, but no such
Sign appeared.

After all which it is manifest the Sinus's themselves have no pulsation, other
than what is communicated to them from the subjacent Brain, which contrary to
what Bourdon affirms, has an evident pulsation through the multitude of
Arteries dispersed through Bourd. p. 196. par. 2.
it so forcible as to create a sensible Systole and Diastole in its outward
coverings.

It Is worth noting, that while the Blood Vessels are all full, so as to keep
the Dura Matter upon its full stretch, the pulsation is not vi sible at all, or
at least very faintly; but after a depletion of the Vessels, so, as that grows
somewhat more lax, the beating becomes very visible, equally in the Sinus and
Membrane too.

After having made this Experiment I found one Author of the same opinion, and
that is Falloppius, who in vindication of Galen against Vesalius, his
Contemporary, says, all I have said upon the foregoing Experiment, and all the
great Vesalius was able to answer in his own vindication in his ingenious Book
called Anatomicam Gabr. Falloppi Observat. Examen, falls very short of its aim.

As to the Transverse Ligaments which are in some places Fig. 4. r.
round, cordal, and in others Ibid. x.
broad or membranous, in the Longitudinal Sinus chiefly, both serving for
Strength and (in concurrence with the cruciform ligamentous Fibers, taken
notice of by Vieussenius, on the under and outside of this Sinus, from whence
the Fibers belonging to the falcated Process aforementioned seem to have their
original,) Elasticity to this part for its more vigorous reduction of the Blood
passing through it, together with its blind Cavities or Diverticulums serving
to moderate the over-swift or violent motion of the Blood; seeing I find them
so exactly described by Vieussenius, to whom the Reader may have recourse, I
think their description need take up no room here.

But as to the manner of the Veins entering this Sinus, I find it far different
from that which is described by Lower first, Low. fig. 4. h h. Vituss. tab. 2 D
D, etc.
and afterward by Vieussenius, both whom make them enter with their Orifices
from behind forwards, (two or three only excepted by Vieussenius) and that for
some other useful purposes than what have hitherto been taken notice of.

And this is as follows, Fig. 4. dd, etc.
(viz.) About one half of them (though intermixedly) (but all, after having first
upon their arival at the Sinus insinuated themselves for some space alter the
manner of the Pancreatick Duct or Ureters first taken notice of by Lower, Ib.
dd, etc.
betwixt the Duplicature of the Dura Matter) from behind forwards, the other
half from before backwards, as in the Figure.

Now, by this contrivance it is plain, that first of all there are made two
contrary Torrents in one and the same Channel, by which means the refluent
Blood, made poor by the vast quantity of its richest parts drawn off as it were
into Animal Spirits, through a collision of Parts, which by this contrivance must
needs fall out, is preserved in its due mixture, which when at any time lost
through the languishing of its intestine motion or elasticity, retards even its
circular or progressive motion, which when it happens but in some degree, is
the cause of many Distempers; and when altogether, of Death it self.

In the next place the circulation is at all times not only somewhat retarded,
and the Blood hindered, (together with the help of the bony Cell at which the
internal Jugular Veins enter the Sinus's) especially in an erect posture, from
descending with that rapidness and weight it would otherwise have done upon the
descending Cava to the Heart; but also much more so retarded in a supine
position of the Head, a posture most natural and ordinary for Mankind to take
their rest in, through which contrivance, in concurrence with that of the
Lateral Sinus's, (whose structure is such, that in the aforesaid posture the
Blood is forced to climb upwards before it can arrive at the place of its
descent into the Jugular Vein) there is made a more plentiful generation of
Animal Spirits, one chief Cause of the great refreshment and vigorous
disposition of the whole Body we find after Sleeping.

As to the other manner of the Veins entering this Sinus, ( viz. from before
backwards) it from thence happens, that in a prone Position of the Brain, a
posture not uncommon amongst Men, the Blood is helped forward in its
circulation through the Sinus; the truth and design whereof are at once both
evident and pointed at by Nature from the Structure of this part (and which
therefore shows the great usefulness of Comparative Anatomy) in Brutes, who by
reason of such a Position, which the necessity of Feeding almost always keeps
them in, have always such a disposition of this Part, to assist the Blood in
its heavy circulation.

The design of Nature in making these Channels so wide on a sudden, in respect
to the Branches of Veins lately treated of terminating in them, seems to
correspond with the conformation of the Parts just now treated of, and with
that it had in making the Ramifications of Arteries before taken notice of so
large and unproportionable to the Trunks from which they spring, which is a
flower than ordinary circulation of Blood through the Brain, in order to make a
still more copious production of the Animal Spirits so called. Which profitable
Design and End of Nature had nevertheless been attended with a very great
Inconvenience, (viz.) an extravasation of too much Serum, the usual effect or
consequence of a slackened Circulation, had it not been for another provident
Contrivance of Nature in the two Communicant-branches, betwixt the Carotid and
Vertebral Arteries aforementioned, p. 36. by the narrowness of whose Channel
the influent Blood is in some measure represt in its motion, and an
overcharging the Vessels with Blood prevented.

These Sinus's differ in structure one from another, the Longitudinal and
Lateral ones having many transverse Ligaments which the other have not, and the
Longitudinal having many small Cavities or blind Diverticulums, as aforesaid,
which the Lateral have not; the use of them all being for strengthening and
defending them from giving way to the violent irruption of Blood into them,
against which sometimes notwithstanding they are not able to defend themselves;
as I have seen in many Skulls ni which the Blood has burst open the sides of
the Sinus's and found its way between the Duplicature of it, so as even to have
made a Fovea or Cavity in the Cranium it self, as was before noted, one of
which I have now by me.

CHAP. VII. Of the Plexus Choroeides.
THIS Plexus is an aggregate Body made up of Arteries, Veins, Membrane, and
Glands, double on each side, (which has not before been taken notice of) and
consequently having two Originals.

The first Original is from the foremost Branch of the Communicant Artery, FIG.
1. ee.
which running backward up betwixt the hinder Lobes of the Brain, (in which for
some part of the way it is immerged, and to which it gives many large Branches)
and the Medulla Oblongata at length arrives at the Lateral Ventricles, FIG. 5.
ee.
and makes one part of the Plexus on each side.

The second Original is from the hindermost Branch of that Communicant Artery,
FIG. 1. second ee.
which running more backwardly, ascends betwixt the hinder Limbs of the Brain
and the Cerebellum, till it comes to the Isthmus, where communicating with the
first Branch abovementioned, they make a reticular broad Expansion, which
covers both Nates, Testes, and Glandula Pinealis, FIG. 5. GG
and constitutes the second or other part of the Plexus Choroeides.

The first Branch begins to divide it self into diverse Network Fouldings,
interspersed with Glands somewhat what before it enters the Ventricles, Ibid. 5.
and continues such to its Extremity on each side, where they both under the
Fornix wind cross the third Ventricle into a mutual inosculation.

The second begins to assume the same shape or contexture as soon as it begins
to enter the Isthmus, continuing such throughout its entire abovementioned
Expansion.

These two on each side are joined together by a twofold connection, the first
is by an Artery running under the Bombyces, intervening betwixt them, which
could not be here inserted so as to come in view.

The second is by a production of the Pia Matter, which is extended all over
these parts of the Lateral Ventricles, and the third Ventricle which lies
betwixt the first two parts of the Plexus forwardly, and down to the other two
hinder parts of the Plexus backwardly under the Fornix and Septum Lucidum; so
that whatsoever Water is transmitted out of these Ventricles, must slip down
not only under the Fornix, but that Membranous Production it self; from which
kind of structure and position of this Membrane may probably be understood how
there might happen such an Hydrocephalus as the learned Tulpius mentions, Tulp.
lib. 1. cap. 24
in which there was found above two pounds of Water in one Ventricle, without
any at all in the other: and such another as Wepfer mentions, Wepf. p. 69
where the Water causing the Hydrocephalus in an Heifer, was found contained in
a Cystis, and that only in the left Ventricle too: for, supposing this
membranous production of the Pia Matter to be double here, as it certainly is in
all other places, it is not difficult to conceive, that the Water which is
extravasated must needs insinuate it self betwixt the two Lamina's, till by a
continual increase it extends them into the shape of a large Bladder, such a
one as the latter found there and drew out with his Fingers; and that which
seems to put out of all Controversy that it was so, is, that in those places,
both above toward the Corpus Callosum, and below on the Basis of the
Ventricle, he found some sort of Asperities as though the Bladder filled with
Water had been covered with some small Protuberances not much unlike to White
Poppyseed, in those places where it was contiguous to them; which Protuberances
doubtless were the small Glands interspersed quite through this Plexus.

How this Distemper came to be on one side only, though sometimes it is on
both, as you may see in another place of the aforesaid Tulpius, may likely
enough be from an Adnascency of both the Lamina's of this Membranous
Production, Willis p. 10 col. 2. par. 1.
in that place where the Septum Lucidum sinks down from the Fornix, occasioned
by some small sort of pressure of the superincumbent Brain. Besides these
Veins, which are very truly described by Willis, I have always found two more
meeting the foremost Extremities of this Plexus, from between the two first
Lobes of the Brain, where it seems to end under the foremost part of the
Corpora Striata, by which it is there fixed and as it were kept in its due
situation: and from these Branches are on each side sent forth many more little
ones to the Corpora Striata, and several other parts adjacent.

To this Plexus belong also Veins, which from the Extremities of that part of
it in the Lateral Ventricles begin to come into two distinct pretty large
Trunks, FIG. 5. hh.
running down through the middle of the third Ventricle, as far as the fourth
Sinus, and there receiving some Branches from the other hinder part of the
Plexus spread over the Isthmus, discharge the refluent Blood into that Sinus.

But besides this sort of Reductory Vessels, Ibid. qq.
it has also another, (viz.) Lymphaeducts, which I first discovered in the
Brain of a strangled Body, and showed to several then present, running in
different ramisications amongst the reticulated Vessels and Glands of this
part: Which Observation being added to that of the great Anatomist Anthony
Nuck, who in that curious Piece called Adenogrophia says, Nuc. p. 150.
he saw one coming from the Glandula Pinealis, and that his Friend another
Anatomist, whose Name he mentions not, (but I know it was one Bodivol, whom I
had the Happiness to be very well acquainted withal, now dead) sent him word,
he saw another not far from the aforesaid place; may be of sufficient authority
to evince the real Existence of these Vessels hitherto so much inquired after,
in the Brain as well as in other parts of the Body.

The Glands belonging to this Plexus are very many, but very small, and their
Use, according to all the Moderns, especially Willis, Duncan, and Vieussenius,
to carry off the redundant watery part of the Blood, but that without ever
showing by what rational contrivance of Structure it can be done, seeing none
of them ascribe a Secretory Duct, which must always be in readiness when any
unprofitable part is to be discharged.

Since therefore this part is found furnished with Lymphaeducts, 'twill be no
hard matter to conceive the genuine use of the Glands, which is, to separate a
rich nutritious Juice from the influent Blood, and by the Lymphaeducts to
refund it to the refluent, after the loss of its noblest parts left behind in
the Brain in its passage to the Heart again.

It may also, for ought I know, according to the Opinion of Willis, serve to
warm its neighboring parts the Internal Superficies of the Brain, which being
purely medullary, has not so plentiful a share of Blood Vessels dispersed
through it as the rest, and consequently, to maintain an equality of warmth
conducing so much to the conserving the Spirits in their due vigor and
exercise, must borrow an additional supply from hence. It is situated upon the
middle of the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum, all-along them length way, and,
contrary to what Willis says, is, by virtue of several Blood Vessels, joined to
that medullary part of the Brain so called, immediately lying under it.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Rete Mirabile.
NOtwithstanding the Opinions of the late Wepfer, Willis, and Vieussenius too,
(which two last indeed, though but now and then, are willing to allow it an
existence only in Men, (who nevertheless, if the Supposition of Willis be true,
viz. That such cannot but be Fools) had better be without it, Willis p. 2^.
col. 2.
) together with almost all the Ancients, as Vesalius, Columbus, etc. to the
contrary, I have never found this Rete wanting, or with any difficulty
discoverable in Men, springing from and lying on the inside of each Carotid
Artery, in that place of the Circular Sinus chiefly which looks into the four
abovementioned inferior and superior Sinus's in the Basis of the Brain, and
in some measure also the whole length of the Sella Turcica, on each side,
between the Gland and the Carotid Artery.

And that it is so small in them with respect to what it is in Brutes of
several kinds, is no way surprising, when consideration is had to the Use and
Service of it in those Creatures, who, by reason of their prone Position, would
otherwise be in danger of having their Brains deluged as it were with an
overgreat quantity of the Influent Blood, and of a Rupture of the Vessels, by
its violent ingress, and this Danger so much the more threatened by how much the
same Cause which brings it into the Brain with that force is equally as great
and effectual to hinder its proportionable return; for the relief of which
Inconveniency Nature has contrived a means of its more easy and safe descent
into the Brain, by turning that one large Stream of Blood, (which through its
being penned in one Channel, becomes so rapid) into many more, (by which means
the Carotid Trunk above the Dura Matter in those Creatures is very small to what
it is beneath, whereas that Artery in Men, etc. has the same bigness on both
sides that Membrane,) and they not only reticulated and contorted for the more
slow and laborious (which Contrivance the Ancients thought was only for a more
exact preparation of the Blood for Animal Spirits) descent of the Blood, but
also many of them by their insertion into the Glandula Pituitaria attended with
small Veins issuing thence, to take off some part of the burden too.

This last contrivance of Nature methinks may be sufficient to render that
Controversy of Vieussenius with Willis (which, before them, Vieuss. p. 16 pat.
2.
was bewixt Waleus and Rolfincius) the two latter on each side denying this
Rete to have any Veins, very needless; feeing that if the Pituitary Gland have
any, which I am confident it has, (notwithstanding the positive Assertion of
Diemerbroeke, Diemerbr. p. 364. par. 3.
in order to serve his own most unprobable Hypothesis, to the contrary) as
having seen them plain injected with Wax; then this part of the Blood in some
of the Branches of the said Rete, which are plainly inserted into the Gland, is
equally capable of being reduced by those Veins without any necessity of having
recourse to those remote Branches Vieussenius has been forced to seek for,
Vieuss. p 45 par. 2.
as if it had had them of its own.

And that to the aforesaid Position of different Creatures ought chiefly to be
ascribed the variety of Magnitude of this Rete in several of them, its size in
Dogs seems highly to evince; in which, by reason of their Horizontal Position,
being neither so prone as several Brutes who seed on Grass, nor so erect as
Man, that Rete is found smaller than in the first, and larger than in the last.

Another Use it has been thought to have, is, to carry off a considerable
quantity of a dull watery part of the Blood, in order to the production of the
finer Animal Spirits; and this it is thought to effect by means and help of the
Pituitary Gland, betwixt which and it self there is constantly observed a
greater affinity, the one being either greater or lesser in proportion as the
other is so, and betwixt, which there are in all Creatures, but more remarkably
in those where they are both large, a distribution of several Branches coming
from the aforesaid Rete. And this is looked upon by Vieussenius so considerable
an office of the Glandula Pituitaria, that in those Creatures where it is but
small, as in Men, Horses, Dogs, etc. he has substituted many, Vieus. p. 102
par. 3.
but particularly two Cavities, for that use in the Wedglike Bone, just under
the Sella Turcica, in which he supposes that part of the aforesaid Serum, which
by the smallness of the Rete cannot be returned that way, is remitted by
several little Arteries slipped off from the Carotid, whilst under the Sella
Turcica, terminating in the two abovenamed Cavities, there either deposing a
part of the Serum to be carried off by a strange way he there mentions, (viz.)
by two holes, into the Nostrils, and thence into the Fauces; or else by certain
Veins meeting them in that place, as their proper Reductory Vessels, Vieuss. p.
9. par. 2.
to the Heart.

Now, as to this office of the Glandula Pituitaria, I cannot easily be
persuaded it is either designed for, or capable of it, till such time the
Abettors of this Opinion can be able to show me it furnished with an Excretory
Duct for this purpose.

And if they offer, that the Veins are such, I reply, That (besides its being
very unprobable that so vast a quantity of Blood as continually is brought by
the Carotid Arteries to the Brain, should be able to get rid of any
considerable quantity of its Serosity, by so small a part as the Glandula
Pituitaria is;) it is not the usual way of Nature to part with any Share of its
Juices out of its Vessels, when so unactive and unprositable as this is, and
immediately to receive it in again, seeing it is provided of Emunctories enough
to convey it away by.

Moreover, granting (which by no reasonable means is to be granted) it were so
as they would have it, yet nevertheless, in conformity to Nature's proceedings
in all suchlike case, there ought to be an intermediate passage by way of a
Secretory Duct, which none has been able hitherto to discover.

And so far as Vieussenius seems to be of this opinion, Vieus. p. 102 par. 3.
which in one place he plainly is, making it of so gross and viscid a nature,
as is only sit to be discharged at the Emunctory of the Nose; the same Reply is
satisfactory: But when by way of flat contradiction to himself he comes to make
the same gross Humor a perfect fine Lympha, the Answer is then, Vieuss. p. 54.
par. 1.
That there is no need of parting with it beforehand, seeing we find that
Liquor only separated by the Lymphaeducts of the Brain afterward.

Seeing therefore there is such an affinity as before mentioned, between the
Rete Mirabile and Glandula Pituitaria, and taking it for granted, that the
office of the Glandula Pituitaria is not what it has generally hitherto been
believed, to the end we may attain a more exact knowledge of what it really is;
it seems not altogether immethodical to take that part into consideration in
the next place, together with the Infundibulum, which last has not only as
near a relation to the Gland as the Gland has to the Rete, but such a close
communication with it, that it seems in a manner almost impossible to treat of
one independently on the other.

CHAP. IX. Of the Glandula Pituitaria, and Infundibulum.
THIS Gland is seated in and fills up in a manner all that space contained
within the Sella Turcica (Vessels only excepted).

It Is covered on all sides with the Pia and Dura Matter, excepting that part on
its upper Superficies, in which there is a little round hole, by which the
Infundibulum descends slopingly into it, being at its entrance environed with a
Production of the Pia Matter, for its more firm connection with that part, as was
before noted.

But as to the Dura Matter, it encompasses it after a far different manner than
what Vieussenius has described, Vieuss. p. 51 par. 5.
not suspending it in Man as it does in Brutes, so as to hinder it from
touching the bottom of the Sella, and that forasmuch as there is not the same
reason for its so doing in one as there is in the other, for in Brutes the Rete
Mirabile is not only situate on each side this Gland, but: runs quite under its
hinder part, by which one side of the Rete communicates with the other, a
Disposition of this Part which Vieussenius was altogether unacquainted with;
whereas in Man, inasmuch as there is not that sort of Structure in the one ( i.
e. the Rete) it is not nccessary it should be required in the other.

However, in neither one nor the other is the Reason which Vieussenius gives
for Nature's contrivance of this affair of any weight, seeing neither the Rete
Mirabile, Vieuss. p. 50 par 1.
much less the few small Veins belonging to the Bone beneath, could possibly
any way be compressed by this Gland, though superincumbent, because it is so
firmly knit to the Dura Matter, lying above and upon it, which is supported by
the two foremost and hindermost Processes of the Sella Turcica, in such a
manner as is sufficient to sustain and keep from pressing upon any subjacent
part ten times a greater weight than the Glandula Pituitaria is.

Moreover, the Dura Matter is so far from suspending it from that Bone, that it
is, together with the Gland, fixed to that very Bone it self.

The substance of this Gland is far differing from that of all the rest, which
I have often upon this account particularly examined; in consistence indeed
it is the same with most of the Conglobate kind, if not somewhat harder, but
then being pressed or squeezed, it emits much more Water than any of them.

As to the Conglomerate sort, it has not the least resemblance to any of them,
and consequently cannot be supposed, as it has hitherto been by all, to carry
off any excrementitious or unprofitable pare of the Blood.

Now, if we consider this part, together with the appended Infundibulum, we
shall certainly find a conformation far different from any other part in the
whole Body of Man, inasmuch as that which this Gland receives by the
Infundibulum, or which is the same, what this Infundibulum conveys to it, is
not separated from the mass of Fluids by any visible Secretory Duct, which in
its ordinary method Nature is observed constantly to make use of, whenever it
parts with any part of the Blood, whether excrementitious or reductitious,
throughout the whole compages of the Body.

Nor has the manner of Nature in transmitting a certain Liquor to the Gland
been less abstruse in carrying it off from that part again, the reductory
Vessels from the Gland being equally concealed, as the adductory to the
Infundibulum; that way of Transudation, according to the invention of
Vieussenius, being to the greatest degree improbable, as having no resemblance
to the course of Nature throughout the whole Body.

Nay, even a possibility it self seems hardly allowable, if we take but notice
of that part in Brutes in whom its Integuments are extraordinary dense, the
Dura Matter, as he truly observes, investing it close on every side, (and which
he perceiving, and consequently foreseeing what might from thence unanswerably
be objected against him) was forced to make them much more than in Men; in
which last indeed there is seemingly. some reason for its being so, Vieuss. p.
52 par. 2.
inasmuch as the Rete lies in a Duplicature as it were of the Dura Matter, on
each side of the hindermost part of the Sella Turcica, as though one Lamina of it
was spread upon the subjacent Bone, and the other over the Pituitary Gland, (a
disposition contrary to that in Brutes, as has already been taken notice of)
but nevertheless there is no necessity that it should be so divided in this
place, nor does the said Author ever offer a Reason for its being so, (which
looks as though his Assertion was only a Guess) seeing this Membrane can send
out new Productions as well double as single, as we find in its two eminent
Processes before described, and Sinus's; agreeable to what it also therefore
may and does do here, where the Integuments of this part appear plainly to be
of too thick a consistence to admit of his imaginary way of transudation, which
is manifest not only by sight and section, but in that by the greatest force
made use of in compressing and squeezing it between ones Fingers, we find it
impossible to force out the least appearance of Humidity through its aforesaid
Enclosure or Integuments,

Being therefore very inquisitive after the true use of this part, and
despairing of ever attaining to such a Knowledge without first knowing the
exact Structure thereof, besides all other means commonly made use of in all
Anatomical Enquiries, I made use of all sorts of Injections serviceable to such
an end, as of tinged Liquors, Wax, and Mercury, but all with little, if any,
success according to my expectation, the Wax not penetrating its Texture at
all, the tinged Liquors but very superficially, and the Mercury, (where my
chief Hopes were) always by its weight (do what I could to the contrary) either
breaking through the sides of the Infundibulum, where it leaves the Brain, or
else falling down in greater Globuli than the extreme narrow Passages were
capable of admitting. and by this means became altogether useless.

Being compelled therefore for the present to leave off a little while a
further enquiry into the Structure of this part, by reason of the great mist it
is involved in, and to gain a little more Light for our Guidance in searching
after Truth, (which like many other things of greatest value lies deep, and is
with great difficulty accessible) it may not be amiss to see what Assistance
can be had, by making diligent Scrutiny into the Structure of its Appendix the
Infundibulum.

The Infundibulum.
This is a thin medullary Duct, covered with the Pia Matter, descending from the
internal Concave Superficies of the Brain, to which, by reason of its wideness
toward one end, and narrowness toward the other, in resemblance to a Tunnel,
as well as by reason also of the parity of their Uses, the Ancients gave the
Name of Infundibulum.

In Man it is closely inverted with the Pia Matter at its very entrance into the
Gland, and from that place has not any manifest Cavity I could discover by
blast or style, but is altogether of a medullary substance, contrary to what it
is in Sheep or Calves, in which last Creature, where the Parts are larger, by
inserting a Blow-pipe into that part of the Infundibulum, next to the Gland, I
have seen its further Tract or Passage on the upper part thereof a little
puffed up, and a considerable quantity of Water regurgitate, as though it had
lain contained either in some Pipes or Porulous Substance of that Gland.

This Difference is not take notice of by Vieussenius, and therefore what he
says of this part seems chiefly in this respect, if not altogether, applicable
to the Structure it has in Men.

Those two Divisions or Ramifications of this part the said Author mentions,
Vieussen. p. 49. par. 3.
one forwardly, and the other backwardly, in Sheep, Calves, etc. I have always
found correspondent to the Descriptions he there gives of them; but whether the
first be protended so, and terminate after the manner he there describes I
somewhat scruple, seeing I have always observed the Extremity of that part in
Brutes, toward the foremost part of the Gland, sinking as it were into the
very Substance thereof, and afterward becoming presently altogether
imperceptible, and in Man the termination thereof just after the same manner,
save only that in the last it happen forthwith upon its approach to the Gland,
without being protended either backwardly or forwardly.

The Use of this part is certainly to convey some sort of Humidity from that
great concamerated Cavity within the Brain, resulting from its inward
complication of parts, to the Pituitary Gland, and the office of it is to
receive and carry off this transmitted Humidity; but as to how either this
Humidity is collected in the aforesaid Cavity, or how, when conveyed into the
Gland, it is carried off, we are still as much in the dark as ever.

I know very well there is nothing more easy with the Visionary Philosophers
than such a Knack as this; and now I think on it, the great Willis makes nothing
of turning a Vein into a Lymphoeduct in the Glandula Pinealis and Plexus
Choroeides, Will. p. 46.
no less than which does also the accurate Vieussenius, Vieus. p. 110 par. 3.
in the Plexus belonging to the fourth Ventricle; but how consonant this is to
the rational structure or mechanism of parts, neither the one or the other have
been so kind as to explain.

Now, as to the Plexus and Glands before mentioned, it is evident by what has
been already discovered and accordingly given an account of in the preceding
Pages, they are furnished with Lymphoeducts, as proper reductory Vessels; so
that so far the Prophecy is vanished.

But as to the remaining Gland, I am not so fond of guessing to say it has
any, and consequently all I can say is, that as I look upon the Infundibulum to
be no more than a large Lymphoeduct variously ramified through the Glandula
Pituitaria, discharging its Liquor by those many small Branches into the Veins
dispersed through that part to be reduced after the manner it is in all other
Secretory Glands back to the Blood gain.

And that which seems most to favor this Conjecture, is the extraordinary
humidity of this Gland, especially in Brutes, above the rest of the whole Body,
as serving not only to export what Lympha is separated from several Arteries
dispersed through it, but that also which it is charged with from the Brain it
self.

And to this twofold manner or double office of Secretion is owing the two
distinct Substances it seems to consist of, the one being accommodated to that
part of the Lympha coming from the Brain, and is therefore whitish, the other
to that separated immediately out of the Blood, and is therefore reddish.

Lastly, As to the manner how the Lympha passes down through the Infundibulum
passes down through the Infundibulum from the Brain to the Glandula Pituitaria, I
look upon it to be in the form of condensed Vapors arising from the Arteries
of the Plexus Choroeides, emitted thence for the keeping moist and in good
order that inward Production of the Pia Matter, spread all over its Parietes,
which being a membranous dry part of it self, might otherwise become injurious
to that fine medullary part lying under and being contiguous to it; in which
there is a continual motion of Animal Spirits, whose Tracts, and consequently
they themselves, through any the least intemperance of this Membrane, would be
in great danger of either some obstruction or disorder.

And that this Lympha is only the result of the aforesaid Vapors, I am the
more readily inclined to believe, because I never saw Water in that part of any
sound Brain, nor unsound neither, where the Plexus Choroeides was firm; and
there was no reasonable ground, by the extravasation of Serum in some other
remote parts of the Brain, to believe it had its rise from thence.

CHAP. X. Of the Glandula Pinealis.
THE Gland called Pinealis, from its Figure, is about the bigness of an
ordinary Pea, prefixed to the two Prominencies called Nates, hereafter to be
described, at the end of the third Ventricle, immediately under the broad and
hinder part of the Fornix, (with which nevertheless it has no connection,
Vieuss. p. 71.
as Vieussenius says it has) and over that part of the Rima in the third
Ventricle called Anus.

It Is joined to the Nates by several Fibrous Roots, and becomes a support to
that part of the Plexus Choroeides there situate.

In an hydropical Brain of a strumous Boy, I have seen it swelled to a size of
three times its ordinary magnitude, and by reason of the abundance of stagnate
gelatinous Lympha contained in it, perfectly transparent.

Hence it most plainly appears that this part is a mere Gland, and, by what was
said before conformable to what has been observed in this hydropick Brain, of
the Conglobate or Lymphatick kind, and by consequence a very unfit part to be
made a Receptacle of Animal Spirits, Vieus. p. 71.
as Vieussenius makes it, and much more a place of residence for the Soul,
according to Des Chartes.

It Is true, there are two fair medullary Tracts arising seemingly from the two
Roots of the Fornix, stretching length-way upon the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum,
as far back as this Gland, (by Vieussenius called as this Gland, Vieuss. p. 6^
par. 3.
(by Vieussenius called Tractatus Medullaris Nervorum opticorum Thalamis
interjectus, as though it was only one, and accordingly is so delineated by
him, Tab. 7. GG, but indeed is two, one on each side) about which place they
turn in, and by a transverse bending kind of a Process (by the same Author
called Tractus medullaris natibus antepositus) unite, as he has exactly
observed: Willis, p. 9. col. 1. par. 1.
And this, doubtless, gave occasion to the Error of Des Chartes, as Willis
truly thought, (whose sublime and most deservedly-admir'd Philosophy had
doubtless been much more useful, had he conversed more with Dissections, and
less with Invisibility) and Vieussenius too, Mural. p. 508. Will. p. 10. col 1.
par. 3
(with whom in the same Mistake does agree Muraltus and Willis) for upon a more
heedful inspection (as was most evident in the Brain aforementioned) it will be
found that no part of the Process aforesaid, however near it comes to this
Gland, does in any wise become continuous to it.

Dr. Wharton also stumbled upon these medullary Tracts, Whart. p. 141.
placing them amongst the Nerves themselves, and ascribes the same unreasonable
use to them as he does to the Nerves in many other Parts of the body, (viz.) of
separating a superfluous Humor from the Cruca Medulla Oblongata, or Thalami
Nervorum Opticorum, (being the same Part, and only on the other side or upper
part of the Brain, under another denomination) which he supposes to be the
Commune Sensorium.

It has Arteries and Veins in common with other Glands, the Veins ending in
the fourth or inward Sinus; as may the Lymphaeducts too, when they are
conspicuous.

CHAP. XI. Of the Brain in general.
THAT part of this Treatise relating to the Vessels, being dispatched, I shall
in the next place proceed to an account of the Brain it self, under which term
are generally comprehended the Cerebrum and Cerebellum, and Medulla Oblongata,
which Parts being in many respects so different one from another, may justly
challenge a distinct and orderly description.

The Brain then, in the first place, as distinct from the other two, is that
large and almost spherical Body which comes first to sight in the old way of
Dissection, filling the greatest part of all that space contained in the
Cranium, consisting of two different Substances (first taken notice of by
Archangelus Piccolominius) both in Color, Consistence, Piccolom. p. 252.
and Office, the one being more compact, white, medullary, or fibrous, the
other softer, greyish, and glandulous.

The utmost Malpighius (by virtue of his Microscopes) could do, Malp. De Cereb.
Cort. p. 78, 81. par. 3.
was to discover the Cortical part to consist of Glands of an oval depressed
Figure, and in his Opinion, of the Conglomerate kind, (but that how properly,
as also his calling the Nerves their Excretory Ducts, I leave to the Judgment
of others) and the Medullary part to consist of various Fibers immerged in and
having their original from the aforesaid Glands, deriving from them a certain
Liquor called Nervous Juice, concerning the Existence of which, in the usual
sense it is taken in, as a fluid body, contained and running continually in the
Channel of the Nerves, as Water in Wooden or Leaden Pipes, for either Nutrition
or Censation, is a thing somewhat improbable, it being not only possible, but
very easy to resolve those two Phoenomena's, the first from the Blood, and the
other from the Natural Tenseness of Sensible Parts maintained by the supply of
a proper Liquor from the Blood, both in their Originals and continued or
elongated Productions; inasmuch as it does as certainly circulate in them as in
any other parts of the Body. And as to the manner how this is done, it will
appear very plain and intelligible, after the innate Structure of the Part has
been more accurately enquired into.

The Curious Lewenhoeck made a far deeper scrutiny into these two Parts,
Lawenh. de Struct. Cereb. p. 37.
being very probably assisted by better Glasses, and from what occurred to his
view, called the cortical part a pellucid Vitrious Oily Substance, (the seeming
oiliness of which Substance I attribute only to the stagnating of the pure
Liquor, growing cold after death of the Creature,) from such a close and
regular Position of the Globuli swimming therein, as allows the Rays of Light
to pass them without refraction, contrary to what they do in the other or
medullary part of the Brain, in which they are so disposed that the Light
cannot pass them in right lines, and consequently being a little distorted,
makes them appear white, notwithstanding Malpighius on the contrary neither
allows the Parts of the Brain to be diaphanous, Malpig. de Cereb. p. ^.
nor the Animal Spirits to be any thing akin to Light.

It Is true, even by his own confession, that his most nice and diligent
Inspections could not free him from many Scruples about what he saw; yet some
things to our purpose were plain enough, as Reticular Bodies of a red color,
which being larger in the Cortical Parts than Medullary, helps to give it that
greyish or subrunneous color, as he calls it.

Nextly, a transparent Vitrouscolour'd Substance contained in most minute
Vessels; whence it is plain there are two sorts of Liquors in this Cortical
Part, one of a red color, or Blood, contained in larger Vessels, whose
Globuli, which give it its redness, either by reason of their size or figure,
cannot enter those small Vessels which with the Fluid contained in them
constitute this transparent, cineritious, or cortical part of the Brain.

The other a transparent Liquor, contained in most minute Vessels, as
aforementioned; from whence I am induced to believe this Cortical part to be
only an Aggregate of different Vessels, (as also I do of all the rest of the
Parts of the Body) containing different sorts of Fluids.

Of these Vessels some contain a more compound Liquor, commonly called Blood,
which whilst in that state, by reason of the Globuli swimming on it, looks red,
and by reason of a tubulous Pore of a proper size and figure so continued to
the Vessel we call a Vein, that it undergoes a continual quick circulation.

Another sort of Vessels there is which receive and contain a more simple fluid
body, of a thin transparent nature, which when in some parts of the Body, gives
the name of Lymphaeducts to the Vessels that it runs in; but when in these
Vessels, which are discovered to make up the great Substance of the Brain,
whether Cortical or Medullary, may be allowed the name of Fluidum Animale.

And this last sort of Vessels I look upon to be either a certain Protension of
an Artery, by its smallness rendered capable of holding such a sort of Liquor
only as the last spoken of, or else such a tubulous production of the Artery as
by its Orifice of Pore answers to the figure and size of the Fluid it is by
Nature intended to receive.

Upon the same exact Enquiry made by a Microscope, the medullary part of the
Brain appears to be of the very same constitutive parts, ranged only after a
somewhat different manner, which makes this part appear more white, as was
before observed. But over-and-above (if it may be allowable to make a
Conjecture) I am inclined to think the Whiteness of this part may be owing in
some, if not the greatest part, to such a narrowness of the Vessels discovered
here, containing the pellucid Substance aforementioned as will not entertain
any Fluid whatsoever, without its being first reduced into very minute
Particles, or Septometry so called: Which last Vessels I therefore suppose to
be only yet more Capillary Productions of the aforesaid Cortical Vessels, as
they are of the red or Blood Vessels indu'd with such a Pore as fits them only
for the reception of a most subtle, fine, soft Liquor, which I esteem the true
Medullary and Nervous Juice, which being contained in its proper Capsula, and
many of them collected into one Fasciculus, at its egress out of the Brain,
being there wrapped up in more thick and strong Coverings made of the two
outward Membranes of the Brain, do constitute that part we call a Nerve, which
having all its Integuments or Membranous Enclosures always kept turvid and
tense by its contained Fluid, after a slow and leisurely manner continually
dispensed from the Fountain, and by its growing more taper toward the place of
its termination, by which means it acquires a greater streightness or
narrowness of its Pores ordinarily called Fibrillae, it so falls out that all
inward Impressions, upon all occasions, are the more easily and speedily
transmitted through it.

The very same notion also concerning Nutrition (which in the truest sense is
only an apposition of Parts nourishing to Parts pre-existent to be nourished)
in the rest of the Parts of the Body, I have thought reasonable to entertain
ever since, by assistance of the Microscope I have plainly discerned the Veins
to be only continuations of Arteries, and the Blood to run in the same Channel
variously modified, without the least suspicion of Extravasation, (viz.) a
continual transmission of Nutritive Juice out of the Pores of Arteries, after
many windings like Tindrils of Vines ( Analogus to which the red Reticular
Bodies of Lewenhoeck seem to be in the Brain,) grown very capillary into
certain Tubuli's or Pores of a corresponding bigness and figure, making up the
whole fleshy part of the Body, whose Substance, when it is freed by washing or
injection of Water, we see to consist only of large and small Blood Vessels and
Fibers; which last, whether Nervous or Membranous, or such as relate to
Muscular Motion, commonly called Carnous, I suppose to be full of minute
distinct Vessels for the communicating and receiving their proper Liquors or
Fluids after the manner already expressed, which as contained in the said
Tubuli or Pores, whilst they retain their Natural Constitution and Proportion,
I presume it is which keeps the Habit of the Body plump and vigorous, the more
thin and languid being perpetually carried back by the Lymphatick Vessels, and
a great part wholly exterminated by mere simple Transpiration; which I
adventure to think is not only superficial from the Sudorifick Glands in the
Skin, but also through the whole Substance of inward parts, through small
Canaliculi's or Meantus's in even the Viscera themselves; by which, not
unlikely, we may guess at the Meaning of Hippocrates, when he said, All things
were conspirable and transpirable.

The minuteness of Vessels is that which has so embroiled the Thoughts of
Naturalists upon this Subject, and set Realities so remote from the
Understanding, otherwise it is no Paradox to affirm the Existence of Vasa
Vasorum almost to Infinitum, some containing Liquids in a continual more nimble
circulation, others in a gentle protrusion only: Which will appear altogether
unsurprizing, if it be considered that the aforementioned Ingenious Author has
computed, that even the 64th part of a Miriad (i. e.) of a Ten hundred
thousandth part of any Substance but as big as a small grain of Sand, Leweth.
p. 46.
cannot, especially if of a rigid or inflexible nature, enter those little
Vessels, which are seen in a retiform manner distributed amongst, and fixed to
the aforesaid pellucid Globules, which swimming in those little Vessels, are
discovered to make up both the Cortical and Medullary part of the Brain. As
also further, that even the tender Coats of the smallest of those Vessels which
contain the aforesaid most minute Globular Fluid Bodies, Lewe^^^^
are also full of yet far more minute Vessels than they themselves are.

Nay, I am so far from being surpised at this kind of Vascular Constitution of
Parts, that I apprehend not how Nature could otherwise have acted without the
consequence of a boundless Accretion, inasmuch as that when any parts of a
Fluid become extravasate, they necessarily lose much of their progressive
motion, and if of a gross consistence, are either proscribed by the wider
passages, or of a finer, through those more straight and elaborate (viz.) by
Transpiration; so that what Particles of Matter soever continually arrive, for
either the augmentation or reparation of the Parts, must (unless the ruin of
the Subject do not first happen, as we see it often does in Diseases proceeding
from such Causes) needs (if not confined in Vessels) advance into a monstrous
preternatural accumulation, as being, by reason of their gross consistence,
altogether incapable of being carried off proportionably to the measure of
their aggestion, in the form of subtle Steams or Exhalations.

Besides a rational explication of the natural Functions which this Hypothesis
furnishes us with, it also, seems to clear a great many Difficulties which
have hitherto puzzel'd the most refined Physiologists relating to the Animal
Faculty, such as are Sensation and Muscular Motion; of which last here in the
next place, the other being reserved for the last Chapter, which treats of
Sensation and Motion in general.

CHAP. XII. Of Muscular Motion.
TO recite the Opinion of others upon this Subject would be a thing altogether
useless here, seeing an Abstract of them is already extant in the Philosophia
vetus and nova by Mr. Colbert; and besides, the most correct of them are not
only very unprobable, but absolutely repugnant to plain Reason and Matter of
Fact too; an Instance whereof you may have in Dr. Willis's Tendinous
Reservatories of Animal Spirits, Willis de Mot. Musc. p. 35. Mayow de mot.
musc. p. 73.
in Dr. Mayow's Twisting or Fiddlestring Fibers, with whom of late Mr. Regis
agrees, by which the Muscle must needs lose a great deal of its thickness, than
which nothing is more contrary to Experiment; in Duncan's first and second
Element of Des Chartes, Dunc. p. 90
which he makes the Animal Spirits to consist of, contrary even to the very
Principles of that great Man's Philosophy, which allows no Elasticity to those
Bodies themselves, though the Authors of it in all others; likewise in Dr.
Croon's making the Blood it self, Croont, p. 23, 24, 25, 33. Philos. c^^. p. 23.
as well as the Animal Spirits, to be moved by the power of the Soul to any
Muscles; as likewise the extravasation of those two Liquors first into the
spaces betwixt the Fibers, and then their introvasation into the Fibers
themselves again, in order to make inflation, an Error incident to the Immortal
Borellus also, Borel. de mot. Ati^. p. ult. prep. 23. and ^^ribus ^l^s loci^.
whose imaginary Discourse upon this Subject seems of a very different Thread
from the rest of his Excellent Works.

If therefore what has been already said about the Structure of Parts be
remembered, (viz.) That the Medullary Part of the Brain is only a Contexture of
Vessels; that its Nervous Propagation or Nerve is also a Compages of Vessels,
formerly called Filaments, much more narrow than those of the Brain it self;
and, that these Nerves produce, or at least terminate in the Fibers of all
sorts of sensible Parts whatsoever, though of a different texture, as well as
those carnous ones of Muscles, which last are tubulous, 'twill not be in the
least unreasonable to infer, That these Bodies being kept continually turgid
with the contained Fluid, are equally capable of transmitting or receiving
Impressions of the Object, as if they were stretched longitudinally like a
Bow-string from each Extremity, according as Borellus has observed.

And as to Muscular Motion, allowing only what may directly be inferred from
what has previously been said, (viz.) That the Nervous and Carnous Fibers are
only a congeries of Fluids contained in certain Vessels communicating with each
other, that by reason of a Plenitude in the aforesaid Fibers, the whole Machine
is in a constant Equilibrium, it will necessarily follow, upon the common
Postulatum, (to which all Mankind must be beholdden upon all such Explications
as these to the World's end) viz. that the Sensative or Rational Soul can
command the Animal Spirits (which I call only a Nervous Fluid) into a Primus
Impetus, or local motion, that a part of that Liquor, whenever a Muscle
contracted is transmitted through the Vessels which contain it from the great
Reservatory thereof, the Brain, to its Carnous Fibers, into whose Vessels,
being so much narrower than those of the Nerves, even by virtue of the same
force which moves it from the Brain, that Liquor is driven after a most rapid
manner, (which Effect, to any acquainted with the nature of Fluids and
mechanical Laws of Motion by Projection, needs not any demonstration) causing
the Intumescence or Inflation of the Muscle, the same Liquor at the same time
being driven back again with an equal speed from the Antagonist Muscle into the
room of the first, which was transmitted from the Brain to the contracted one,
in order to maintain the same Plenitude or (which is the same thing in the
sense of the old Philosophers) to avoid a Vacuum. And if any object the
wideness of the Passage it is to come back by from the reflexed Muscle, as an
impediment to an equivalent speed in that Liquors retrocession, I have to
answer, that the Emptiness being made first, is a sufficient recompense for
that.

And here I cannot but take notice, that all they who contend for Animal
Spirits, analogous to those we see produced from various Subjects by Fire, as
the only adequate medium for all sorts of Muscular Motion, have been forced to
have recourse either to certain Tracts or Interstices betwixt the Filaments of
the Nerves continued from the Brain, or the Original of the Nerves through
their whole Productions to the Muscle, of which sort are the Cartesians, or
else to a certain Nervous Juice, for their place of residence, of which sort
are most of the Moderns, and particularly Vieussenius, by which Passages, or
out of which Juice these fine invisible things are either voluntarily, by the
command of the Soul, or inadvertently, from several either inward or outward
impressions, transmitted, in order to produce Motion: which if true, and the
only ways of producing Muscular Motion, I beg leave to ask, how it comes to
pass, by either of these ways, that when another person bends my Arm, and that
againfl my Will too, the bending Muscles of the Arm become as tumid as when
voluntarily or inadvertently contracted at any other time; which has been
truly observed though not satisfactorily accounted for, by Dr. Croone, Croone, p.
^^
or any other I know of.

But how this or any other sort of contraction of a Muscle happens, does by the
other afore-mentioned Hypothesis become explicable, without any manner of
difficulty at all: For when the Cause of Contraction is from the Command of the
Soul, the pressure is first from the Fluid in the Brain, by which all the
interjacent or continued Fluid slows toward the Part to be moved, the same
proportion of Fluid being at the same instant transferred into its room from
the relaxed Muscle; and when the contraction of the Muscle is from the
abovementioned external force bending the Arm against my will, then the Liquor
contained in the relaxed carnous Fibers or Vascula is transmitted through the
whole continuity of Fluids, to that which is contracted, and all this without
being beholden to the wild Conceits of a dry and moist part of the Nervous
Juice, blind Passages, invisible Tubuli betwixt the Antagonist Muscles or
Valves in the Nerves, by a mere Aequilibrium of the Fluids contained in the
Vessels the Parts consist of.

At the same time I am not insensible of the Solution some have given this
Instance of Involuntary Motion upon another Hypothesis, (viz.) by supposing an
equality of Tension or Elasticity in all the Muscles of the whole Body; by
which means it falls out, that when any new additional force (though never so
small) is added to the Fibers of any Muscle, as in voluntary motion, or the
power of Elasticity in the Antagonist Muscle, overcome by outward force, as in
the aforementioned Instance of Involuntary Motion, the other Muscle then
becomes contracted.

Now, that this is one concurrent Cause in both sorts of Instances, as being
confirmed by the Experiment of cutting a Muscle through, either toward the
Extremes or in the middle, by which the Fibers, by their natural Elasticity,
are found to contract either to one or the other, or to both Extremes, is
allowed to be true; but to be the only Cause, is altogether as false.

For, in the first place, as to the case of voluntary Contractions, it is
allowed to proceed from a transmission of Spirits from the Brain into the
carnous Fibers, (that Hypothesis of Steno to the contrary having been convicted
long since by Borellus, in his Book De Motu Animalium) though not without the
concurrence or sympraxis of the natural Elasticity of the Fibers belonging to
the Muscle to be contracted.

So likewise, without the transmission of Animal Spirits from some force or
another, I deny even the possibility of that stiffness or hardness which is
easily preserved in all contracted Muscles, feeling and seeming as though they
were indurated and swelled out, as really they are, whether it be in the case
of voluntary or involudtary motion; in confirmation of which, I affirm, that
though by the cutting of the carnous Fibers of any Muscle through, which way
soever it be, the contracted part may, and doubtless does, grow thicker by the
shortning of its Fibers, yet by that means only it does not become stiffer and
harder, so as we find Muscles do when contracted by any natural Cause, nor is
there any necessity it should do so, according to any Rules of Mechanism,
seeing the Fibers shortning only by their own elastick force, when they find
the circumambient space give way have no necessity of subintration of parts,
which is always requisite to procure a stiffness or hardness to a part altering
its dimensions as Muscles do, from a longer and thinner to a shorter and
thicker circumference; and upon this it must needs follow, that in a Muscle
contracted by involuntary force (in which Action the Brain is altogether
unconcerned) that stiffness or hardness then perceivable in it, must needs be
owing to the Fluid or Spirits in the antagonist Muscle, after the manner
already explained, transmitted to it.

Now, to define what sort of thing this Animal Fluid (so called) is, I see no
occasion to frame any other Idea of it than what we ordinarily have of the
purest Liquors, seeing the Nerves are a Substance which (to the Senses of
either Smell or Taste discovers very little else than what is insipid) are
always reckoned amongst the least hot parts of the Body, and doubtless far less
warm in Fishes than us, who yet have as great a stock of Animal Spirits as any
other Creatures. And this Consideration may be it was that occasioned an Author
to give the Animal Spirits the Epithet of Frigidiusculi. Du His. T. l. p. ^^^


It Is plain enough, that the Vessels which contains this Fluid are extreme
minute, and consequently the Content must needs be of a very fine and depurate
consistence, though without much resemblance to either the aforesaid nimble,
saline, or sulphurous Productions of the Fire.

It Is in a continual, gentle, direct motion, though perhaps contained in curved
or reticulated Vessels, from its original source to the ends of the carnous
Fibers, from whence it is conveyed into the Membranous or Tendinous
Productions, according as the Fibers terminate, and it may be by filtration
only; in which, as in other, and particularly in Glandulous Parts not
subservient to Muscular Motion, where Nervous Ramifications are very copious,
whether it be of any other use than to keep the Parts in their proper tone, in
order to their regular discharge of the office of Secretion, must still remain
a Controversy, notwithstanding all that has been yet advanced against it,
inasmuch as wastings and numbnesses of Parts, the common Symptoms of obstructed
or divided Nerves, (which doubtless by their hastening through such Causes to
Muscular Parts, gave the first rise to that Conjecture about the Existence and
Use of that Juice throughout the whole Body) are equally explicable by the want
of Tone, as of that supposed Liquor.

To the proof of all this an Experiment frequently made does not a little
contribute, and that is the injecting the Arteries of a Dog, or any such
Creature, when dead, upon which there immediately happens a contraction of the
Muscles, according to the different strength of them, (viz.) of the Extenders
in the hinder Legs, and of the Benders in the fore Legs, though the Injection
be only of cold Water, the reason of which effect in particular, if it be
remembered what has been before observed, (viz.) that the Blood Vessels do most
certainly enter the composition of the Nerves themselves, will not only become
very easily explicable, but the whole Hypothesis at least very highly probable.

If it be said, That this speedy instantaneous reflux of the Animal Fluid is
opposed by the aforementioned constant direct motion it has from its Source to
the parts to be moved, it is easy to reply, That its slow direct motion that
way is casily overcome and repelled by the violent impulse of the
forcibly-relaxed Muscle the other way.

If further it be demanded, by what means it so happens that in the Instance
before us of an Arm bent by force, that the refluent Animal Fluid is rather
toward the Muscle, which by that means then proves contracted, than toward
any other whatsoever, to all which it may indifferently have access, I think
the Solution seems not difficult, if it be considered, that at the same time
that the one Muscle is forced from, the other is forced into a contraction;
from whence it so falls out, that the carnous tubulous Fibers of the last,
which by being extended under the state of relaxation, did lose their cavity,
must needs by their natural elasticity, when freed from the preponderant force
of its Antagonist, acquire it again, by which means a space being made, the
repelled Fluid, by the Laws of Libration, (to say nothing of the habitual
motion of the Animal Spirits, or Liquor, by most Authors, especially Borellus,
urged as a Reason for this effect) must needs be driven thither.

In fine, though I am not averse to think most of the Phoenomena relating to
Sensation and Motion may be solved by this Theory, though of so small an
apparatus, yet I am so far from being fond of it, that I have reserved a far
greater share of Friendship for any other that may seem but of never so little
more a kin to Truth, and submitting all I have said on this Subject to the
candid Sentiments of the more judicious Proceedee in describing the other parts
of the Brain as they offer themselves in the usual modern way of Dissection.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Brain in particular.
THIS Part being already described and considered in general, as consisting of
two different Substances commonly called its Similar Parts, and the Source of
all Sense and Motion, comes now to be taken notice of in a more particular
manner, with respect to its dissimilar parts or conformation; and this I think
may best be done first according to its outward, and next to its inward
appearance.

Outwardly it is unequal and cortical, exactly divided into two Hemispheres by
the first Process of the Dura Matter called Falx, from the bony Process called
Crista Galli forwardly to the very hindermost part of the Cranium, where these
two Divisions are stretched over the Cerebellum, from which part also it is
perfectly separated by the second Process of the Dura Matter, to the end it may
not cause any prejudicial compression upon that part, either by its weight or
pulsation.

The foremost Division is made only as deep as the Corpus Callosum, the latter
to the very Medulla Oblongata it self.

It Is further imperfectly divided into four Lobes, two whereof (which being the
less) are forwardly, and two (which are much bigger) backwardly.

These Divisions appear best in the inverted or Varolian Dissection, being
marked out as it were by four Branches of the Carotid Artery, two before, and
one on each side.

These I call Imperfect Divisions of the Brain, because though the Pia Matter
runs betwixt them, together with the aforesaid Branches of the great Artery,
yet they adhere by several Fibers, both of that Membrane and the Blood Vessels
themselves.

It Is also imperfectly divided through all its external cortical part by the Pia
Matter, though not so profoundly, to the end the Blood Vessels may penetrate
this part in more sine and reticular Ramifications; and that by the pulsation
of the Arteries the interjacent cortical Glands, (or rather Vessels) may more
freely make their proper Secretions.

Nextly, it may be considered in its inward appearance, which is concave and
medullary, taking its original from the Extremities or Apices of the Medulla
Oblongata, (or rather a little more forwardly from the foremost part of
Vieussenius's oval Center) commonly called Processus Lentiformes, or according
to Dr. Willis, Corpora Striata.

From hence it is presently reflected back on each side in the form of a Vault,
very near as far as the Nates and Testes, a little below which on each side
it is joined with the Crura Medulla Oblongata on their under side, being
continuous there to those Parts commonly called the Crura Fornicis.

The middle and uppermost part of this Medullary Substance, by the Ancients
always called Corpus Callosum, is therefore by Vieussenius called Fornix Vera,
Vicus. p 61 par. 1.
in his Opinion sustaining that Office (though I see not that it does, or for
the Reasons before given in the description of the Dura Matter and 'its
Processes, needs to do any such thing.)

This is that part which, as was before noted, was thought (but mistakenly) by
Vesalius and others to escape the covering of the Pia Matter and in it are not
visible any bloody Specks, as in most other parts of the Medulla Cerebri.

It Is the medium uniting the medullary part of each Hemisphere or Division of
the Brain, famous for the transverse Stria running through it from each side of
the aforesaid Hemispheres, the Septum Lucidum only coming between.

In this large or principal Cavity are contained the three Ventricles, the
Fornix, the Septum Lucidum, Corpora Striata, Thalami Nervorum Opticorum, the
Roots of the Fornix, the Tractus Intermedius of the Corpora Striata, the
Tractus Medullaris Thalamis Nervorum Opticorum Interjectus, (which last has bin
already described) the Vulva, Anus, and Rima or Passage to the Glandula
Pituitaria by the Infundibulum, and Glandula Pinealis, (which also has already
been described) of all which briefly in their order.

The three Ventricles, FIG 5. AA
by cutting asunder the Fornix near to its Roots, and turning it backwards over
the Nates, The three Ventricles.
Testes, and Glandula Pinealis, appear to be but one, those on each side it
being called the Laterales, in which are the Corpora Striata Thalami Nervorum
Opticorum and Crura Medulla Oblongata, that Rima, so far as it is covered with
the Fornix and parts the Crura Medulla Oblongata, being the third.

From the extreme Limits of these two side Ventricles, Vieuss. T. 10 AA, etc.
from before to behind, Centrum Ovale.
does arise that medullary space called by Vieussenius, Centrum Ovale, in his
Opinion the great Dispensatory of Animal Spirits, the fore part whereof Willis
calls Limbus anterior corporis striati. Will. De An. B^ut. p 42. T. 8. F.


The Fornix is a medullary part arising from two Roots in the foremost part of
the Basis of the Brain, The Forix. FIG. 5. AA, bb.
lying betwixt and upon the uppermost parts of the Thalami Nervorum. Opticorum,
which Roots come out of the foremost part of the Geminum Centrum semicirculari,
so called by Vieussenius, like two large Nerves, and afterward join together,
constituting a broadish medullary Body, which after having first projected it
self for some space forwardly betwixt the Corpora Striata, and afterward run
the length of the third Ventricle, growing all the way broader and broader, and
toward its edges (by Vieussenius called Fimbrae) thinner; Vi^ussu Tab 6. D
and being reflected backward toward the hinder part of the lateral
Ventricles, like two Arms, commonly called Crura Fornicis, the beginnings
whereof on each side are by Aurantius called Hippocampi and Bombyces, Aura^.
Anal. O^. p. 45.
(from whence, I know, he had chiefly observed this part in Brutes, in which,
by virtue of the hinder part of the Fornix, in that place growing somewhat
thicker, and running over the hinder and upper parts of the Th. Nerv.
Opticorum, which are more prominent in them, as in Sheep, Calves, etc. than in
Men) it is made to appear on each side like the bending Crest of the Seahorse,
and is in color much like the Silkworm. certain minute Stria's, Malp. de
C^r^b. p. 5.
which Malpighius calls Fibrae, crossing them like Rings obliquely, contrary to
what the same Author's Account is of them, who says those Fibrae or Striae run
upon them otherwise, viz. as they do on the Septum Lucidum ( i. e.
longitudinally) and embracing the Th. Ner. Opt. on their upper part on both
sides, but adhering close to them as one continued Substance on their under
part, (in which place they are called, by Vieussenius, Vieus. p 61.
Posteriores very fornicis (viz. Corporis Callosi) Columnae) becomes there
continuous with the hinder part of the Corpus Callosum, where it winds down
upon the sides of the Crura Medulla Oblongata, Ibid.
and makes up that undermost space or cavity of the two side Ventricles, by the
said Aurantius called Ventriculi Hippocampi or Bombycini, and Vieussenius
called the hinder part of the Centrum Ovale, which by that kind of curved
passage loses something of its oval figure.

The Septum Lucidum.
The Septum Lucidum some of the Moderns think to arise from the Fornix, thence
ascending to the internal Superficies of the Corpus Callosum; others from this
last descending down to the Fornix, but most likely from this last, where
toward its foremost part I have always sound it double, (first taken notice of
by Sylvius de le Boe) and as Vieussenius truly says, Sylv. dele Boe Disp. Med.
p. 19. par. 1. These. 13.
often with Water in its duplicature.

It Is a very thin, medullary, transparent Body, intermediate to the Corpus
Callosum and subjacent Fornix, by means whereof the two lateral Ventricles are
in that place separated one from another.

The Corpora Striata, The Corpora Striata, FIG. 5. I 1, etc.
or Processus Lentiformes, are two Prominencies situated something higher than,
and in Men a great part of them on each side (though Dr. Willis says, where the
Corpora Striata ends the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum begins, which is only so in
Brutes) of the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum, or Juga Crurum Medullae Oblongatae,
and are so called from the many white Streaks appearing in them, descending
obliquely to the Medulla Oblongata, with Cineritious Substance coming betwixt
them when they are cut horizontally.

They run down on each side the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum as far as till the
Corpus Callosum begins to wind back upon the Crura Medulla Oblongata, toward
the hindermost part thereof.

I have got them delineated here exactly true, (though by neglect without the
Striae) finding all the Cuts of them in Willis to be from Brutes, except one,
which is done very ill, and those in Vieussenius very false, unless in Figure
the 8th, which also wants the Striae.

The Thalami Nervorum Opticorum.
The Thalami Nervorum Opticorum are two prominent Bodies, more purely medullary
on their outward Superficies than within, which meeting together like the two
topmost strokes of a Y inverted, constitute the uppermost part only of the
Crura Medulla Oblongata in that form, the other or undermost side being quite
of another figure; and seeing they are the immediate continued Productions of
the Medulla Globosa Cerebri, (which contrary to the old Opinion of Praxagoras
and Philotimus, asserting the Brain to be only a Germination of the Dorsal
Marrow, of late revived by Bartholine, Causab. ^n Athan. p. 137.
(if any precedence of Parts as to time may be allowed) I look upon to be
rather the original than the production of the Medulla Oblongata and Spinalis
too) and may more properly be called Capita than Crura of the Medulla Oblongata.

The Tops or Juga do, FIG. 5. cc.
as already observed, incline close, yea, join together, as Vieussenius has
rightly observed contrary to Willis, (whose Figures of that part are utterly
false) unless where the Rima ad Infundibulum parts them, leaving like the
Corpora Striata an obtuse angle between them.

Betwixt these two last mentioned Bodies there is a medullary space on each
side, which in a bending manner encompasses the Thalami themselves, and receive
the Extremities of the Striae in the Corpora Striata, as they descend from the
aforementioned Centrum Ovale, and is therefore by Vieussenius called Geminum
Centrum Semicirculare, Vieus. p. 67. par 2. Willis de An. Brut. p. 42. T. 8.
(...).
by Willis Limbi Posteriores Corporum Striatorum

The reason why they are called Thalami Nervorum Opticorum, is from certain
Fibers supposed to be in them, arising both from their true medullary
Superficies (by Vieussenius called a Medullary Membrane) and some from within
their own Substance, which at last, toward their foremost part meeting
together, make up the Bodies of the Optic Nerves.

Willis says nothing of these Fibers, though in his Opinion Galen did not
improperly give them that name. Vieussenius paints them very strong.

As for my part, I never could find any Fibers at all appearing in their
external medullary part, those within are very small at best, and scarce
discernable.

On the outside of these I have always found and often showed a very fair
medullary Tract, A Medulla^y Tract. Tab. 5. mm
here described, running all-along betwixt the Corpora Striata, etc from the
very hindermost extent of the Corpora Striata forwardly, down to the very Roots
of the Fornix, to which they seem to be continuous.

The Passage into the Infundibulum
Within this Cavity of the Brain are likewise two passages into the
Infundibulum, and so on to the Glandula Pituitaria, the foremost of which is
called by the odd Name of Vulva, The Vulva.
and the hindermost of Anus, The Anus.
from their situation, which with the Rima betwixt them, is called, as was
before noted, the third Ventricle.

The places whence all this Water issues are commonly by the latter Anatomists
described under the name of Tria Foramina, Tria Foramina.
situated so as to give passage from all the eminent Regions of the Brain, from
whence there can be access had to them for the Water (or rather the Lympha,
properly so called) to fall into the aforesaid Infundibulum, the first whereof
is behind the Testes, under the Valvula major, (hereafter to be described) the
other just under the Pineal Gland, or the beginning of the Rima, which two meet
in an Aperture, under the Nates and Testes, Vieus. p. 73. par. 3.
by Vieussenius called Aquae Emissarium, having a steep descent into the
Infundibulum; and the last at the end of the Rima, or just under the Roots of
the Fornix, and all ending at length (though by two different passages) in the
Infundibulum.

It may not be unseasonable in the next place to take notice of two remarkable
very fair Processes, The Nates and Testes Tab. 7. CC
called Nates and Testes, by former Anatomists so named from the resemblance
they had to those parts; but it is plain from thence they were only used to
dissect Brutes, in which they have such a proportion as is betwixt them;
whereas in Men it is plain they are very near of the same size, and not very
different in form, being oblong and accuminated toward their Extremities; but
in Sheep, Calves, and most other Creatures the Nates are round and large, and
the Testes oblong, somewhat accuminated, and very small.

Before these Natiform Processes, under the Glandula Pinealis, runs a
transverse Process before taken notice of Page 84, Vieussen. Tab. 8. f
by Vieussenius called Processus Natibus Antepositus, and Nervuli Aemulus,
which upon further enquiry, by drawing the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum still
wider, appears to be rather Nervi than Nervuli Aemulus, being as thick as that
behind the Roots of the Fornix, to which in situation it is just opposite, and
seems to join the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum together, as that does the Corpora
Striata.

In what rank to place them it is hard to say, as being neither proper
Appendices to either the Brain or Cerebellum, properly so called, and being
divided from the Medulla Oblongata in some measure by an Interstice commonly
called Ductus ad Infundibulum by the Moderns, but by the Ancients a Passage for
the Animal Spirits to the fourth or noble Ventricle.

They are situated upon that part of the Medulla Oblongata which is between the
Cerebrum and Cerebellum, The Isthmus.
which space was before called Isthmus, opposite to that part called from its
Author Pons Varolii, and by many Authors, as Bartholine, Spigelius, Highmore,
etc. thought to be the two hindermost Roots of the Spinalis Medulla, which much
more likely Riolanus makes the Processes of the Cerebellum to be, Visalius p.
766, 767. fig. 10. AA, I, K. and fig. 11. GG.
and with him the great Vesalius, who paints them so.

From this intermediate situation Dr. Willis thought sit to make them as it
were an Intelligence Office betwixt the Cerebrum and Cerebellum, how rightly, I
refer to the Judgment of others.

It Is certain they are medullary Bodies, and contribute to the making the
Animal Fluid or Spirits so called after the same manner as the rest of the
Brain does; for in cutting them through, (after having taken the reticular
expansion of Bloodvessels off from them, which is very large here, and
eminently conspicuous in injected Brains) I find them of the very same
substance with the Processus Annularis and the Thalami Nervorum optici, partly
cineritious, and partly medullary, and in fresh Brains somewhat, but very
faintly, striated.

I know not of any part within the Brain, properly so called, that is not
already described, except a certain Medullary Chord at the end of the third
Ventricle, and the Valvula ^^ajor.

Commislura Crassioris Nervi Ae nula of Vieussenius.
The first of these is a Medullary Process, Willis p. 43 col. 2. Vituss. p. 83.
which joins the Corpora Striata together, according to Dr. Willis, by
Vieussenius called Comissura Crassioris Nervi aemula; and according to him is
the Medium or Commissura by which his Geminum centrum semicirculare intervening
between the two Corpora striata, superiora anteriora and posteriora, and his
Tractus medullaris transversus and obliquus intervening between his two Corpora
striata inferiora anteriora and posteriora, have a communication with each
other.

Dr. Willis places this Chord or Commissure under the Roots of the Fornix, but
it is always behind it, Willis, p. 6. col. 1.
though contiguous to it.

The second is the Valvula major, The Val^^la major.
so called by Vieussenius, Vieus. p. 76. Willis, p. 49 col. 2. pat. 2
but plainly enough discovered by Dr. Willis long before, and its proper use
described.

It is a thick (especially in Men) medullary Membrane, adhering forwardly to
the inferior part of the Testiforme Process a little behind that transverse
medullary Process from whence the pathetick or fourth Pair of Nerves arise,
laterally to the Process ascending from the Nates to the Cerebellum, on its
hindermost Expansion, to the foremost Vermicular Process of the Cerebellum, and
no where that I know of to any part of the Pous Varolii, as Vieussenius will
have it, Vieussen. p. 76. Id. p. 73. par. 3.
(who seems to have mistaken another part for that Process) unless just where
the second Process of the Cerebellum comes out from thence, which jointly with
its fellow Process on the other side, when they meet together, after their
transverse descent on the backpart of the Medulla oblongata, do really make up
that part which by Willis is called (and that no doubt from Varolius)
Protuberantia Annularis, and by others, from its true Author, Pons Varolii.

By raising up the foremost abovementioned Vermicular Process of the
Cerebellum with the Finger, it rarely fails to come in sight; but if not so,
it is easily shown, by blowing into the Foramen situated under the Pineal Gland.

Its use, according to Vieussenius, Vieus. p. 110. par. 2.
is to hinder any part of that Water which falls into the hindermost Foramen
behind the Testes, from running into the fourth Ventricle, or Vice versa from
the fourth Ventricle into it, or from getting out on each side of the Medulla
oblongata, over the afore-mentioned Processes, so as to fall down upon the
Nerves arising thereabouts below from the Medulla oblongata: Which last use is
evidently most true, (whether it be understood of Water preternaturally or
accidentally collected there, for I must needs confess I could never find any
there, any more than I could in the third Ventricle in Subjects free from those
Diseases incident to that part, as has before already been remarked p. 82) but
as to that relating to the passage from the Cerebellum to the last or third
Foramen, I much doubt the Truth of it, for many Reasons, of which this is one,
viz.

That the Plexus Choroeides in the fourth Ventricle, together with the adjacent
Parts, being of the same Texture as the other are in and about the two lateral
ones of the Brain, renders it as reasonable to suppose that Water may be
collected there as in other parts of the Brain, (nay, that it is so, he himself
also allows as Matter of Fact) and consequently as necessary to have a place of
vent for the Water whenever it happens to gather there, as it was for that
which was at any time got into the other Ventricles. And consequently,

In the next place, I do not see how this tender Film can be able to intercept
a passage of so searching a body as Water at any time forced against it
(notwithstanding the supposed declivity of this Part, which in Man, by reason
of the largeness of the subjacent prominent annular Process, is very
inconsiderable) which by Pulsation must needs happen whenever we suppose that
Cavity filled with it.

And, in the last place, notwithstanding all the Contrivance the aforesaid
Author has shown in conveying the gross part of the Water (which, as was
before noted, he grants may be, nay, constantly is deposed there from the
Glands of the Plexus Choroeides here situate) by the Extremities of Veins, out
of this Ventricle, Vieus. p. 111
I am suspicious, if there was no spedier reductory passage found out, there
would frequently happen very great Mischiefs to the Medulla Spinalis it self,
and the Nerves springing from it, seeing the Extremity of that Ventricle called
the Calamus Scriptorius is there parted from the Spinal Marrow behind it, but
only by the Pia Matter, which notwithstanding it is there double, as it is also
quite down the whole Spine, lest perhaps the Water should fall down upon the
Nerves which arise from it too readily, yet upon such an occasion may be easily
supposed subject to violation. Not to say any thing of the high improbability
of any such Conveyance at all by the Veins, seeing that in a natural state they
are always, as has been already observed, continuations only of Arteries.

It Is true, this may binder the fall of Water into the fourth Ventricle, by
reason of a Passage under the Nates before mentioned, by Vienssenius called
Aquae Emissarium, so near at hand to receive it when it finds its further
passage that way obstructed by the interposition and resistance of this Valve.
And for the same reason doubtless it was, that in Vieussenius's Experiment
which he brings for a Proof of his Opinion, no Water was found in the sourth
Ventricle, Vieus. p 110 par. 2.
it having got a passage immediately, upon its non-admittance by that Valve, to
convey it another way, which by reason of the steepness thereof, is done much
more read^ly.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Cerebellum.
THE Cerebellum falls next in order to our consideration, in describing of
which I hope a great deal of pains may reasonably be spared, seeing all that
has been already spoken of the cortical or cineritious part of the Brain, as
also of its medullary part, is equally applicable to the Cerebellum. Nor is
what has been said already of the Plexus Choroeides in the Ventricles of the
one part less applicable to that Plexus in this.

The Plexus Choroeides of the Cerebellum.
This Plexus Choroeides in the fourth Ventricle begins to be glandulous just
under the Eighth Pair of Nerves, from whence it runs up on the side of the
Caudex Medullaris to the chordal or third Process of the Cerebellum, and from
it enters the fourth Ventricle, Aurant. Anatom. Obs. p. 48.
by Aurantius called Cisterna Spirituum, (which Ventricle, conformably to what
that Author has in the aforesaid place observed, I always find broader than
long, and double, though not divided by any intervening Body, as the two
lateral ones of the Brain are;) not lying loose therein, nor at the bottonn of
it, as the Plexus does in the Ventricles of the Brain, but quite contrariwise,
(and which has not heretofore, as I know of, been taken notice of) adhering
close to the top of this Ventricle, or the bottom of the superincumbent
Cerebellum, then running transverse just at the end of the Calamus Scriptorius,
there becomes continuous to the Plexus of the other side; as has been observed
of the Plexus in the lateral Ventricles of the Brain.

This Plexus arises from a ramification of the second or backwardest Branch of
the Cervical Artery, as one part of the other Plexus of the Brain mentioned in
that Chapter where the said Plexus is treated of, does) and another smaller
Branch of the said Artery about the place where it ascends from the Vertebrals,
which last Branch turns into a reticular Expansion first, FIG. 1. q
and then a little space further meeting with the other, constitutes this
Plexus.

This part differs from the Brain in its cortical structure, inasmuch as its
Interstices are here eliptical or pieces of imperfect Circles, growing shorter
toward those two Productions of the Cerebellum, before and behind, (which by
reason of certain annular depressions occasioned by Bloodvessels there
embracing them, seem as though they were wrinkled like Worms, and therefore
called Processus Vermiculares) as Parallels upon the Globe do toward each Pole.

The three Process of the Cerebellum.
It has three Processes, which joined together on each side, make up as it were
two fair Roots, according to the Ancients called the hinder Roots of the
Oblongata Medulla, by the Moderns Peduncles or Stalks, by which this part grows
to the Medulla Oblongata.

The first of these ascend from the Cerebellum to the Nates, FIG. 7. gg
the second from the Cerebellum to the Medulla Oblongata, FIG 6. BB.
which meeting together on the under side thereof, as was before noted, make up
that large Protuberance by Willis called Processus Annularis, Var. Anat. p. 26.
by others from the first Author Pons Varolii.

This I sind full of Stria's or medullary Tracts, F 10.6. cc
much stronger and larger than those of the Corpora Striata, running transverse
on each side the length of the whole Process, and terminating in a medullary
long Tract, dividing that Process into two equal parts, as you see in the
Figure, Ib. cc
the use whereof, as having never been before observed will be hereafter taken
notice of.

The third descends from this part backwards, Ib. ss FIG. 7. hh
upon the upper side of the Medulla Oblongata, like two longish thick Chords on
each side, making the Medulla look somewhat thicker and broader in that place,
and not unfitly styled the Chordal Process.

These Stalks, when they join together at the other end, make up the
Meditallitum or Corpus Callosuas of the Cerebellum.

The transverse Process of the fourth Ventricle.
There are two or three fair medullary Processes close to, and sometimes riding
one over another, a little on this side the fourth Ventricle, or about the
beginning of the Calamus Scriptorius, which join the two cesses together that
descend from the Cerebellum to the Medulla Oblongata; and there are two more
deseending length-way from that other transverse Process behind the Testes,
down to these.

^^w Processes on the inside of the ^^edulla O^^ongata.
These long medullary Processes I never find wanting, though in different
numbers, sometimes having seen three, sometimes two, and once I oould find but
one, (though larger than ordinary) and constantly, in what number soever,
ending in the transverse Processes at the afore-mentioned beginning of the
fourth Ventricle.

These long descending Processes are just over against the Corpora Pyramidalia,
on the other or under side of the Medulla Oblongata, and the transverse
Processes at the beginning of the fourth Ventricle last mentioned, are a little
above the original of the Eighth Pair of Nerves, insomuch that without being
very circumspect one may mistake them for the original of that Nerve, whereas
in reality I find them to be the original of the soft or hinder most Branch of
the Seventh, as will be more particularly taken notice of hereafter, in the
description of those Nerves; and therefore cannot but wonder how Dr. Willis
(who speaks in one place as though he had seen them) came to assign them for
the Root of the ninth Pair, Willls Cirib. Anat. p. 12. col. 2. per. 3.
beneath which and this Process I have always observed the space of half an
inch.

CHAP. XV. Of the Medulla Oblongata.
THE third part of the Brain, in its general acceptance, according to the
foregoing method, is called the Medulla Oblongata, all whose parts on its
foreside having already been spoken of, it remains in the next place that we
take notice of it on its other side, where are most considerable its Crura,
Crura Medulla Oblongata.
so called, which Crura are only the under part of the Thalami Nervorum
Opticorum before described, which in their Extremities becoming continuous to
the under side of the medullary hinder part of the Brain, occasioned the
Ancients to think the Medulla Oblongata had its foremost Roots immediately from
the Brain there, as it had its hindermost from the Processes of the Cerebellum;
but upon a more diligent enquiry it appears, that these Crura are more deeply
immerged in and knit to the Medulla Globosa of the Brain forwardly, by virtue
of the Corpora Striata, as also by the very medullary part of the Brain it
self, which there, from the back or undermost winding part of the Corpus
Callosum is perfectly mingled with it.

Where these two Crura begin to come close together, the Protuberantia
Annularis, FIG 6. BB
or Pons Varolii, made up of the second Process of the Cerebellum
aforementioned, begins to cover the Medulla Oblongata for about the space of an
inch and an half, after which this Medulla Oblongata in one large Trunk is
continued to the first Vertebra of the Spine, and so quite down to the end
thereof.

Whilst the Brain is in this position it may not be unseasonable to take notice
of two fair white Bodies on this side of the Infundibulum, The two white Bodies
behind the Insundibulum. FIG. 1. bb
in that depressed part of the Brain, where the Pia Matter (as has before been
taken notice of) is so remarkably double.

There are also two white long medullary Processes called Corpora Pyramidalia
both by Willis and Vieussenius, The Corpora Pyramidalia. FIG. 1. n.
which arise just at the ending of the Annular Process running down upon the
Med. Oblongata the space of an inch, ending a good space below the place where
the Eighth Pair of Nerves begin, which have their original between the Corpora
Olivaria and the Chordal Processes partly on the other side thereof, contrary
to the account we have of them by Dr. Willis, Willis, p. 13. col. 1. par. 1 p.
61. col. 2. par. 3.
who describes them as ending in pointed Extremities, just where those Nerves
have their original.

On each side of these appear plainly the Corpora Olivaria, The Corpara
Olivaria. I^^d. o.
so called from their Figure, as the former were by Vieussenius, which with the
Corpora Pyramidalia and two white Bodies behind the Infundibulum, he calls
Conceptacula Spirituum Animalium, or places containing Animal Spirits upon
several occasions of use to the Brain, both in its natural and intellectual
Faculties.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Nerves.
IN the same position of the Brain we also have a sit time of taking a view of
the Nerves, which are still medullary Productions of the Brain dispersed to all
the parts of the Body, which have need of either Sense or Motion, and these are
in number ten Pairs or Conjugations, having their Names and Originals as
follows.

The first is the Olfactory Pair, which after they leave the former Lobes of
the Brain, and begin to run to the Bone called Ethmoides, take the name of
Processus Mammillares; but this is chiefly in Brutes, where through their
largeness they have that appearance, and are manifestly hollow.

By the utmost Scrutiny I have been able to make, they have but one Original,
and that is from the undermost and foremost part of the Crura Medulla
Oblongata, where they advance on each side into the Globous medullary part of
the Brain, from whence running concealed betwixt its foremost and hinder Lobes
obliquely, for a good space, at last they come in sight, as you see them in the
Figure: And by what means Vieussenius comes to find such diffused Originals for
them as he speaks of, I know not.

Their Use is known to most, and a particular account thereof, as of the rest,
together with the manner of Sensation, with relation to the external Organs of
Sense, is much more fit for a Physiological Tract than one of this kind.

I shall therefore only at this time give a general description of the Nerves
belonging to the Brain, how and where they arise, the difference or variety
whereof serve very well to inform us, according to several late Theories,
concerning the different Reservatories of the Animal Fluid or Spirits, and the
different dispensation of the same to several parts of the Body.

The second Pair are called the Optic or Seeing Nerves, The Second Pair. Ibid.
2 2.
of which I sind no more Originals than of the former, and that is from those
medullary parts called Thalami Nervorum Opticorum, though Vieussenius says they
are from several parts; and Willis in general terms from the aforesaid Thalami
Nervorum Opticorum, behind the Corpora Striata: which description is more exact
in Quadrupeds, where the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum are altogether in situation
behind the Corpora Striata, than in Men, where a great part of the Corpora
Striata are situated on the outsides of the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum, and
only their Heads or Extremities before them.

The Blood vessels mentioned both by Willis and Vieussenius belonging to these
Nerves, I have seen to run not only upon or with them, but also in injected
Bodies exactly quite through the medullary substance of them, into the reticular
Coat of the Eye, wherein they end in an infinite number of the most capillary
Ramifications, which by an injection of that Artery made with Mercury, become
very delightfully conspicuous to the Eye.

The Nervous Fibers also, from the fifth and third Pair of Nerves, do twine
about the Bodies of these Nerves, as the two abovementioned Authors do truly
affirm, but how rightly they both assign to them the office of dilating and
contracting them subserviently to the visory faculty, and preternaturally in
Convulsions of the Eye, as though these Fibers were truly Muscles, or of the
carnous kind, I refer to the Judgment of others.

These go out of the Skull at its first Foramen.

The third Pair arise out of the forward and upper part of the Annular Process,
where it is contiguous to, and covered with the under part of the Thalami
Nervorum Opticorum, coming out into sight from between them, just where that
Process terminates forwardly, which is where the Crura Medulla Oblongata come
together into one body, constituting the Caudex Medulloe Oblongatoe.

These running through a duplicature of the Dura Matter, on the outside of the
Circular Sinus, go out of the second hole of the Skull to the Eyes, and are
therefore called Par Oculorum Motorium, to the voluntary motion of which only
they are granted to be subservient, which, seeing they have their original from
the Cerebellum, afford us no weak Argument against the Hypothesis of Dr.
Willis, who has reserved that part in Nerves subservient to involuntary
motions only.

The fourth Pair is very small, The Fourth Pair. Ibid 4 4.
coming from the transverse Process on the foreside of the Medulla Oblongata
behind the Testes, first coming in sight between the undermost part of the
hinder Lobe of the Brain and the Cerebellum laterally, crossing that part where
the Annular Process ends toward the Crura Medulla Oblongata, from whence they
pass into a duplicature of the Dura Matter, and afterward, a little more
outwardly than the former, goes through the same second hole to the Trochlear
Muscle of the Eye, and are called from their moving of that according to the
passions of the Mind; the Pathetick Pair.

The fifth Pair is broad and large, The Fifth Pair. ^ld. 5 5.
made up of many thick Fibers continuous to each other, some softer than
others, arising from the uppermost part of the Processus Annularis, which is
backward laterally, where it is broadest, by reason of the second Process of the
Cerebellum there entering it.

This Nerve, The several ^^^ches of the fifth Pair.
after having first climbed over the inner Process of the Os Petrosum into a
kind of a Cavity made of a duplicature of the Dura Matter in that place,
immediately swells into a kind of a thickness, called a Ganglion, Pro. 3. B
from whence several Branches are propagated, lying betwixt the Dura Matter and
the Cranium, on each side the Sella Turcica, without any Fovea or Cavity at
all, going out of the Skull at three several place, Pro. 3. C, D, E
its superior small Branch at the second hole with the third and fourth Pair
of Nerves, its inferior smaller Branch at the third hole, and its posteriour
or largest Branch at the fifth.

From the inside of the foremost Branch two little ones turn back, FIG. 2. y.
and meeting with another small Branch a little lower turned back also from the
sixth Pair, where that Nerve is fastened to the outmost or borrowed Coat of the
Carotid Artery, make up a small Trunk of a reddish or fleshy color, like to
that which it is of when passed out of the Cranium, (as Veslingius has truly
observed, The Interco^tal Pair. X. Z Z.
who calls it The Internal Branch of the Sixth pair) which descending
obliquely, and creeping under that Artery, betwixt its external, proper, and
borrowed Coat, goes out with the Carotid Artery at the fourth hole of the
Skull, which is in a manner double between the Os Petrosum and Cuneiforme, and
from its passage through the Thorax, near the Roots of the Ribs, (all-along
which, it receives a Branch from the Intercost^l Nerves) is called, The
Intercostal Pair.

The sixth are about the bigness of the third, The sixth Pair. FIG. 1st. 6 6.
arising from the hinder part of the Annular Frocess over against, and not far
off from the beginning or head of the Corpora Pyramidalia. It sends out
sometimes one (in this Subject very short) sometimes two slips, as was before
said, for the making up the Trunk of the Intercostal Nerve, and after that
(with the foremost Branch of the fifth Pair, in one and the same duplicature of
the Dura Matter, together with the preceding third and fourth Pair of Nerves)
goes out at the second hole of the Skull, and terminates in the abductory
Muscles of the Eye.

The seventh Pair, The seventh Pair. Pro. 1st, 7 7.
or Hearing Nerve is large, and comes out almost just over against the original
of the fifth Pair, on the lower or under side of the second Process of the
Cerebellum, where it first appears coming out from the Cerebellum to make the
aforesaid Protuberantia Annularis between the Corpus Olivare and that
Protuberance, as though it crept out betwixt them, and had (as it really has)
a move remote extraction.

It consists of two distinct Processes, the first of which is more round, hard,
and less than the second, that being for Motion, this for Sense, but though they
seem as though they had the same original, being seemingly continuous at their
rise from the Brain, Willis, p. 12 col. 2. part 3 and p. 56. col. 1. par. ^.
(which Dr. Willis affirms they have, though sometimes he makes it in one place,
and sometimes in another) yet upon a further enquiry it does appear otherwise,
the first or hardest having its original from the Caudex Medullaris, not far
from the place where it comes first in view; the second very remote from the
transverse Process or Processes in the passage to the fourth Ventricle before
described, FIG. 7. ii
(which in another place the same Author seems plainly to have observed,
Willis, p. 78. col. 1. par. 2
taking it for the Original of the other Process of this Nerve;) from whence it
ascends all-along on the sides of the Medulla Oblongata till it arrives at the
afore-mentioned place, where it first, together with the other Branch, leaves
the Medulla, to pass out of it at the seventh hole in the Bone called Petrosum.

The eighth, The eighth Pair. FIG. 1st 8 8
or Par Vagum, arises a very little beneath the seventh, but yet not from any
part of the Annular Protuberance, but exactly in that somewhat hollow place
betwixt the Corpus Olivare and third or Chordal Process, having numerous (I
have counted ten or twelve) Fibers, but all continuous at their first rise, for
its original.

This in a multitude of Ramifications is spent upon the Bowels, and goes out at
the eighth hole with the Spinal Accessory Nerve, where the great lateral and
the inferior little Sinus's in the Basis of the Skull go out into the Internal
Jugular.

To this eighth Pair about half an inch from its first rise, whilst it climbs
upon or sticks to the Pia Matter upon the Basis of the Cerebellum, ascends a
Nerve called Spinalis Accessorius by Willis, I^id * *
but long before him taken notice of, nay, painted and described, by Vidus
Vidius, Vidus Vidius, p. 93. T. 18. Fig. 2. *
the original whereof I find to be as far as the seventh Vertebral Pair, from
the foremost and hindermost beginnings of that Nerve, notwithstanding
Vieussenius confines its original to the fourth Pair of that part only.

This Nerve runs under the Vertebral Artery near half an inch on the side of
the Medulla Oblongata, at length, about half an inch from the beginning of the
eighth Pair, leaves the aforesaid Medulla Oblongata, running obliquely upon the
Pia Matter of the Cerebellum, to join with the aforesaid Pair, which it really
does in that very place, though it part with it afterward again.

The ninth has several (in one Body I counted seven or eight) pretty large
Fibers for its original, The ninth Pair. Ibid. 9 9.
very distant one from another, the first of them coming higher, from the very
top of the Corp. Olivare; the next, and several others, are much less, a
quarter of an inch lower; and the last much lower yet, about the ending of the
Corpus Olivare, or beginning of the tenth Pair, with several others between the
Pia Matter and subjacent Medulla Oblongata; but after all, its Trunk is very
little, about the bigness of the Accessory Pair.

Through the Fibers of this Nerve there runs commonly a small but very visible
Branch of the Vertebral Artery, at its original; as you see in the Figure
expressed by the Letter k on the right side, P^o. 1. k.
going out at the ninth hole, together with this Nerve and the Vertebral Vein,
Vieus. p. 163
which Vein Vieussenius mistakenly makes to go out at a tenth hole, forasmuch
as that is never found in Nature, neither need be, seeing the tenth Pair goes
out at the last or great Foramen, by which the Medulla Oblongata passes into
the Spine.

The tenth Pair, The tenth Pair. I^id. 10 10
(which had it a double Original from each side of the Spinal Marrow, (as all
the rest of the Spinal Nerves have) might much more properly be called the
first Vertebral, inasmuch as that both a great part of its rise and egress is
quite out of the bounds of the Cranium) serving chiefly the Muscles of the
Neck, it begins with three, and sometimes more, small Fibers lower a great
deal, out of the Medulla Oblongata, almost an inch below the Trunk of the ninth
Pair, and is about the size thereof.

It goes out of the Cranium betwixt the first and second Vertebra of the Neck,
making its passage through the Dura Matter from the Medulla Oblongata, about
half an inch below the place where the said Artery comes in.

The Structure of these Nerves is consistent of many Fibrilla's or Stria's, a
certain number whereof being first enclosed in a production of that delicate
inward Lamina of the Pia Matter before described and spoken of, makes up a
Fasciculus or Bundle, and many of these colletively the Body of a Nerve.

In these Fibrilla's or Stria's (betubulous and always turgid, as in so many
Rivulets springing from the main Fountain the Brain, and from thence
distributed to every respective part of the Body) is contained the Animal
Fluid, by means whereof there is maintained a constant intercourse betwixt it
and the Soul, and reciprocal acts of Friendship betwixt one part and another.

This Animal Fluid I look upon only as a Body consisting of very minute and
flexile Particles, contained in such a space as allows them a capacity of being
agitated on all sides by virtue of the subtle matter, or Ethereal Globuli
they swim in, by which means they are rendered capable of pervading the
narrowest Channels of the whole Machine, provided its Orifice or Pore be adapt
thereto, in contradistinction to those other sort of grosser Particles of
Matter, which by reason of the narrowness and figure of the space they are to
enter, do approximate so close, as to become contiguous in all their
Superficies, whereby they become deprived of their former expansive agitation,
which is always necessary to make a Body fluid, and like so many small
Filaments orderly disposed, do constitute the Enclosures or Coats of those
Vessels the Fluids are contained in.

This Animal Fluid I conceive to be in a continual state of Transpiration,
proportionable to the measure of its leisurely production, seeing no more
necessity of ascribing any further Uses to it, besides those afore-mentioned,
than I do to the watery Humor of the Eye, besides its service to Vision, which
is always in a state of fresh production, as by the Excellent Nuck's Experiment
is plainly manifest; Nuck de Saliv. and Duc. Aqu. Oculor. p. 109.
and yet, by virtue of Transpiration, some way or other, though to us not
visible, without any inconveniency to that noble Organ.

CHAP. XVII. Of Sensation and Motion in general.
THE Nerves thus constituted, become accommodated for Use in relation to their
several and distinct Functions, in some consisting of Sense only, such as are
those appertaining to the particular Sensories, (viz.) the Smelling and Seeing
Nerves, as also the soft Process of the Hearing Nerve, some Branches of the
fifth, and it may be of the ninth Pair, for Tasting; in short, all the Nerves
belonging to those external Sensories, by way of eminency, and in a less
eminent or general way all the Nerves of the whole Body, which are distributed
to such Parts as by reason of their structure are capable of Sensation only,
any of which, as furnished with the Nervous Fibrils, but more eminently the
Cuticula, my properly be called an Organ or Sensory of Feeling; in others of
Motion chiefly, such as are all the whole System of Nerves, (excepting them
only afore-mentioned) ses, which though in a less eminent manner, are
nevertheless sensitive Nerves also: In others of both, in all respects (viz.)
either in a more eminent or less eminent Sensation, and Motion too, with
relation to the different Fibers they consist of in their Originals, as the
fifth and ninth Pairs.

These two different Functions of Sensation and Motion are executed after two
as different manners.

The first of which, being occasioned from external Objects, is discharged by a
pressure thereof made on the Instrument of Sense, so that the Motion is
backward irom one Extreme of the Organ to the other, where it terminates in the
Commune Sensorium, commonly so called, and is therefore styled Perception,
Passion, or Affection.

The other is discharged by some manner of impulse upon the Organ from within
outwardly, with a tendency either to acquire some Good, or avoid some Evil; by
which Impulse, when carried on so far, either in a natural or moral sense, as
to terminate in, or to be executed upon its proper Object; the Object then may
be said to suffer as before in the other case it might be said to act, and the
perceptive Faculty now to act as before it might be said to suffer, and this
Action is commonly called Local Motion.

For whose sake, seeing it is of different kinds, learned Men have thought sit
to organize or divide the Brain into two distinct Provinces invested with
several Rights and Jurisdictions abating the Power of the Sensitive Soul, which
before was looked upon universal over the whole Brain, allowing it only a
principal, but no absolute Empire there: And this they have done upon no weak
or unreasonable grounds, seeing that Local Motion is not only in many respects
performed without its assistance, but even against its power of resistance; as
in the Pulsation of the Heart, vermicular Motion of the Bowels, and in a great
measure the Act of Respiration.

Now, that which has been taken from the Brain has been conferred on the
Cerebellum, to which, though some Power in this Affair may justly be allowed,
as was before observed, yet possibly not altogether so much as there has been.

Dr. Willis, who is Chief in this Cause, having distinguished Motion into
voluntary and involuntary only, has made the Cerebrum accountable for the one,
and the Cerebellum chiefly for the other; and to that end has furnished it
with the like number of Nerves, as in his own words is expressed, Willis c. 1^.
Vt divisum cum ipso (i. e.) Cerebro, imperium Cerebellum habeat; nay,
considering the Intercostal Pair, derived from the fifth and sixth Pair, which
belong to the Cerebellum, he has made it exceed.

I am apt to think that Learned Person too soon fell in love with his first
Thoughts, the ordinary reason of either ones seeing false, or not far enough.

Nothing being more apparent, than that most of those Actions of Animal Motions
he calls Involuntary, and of which he gives so many Instances, are equally
found in Brutes and rational Creatures too, whilst in the state of Infancy, as
well as when grown up with this only difference, that all of them in the last
are under the controuling power of the Soul, and consequently may be suspended
upon a reflex'd Act of the Understanding; whereas in Brutes and Infants they
are necessary, and do as naturally ensue upon the impulse of the Object, as
Water, when unconfined, runs toward a Plain.

Now, if all these were supposed to be under the power of the Cerebellum only
in Brutes and Infants, the Brain it self must necessarily be thought altogether
useless in them.

It will be necessary therefore to take notice, that there are two sorts of
Animal Motion in Brutes, as in Rational Creatures, the one purely natural, such
as is Pulsation of the Heart, and various contraction of the Viscera,
proceeding from a certain portion of the Animal Fluid continually dispensed to
the Nerves in an equal proportion, and so may be said to have their cause
originally co-existent with the Creature, and always present: And this kind we
find by a most convincing Experiment hereafter to be mentioned, to be from the
Cerebellum, and absolutely free from the dominion of the Brain, in its ordinary
way of acting or influx.

The other is that of Instinct, relating to the Sensative Soul, or an aptitude
of the Nervous Structure, to act according to the Impressions made upon the
Nerves, either from within, or from without, and so may be said to depend on
the presence of such Causes as are supervenient and extraneous to Nature,
suitable to the impressions whereof the Animal either pursues or avoids the
Object, obeys, or resists the Impulse.

Now, I take it for granted, that no body will deny but that the Nerves (by
virtue whereof these last actions of Instinct are performed) whether they ^r^se
from the Cerebrum of Cerebellum, are equally under the command of the Soul; or
else, as I said before, the Brain in those Creatures is to no purpose.

And of this sort I reckon all those actions in rational creatures of Instinct
before they have attained to the use of their Understanding, from any sort of
Impressions, or inadvertent and inconsulted, when he has the controuling power
of Reason allowed him and makes no use of it, such as are called Habitual,
which at first were produced by command of the Rational Part only, but through
frequent repetitions at last, without any command from that, out of a blind
obedience to a bare impulse from the Object; or lastly, such as happen when he
has altogether lost the use of it, as in Sleep or Distraction; in which last
Cases 'twill be very difficult to distinguish him from a mere Machine or
Automaton.

Now, from what has been said, I cannot but think it plain, that many of the
Actions before spoken of in Dr. Willis's sense, by him called Involuntary, as
proceeding from the dominion of the Cerebellum only, such as he calls the
various Configuration of the Face, from some Impulse or Provocations in the
Viscera or elsewhere, erecting the Ears, turning the Neck and Eyes about,
sudden Shrieks and Outcries upon some extraordinary frightful Object
surprizingly affecting one Sense or another, furnished with either such Nerves
as he supposes to be altogether under the command of the Cerebellum, as the
fifth and seventh, or else to have a very near correspondence with that part by
virtue of Vicinity, as the ninth, do more truly proceed from that perceptive
faculty, or (to use his own words) that part of the Soul, he has confined to
that part of the Medullary System called the Cerebrum. inasmuch as in
reasonable Creatures they may and commonly are suspended, as well as the Nerves
they slow from, sometimes made use of as Instruments of Voluntary Motion by it
also; and to think the contrary, is as much as to say, that when any body
happens to express any of the aforementioned involuntary Acts, or but hit his
Bedfellow a box of the Ear, whilst asleep, all these must be allowed to proceed
only from the Organ of Involuntary Motions called the Cerebellum.

And of this kind also in a great measure I reckon Respiration, concerning
which I cannot easily be brought to think it satisfactorily explained by Dr.
Willis, from the Energy of those Animal Spirits which flow only from the
Cerebellum in the Par Vagum, after the same manner they do to the Heart by the
Intercostal and that Pair for its pulsation, and as only under the command of
the Soul, to be stopped now and then, as it pleases, by virtue of some Nerves
communicated to the Intercostal Muscles and Diaphragm, the chief Instruments of
breathing, from the Spina Dorsi.

I am therefore rather inclined to think this Motion is of the other different
kind before spoken of, under the Title of Instinct, proceeding from an
extraneous supervenient Cause, acting conformably to the course of Nature in
oother Cases of the same kind, as in Hunger and Thirst, and the like, where the
obtaining the designed End or Effect renders the part from whence comes the
Motion for some time insensible of the impression, and where, after the*
ceasing of the Effect or Motion, the sense of the impression revives again,
whence there happens an equal reciprocation between the Sense and Fruition, or
Sense and Motion.

To apply this account of the manner and reason of the Spirits acting upon the
Stomach and Par^^te in relation to Hunger and Thirst, to that of the Systole
and Diastole of the Lungs or Respiration, 'twill be needful to take notice,
that in an Infant unborn there is no Respiration, but yet there is a
Cerebellum; and that if this sort of Motion called Instinct, which I make to
differ from purely Natural Motions, such as are contemporary with even the
first living Rudiments of the Individual, was altogether and solely owing to
the Cerebellum, after the manner of that of the Heart; then of necessity the
Child in the Womb ought to respire. But being satisfied of the contrary, it
remains that we account for its respiration another way, which is as before
noted, through the presence or absence of the first moving Cause or Impulse,
which I make or suppose to be any thing impressing the Nerves, propagated
through the Organs of Breathing, so as to transmit the impression from within
to the perceptive Faculty, presiding both over the Cerebrum and Cerebellum too,
to the end the Spirits may from thence forthwith be commanded into such other
Nerves as act those Muscles which serve for enlarging the whole Cavity of the
Thorax, in order to let the Air into the Lungs more plentifully, which was the
thing aimed at by Nature; and these are the Intercostal Muscles and Diaphragm.

Now it is easy to conceive, that whilst the Child is enclosed in its Mothers
Belly, there is not that occasion for Respiration as when it is born, the main
Stream of Blood all that while finding no passage through them, and that which
does by the Ruyshian Artery made of Juices much more mild and cooler, the
native heat being little, and the Aliment mere Chyle or Milk; from whence it
falls out that the Pulmoni^k Nerves go altogether unprovoked, which after birth
are continually otherwise impressed or provoked by the hot Effluviums of Blood,
new bred of stronger Food, and by a stronger native heat, and wholly flowing
through them; which heat continually, as the Child acquires a greater maturity,
increasing, may, for ought I know, not a little contribute, by way of natural
impulse, to its exclusion.

The truth of this will the more clearly appear to any who will take the pains
to consider well of the structure of Parts in Children unborn, in whom the
usual circuit of Blood through the Lungs, which are designed for rarifying and
perfecting the mixture of Blood and Chyle, is denied; as also through the
Liver, serving chiefly for separating that gross Excrement the Gall, not bred
(at least in any proportion) in an Infant unborn, and in lieu of these, other
Passages, (which become altogether unnecessary after birth) provided by Nature
after a shorter and more compendious way, (viz) by the Foramen Ovale betwixt
the Vena Cava and Vena Pulmon. and Tubulus Arteriosus between the Art. Pulm.
and Aorta in the Lungs, and the Tubulus Venosus between the Sinus of the Porta
and the Cava in the Liver; as has been most sagaciously observed by the late
Learned Dr. Walter Needham.

It Is true, That in several Creatures there are some Nerves very much depending
on the Cerebellum, as are they which minister (though in a different manner, as
has already been taken notice of, and will be hereafter further explained) to
the Natural and Vital Functions, (viz.) the Par Vagum and Intercostal Pairs,
and therefore the aforesaid Author, who is in this as in many other of his
Discoveries very fortunate, and highly commendable, made a very good guess when
he brought these Faculties into subjection to that part, inasmuch as by several
others, as well as by my own Experience upon living Bodies, we find, that
notwithstanding most part of the Brain be pared off with a Razor, yea, even
after the Medulla Oblongata be divided betwixt the Cerebum and Cerebellum, and
taken wholly out of the Cranium, the Heart will beat, when at the same time if
the Cerebellum it self be but cut in pieces, though all the rest of the Brain
be kept entire, the Creature expires presently.

Yea, I have seen Respiration (which only in part depends on the Cerebellum)
totally to cease upon only a sudden violent compression of that part by a blow,
and, after its being wounded, the Heart to cease beating immediately.

All which must of natural consequence fall out upon the Hypothesis, That those
Functions of Nature do depend on the Cerebellum for their source and influence,
which is constant, uninterrupted, and out of the arbitrary jurisdiction of the
Brain; yet with this difference, that in Motions purely natural, and either
contemporary with the Embrio, as the first signs of its vitality, such as is
Pulsation of the Heart, during its enclosure within the Mother, or supervenient
upon its further growth and more visible organisation of Parts, as the natural
contraction of the other Viscera subservient to the offices of Protrusion of
the Chyle, separation of the Glandular Juices, and proscription of the
Excrements, the Animal Fluid or Spirits do altogether flow from the Cerebellum,
the Nerves there both descending from the Cerebellum, and terminating in those
parts aforementioned; whereas in Respiration, which I call a Motion of
Supervenient Instinct, (if I may be allowed to use the word Instinct in that
sense) the Nerves descending from the Cerebellum, and propagated through the
Lungs from the Par Vagum, serve only to convey the first Impulse or Impression
of the Object to those parts which are by Nature framed and qualified to
produce Respiratory Motion, and those are the Nerves of the Spinal Marrow,
receiving the impression from the Cerebellum, seeing that by the aforesaid
Experiment it appears plain, that after the whole Cerebrum was divided from the
Cerebellum and Medulla Oblongata, the act of Respiration continued for a
considerable time entrire, which Motion is dependent on the Sensative Faculty
presiding in the Cerebellum, transmitting the first Impulse produced by the
eighth Pair or ParVagum (as before observed) and communicated thence to those
Spinal Nerves which act the Intercostal Muscles and Diaphragm.

So that all the office of the Par Vagum, which is propagated through the Lungs,
is to convey the Impression from thence to the Cerebellum, which by virtue of
its connection with the Caudex Medullaris (from whence the Ancients rightly
thought that part had its hindermost Roots from the Cerebellum, as before taken
notice of) it is able to transmit it further, as the Sensative Faculty
presiding there shall direct, and that too by the common way, the Medulla
Oblongata and Spinal Nerves.

And further; That this part is as capable thereof as the Cerebrum, and is not
wholly and only deputed for the service of such Nerves or Organs as are
employed by the involuntary part or portion of the Soul, (as Dr. Willis would
have it) appears in that the third Pair of Nerves, by him allowed to be amongst
the number of the other kind of Nerves, (viz.) those commanded by the Will,
from hence (as has been already shown) has its original. And here also
furthermore give me leave to add, by way of conjecture, that the reason why the
Soul has not an equal command over those before mentioned Nerves dedicated to
the vital and natural Motions, is, the early date or commencement of the office
of those Nerves, by which means they contract an habitual irresistible Influx,
much less so in those belonging to the Respiratory Functions, the exercise
whereof is of a later date; and lastly, the Influx is not in the least so
habitual in those other subservient to the Organical Functions of the Limbs,
inasmuch as they are not capable of being exercised till a much longer time
after, and then not so uninterruptedly as either the first or the second, but
gradually, and with intermissions.

So that the only reason why upon cutting the Cerebellum Respiration ceases,
is, that by that means its structure is discomposed, and rendered unfit either
to receive or transmit the impression further to the aforesaid Nerves, which
are subservient to the Instruments of Respiration.

It Is true, there arc reciprocal communications betwixt the Nerves of the
Intercostal Pair, Vertebrae, and Diaphragm, yet seeing they terminate nor
immediately in the Parts of each others particular distinct jurisdictions,
there is no interchangeable act or office from thence produced betwixt them.

For as, notwithstanding* there are so many Branches of Nerves communicated
from the Spinal Nerves subservient to voluntary motion, to the Intercostal
Pair, on their descent to the Viscera, and yet by reason of their not
terminating in those parts, they are not in the least able to bring these
Nerves under the commands of the Rational Soul, by which provident Care of
Nature it so falls out, that it is not in the power of any, by misguided Reason,
to act injuriously to themselves: So by virtue of several Branches reciprocally
communicated from the Intercostal Pair in its passage down to the Viscera, to
the Spinal Nerves, there is no power given to them of moving the Muscles to
which they are subservient uninterruptedly, after the mere manner of the
Viscera.

But now, to return to where we left off, in some Creatures it is very plain,
that Nature has extended this imperial residence of the Soul beyond the
Cerebellum, even as far as the Spinalis Medulla, having not only put this last
motion, but that of Pulsation too, under the jurisdiction of that elongation of
the Brain; as appears in the famous Experiment of the Industrious Caldesi upon
the Tortoise, which after the Head was cut off lived, and carried its Shell
about, the space of six Months.

Besides which, it is remarkable, (by way of digression) according to another
Experiment by the aforesaid Author made upon that Creature, that after even the
Heart and all the Viscera besides, were taken out, except the Lungs, that
Creature (to use his own Expression) was sound so to resist Death, as to turn
it self from the inverted or supine position it had been placed in, in order to
make the Experiment, to its prone or natural one, and to live and move six
hours, after. From whence it appears, that Muscular Motion is capable of being
performed by the Animal Fluid alone, without the concurrence of the Blood, by
most Authors constantly hitherto made to go a share therewith in the
performance of that action. Caldesi, p. 75, 76.


So that we find Nature has not stinted it self to one place for the Seat of
the Sensative Soul, or Reservatories of the Animal Spirits so called, in order
to the discharge of the afore-mentioned Functions, no more than it is at a loss
about the maintaining them in their Integrity by other ways, when it has so
fallen out that the natural structure of the Organs, destined by Nature to that
end, have utterly been destroyed, of which we have many Instances in the
Anatomical History, those Functions in several Creatures remaining perfect,
where after death there have been sound neither any Cerebrum or Cerebellum at
all, or at least such as by their constitution was utterly rendered useless to
any such end.

Of the first is an Instance of the Learned Wepfer, in a Child living sixteen
hours alter it was born, and discharging all the Duties of Nature that one of
its age was capable of, and by tho by (which all the patrons of a nutritious
Juice by the Nerves may do well to take notice of) of a very strong and good
habit of Body, Misc C^ries. Av. 3 p. 120
whose Brain, after death, was found to be only an heap of Watery Bladders or
Hydatides, except a small part at the bottom of the Skull, lying in a Sinus
made in the Wedglike Bone, where the Pituitary Gland is commonly found
consisting only of three Medullary Bodies, two of which being each of the
bigness of a Kidney Bean, and the third behind them of a Pea only, from which
indeed there did proceed some, but very inconsiderable Nerves, or Nervous
Fibrils, but such as none can judge of a due proportion requisite to satisfy
the Exigencies of the common natural, and vital Functions.

The truth of which is still more plain, and without exception, in another
Instance in the Miscell. Med. Physic. Gallic. of a Child living sive days after
it was born, Misc. Med. Phys. Gall. Au. 3. p. 54.
whose Head had nothing but Water contained within the enclosures of the Dura
and Pia Matter, without the least footsteps of any medullary part at all.

Parallel to which two last Instances, I had one communicated to me by that
curious Anatomist and learned Person Dr. Tyson, in a Child born alive, with no
more Brain in the Skull than what might lie in a Filbird-shell, the Medulla
Spinalis being much larger than ordinary, as though part of the absent Brain
had been squeezed down thither.

Of the last ( viz. where the natural conformation has been depraved) there is
extant an Instance in two several places of the Miscell. Curios. in a sat Ox,
Misc. Cur. Obs. 26. and 130. An. 1.
which while living there were observed but very little signs of any such
thing, whole Brain was nevertheless after death found wholly petrified.

From all these it is manifest the Sensative Faculty is able to answer its
internal or external Impressions, by one part as well as another, and that the
Medullary System of the Spinalis Medulla may become as adequate a Sensory, in
relation to the aforesaid Functions sometimes, as either Cerebrum or Cerebellum.

And as to the power or influence the Soul in general exercises over the
Nerves, howsoever different in their original, seeing we have already observed
what a provident care Nature has taken for the preserving Creatures from their
own violence, in that it has not only constituted the chief Fountain from
whence the great current of Spirits is derived, for the service of the vital
and natural parts, by the Eighth and Intercostal Nerves, which is the
Cerebellum, so as to be free from the commands of the Rational Will in its
ordinary way of acting, but has also taken care that not any of those Branches
which have their originals from Trunks, which are under the power of voluntary
dictates of the Soul, should terminate in such Organs by which those Functions
are discharged, (abare communication between Nerves of different Provinces not
being sufficient to such ends or offices, as has been observed in those
afore-mentioned additional subsidiary smaller Streams of Spirits flowing to the
parts consecrate to the natural and vital Functions by Branches propagated from
the Spinal Marrow, to the Intercostal Nerve, all the way of its descent to the
lower Venture.)

So we may further also remark, that as there are some manner of Impressions
made upon the perceptive Faculty, after such sort of a manner as that it even
loses its power over its own Subjects, (viz.) the Nerves, which are subservient
to its voluntary commands, as in Laughing, Sneezing, and libidinous Erections,
the Organs by which these Actions are produced, being altogether under the
power of those Nerves subservient to the voluntary dictates of the Soul, and
acted after the very same manner as those of Respiration, as often as
preportionable objects present, and (notwithstanding the assertion of Dr.
Willis to the contrary, who makes Laughing proper to Man only, and, by the
authority of Aristotle, Sneezing an Affection proper but to few, if any other
Creature besides Man) might also produce the same effects in Brutes, Will p 106
provided their stupid Souls were capable of being equally impressed by such
Objects as arc proper for exciting a rational Laughter, as we see they are by
those producing the aforementioned venereous actions, of the want of the Plexus
Cervicalis, of the Intercostal Nerves, and two or three small Branches
propagated from thence to the Nerve of the Diaphragm (which he calls a
Disposition peculiar to Man, and consequently in his opinion the cause of that
Affection in him) might be in a great measure supplied not only by that nervous
Branch we find propagated from the interio^r Plexus of the Par Vagum (which
Nerve is equally dependent on the Cerebellum, as the Intercostal) to the third
Brachial Nerve, from which the Nerve of the Diaphragm has one of its
originals, but also that other propagated from the Thoracick Plexus of the
Intercostal Nerve it self, to the same aforesaid Brachial Nerve, into which the
Nerve of the Diaphragm is inserted.

So, on the contrary, there are some Impressions made upon the Soul sometimes,
through which it acquires a power over those Nerves at other times in no wise
subject to it, and those are the impressions either of great Joy or great
Grief, suitable to which the Vital and Natural Faculties are made either much
more or else so much less vigorous than ordinary, as even quite to languish.

How this comes to pass, according to Dr. Willis in savor of his own
Hypothesis, and particularly in relation to the first, (which allows of no
Involuntary Motions, but what come from the Province of the Cerebellum) is
explained by supposing an undulating or rolling motion of the first impression
upon the Brain out of it again, through the Natiform Processes into the
Cerebellum, and from thence by the Annular Process into the Intercostal Pair of
Nerves, and so to the Nerve of the Diaphragm, (and he should, to make this way
of explication entire, have taken in also all those Vertebral Branches inserted
into the Intercostal Nerve, in order to the moving of the Intercostal Muscles,
without which that action cannot be performed) by a correspondence between
which Nerves and those of the Face, being all of one family, the aforesaid
Gesture of Laughing is performed.

Now, besides the needlesness of bringing the Conceptions or Impressions of the
Brain under a necessity of being executed by the inferior Province of the
Cerebellum, till such time as it is proved, that such motions of the Spirits,
upon extraordinary occasions, may rationally be granted, without supposing a
regular motion of the same through such supposed Passages leading from one Part
to the other at all other times, (the allowing whereof does necessarily imply a
capacity of the Soul to alter the course of the Spirits influencing the vital
and natural Organs, at least in some measure, at its pleasure, which is plainly
contrary to Experience;) I shall hardly look upon that Hypothesis to be any
more than merely precarious.

And further, to show, that such Effects or Alterations of the Vital Organs
happening upon violent Passions of the Mind, are no way owing to such a
transmission of the Animal Fluid from the Cerebrum to the Cerebellum, as the
aforesaid Author supposes, I ask, how it should come to pass that in the
contrary Passion of Grief, especially when occasioned by surprising frightful
Accidents, the Heart should so languish, as sometimes wholly to cease beating,
seeing in the aforesaid Experiment we find that Motion self-sufficient, by
virtue of a constant irradiation or influence of the Cerebellum only, and
consequently could not be thought so to languish upon such occasions for want
of those Spirits it never stood in need of.

Without therefore being forced to have recourse to that other Hypothesis
clogged with so many difficulties, I think the aforesaid case may admit of
another manner of explication, consistent with what I have all-along advanced
upon this Subject relating to the true source of voluntary and involuntary
Actions: if we suppose, that from such Impressions upon the Soul as are either
extremely more or less welcome to it, (in which case the Object is said to act
unproportionably upon the Subject) it may not only act accordingly, above its
usual irradiation and force over the Cerebellum, and by that means, as sending
the Spirits either more or less copiously to the Vital Organs, particularly the
Heart, the nearest way, (viz.) by the Par Vagum and Intercostal Pair, for that
time render them more vigorous, or more languid in their operations, in
proportion to the difference of the Passions, just after the manner it happens
in cases of Alienation of Mind or Distraction, where by the Strength of the
Impression, or Idea upon the Mind, it drives the Spirits with such an impetus
into the Limbs, as makes them act with a vast greater force than what they were
wont to do, even above the resistance of Chains or Bars of Iron; but also it
may transmit the Spirits more or less copiously, to the Vital and Natural
Faculties, the other way freed from the subsidiary Nerves of the Spina
aforementioned, to the Intercostal Pair, which sends forth ramifications to the
Heart (in Men especially) equally with, if not more plentifully than the Par
Vagum, and from the Vertebral and Brachial to the Nerve of the Diaphragm and
Intercostal Muscles, by which means it so falls out, upon such impressions,
that the Organs of Respiration to the sight, and that of Pulsation to the
touch, are very remarkably affected.

By this means I have endeavored to restore the Brain to a capacity of putting
its own Conceptions or Impressions made upon it into execution, without being
beholden to its neighbor the Cerebellum, and that either in relation to its
voluntary, inadvertent, or involuntary Acts; where, note, I make a distinction
between Acts involuntary and those of inadvertency, inasmuch as these last,
though they are not with, yet they are not contrary to the actual consent of
the Will, after the manner of the natural actions of the Viscera, such as are
out of the power of the Will to hinder; besides which, I look upon no other in
Rational Creatures (in a strict sense considered) to be involuntary, forasmuch
as it is a contradiction to say a Voluntary Agent does any thing against his
Rational Will (though it may be against his Approbation) by which he is only
distinguished from a Brute: Though Dr. Willis has all-along used the word
involuntario in another sense, confounding it with acts of mere Ignorance under
the term of Inscie, and those also done only inadvertently, or without
consideration, under the term of Inconsulto; and doubtless upon this notion of
Involuntary Motions built his Hypothesis, which makes all those Actions which
are performed at any time without the notice of the Intellectual Faculty,
notwithstanding at other times they are altogether under its command, equally
depending on the Cerebellum as those purely natural, which are always free from
the power of the first, and also absolutely subject to the last.

These Actions I have therefore called by the term of Supervenient Instinct,
and being the mere Effect of external or internal Impressions upon Sensative
Bodies, as Echoes are to those upon such as are only natural, are equally
competent to Rational and Irrational Creatures, and capable of being exerted by
the influence of the very same Nerves which minister to the Sensative Faculty,
whether it act advertently or inadvertently in the one, or spontaneously in the
other, (where, by the way, it may not be altogether unworthy of our taking
notice, the genuine sense of that word in Actions performed by those Creatures,
is much nearer akin to the term Inconsulto than Involuntario in Men) without
the supposed rambling Motions of Impressions made upon it, (through Passages
only at some times or upon eztraordinary occasions made use of) out of the
Cerebrum into the Cerebellum.

Now, as to the organisation of this Part, made to consist of various Medullary
Prominencies, Appendixes, and Tracts, by Nature contrived for and adjusted to
the various functions of the Soul, and dispensation of the Animal Spirits through
the whole System of the Nerves, which first are confined to, or made to reside
in such and such places as so many distinct apartments, viz. the Commune
Sensorium in one place, the Imagination and Judgment in another, and the Memory
in a third; of which there is such a large and formal apparatus and description
(though with great discrepancy of opinion) in Willis and Vieussenius, the one
placing the Commune Sensorium in his Corpora Striata only, the other in the
superior and middle Corpora Striata, jointly with the Centrum Ovale; from both
whom Des Carts and several others, and with much more show of Reason,
particularly Malpighius, differ, Malpig. de Cereb. p 11. par. 2.
placing it in the extreme limits of the medullary part of the Brain, where
it is continuous with the cineritious circumassused Part; I must confess, that
as I have not been able, by the best enquiry I could make either into Brains
dissected whilst fresh, or when boiled in Oil, to discover any such actual
configuration or disposition of Parts, as we find so formally delineated by
either of them, but especially the last.

So neither do I see any necessity thereof, seeing we may much more easily, and
to the self-same ends and advantages, look upon the Soul as one internal
principal Sensative Faculty. and the whole medullary part of the Brain, as
consisting of such Fibrils or Vascula's as in some places more nearly in others
more remotely communicate with the Nerves propagated thence to all the external
Sensories, one adequate Common Sensory, by which that principal Faculty both
receives all its impressions, and accordingly, as by so many gradations of one
and the same power, executes or performs those different Functions commonly
going under the aforesaid Names of The Common Sense, or Simple Apprehension,
Imagination, Judgment, and Memory.

And as to the second, (viz.) the Medullary Tracts, by which the Animal Fluid,
as by so many Rivulets, is derived from the great Pond or Magazine into many
Rivers, furnishing the whole Body therewith, all I could find by the most
diligent search, were only those which have already in the preceding Sheets
been remarked, of which, in the first place, are those in the Corpora Striata,
very large and discernable.

Those in the inward or concave Superficies of the Corpus Callosum running
transversely by the Septum Lucidum into the Fornix, and from that
longitudinally into its hinder Thighs or Pillars formerly called Bombyces, over
which they run in a wreathed manner, as was before observed, terminating in the
back part of the Lateral Ventricles, enclosed in the hinder Limbs of the Brain,
which Ventricles at length terminate in, and are continuous to the subjacent
forepart of the Crura Medulla Oblongata.

Those in the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum running obliquely down to part of the
subjacent Crura and Caudex Medullaris.

Those of the Nates and Testes running after the same manner, and terminating
so too, only something lower.

Those in the Annulary Process, which forasmuch as they have never before been
taken notice of, I have caused to be engraved in a Figure by themselves, whose
Medullary Tracts or Striae, furnished with Spirits both from the continuous
medullary Caudex, and Productions of the Cerebellum too, of which the Annular
Process is made, (by means whereof the Nerves appertaining thereto may be
rationally supposed to be under the influence of both those Parts, conformable
to what has all-along been asserted;) are as visible, being more thick, and of
a far harder consistence, than that of the Corpora Striata themselves, (though
upon every attempt of cutting that Process, they may not appear so) and most of
them terminating in a middle Medullary Tract, by means whereof there is the
same inconveniency prevented, at least in some measure, as there is by that
sepimentum of the Pia Matter, continued from the joining together of the Crura
Medulla Oblongata, down quite through the Medulla Spinalis, (viz.) that at the
same time the Nerves on one side may, (as Molinetti, Mol. p. 104
though in another place of the Brain, has truly observed) by any morbid cause,
be injured, those on the other may escape.

Concerning these, seeing they seem to have a particular aspect or relation to
those Nerves, whose originals we find nearest them, it may not be unreasonable
to think they are particular Conduits, from whence the said Nerves are
furnished with Animal Fluid, though at the same time we must allow a very free
communication betwixt them all.

And consequently, we may suppose the first of those to convey Spirits from the
globous medullary part of the Brain next to it, by Vienssenius called the
Superiou^. Part of the Centrum Ovale, down to the subjacent medullary part of
the Brain, to augment those which are produced lower, and particularly for the
service of the Olfactory and Visory Nerves, which last has more eminently its
Supply from the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum.

The second sort, or the transverse Striae's of the Corpus Callosum, to convey
an additional Supplement by way of the wreathed Tracts in the hinder Columns of
the Fornix, to the Crura Medulla Oblongata, where they become continuous to the
reflex'd part of the Lateral Ventricles backwardly, for the service also of the
aforesaid two Pair of Nerves, but more particularly to those arising lower
either on the Annular Process or Caudex Medullaris.

Those of the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum and Natiform Processes, the first of
which lies upon, and is continuous to the subjacent medullary part of the Crura
Medulla Oblongata, the other to the Caudex Medullaris, may be supposed to
derive Spirits on the behalf of those Nerves which spring from any adjacent
parts, whether on this or the other side of the Annular Process or Caudex
Medullaris.

And of this sort are the Optic Nerves, which are supplied immediately from
the first of those Medullary Prominencies, and not unlikely from those fair
Medullary Tracts aforementioned, running from the Root of the Fornix,
extending themselves all the way between the Corpora Striata and Thalami
Nervorum Opticorum, in which last at length they are obliterate. The Third,
Fifth, Sixth, and First or hard Branch of the Auditory Nerves, mediately by
continuity of them with the Annular Protuberance, to all which the other or
lesser Medullary Prominencies called Nates, by virtue of their continuity with
the subjacent parts, may be supposed to contribute something also: and these
seems to be better provided for than the rest of the Nerves, inasmuch as
besides this way of being supplied from the Cerebrum, they have also another
very visible, and much larger, from the Second Process of the Cerebellum, of
which the Annular Protuberance is made, and this seemingly not without a
provident Design of Nature, seeing the Nerves which are derived thence are much
larger, and have a greater Task of service laid upon them than any others of
the whole Brain, as has also the Par Vagum, or eighth Pair, which therefore,
by virtue of its insertion between the Chordal or third Process of the
Cerebellum and Corpus Olivare (and not according to Dr. Willis, from the points
or extremities of the Corpora Pyramidalia) has a double tribute of Spirits,
one from the Caudex Medullaris or Cerebrum, the other from the Cerebellum.

And to this End or great Service it looks as though this Process was furnished
with such a Texture as it appears to have, of strong, large, medullary
Striae's, capable of receiving and containing a Supply from both Fountains.

Whence it may not be unseasonable to remark, That not without show of good
Reason I have all-along asserted the Propriety of the Brain to those Nerves in
part, allowed by Dr. Willis to be no further affected by any Impressions of the
Brain, than as first conveyed from it into the Province of the Cerebellum, and
consequently to depend immediately on this last for influence entirely in order
to convey Animal Spirits to those parts wherein they are inserted.

Upon the Caudex Medullaris, on its under side contiguous to the hinder
Extremities of the Annular Process, are situate the Corpora Pyramidalia and
Olivaria, over against which are the two long Medullary Tracts lately taken
notice of, seeming to come from the transverse Medullary Process behind the
Testes, and terminating in those other transverse Medullary Processes before
the entrance into the Fourth Ventricle on the other side, by which there may be
conveyed a considerable Portion of the Animal Fluid to the Pathetick Nerve,
which has its rise from the first transverse Process, and to the soft or
second Branch of the Auditory Nerve, which has its rise from the second on
that side, and also to the Ninth and Tenth Pair on the other side.

And to conclude, From all these taken together, with the rest of the whole
medullary part of the Brain, the Overplus of what is not spent upon the inmate
Nerves of the Brain may truly be supposed to be promiscuously dispensed to all
those other extraneous ones produced from the elongation of the Brain, called
the Spinal Marrow. In which last there is this conformation or disposition of
Parts differing from that of the Brain, that whereas in that the cineritious
part is external, it is here internal; and this for very good reason, and by a
provident contrivance of Nature, seeing that not only the cineritious part of
the Brain serves for supplying those Nerves which have their original thence,
as well as all the rest of the Spinal Marrow, and consequently ought to have
the largest space and dimensions possible, which without this situation could
not have been; but also without this contrivance the Nerves of this part must
of necessity have had their originals from the cineritious part of the
aforesaid Marrow, contrary to both the custom and convenience of Nature too.

FIG. I. Exhibits the Basis of the Brain, with part of the Medulla Oblongata,
the Blood Vessels being injected with Wax.
A A The fore Lobes of the Brain. B B The hinder Lobes. CC The Cerebellum. D D
The lateral Sinus's. E E The Vertebral Arteries as they pass between the first
Vertebra and the Bone of the Occiput. F The Vertebral Sinus. G, etc The Dura
Matter on the right side taken off from the Spinal Marrow, and remaining on the
left. 1, 2, 3 4, etc. The ten pair of Nerves belonging to the Brain, with seven
of the Spinal Marrow. a The Foramen that opens into the Pituitary Gland from
the Infundibulum. b b The two white Protuberances behind the Infundibulum. c c
The two Trunks of the Carotid Artery cut off where they begin to run betwixt
the fore and hinder Lobes of the Brain. d d The two Arteries joining the
Carotids with the Cervical Artery, called the Communicant Branches. e e Two
large Branches of the Cervical Artery, sometimes seeming as though they came from
the Communicant Branch on each side, from the first of which the Plexus
Chorocides has its original in chief, and from the last the Plexus Chorocides
of the 4th Ventricle. f Several little Branches arising from the Carotid
Artery. g The Cervical Artery composed of the two Trunks of the Vertebral
Artery within the Cranium. h h The two Trunks of the Vertebral Artery. i i i
The Spinal Artery. k A small Branch of an Artery running through the 9th pair,
broken off from its other part through inadvertency of the Graver. l l The Crura
of the Medulla Oblongata. m m The Annular Protuberance, or Pons Varolii. n That
part of the Caudex Medullaris on the right side called by Willis and
Vieussenius Corpora Pyramidalia. o That part on the same side called Corpus
Olivare. p The foremost Branch of the Carotid Artery, dividing the fore Lobes
of the Brain, consisting of two Branches, one of them only appearing here. q q
Little Branches of Arteries helping to make the Plexus chorocides in the 4th
Ventricle. r r r Branches of Arteries dispersed from the Cervical Artery upon
and through the Annular Protuberance. s s Part of the 2d Process, or Podunculi,
of the Cerebellum. * * The Spinal Accessory Nerve.
FIG. II. Showing the internal Basis of the Cranium, the Sinus's being injected
with Wax.
A A The Edges of the Skull. B B The Dura Matter upon the bottom of the Skull. C
C The lateral Sinus's d d The superior, longer and narrower Sinus's. e e The
inferior, shorter and wider Sinus's. f The Process of the Bone Cribriforme,
called Crista Galli. g g Some small descending Branches of Veins upon the
bottom of the Dura Matter. h h The first Branch of Arteries proper to the D.
Matter. i i The second Branch of Arteries belonging to the Dura Matter. k The
third Branch belonging to the Dura Matter. L The last hole of the Skull. m m
Several Veins communicating with the inferior short Sinus's. n Part of the Os
Jugale. o o The Os Ethmoeid, where the first pair of Nerves or mammillary
Processes go forth. p p The Optic Nerves cut off. q q The Carotid Arteries cut
off. r The third pair of Nerves vissible only on one side. S S The fourth pair
of Nerves turned up. t t The fifth pair of Nerves on one side expanded before
it is divided into its three Branches, on the other side whole; which Nerves,
with its three Branches, are expressed in the third Figure. V Its foremost
superior Branch on the left side, going out at the second hole of the Skull. w
The sixth pair of Nerves. X The Intercostal Nerves, in this subject proceeding
from two Branches of the fifth Nerve, joining with the body of the sixth Nerve.
y Two Branches of the fifth pair of Nerves, in this subject running almost
close to the 6th pair, being partly the Roots of the Intercostal Nerve, which
creeps out of the Skull under and between the Coats of the Carotid Artery. z z
The Body of the Carotid Artery, after it has entered the Cranium. 1 1 The
Glandula Pituitaria. 2 2 The Circular Sinus. 3 The Infundibulum. 4 4 The
Frontal Arteries. 5 The place where the Lateral Sinus's begin to be declive and
tortuous. 6 The Dura Matter raised and reclined to show the subjacent Nerves. 7
7 The seventh or Auditory Nerves. 8 8 The eighth pair, or Par Vagum. 9 9 The
ninth pair.
FIG. III. Being the Fifth Nerve, with its Branches, whilst within the Cranium.
A Its Trunk. B Its Ganglion. C Its first or superior Branch, going out at the
second hole of the Cranium. D Its second or middle Branch, going out at the
second hole. E Its third or hindermost Branch, going out at the fifth hole.
FIG. IV. Shows the superior and lateral Sinus's of the Dura Matter, opened
after they had been injected with Wax.
A A The third or longitudinal Sinus. B B The first and second, or lateral
Sinus's. C The fourth Sinus. d d d A Vein running on each side of the third
Sinus. eeee Mouths of Veins opening into the longitudinal Sinus of the Dura
Matter, after a contrary manner one to the other. f f The fifth Sinus at the
bottom of the Falx. g The Torcular, where all the superior and lateral Sinus's
meet. h h The tortuous part of the lateral Sinus running under the Cerebellum.
i i The Veins entering the fourth Sinus from the Plexus Choroeides. k The place
where the fourth Sinus arises. * * The Specus or round hole at which the
lateral Sinus's on each side go out into the internal Jugular Vein. l l Two
large Veins, whereof one enters the fourth Sinus upon the second Process of the
Dura Matter, so as to resist the course of the Blood in that Sinus, in its
ascent to the Torcular; the other upon the same Process, so as to hinder its
descent to the Internal Jugular, contrary to a conformation of Vessels which
Vieussenius mentions in his third Table, H H. mmm Transverse Chordal Ligaments
in the longitudinal and lateral Sinus's. n n Part of the Dura Matter on each
side of the longitudinal Sinus. o o Portions of the Pia Matter. PP etc Diverse
small Veins on the Dura Matter, which enter those that run on the sides of the
longitudinal Sinus, according to its length. qq etc The Veins of the Cerebrum
as they appear under the Pia Matter, before they enter the longitudinal Sinus. R
R The falcated Process, with its Veins which enter the fifth Sinus. S S The
second Process of the Dura Matter. The beginnings of the Jugular Veins.
FIG. V. Representing the Brain in a middle section, the Blood Vessels being
first injected with Wax.
A A The Fornix cut off at its Roots and turned back. b b Its Roots at the
beginning of the Thalami Nervorum Opticorum. cc, etc. The Thalami Nervorum
Opticorum. d d That part of the Crura Fornicis which growing somewhat thicker
as it turns off toward the Lateral Ventricles, runs over the Crura Medulla
Oblongata, which being very prominent in Sheep, and Calves, helps to thrust it
up into such a Protuberance as the Ancients called Bombyces or Hyppocampi. e e
That part of the Plexus Choroeides which is made of the first Branch of the
Cervical Artery, sometimes seeming as tho it came from the Communicant Branch*
in the Lateral Ventricles. f The place where those two Plexus's on each side
meet under the Fornix. g g That other part of the Plexus which is made of the
second Branch of the Cervical Artery joined with the first by a Communicant
Branch not to be seen here, lying under the Crura Fornicis, which is expanded
all over the Isthmus, becoming glandulous near to, and especially under the
^^a^d^la Pinealis covered here with the Fornix. h h Two large Veins coming from
the top of the upper part of the Plexus down to the other Branch of the Plexus,
all the length of the third Ventricle, and then terminates in the the fourth
Sinus. i i The Trunks of several Arteries, appearing as they were cut off in
dividing the Medullary and Cineritious * part of the Brain. k k A Venous Branch
of each side entering the Plexus Choroeides, from whence there are many slips
branched upon the Corpora Striata. D D The Corpora Striata whole. l The Rima of
the third Ventricle. m m A long Medullary Tract between the Thalami Nervorum
Opticorum and Corpora Striata. nn, etc. The Centrum Ovale of Vieussenius. O The
fourth Sinus of the Dur. Matter. P The Torcular, where the four, and sometimes
five, Sinus's meet. Q Q The Lateral Sinus's. R A large Vein entering the Lat.
Sinus's on one side. SS, etc. The Cerebellum covered with the second Process of
the Dura Matter on its uppermost part, T T The Vertebral Arteries. V V the
Vertebral Sinus's. W The Medulla Spinalis, with its integuments. x x The Style
supporting the large Veins of the Plexus Choroeides in the third Ventricle. q q
The Lymphaeducts of the Plexus Choroeides. Y Y Two of the Cervical Nerves
springing from the Medulla Oblongata., etc. The Medullary part of the Brain.
**, etc. The Cineritious part.
FIG. VI. Being a draught of the Annular Protuberance, Med. Spinalis, etc. cut
through the middle lengthway.
A A The Crura Medulla Oblongata. B B The Annular Process, or Pons Varolii
divided. c c The Transverse Striae. e e The intervening Medullary Tract in
which the Striae terminates on each side. f f The third or chordal Process of
Dr. Willis. h The Spinal Marrow. i i Some part of the Cerebellum. k k The
second Processes of the Cerebellum, which compose the Annular Protuberance. l l
The cineritious part of the Medulla Oblongata.
FIG. VII. Being the Cerebellum cut through on its hinder part, and reclined
laterally.
A A The Cerebellum. B B The arboreous ramification of the Meditallium of the
Cerebellum appearing, being cut right downwards. C C The Pathetick Nerves. c c
The Nates. d d The Testes. e The transverse Process whence the Pathetick Pair
have their original. f The Glandula Pinealis. g g The first Process of the
Cerebellum, running from it to the Nates here extended laterally. h h The third
or Chordal Processes. i i The transverse medullary Process in the 4 Vent. from
whence the soft Branch of the 7 N. has it original. k k The Medullary Process
descending from the Transverse Process behind the Testes, down to the
aforementioned other Medullary Transverse Process. l l The Originals of that
Process a little too low. m m The eighth pair of Nerves. n The Calamus Script*
or Extremity of the 4th Ventricle o The Spinal Marrow. P P The Accessory
Nerves. q q The tenth pair of Nerves.
THE TABLE.
A
ARtery Carotid, and the manner of its entrance into and distribution through
the Brain. Page 32, 33. Where it parts with its borrowed Coat. p. 33 Artery
Vertebral, and its manner of entrance and distribution. p. 35 Artery Cervical
ibid. Why not Conical p. 38 The Communicant Branches of Arteries. p. 36 Their
Use and Benefit ibid. and 37 A small Branch of Arteries not before observed p.
38 Why the Arteries of the Brain enter not the Cranium with the Veins p. 27
Artery Spinal, how the Blood is forced into it, p. 37 Animal Spirits, how more
plentifully produced, p. 54 Anatomy Comparative, its use p. 54 Arteries, why
their Ramifications are over-proportionable to the Trunks in the Brain, p. 55
The Use of the narrowness of the Communicant branches, p. 56 How the Carotid
Artery in Brutes comes to be smaller above the Dura Matter than under it, p. 65
Animal Fluid, what, p. 91, 108, and 155 How it passes out of the Carnous
Fibers, p. 109 Its effect in glandulous and other parts not serviceable to
Muscular Motion, ibid. Its production, p. 115 Anus, p. 124 Aquae emissarium of
Vieussenius, p. 132
B
Brain, its Vessels in general, p. 20 Their kinds, ibid. Blood vessels, their
different distribution in relation to the Brain it self, and its Integuments,
ibid. and 26 The reason of this different distribution, p. 27 Blood Vessels
belonging to the Brain it self only, p. 32 What proportion the Blood Vessels of
the Brain bear to the rest of those of the whole Body, p. 32, and 38 The
remarkable propagations of its Arteries, p. 35 Blood Vessels belonging to the
Nerves, p. 33, 34 Blood in the Sinus's has two contrary torrents, p. 53 The
effects thereof, ibid. How the circulation of the Blood comes to be retarded in
the Brain, p. 53 The Bony cell where the Sinus's go out into the internal
Jugular, p. 53 The effect of its structure, ibid. and 54 The Brain, how
distinguished, p. 87, 113 Its two Substances, ibid. Their structure, p. 89, 90
Why of a different color, p. 90, and 92 Blood, why red p. 91 How the Brain is
suspended, p. 7, 8. Its Lobes and particular description, p. 113, 114 Its
hinder Lobes stretched backwardly beyond the Cerebellum, ibid. Original of its
medullary part, p. 115 Bombyces, vide Hippocampi, Blood Vessels of the Nerves,
p. 144 Watery Bladders instead of Brain, p. 178, 179 Brain petrified, p. 179
Propriety of the Brain to Nerves often thought under the power of the
Cerebellum, p. 198
C
Consent of Parts. p. 19 Carotid Artery, vid. Artery. The Circular Sinus, p. 43
Communicant Branches between the Carotid and Cervical Arteries, their Use, p.
55, 56. The Cortical or cineritious part of the Brain, p. 88 Its medullary
part, ibid. Corpus Callosum, p. 115 Its Striae, p. 116 Centrum Ovale of
Vieussenius, p. 117 Crura Fornicis, p. 818 Commissura Crassioris Nervi Aemula
of Willis and Vieussenius, p. 126 Corpus Callosum, p. 115 Centrum Ovale, p. 117
Crura Fornicis, p. 118 Corpora Striata, p. 120 The Cerebellum, p. 133 Its
d^fference from the Brain, p. 135 Corpora duo alba pone Infundibulum, p. 140
Olivaria, ibid. Power of the Cerebellum, p. 170, 173
D
The Dura Matter, p. 1 Its manner of adhesion to the Cranium, p. 2 Is double,
ibid. What sort of Fibers, and their distribution, p. 3 Their Use, p. 4, 5, 6
How affected in some Distempers, particularly in Vapors, p. 6 Its Nerves,
ibid. Its Processes, p. 7, 9 Their Uses, p. 7, 8, 9 Its Blood vessels apart
from the Brain, their number and distribution, p. 20, 22 Two sorts of Dropsies
of the Brain observed by Tulpius and Wepter, p. 59 Their Solution, ibid. and 60
E
Elasticity of the Blood, p. 53 The Effects of that being weakened, ibid.
Extravasation of the Nutritious Fluids, its effect, p. 97 Elasticity not
competent to the first principles of Bodies, p. 100 The Occasion of it in other
Bodies, ibid. Elasticity its aequilibrium in the whole compapages of Muscles,
p. 105 The Effect thereof. ibid. and 106 Experiments by Injection, of what use
in Muscular Motion, p. 110
F
The Falx and its particular uses, p. 7, 8, 9 Is wanting in several Creatures,
and why, p. 9 Fibers of the Dura Matter do the office of Valves, p. 5 Fleshy
part of the Body, what, p. 94 Fluids of the Body, their different motions, p.
96 Fornix, p. 117 Its Crura, p. 118 The Fornix of Vieussenius, p. 115 The
Fornix commonly so called, p. 117 Its Fimbria, according to Vieussenius, p. 118
Its Crura, ibid. How natural and vital Functions relate to the Cerebellum, and
with what difference, p. 170, 171 How they come to be not under the power of
the rational Soul, p. 174 How performed when the Brain is utterly incapable of
acting, p. 177
G
The Glandula Pituitaria enclosed in strong Membranes p. 46 No Serum can get
through its Integument, ibid. and 75 Glands of the Plexus Choroeides, p. 63, 63
The Glandula Pituitaria not capable of carrying an Excrementitious humor, p.
69, 73 The Gland. Pit. its situation, p. 71 Is not suspended in Men as in
Brutes, ibid. and 73 In substance it differs from all other Glands, ib. Is of
two sorts, and why, p. 81 In what manner the Lympha gets into it, ibid. The
Glandula Pinealis, its situation and connection, p. 83 Is of the Conglobate
kind, p. 84 Errors of Des Chartes, Lower and others about it, p. 84, 85 Geminum
Centrum Semicirculare of Vieussenius, p. 122
H
Headache, how happening in Fevers, p. 29 From the closeness of the Pores in
the Cranium, p. 42 Two sorts of Hydrocephalus, p. 59 Hippocampi Arantii, p. 118
Their Striae, ibid.
I
Injection with Mercury makes Blood Vessels appear, p. 34 The Infundibulum, p.
77 The difference between it in Men and Brutes, ibid, Its two Ducts in Brutes,
p. 78 Its Office, p. 79, 80 Infundibulum, the passage into it by three
Foramina's, p. 124 Isthmus, p. 125 Instinct, what, p. 162, 163 The differing
effects of some Impressions upon the Soul, p. 181, 182, 183 Transmission of
Impressions, according to Doctor Willis, improbable, p. 184, 185 Difference
between involuntary and inadvertent acts, p. 187 Internal Senses, their seats,
p. 190
L
Lsgaments of the Sinus's, p 51 Their Uses p, 52, 56 Lateral Sinus's, p. 40
Longitudinal Sinus's, p. 41 Lymphaeducts of the Brain, p. 61, 62 Lympha, how
generated within the Ventricles, p. 81, 82 To what end, ibid. Laughter, how
made, p. 181 Why peculiar to Man, p. 182 Libidinous Actions, how caused, p.
181, 182
M
Membranes of the Brain, vid. Dura and Pia Matter. Muscular Motion, p. 99 Diverse
Opinions about it, ibid. Muscle, its inflation or contraction, p. 102, 106
Muscle, how contracted or swelled by force, p. 104 Muscles, the effect of their
being cut through, p. 105 Muscles, their hardness and swelling in contraction,
whence caused, p. 106, 107 Muscular Motion, some particular Phoenomena about it
solved, p. 110, 111 Muscular Motion made by the Nervous Fluid alone without
concurrence of the blood, p. 177 A Medullary Tract not before observed, p. 123
Medulla Oblongata, p. 139 Its Crura, ibid. Animal Motion, p. 158 Motion
voluntary and involuntary, p. 159, 160 Two sorts of Motions in Brutes, p. 161
Medullary Tracts of the Brain, p. 192
N
Noise in the Head, how occasioned, p. 29 Nervous Juice, p. 88, 93 Nutrition p.
88, 89, 94 Nervous Juice, how generated ibid. Nerve; its structure p. 93 The
effect of its being taper ibid. and 102 Nates p. 125 Nerves Olfactory, p. 143
-- Optic p. 144 Motorium or third Pair p. 145 Patheticum or fourth pair p. 146
The fifth pair p. 147 The sixth pair p. 148 The Intercostal ibid. The seventh
or auditory pair p. 149 The eighth or Par Vagum The Accessory Spinal Nerve p.
151 The ninth pair p. 142 The tenth pair p. 153 The structure of the Nerves p.
154 Nerves their different functions p. 157 The effects of Communications
betwixt Nerves, p. 175, 181 The Nerves within the Cranium, how supplied with
Spirits from various medullary Tracts of the brain, p. 194, 195, etc.
O
Optic Nerve its original p. 123 External Objects, how they act p. 158
Improportionable actings of the Object p. 186 Organization of the brain p. 189
Overplus of the Animal Fluid of Cerebrum with its use p. 199
P
The Pia Matter, p. 10 Why called Choroeides ibid. Its particular distribution
ibid. How to isnd it in the Ventricles p. 11 Is double every where, but where
most visibly, p. 12 Its inward Lamina is of a Netlike Texture. p. 15 Its Uses
p. 16 Its Blood Vessels, which are of two sorts, p. 18, 19 How it invests the
Nerves and their distinct Fibrils p. 19 How the Arteries belonging to the Brain
it self are ramified through it p. 33 How some branches of the Carotid and
Vertebral Arteries are exempt from it, p. 34 The Processes of the Dura Matter,
with their distribution and use p. 7, 8, 9 Pulsation of the Sinus's, whence p.
50 The Plexus Choroeides of the Brain p. 57 It is double ibid. Has two
different Originals ibid. What they are ibid. Where the first part begins to be
glandulous, p. 58 Where the first part of the Plexus terminate and meet p. 58
Where the second part begins to be retiform, ibid. The double connection of the
two parts of the Plexus ibid. Two Veins joining the first part of the Plexus in
its extremity p. 61 Its large reductory Veins entering the fourth Sinus ibid.
Its Lymphaeducts ibid. Its Glands p. 62 Their Use ibid. and 63 Its situation
and use ibid. The Pituitary Gland has Veins p. 66 Processus Lentiformes, vid.
Corpora Striata. Passage into the Infundibulum p. 123 Processus Annularis, or
second Process of the Cerebellum p. 129, 135, 140 Its Striae p. 136 Processus
Natibus antepositus p. 125 Processus Nervi Aemulus p. 126 Processus Nervuli
Aemulus p. 128 The Plexus Choroeides of the Cerebell. p. 134 Processus
Vermiculares p. 135 The first Process of the Cerebellum ibid. The third or
Choadal Process of the Cerebellum p. 136 The medullary transverse Processes of
the fourth Ventricle p. 136 The medullary Processes descending to those
transverse ones p. 137 The Plexus Choroeides of the Cerebellum, p. 133
Perception or Passion, what, p. 158
R
The Receptacula Sellae Aequinae, etc. of Vieussenius not existent in Men p. 45
Their Use impossible p. 46 The Rete Mirabile p. 64 Always existent in Men ibid.
Its situation ibid. Why smaller in them than Brutes ib. and 65 The effect of
its being so large in Brutes, p. 65 Is differently situated in Men and Brutes,
p. 72 Hindermost Roots of the Medulla Spinalis, what formerly p. 126
Respiration, how performed p. 165 Why a Child unborn respires not, p. 168 Why
Respiration ceases upon cutting the Cerebellum, p. 174
S
Sinus's of the Brain p. 39 Their number ibid. The Lateral ones p. 40 The third
or longitudinal p. 41 The fourth or internal one ibid. Four other smaller
Sinus's, and their first Author, p. 42, 43 The Circular Sinus p. 43 Its
particular description ibid. and 44 Its use p.47, 48 No Serum can be separated
but by proper secretory Ducts p. 47 The Sinus's have no pulsation of
themselves, p. 50 Their pulsation is from the Brain, ibid. The different
Ligaments of the Sinus's p. 57 The use thereof ibid The blind Cavities or
Diverticulums of the Sinus's p. 52 Their Uses ibid. The structure of the
Sinus's p. 53 Effects thereof ibid. Animal Spirits, how made more plentifully,
p. 54 Why the Sinus's grow so wide on a sudden, ibid, Their difference of
structure p. 56 The longest Sinus commonly burst in strangled bodies ibid How
the blood passes the Lateral Sinus's in different positions of the Brain p. 54
Structure of the Brain Vascular, p. 91 Secretion, how made, p. 91, 92
Sensation, how explained p. 88, 101 How made, p. 158 Corpora Striata p. 115,
120 Septum Lucidum p. 119 Its Striae ibid. The Spinalis Medulla in a Tortoise
officiating instead of the Brain p. 176 Sneezing, why peculiar to Man p. 182
Commune Sensorium, what, p. 191 Striae of the Annular Process, why large, p.
193, 197 Why terminating in a middle medullary Tract, p. 193 Conformation of
the Spinal Marrow differing from that of the Brain, and why p. 200
T
Torcular Herophili p. 42 Tractus Medullaris Th. Nerv. Opt. interjectus of
Vieussenius p. 84 Tract. Med. Natibus antepositus of Vieussen. ibid.
Transpiration, what, p. 95 Conspiration of Hippocrates ibid Tone of Parts p.
109 Testes p. 125 Thalami Nervorum Opticorum p. 121 Tria Foramina relating to
the Insundibulum, vide Insundibulum.
V
Vapors, commonly so called, how sometimes affecting the Fibers of the Dura
Matter, p. 6 Some Veins of the D. Matter entering the third Sinus p. 41 Vertebral
Artery, vide Artery. Veins of the Dura Matter enter the Brain with the Arteries
contrary to those of the Brain it self p. 26, 27, 28. Two Veins entering the
Circular Sinus, p. 45, 46 How the Veins enter the Sinus's p. 52, 53 The effects
of their different entrance, p. 54 The Veins have a different disposition in
the Sinus's of Brutes, from what they have in Men p. 54 Veins of the Corpora
Striata p. 61 The large reductory Veins of the Plexus Choroeides, ibid Vapors
condensed into Lympha p. 81 Vascular constitution of Parts p. 91 Veins, how
continuous to Arteries ibid. Vessels containing the Animal Fluid are capillary
productions of Arteries p. 93 Veins only productions of Arteries p. 94 Vessels
their minuteness p. 95, 96 Vessels of Vessels ibid. Ventricles of the Brain p.
117 Valvula major p. 128, 119 its situation and use p. 128, 129, 130, 132 The
three Ventricles of the Brain p. 117 Vulva Cerebri p. 124
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 9. l. 14. for to read toward; p. 16: l. ult. for from which r. which
from; p. 32. in the title of the Chapter, for Veins r. Vessels; p. 32. l. 13.
after Veins insert which last have already been treated of; p. 64. l. 5. dele
only; p. 89. l. 16. Vitrious r. Vitrous; p. 92, l. 29. for Septometry r.
Leptometry; p. 102. l. 3. for contracted r. contracts; Ibid. l. 29. for
reflexed r. relaxed; p. 109. l. 18. for hastening r. happening; p. 117. l. 28.
for Semicirculari r. Semicirculare; p. 119. l. 12. for becomes r. become; p.
138. from And therefore in the 7th line to the end of that Paragraph, leave it
out: p. 137. l. 7. for above r. below; p. 168. l. 8. after passage add at least
but very little.





M. Vander Gucht Sculp:







