A DIALOGUE BETWIXT Jack and Will, Concerning the Lord Mayor's Going to
Meeting Houses WITH THE SWORD Carried before Him, etc.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1697.

A DIALOGUE BETWIXT Jack and Will, Concerning The Lord Mayor's going to
Meeting Houses with the Sword before him, etc.
Jack. HOW d' ye Friend Will? have you heard the News?


Will. What News d' ye mean Jack? We have little cause to fear ill News, now we
have Peace.


Jack. No? I Am sure I have a piece of ill News to tell you. Did not you hear
that my Lord Mayor went to Salters-Hall on Sunday last, with the Sword carried
before him?


Will. To Salters-Hall, what to do? to a Play, or a Ball there?


Jack. Pox on ye for a nump-skull'd Fellow, to a Play or a Ball on Sundays!


Will. Why all this Fury, Jack? I Am sure I have read a Play that was acted at
Whitehall on a Sunday in the Blessed Martyr's time, present King, Queen,
Prince, and God knows how many Stars and Garters: but indeed I don't know
whether the Sword was carried thither in State or no.


Jack. Come, come, Will; you love to play the Rogue; you know the Lord Mayor
went thither on no such Account.


Will. Why so? how should I know? d' ye think I am a Conjurer? What did he go
thither for then? was it to hear Archbishop Laud's Book of Sports? I hear my
Lord Mayor is a brisk Man, perhaps he loves Sport and Pastime, and is a good
Gamester; for you know we use to say of such, that they play a Sundays.


Jack. Plague on ye, leave off your Banter, I tell you he went thither to a
Conventicle.


Will. Pish, what is that your ill News? I was afraid you would have told me that
he had gone to treat the Pope's Nuncio at Dinner at Guildhall; or that you had
had some such frightful Story to tell me, as that the Town was on fire again,
and we should have been forced to be at the Expense of a new Monument, which
would have ruined the Orphans to all Intents and Purposes.


Jack. Well well, Friend Will, tho the Town be not a fire, I am sure the Church
is.


Will. Nay then Friend Jack, my Lord Mayor did very well to carry the wooden
Sword away from it, for that would have added Fuel to the Flames.


Jack. Prithee leave off thy fooling, and let us discourse the Point in good
earnest; thou always pretendedst to be a true Church-of- England-man, and don't
ye think that the Lord Mayor's going to a Conventicle with the Sword is an
Injury to the Church of England?


Will. Why truly Jack, whether thou believe it or not, I am as much for the
Church of England as any Man alive, and for my part I think that my Lord
Mayor's going to Meetings with the Sword is a very noble Act: for it seems to
me, that by carrying the Sword thither, he designs to make a Conquest of 'em
for the Church of England.


Jack. Well, I see you love to banter: but you know that by going thither with
the Sword, he makes a Surrender of the Church of England's Authority to a
pitiful little Conventicle.


Will. Why prithee Man, if the Sword be all, no matter if it had been burnt a
dozen Years ago: Thou know very well, that in the late Blessed Reigns it was
the peculiar Doctrine of the Pulpits, that the Church had no other Weapons but
Prayers and Tears; and why do make all this pother about a wooden Sword? Sure
thou art not afraid it will produce as strange Effects as the old rusty Sword
in Westminster Abbey, with which they say the Norman Duke conquered England.


Jack. Thou talkst like a mad Man; it is not the very individual Sword that I
mean, but it is the Badg and Ensign of Authority that is carried away from the
Church to a nasty lowzy Conventicle: a Pox on 'em, damn 'em, I hope to see 'em
fast in the Pinfold yet once more before I die; and then we'll make 'em pay for
their Insolence, and Contempt of the Church.


Will. Prithee don't rage so: thou have been so out of Humor ever since Lewis
XIV was necessitated to resign his new Conquests, and abjure King James, that
thou art fitter for Bedlam than any Place else. Come, I tell thee, that my Lord
Mayor's carrying the Sword thither, neither adds to the Authority of the
Meetings, nor derogates from the Authority of the Church of England, but rather
enlarges her Pale. But after all the do^ and stir^ you make about the Church, I
believe I may say to you as the little Boy said to his Mother, Mother, what
need you talk so much of the Church? you don't go so often to it.


Jack. That Is nothing to you Will: do you make out your Assertion, and then
I Will say something to thee.


Will. Have but Patience, and I will. Thou know that the Dissenters are
allowed their Meetings by Act of Parliament, which I hope is another kind of
Authority than my Lord Mayor's Sword; and most honest Men think it but
reasonable they should have that Liberty, notwithstanding the threatening Words
of the D -- n of C. that if King William did not take away the damned Act of
Toleration, they would send him back again to the Bogs of Holland.


Jack. Prithee let your Stories alone, and come to the matter. I own that an
Act of Parliament is a better Authority than my Lord Mayor's Sword.


Will. Thou know also that that Liberty is allowed them on condition that
they subscribe to the Doctrine of the Church of England.


Jack. I do.


Will. Why then it is certain that my Lord Mayor could not go thither with nor
without his Sword, if the Dissenters did not qualify themselves according to
the Terms of the Act.


Jack. No, he could not.


Will. Is it not plain then, that if my Lord Mayor's Sword signify any thing,
it comes to defend the Doctrine of the Church of England at the Meeting as well
as in the Church? And is not his Presence there with the Ensigns of Authority
an Evidence that the Doctrine of our Church is preached there? whereas in
former times the Meetings were looked upon to be quite another thing than the
Church of England. So that I think it is plain to any Man's Understanding, that
his being there is only a Declaration that the Pale of the Church is enlarged,
and that we now own them for Brethren, that by the heat of some ill Men were
formerly accounted our Enemies!


Jack. Nay but you mistake the Matter. The Meetings have only a Liberty, but
ours is the Church established by Law; their Meetings must not be accounted the
Church, because they have neither Bishops, nor Ceremonies, nor Benefices.


Will. Prithee Jack don't talk such Nonsense. The Meetings are as much
established by Law as the Church of England, if an Act of Parliament be a Law:
and you know that it is only the Acts of Parliament that defend you in the
practice of those things wherein you differ from them. And our wise Lawgivers
finding the mischievous Consequence of having one Party of Protestants
empowered to destroy another that differed from them only in Circumstantials,
as if they had been Heretics, Schismatics, and God knows what, thought fit to
take those Edg-tools out of the hands of a set of Men that know not how to use
them, but to the wrong of their Neighbors, and to throw the Nation into
Convulsions; and have granted Liberty to our Brethren to worship God in the
very same Ordinances that we do, tho they don't observe all those Modes and
Forms which by our selves are accounted indifferent.


Jack. How do you mean indifferent? Is it a thing indifferent to observe the
Directions and Commands of the Church? that is fine Work indeed!


Will. By Indifferent I mean a thing that may be done or left undone, and so
the Law m^^ns; otherwise it would never have left me at my liberty to go to a
Meeting where there are no Ceremonies, or to a Church where there are
Ceremonies.


Jack. I am sure the Church is Apostolical, and enjoined those things upon her
Members on pain of Excommunication, both as to Belief and Practice, if we may
believe her Canons.


Will. Thou art in a grand Mistake, Jack. I grant you there was once such a Set
of men as arrogated to themselves the Name of the Church, that did so; but you
know that the greatest Divines of the Church of England did always account
those things indifferent even in Queen Elizabeth's time: Read but the Lord
Bishop of Salisbury's Letters, and you will there find plain Proofs of it,
under the Hands of our greatest Bishops to the Divines in Switzerland: and for
what has been done since, you know that it was a Court, and a Popish Faction
that enjoined those things on such and such Penalties, merely to widen the
Differences amongst Protestants, that they might swallow up both our Religion
and Liberties; but the Church of England has altered her Mind since.


Jack. How! the Church of England altered her Mind? What? d' ye make her akin
to Mahomet? as if her Religion depended upon the Moon, and were as changeable
as she.


Will. Prithee not so fast Jack, I know what I say; the Church of England has
altered her Mind oftener than once; and no Disgrace to her neither. Protestants
hold no Church nor Council Infallible; we have indeed an infallible Rule, the
Scriptures, but so long as we are clogged with Humanity, we are either like to
come short of it, or shoot beyond it; and in both these Cases must alter our
Mind, or set our selves in opposition to the Almighty.


Jack. This is Fanatical Cant. When did the Church of England alter her Mind?


Will. Nay Jack, if you be so forgetful, I Will tell you: The Church of England
in Queen Elizabeth's time prayed her to cut off Mary Queen of Scots, the Heir
apparent, or presumptive at least, to the Crown, and a Crowned Head too,
because she was at the Head of a Popish Plot. In Charles the Second's time the
Church of England damned all them that were but for excluding the Duke of York
upon the like Account. In Queen Elizabeth's time the Church of England made an
Act of Parliament, that the King and Parliament might limit and alter the
Succession; it is the 13th of Eliz. as I take it: In Charles the First and
Second's time they accounted it damnable Doctrine to recede in the least from
the Her^ditary Lineal Succession. In Charles the First and Second's time she
held it damnable not to believe the Doctrines of Passive Obedience and
Non-Resistance, and all her Clergy were sworn to it in her Sense: but in the
end of James the Second's Reign, when he came to touch their own Copyhold, then
the Church bellowed so loud, that she was heard as far as the Hague, she put on
a blue Cloak and Jack-boots, and fought against her Sovereign with Jack and
Spear, and after all settled King William, our present glorious Monarch, on the
Throne, contrary to all her former avowed Principles. So that you must either
own that the Church of England has altered her Mind, or declare your self a
rank Jacobite, and disown any Church but their Faction: and to tell you the
truth, it is that wretched Cabal that blows all these Sparks of Contention among
the hotheaded Party of our Church, and I know you keep Company with them.


Jack. Thou have said a great deal to convince me; but pray let me see how the
Church of England has altered her Mind as to that Point of the Dissenters.


Will. Why they have altered it in giving them their Liberty by a Law, whereas
they formerly persecuted them.


Jack. How strangely do you talk? It was the Parliament that gave them the
Liberty, and not the Church; if she had done it, it must have been by
Convocation.


Will. Nay Jack, you talk strangely, and not I. Is not all the People of
England represented by the Parliament?


Jack. Who doubts that?


Will. Is not the Church then represented in Parliament?


Jack. That Is another thing: The Church is the Bishops and their Clergy.


Will. Grant it be so: The Bishops you know do actually sit in Parliament in
the House of Lords; so that you must own the Church is well enough represented
there where all her Fathers meet; and you likewise know that the Clergy as
Freeholders have their Votes in choosing Members of the House of Commons, so
that there the Clergy is sufficiently represented, nay better and more
universally than in any Convocation. Then you know the Laity of the Church is
truly represented in Parliament, whereas they have no room in the Convocation,
which is only the Officers of the Church, and can no more be called the Church
it self, than Officers without Soldiers can be called an Army. So that when
you inveigh against the Liberty given to our Dissenting Brethren, you inveigh
against the Church of England her self, who by her Bishops and other
Representatives in Parliament have granted them that Liberty: And tho they have
reserved the Sacramental Test as a Quit-rent, to make all ^^ose who come into
any Place of Power and Trust, acknowledge their being Members of that Body of
Protestants who are known by the name of the Church-yet they have not
restrained any of those Members from frequenting other Meetings where the
Doctrine of the Church is preached either with or without the Ensigns and
Badges of their Office. So that those Gentlemen who by their Order would go to
restrain an Act of Parliament, might do well to consider how they will be able
to justify themselves if the Parliament should call them in question for it;
which they are more like to do than to turn his Lordship out for acting
conformably to the Law, and the Practice of other Corporations, to whom London
ought rather to set a Pattern for asserting the Liberties of the Subject, than
to follow them.


Jack. Nay now thou speak big, Will.


Will. I have reason for what I say. It Is the Parliament that has settled the
Limits of our Church, and given her all the Authority she has, otherwise it is a
mere Bull to call her the Church by Law established; and that same Authority
may enlarge her Bounds and Pale when they please: and therefore to be so angry
at the Parliament for taking in all those that embrace the Doctrine of the
Church under the Protection of the Law, tho it has not admitted 'em to partake
of the Benefices, is a horrid piece of Ingratitude to that August Assembly, who
have all along defended the Church of England in the Possession of what she
enjoys, more than her Brethren the Dissenters; and by this Liberty the
Parliament have added to her Strength, by giving those a Legal Authority to
defend her Doctrine without Wages, which so many of those that profess
themselves to be her Sons, have either slily undermined, or but faintly
asserted, notwithstanding their Benefices. And you know, Jack, that the
Dissenters have been as stanch Patriots of their Country, and Defenders of our
Religion and Liberties, as any Men in the Nation: and therefore it is the
Interest of all Men that wish well to either of 'em, to promote a hearty Union
amongst Protestants of all Denominations whatsoever. So that for my own part I
can see no harm in my Lord Mayor's carrying the Sword to a Me^ting as well as
to a Church; it has heard Passive Obedience preached long enough, and it will
do it no hurt to be taught the Doctrine of Self-defence in its turn: for if the
latter Doctrine had not been more serviceable to us than the former, we had
neither had a Protestant Church nor Meeting House to have carried the Sword to
long e're this.


Jack. Well, but for all that you cannot but say it is an ill thing to carry the
Sword thither.


Will. Prithee in what sense is it ill? For my part I think the Sword ought to
be carried thither rather than any where else; because to give the Dissenters
their due, they always held that it was lawful to make use of the Sword in
defense of their Religion and Liberties, as w^ll against Tyrants at home, as
from Invaders abroad; wh^reas many of our Churchmen would allow of no other
Weapons against a Tyrant at home but Prayers and Tears: but to say the truth,
and no more, that was only while the Tyrant empowered them to tyrannize over
the Bodies, Consciences and Estates of their Fellow Christians and Subjects;
for when he came to touch themselves, nay but one of their Fingers, as a famous
Author has it, they made use of Guns and Spears, instead of Prayers and Tears,
against him; and let him understand, as the same Author says, that they had
given him only a spiritual Kingdom, and not a Kingdom of this World: for if his
Kingdom had been of this World, then would his Servants have fought for him.


Jack. Ay but a pox on it, tho we allow our selves to do so, yet we would not
have the Dissenters use the Sword; ours is the Apostolical Church, and they are
but Schismatics.


Will. That Is easier said than proved; they hold the Doctrine of our Church,
and live up to it as well, if not better than many of our selves: so that we
must not c^ll Men Schismatics for differing from us in those things which we
our selves account Indifferent. And as for the Sword, tho some Gentlemen have
thought fit to endeavor the preventing its being carried to Meetings by an
Order, I cannot think that the Act of Parliament did ever intend to make better
Provision for our Swords than for our Souls, or for the Ensigns of Magistracy
than for Magistrates themselves. If our Legislators had thought the going to
Meetings would be either hurtful to the Bodies, Estates, Liberties, or
Consciences of English Men, they would never have allowed them at all; and if
they had thought that the Nation would be any ways endangered by Magistrates
going to Meetings, they would have made an Exception against it. So that for
any Party of Men to take upon them to bind up any Person, especially a
Magistrate of so great Power and Trust as the Lord Mayor of London; where the
Law has left him at liberty, seems to me to be a manifest Incroachment upon the
Legislative Power: and I wish with all my Heart there may not be more of Envy
and particular Pique, (in such especially that are angry to see the Lord Mayor
have more Courage than some of his Predecessors) than of Zeal for the Church of
England, at the bottom of this Opposition: for my own part I know not why those
Dissenters who have so cordially contributed to deliver us from Tyranny and
Popery, should be suffered still to languish and groan under the Yoke of an
Ecclesiastical Tyranny themselves, and be deprived of the Liberties and
Privileges that other English Protestants enjoy. So farewell Jack till next
Meeting.


Jack. I have not had such a rude Mercurial this good while; I Will go to Sam's,
and get a Glass of Cordial Water, and then to the Commons, and recruit my self
over a Bottle, and muster up more Forces against next Meeting. Farewell.


FINIS.

