A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR AND ALDERMEN Of
the CITY of LONDON, AT THE Guildhall-Chappel, September XVII. 1682.

By JOSHUA RICHARDSON, A.M. Chaplain to his Lordship.

LONDON, Printed by A.G. and J.P. for W. Ketilby, at the Bishops-head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

MOORE MAYOR.
Martis xxvio die Septembris, 1682. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi,
Angliae, etc. Tricesimo quarto.
THIS Court does desire Mr. Richardson to print his SERMON lately preached at
the Guildhall-Chappel, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN MOORE, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON.
My Lord,
THE mean Opinion I had of this slight Composition when I preached it, removed
me far from any Apprehensions of an Order to print it; but Your Lordship, and
the Honorable Court, to whom it is habitual to overvalue all the Performances
of Your Servants, having required the printing of it; I present you with an
honest, wellmeant Sermon, and of which I should despise from any Man the
Complement of a higher Character. The Relation I stand in to Your Lordship,
might put me under a temptation of taking this Opportunity to mention something
that might look like Flattery; but Your Lordship's Virtue surmounts the
Possibility of it. To say that the Memorable Lord Mayor of Eighty two, Sir JOHN
MOORE, is a Person most exemplarily Devout and Pious, Wise and Prudent,
Obliging and Affable, Valiant and Loyal, were no more than for which I should
have all the honest World my Vouchers. May God Almighty bless Your Lordship,
and grant that this City may always have such a Magistrate to fill the Chair. I
am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient Servant and Chaplain, JOSHUA RICHARDSON.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR.
PROVE. XIV. 34. Righteousness exalts a Nation: but Sin is a reproach to any
People.
WHEN there is no Propensity more prevailing in Humane Nature, than the desire
of Honor and Esteem, and there is scarce any thing which Men bear more
Impatiently than the being rendered little and despicable; when a nice
Resentment of any Diminution does not only affect some particular Persons, but
spreads it self, like an Universal Genius, through whole Communities and Bodies
Politic; insomuch that the several Individuals do not only agree to defray
every one his share of the Charges, requisite to support the Dignity of the
just Governments they live under, but are in some Constitutions known willingly
to submit to many private Pressures for the promoting of the Grandeur of the
whole: things standing thus, I say, it might appear strange and surprising that
any society of Men should be generally vicious and debauched, when there is
nothing more certain than that Virtue and Piety alone can render them great and
considerable, and that by the same degrees that they degenerate from the
practice of Religion, they must necessarily sink and dwindle into Contempt
among all that are round about 'em, And yet, in an Age that has reconciled
almost all Moral Contradictions, Experience does convince us, that, whether
their Understandings are more infatuated, or their Wills more perverted, Men
generally act in this matter by wrong Measures, and pursue their most desired
End by false Means. Though Justice and Integrity, Agreement and Union,
Fortitude and Magnanimity, Diligence and Industry, and the like Virtues, are
the great Instruments of advancing the Reputation of a Kingdom or State, yet
while Men retain a strong desire to This, they retchlesly neglect the practice
of Those, and seem to lie under the fatal Delusion of a deceitful hope that
Vice and Infamy are not inseparable. Now this may arise either from a more
confirmed Mistake concerning, or an actual Inadvertency to, the true State of
the matter; and in order to remove Both, I shall endeavor in the following
discourse to evince the everlasting Truth, and to prompt you to a present
Consideration, of the Assertion of my Text: Righteousness exalts a Nation:
but sin is a reproach to any People.

In treating of which words I shall do these two things:

I. I shall consider two particular Notions of Righteousness contained in
Scripture, which may be accommodated to our present purpose.

II. Because both the Assertions of my Text, (after I shall have briefly given
you an account of the Righteousness therein mentioned) are so plain and obvious
that I need not vary them into any other Propositions, I shall endeavor to
make out distinctly the truth of each of 'em as they lie before me.

I. I am to consider two particular Notions of Righteousness contained in
Scripture, which may be accommodated to our present purpose. Now Righteousness
in Scripture, as it falls within the compass of our present Undertaking, may be
considered either in a more strict and confined, or a more large and
comprehensive sense.

First, In a stricter and more confined sense, it is taken for that Equity
which ought to be observed both in distributive and commutative Justice; in
rendering to every one his Right with regard to more Public and Judicial
proceedings, and in doing as we would be done by in our mutual Dealings and
private Contracts with one another. With respect to the former, Lev. 19.15. the
Jewish Magistrates have this Command given them: Ye shall do no Unrighteousness
in Judgment, thou shall not respect the Person of the Poor, nor honor the
Person of the Mighty, but in Righteousness shall thou judge thy Neighbor. And
with regard to the latter, Psalm. 15. to the question, Who shall abide in thy
Tabernacle, who shall dwell in thy holy hill? the Answer is, he that walks
uprightly, and works Righteousness; and what Righteousness is there meant,
appears by the several instances of it afterward enumerated, viz. That
speaks the truth in his Heart, that backbiteth not with his Tongue, that does
no evil to his Neighbor, that swears to his own hurt and changes not; that
is, who is sincere and unreserv'd, Charitable and uncensorious, innocent and
harmless, and so inflexibly just to any Promises he makes, however
disadvantagious they may prove to his own Interest, that he continues honest
and punctual to 'em though he be a loser thereby. Now according to this
Acceptance of the word, the Righteous Man is he, who, if he be a Magistrate,
has the Courage to stem a popular Current, and dares go through with his Duty,
though apposed by a potent and restless Faction; who is even and steady in all
his Actions, and suffers not himself to be biased either by Passion or
Interest, but in all his Proceedings acts without Partiality; who is neither to
be bribed nor awed into or out of any thing, but is guided by the Rules of
eternal Justice and Rectitude, Conscience and Equity: Or, if he be a private
Man, he is one that is fair and open in all his Dealings; that does to others
as he may warrantably expect to receive from them; that makes good his
Contracts, and performs his Oaths and Promises; that eschews all manner of
Fraud and Trick, deceives and imposes upon and oppresses no Man, and does
nothing but what he can honestly stand to, and justify, and modestly own
without a Blush.

Secondly, Righteousness is used in Scripture in a more large and comprehensive
sense, as it takes in our whole Duty, and includes whatever we are obliged to
perform toward God, our Neighbor, or our Selves; all Duty being properly
Righteousness; and so it comprehends all manner of Virtue and Piety, Holiness
and Sanctity. To this purpose, Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5. Moses dissuading the People from a
vain Opinion of their own Merit, and the humor of attributing their Successes
and Victories to any thing in themselves, words it after this manner, Speak not
thou in thy heart, after the Lord thy God has cast them (i. e. the Canaanites)
out from before thee, saying, For my Righteousness the Lord has brought me to
possess this Land. Not for thy Righteousness, or the Vprightness of thy Heart
do thou go to possess their Land, but for the Wickedness of these Nations
the Lord thy God does drive them out from before thee. Where the Righteousness
which he forbids them to assume to themselves, must be supposed of an equal
Latitude to the Wickedness with which he charges those Nations, which was not
merely their Idolatry, or any particular sort of Vice, but Wickedness in
general. And Romans 6.13. the consecrating our selves entirely to the service of
God, and leading an holy and pious Life, is called, A yielding our Members
Instruments of Righteousness. And again, Luke 1.6. Zacharias and Elizabeth
having been said to be righteous before God, the meaning of that Character
appears in the immediately subsequent words, viz. Walking in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless. And according to this
Acceptance of the word, the righteous Man is he, that fears God, and keeps all
his Commandments always; that is Devout and Religious, Holy and Virtuous, and
does herein exercise himself to have always a Conscience void of offense, both
toward God and toward Men. Now though it be true, that Righteousness taken in
the stricter sense (for the Exercise of Justice and Honesty) does highly
contribute to, and is indeed a necessary Instrument of, the Maintenance and
Support, the Benefit and Advantage of Civil Societies; yet because in the
latter part of the Verse mention is made of Sin indefinitely and universally,
that the Opposition may be entire, I presume the Righteousness set against it
ought to be understood in the like Latitude. Having said thus much toward the
Explication of the Righteousness here mentioned, and fixed that Notion of it,
which I conceive most agreeable to the Design and Import of my Text, I proceed:

II. To make out each of the Assertions contained therein; And,

First, That Righteousness exalts a Nation: Now so far forth as any thing
tends to make a Nation prosperous and wealthy, and formidable, so far it
likewise contributes to exalt their Honor and Renown; and that the exercise of
an Universal Righteousness has a Tendency toward the former, will appear in
the following Particulars.

First, In that it entitles them to the particular and extraordinary Favor of
God.

Secondly, In that it preserves their Union and Agreement among themselves.

Thirdly, In that it removes the Grounds and Occasions of Fears and
Apprehensions of Danger from abroad.

Fourthly, In that it comprehends the practice of all those things that have a
Moral Efficiency toward the producing the Honor of a Nation.

First, The exercise of Universal Righteousness, entitles a Nation to the
particular and extraordinary Favor of God; and secures him on their side, as a
Bulwark and Defense, a Patron and Benefactour to them. Holiness, and Justice,
and Goodness and Truth, are the Perfections of the Deity, and by imitating
these we become like to God himself, and are followers of him as dear Children,
resembling their Parents in Feature and Disposition; we have the Similitude and
Image of God renewed upon us, and are made Partakes of a Divine Nature: And
being so, we have all the reason in the World to believe that God is very much
delighted and pleased with us, and has a peculiar concern and regard for us, of
which we may be assured to find the happy Effects. For likeness is the Cause
and Ground of Love; and for the same reason that he loves himself, viz. because
he is Holy and Righteous, Good and Beneficent, etc. he does certainly love
those that imitate him in these Perfections. The Righteous Lord loves
Righteousness, his Eyes will (with Complacency) behold the upright, Psalm. 11.7.
So long as a Nation continue to be his People, not only upon the unalienable
Right of Dominion which he has over all his Creatures, but by a voluntary
Resignation and Surrender of themselves to be governed by his Laws; so long
they may hope upon good grounds that He will be Their God, and accordingly
exercise an especial and particular Providence over them. They shall not only
be partakers in common with the rest of Mankind of those Emanations of Divine
Goodness that are diffused and scattered through all the World; but the Rays
of it shall be contracted and fixed upon them; They shall live under the warmer
Influences of his Bounty, and their Preservation be his more immediate Care.
Indeed it cannot be expected that in a numerous Body of Men every one should
prove virtuous; but when in a Society the honor of Religion is zealously
maintained, the public Worship of God strictly kept up, Virtue encouraged and
rewarded, and Vice discountenanced and punished, so that a general Vein of
Piety runs through it; these things do mightily advance it in the Divine
Favor, and the contrary as much depress it. Almighty God declares to the Jews,
(and considering that he always loves wisely, and without any unaccountable
Fondness, it will hold good of any other People,) 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is
with you while you be with him, and if you seek him he will be found of you;
but if you forsake him he will forsake you. And again (which though it be in a
particular Case, yet may I suppose be without any Incongruity applied to a
Community) 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me I will honor; and they that
despise me shall be lightly regarded. Now the Advantages that accrue to any
Nation by having attained the Divine Favor, are apparent and visible in this,
that he is to such as a Friend and Allie; he prospers their State and defends
their Cause; he blesses and seconds their Endeavors, espouses their Interests,
is a Friend to their Friends, and an Enemy to all their Enemies; he is their
constant Patron and Benefactour, and their assured Guardian and Protector; he
is always in the midst of them, and Encamps himself round about them; he
increases their Basket and Store, and puts them into such a Condition that they
may lend to many Nations, and need not borrow; and he discovers all the sly
Plots and Machinations, and defeats all the unjust open Hostilities that may be
attempted upon them, so that no Weapon formed against them shall prosper.

Secondly, The practice of Universal Righteousness tends to exalt a Nation, in
that it promotes Union and Agreement between its Members. Now Union is so
indispensably necessary toward the making a People happy, much more toward
the rendering them Great, that the want of it is enough to ruin the most
flourishing Kingdom in the World. The adjusting of Supremacy and Subordination,
a Power to Command and a Consent to obey, and Agreement to live together in
Peace and Order, Love and Amity, those are essential to all Constitutions of
Government; and without them any Society would soon degenerate into a
promiscuous Herd of Salvage Animals, continually employed in worrying and
devouring each other. Dissension among a People, is like a latent Disease in an
human Body, that secretly preys upon its Vitals, and from a State of Health and
Vigor, reduces it by Degrees to a faint and languishing Condition, and is
perpetually hastening its Dissolution. Now Pride, Ambition, Covetousness,
Discontent, Self-conceit, and other the like deviations from universal
Righteousness, do naturally separate Men in Mind and Affection, and make them
uncharitable and censorious, ungovernable and Factious. But Religion is a
strong and sure Ligament of Society; it cements Men's Affections, Unites their
Souls, and ties them together by the very Heart Strings; it mollifies their
Natures and sweetens their Tempers, and takes away all that roughness which
otherwise would make them unfit for Conversation. It is altogether inconsistent
with the Rules of Righteousness for Men to Hate and Malign, to Slander and
Reproach, to keep up Feuds and Animosities, and to fasten distinguishing and
opprobious Names upon each other. Such Practices do directly tend to dissolve
that Union which it is the great Design of Religion to settle and establish.
The Laws of Christianity have provided for the Good of Societies by laying upon
them the strictest Commands backed with the highest Sanctions, to Peace and
Love, to Charity and good Will, to desire and rejoice in and endeavor to
promote the good of each other; whereby they become a muttal Relief and Supply,
Defense and Security, and every Member of a Society has a share in every one;
and so are sure of all interchangeable Offices of Kindness and Friendship.
Agreement and Unanimity are the Beauty and Strength of any Body Politic; and a
Kingdom and a City by being divided forfeit them both. Now it is one great End
of Christianity, to conserve Peace among Mankind; and whoever they be that do
not what they can in order thereunto, whatever refined Names they may assume to
themselves, I am sure it is by an odd Figure in Rhetoric that any wise Man
will call them Christians. There is a general Complaint of the Divisions that
are among us, and there is too much reason for it; now the Apostle Romans 16.17.
bids us to Mark them which cause Divisions, (an Exhortation which by Parity of
Reason will reach as much to Factions in the State, as to Schisms in the
Church) and to avoid such Men. Who they are will not easily be acknowledged,
each Party being as forward to shift off the Guilt, as they are to lament the
Misfortune, and I shall not here enter into a strict Scrutiny of the Matter,
being much more desirous that the thing it self were removed, than the Persons
barely discovered. Only thus much I shall say, that whoever they be, who out of
Pride or Self-conceit, Peevishness or Humor, Covetousness or Interest,
Ill Nature or Uncharitableness can oppose and disturb a most excellently formed
Government; or who talking very much of Religion, and Practicing but little,
can strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel, and rather than submit to an innocent
Ceremony, separate from the Communion of the best established National Church in
the World, and Sacrifice her Peace to little, imaginary, groundless Scruples;
those are they, under what Denomination soever they fall, who are Causers of
Divisions, and so come within the Apostles Caution, and do indeed contribute
very highly to the depressing and diminishing any Society they are Members of.

Thirdly, The Practice of Universal Righteousness tends to the exalting a
Nation, as it prevents the Grounds and Occasions of any Fears or Apprehensions
of Danger from abroad. Since the World is not governed by one Universal
Monarch, but divided into several Kingdoms and Principalities and Republics,
and since some ambitious Men will be always likely enough, without any just
Pretensions, when Occasion offers, to endeavor the Enlargement of their own
Dominions by the Accession of new Conquests; it is necessary to support the
Dignity of any People that they be able to guard and defend themselves against
any foreign Attemts, or hostile Incursions of their Neighbors. And this the
Practice of Righteousness does highly contribute to, as by diverse other Ways,
so Particularly by giving a general Reputation to a People, and spreading their
Fame wide through the World. Societies of Men are judged of by some common
Genius that chiefly runs through the whole. For a People to be generally
Industrious and Sober and Martial, this would gain them a settled Name and
Credit. The Neighboring Nations round about who observed them would say,
surely this is a wise and an understanding People. And this it is manifest would
very greatly advance them, and make others willing to keep up Commerce and
enter into Leagues and Alliances with them; it would render them truly great
and formidable, so that an Ambitious Neighbor should not think it safe to
Invade them, nor cheap to Affront them. Whereas on the contrary Wickedness does
slur and reproach a Nation; for a People to be for the most part vicious and
debauched and effeminate, this makes them mean and contemtible, and sollicites
and invites foreign Attempts; and by adding Courage to their Enemies renders
them half-conquer'd before they are engaged with.

Fourthly, Universal Righteousness does imply the Practice of all those things
that have a moral Efficiency toward the producing the Honor of the Nation.
There are none of the Virtues which do not some way or other, more or less,
contribute toward the Benefit of Society; but there are some which are more
immediately necessary to the keeping up and Maintenance of its Grandeur; and
the Disposition to, and Exercise and Habit of these, does depend upon the
Practice of all the Others. I suppose it may be sufficient for me to instance
only in two, viz. Wisdom and Courage; by the former of which I do not mean a
certain slippery Craft and Wiliness, but a solid steady Prudence, nor by the
latter a sort of rash and brutal and Valor, but a brave and generous
Fortitude. Now it will, I think, be plain that neither of those can inhabit in
the Breasts of vicious Men. For with reference to Prudence, Vice does infatuate
their Minds, and craze their Understandings; and render them unfit to manage or
deliberate of weighty and important Affairs. It renders them unable to discern,
and unactive to prosecute their truest and greatest Interests. It makes them
hot and fiery in their Debates, rash and precipitant in their Resolutions, and
giddy and inconstant in their Actions. It misguides their Judgments, and
exposes them to the danger of frequent fatal Mistakes; and thereby supplants
that settled Prudence which is required to support the Dignity of a Nation. But
so long as Men are steered by the Rules of Virtue, they are like to have clear
and distinct Apprehensions of things, and to fix on proper Means to accomplish
their honest Ends. Their sight is not deluded by Pride or Passion or Interest,
but they see things as they are in themselves without the false shapes that
those or the like Vices are wont to put upon them. They soon foresee Dangers
and take the surest Course to obviate them; and quickly apprehend
Inconveniences and make the wisest Provisions against them. In like manner with
respect to Fortitude, Vice does emasculate the Spirits, and soften the Minds of
Men and render them unfit for great and hazardous Enterprises. Intemperance and
Debauchery, Luxury and Wantoness do tend to make Men Impotent and listless,
cowardly and effeminate, and take off that Hardiness of Temper which is
requisite to fit them for a Military state. The wicked flee when none pursue,
their Folly and Guilt expose them to the Terror and Affright of false and
Imaginary Fears. But now a Man that keeps his Virtue and Innocence entire, is
inspired with Bravery and Magnanimity, and dares meet and despise a Danger.
Religion raises Men to an Heroic Constitution of Mind, and fills them with true
Courage and Valor, and enspirits and animates them to do mighty things in
defense of their Prince, their Country, or their Religion. And because these
and other the like Virtues so immediately necessary to support the Honor of a
Society, are all founded upon the Uniform Practice of Universal Righteousness,
I think I need say no more toward the proof that Righteousness exalts a
Nation, which is the former Assertion of my Text. I proceed now to speak more
briefly of the latter, viz.

II. Sin is a Reproach to any People. In the Management of which I suppose I
need not go about to show how sin is a Reproach to a People as taken complexly
and making up a Body Politic; for that I have been doing in Effect, all the
time I have been proving how much the Practice of Virtue tends to exalt the
Honor and Happiness of a Nation; but I may take the Liberty to make out how
Sin is a Reproach to human Nature it self, or to Men considered singly and
individually, and especially to Christians. Now this will appear in the
following Particulars: It is manifestly a Reproach to any Man:

First, To act contrary to the Dignity of his Nature and the Obligations of his
Profession.

Secondly, To violate the Dictates of his own Conscience.

Thirdly, To be employed in doing that which sometime or other he will
certainly wish undone.

Fourthly, To make that his choice which has no other tendency than to his
Ruin.

First, It is a Reproach to a Man to act contrary to the Dignity of his Nature
and the Obligations of his Profession. If we consider our selves in common but
as Men, all Vice is below us; and had we that Reverence which we ought to have
for our selves, we should be raised above all tentations to it, and be able to
despise and reject it as a base, unmanly thing. Sin does deform the native
Beauty, and degrade the Excellency of Mankind; their Craft turns them into
Foxes, their Fierceness and Rage into Tigers, and their Lust into Baboons; and
it is little less shameful for us to have the same Dispositions, than it would
be to exchange Shape and Figure with those Animals. But if we look upon a Man
as he is a Christian, He is one that professes a most pure and holy Religion,
and has agreed to be ruled and governed by the Laws of the Gospel, and solemnly
vowed in his Baptism to renounce the Devil and all his Works, and obediently to
keep Gods holy Will and Commandments, and continue Christ's faithful Servant to
his lives end; now if our Religion does strictly forbid Men to be dissolute and
intemporate, Lascivious and Wanton, Proud and Haughty, Censorious and
Uncharitable, Turbulent and Seditious, etc. any Man who allows himself in the
Practice of these Vices, and yet professes himself a Christian, is false to his
Vow and Promise, and an Hypocrite to his Profession, and I suppose it will be
granted that it must needs be a Reproach to be so.

Secondly, It is a Reproach to a Man to violate the Dictates of his own
Conscience. The Quiet and Peace of our Minds is so absolutely necessary to our
Happiness, that he must undergo the Imputation of Folly, that does not take
care to preserve them; but this no Man does who acts not according to the best
Principles he has: Now the great of our Duty are so plain and visible that all
Mankind cannot but discern them; and according as they keep up to, or deviate
from them, stand either acquitted or condemned to themselves. But Christians
above all others have so plain, and so full a Discovery made to them in the
Gospel, that they are utterly destitute of any Plea of Ignorance, and have
nothing left them but to act according to their Knowledge, and live up to the
Precepts contained therein. And since the doing the contrary will make them
stand self-condemned, be a perpetual Sting and Scorpion to their Souls, and
continually gaul and disease their Minds, and deprive them of that inward
Pleasure and satisfaction with which the Performance of their Duty would always
feast them, it must needs reflect disgrace upon them thus to defeat their own
End, and to supplant and destroy their own Happiness, of which they have a
strong desire rooted in their Natures.

Thirdly, It is a Reproach to a Man to be employed in that which he will some
time or other certainly wish undone. It was never accounted a part of Wisdom
for a Man to exercise himself in such Employments as will turn to no account,
nor compensate the time and cost and pains bestowed upon them; but it is
downright Folly for him to do that which he is assured beforehand he must
repent of. And yet this is the inconsiderate Sinners wretched state, he is
busy at present in preparing himself sad future Work. If he continue
impenitent 'till he be punished for his Wickedness in the other World, there he
will with a fruitless and too late Remorse everlastingly Reproach himself for
his Madness and Stupidity; or suppose the best of his Case, if he do in this
Life betake himself to sober Purposes and make effectual Resolutions of
Amendment, yet even then he must undergo the Agonies of a severe Repentance,
which will be accompanied with that shame and sorrow, that Displeasure and
Indignation against himself, which will be much more sharp and pungent, than
ever the sins which produced it were pleasant and gratifying. Now what is more
inconsistent with the honor of Reasonable Creatures, who are endued with
faculties which enable them to foresee and decline a Danger, than wilfully to
commit that which will end so fatally.

Fourthly, It is a Reproach for a Man to make that his own Choice which has no
other Tendency than to his Ruin. That all the Inconveniences and Miseries of
this Life are the proper Consequences of sin., and all the Horrors and
Tortures of the next will be the unavoidable Punishment of it, is so plain to
all that either believe Holy Writ, or consider the Nature of things, that I
need not stand to prove it. And what a Reflection is it upon our Credit to choose
sin under all these Disadvantages? And yet this we do; the Devil himself can
only tempt and allure, but cannot force-us to it; God has not left us under a
Necessity of sinning, nor can any Temptations prove irresistible but through
our own Fault; God will not withhold from us sufficient Grace; if we ask for
it, and faithfully improve it. And if we may conquer Temtations if we will, (
i. e. if we concur with the Grace of God which he is ready to afford us to that
end) then if we are wicked, we make sin our own Choice, and must not only
undergo the unavoidable Pressures of it, but suffer the Reproach of the
unpitiable State of being miserable by our own Election, and merely because we
would be so.

I have now done with the Consideration of each of the Assertions of my Text,
and I might here take occasion to infer that the Precepts of Virtue and Piety
are enjoined us that it may go well with us; that God has not imposed any thing
arbitrarily upon us, nor merely to exercise his Sovereignty over us; but has
prescribed us only such things as are really for the Good and Benefit of all
Mankind, either singly or in Society. But I shall conclude with the Exhortation
of the Apostle, Phil. 4.8. Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be
any Virtue, and if there be any Praise, think on these things: And the God of
Peace be with you. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 19. Line 20. dele and, p. 24. l. 23. after great, add Lines


