An Epistle From our Monthly Meeting, at our Public Meeting House in Reigate,
in Surry, the 7th Day of the 9th Month, 1692.
WE being assembled with one accord in the Unity of the Spirit of Truth, and
having a deep and weighty Consideration upon our Hearts and Spirits, of the
Important Affairs of the Church which the Lord has gathered in these parts,
and out of the Ways and Works of Darkness, to be a People to his praise, and to
walk as Children of the Day, in all Godly Conversation and Holiness; for he who
has called us is Holy, and he has made us livingly sensible that without
Holiness of Life and Conversation none can be true Members of the Church of
Christ, neither is any the Sons or Daughters of God, but as they are led and
guided by the Spirit of God, in which all who have continued and walked, have
been preserved out of the Pollutions* of the World; and are as Lights among
their Neighbors, showing forth before them their good Works, of a Godly,
Peaceable and quiet Life, to the Praise and Glory of our Heavenly Father; for
the Truth as it is in Jesus (our holy Head, Leader and Governor) is the Life
of Righteousness, and freeth all who receives it from all Unrighteousness: In
this is the Children of God in our day manifested, from the Children of Belial:
for whosoever does not Righteousness is not of God, neither he who loves not
his Brother and Neighbor; but he who walks uprightly, and walks surely,
and there is no occasion of stumbling in him.

And now dearly beloved Friends, whom the Lord has quickened and raised up out
of the Grave of Sin and Corruption, to be Monuments of his Mercy, walk in the
Light of the Lamb; so will the Salvation of God be as Walls and Bulworks round
about you, to preserve you from the fear of Evil: Stand ye as Witnesses for God
in your day against all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, both amongst your
selves, and the World; be ye circumspect and watchful both over your selves,
and your Children, and Indulge them not in any thing that is Evil, but timely
Reprove and Restrain it, lest it become your Sin; and command them to observe
the Law of God written in their Hearts; for if you love the Truth, as you ought
your selves, you will train up your Children in it when they are young; and
keep them to the plain and sound Language which the Truth required and led all
the Faithful into in the beginning; and keep them in plain and modest Apparel
and Behavior, in due subjection to the Truth in all things, in an Holy
Conversation as much as in you lies, that they may grow up in the Grace of God
as Plants of his Renown; this is your Duty the Lord requires it of you, even to
watch over your Children, as those that must give an Account to God, while they
are under your Wings: Elie's not Restraining his Sons became his Sin, because
he restrained them not, and brought a Curs*s upon his House for ever, 1 Samuel 3.
13, 14. Therefore beware of winking at or neglecting your Childrens Sins, while
under your Tuition, but bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the
Lord, lest they bring shame upon your Houses, and a Reproach upon your
Posterity, as some have already done, by departing from the Counsel of God, and
the Word of his Grace, which would have kept them in the hour of Temptation
from the alurements of the Evil one, and so have made themselves a Scorn to
Fools, and a Derison to them that are round about, and has opened the Mouths
of Evil men to Blaspheam the Name of the Lord and his holy Tabernacle; Better
had it been for such not to have known the Way of Truth, then thus to turn from
the holy Commandment, which is the Lamp of Righteousness to guide our Feet in
the Way of Peace.

And all Young Men and Maids, unto whom God has given the knowledge of his
saving Truth, be ye Sober and Watchful, for many and strong are the assaults of
the Enemy to overcome you, and to bring you back again into Egypt's Bondage:
Stand steadfast in him who has Called you, being girded with the Truth, that
you may be able to Encounter the Enemy of your Souls, which way soever he
appears, having upon your heads the Helmet of Salvation, and the Breast* plate
of Righteousness, and Shield of Faith, and Sound Judgment, the Spiritual Sword
girded about your Loins; In this Armor if you keep, the Enemy cannot touch
you. The saving Truth which God has made known in our day, does Reedeem all
who loves and obeys it, from all Evil whatsoever, and out of the Gall of
Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity, and sets free from every Evil Deed, Word and
Work, and discovers Sin in the Seed, Bud and Root thereof, and gives power to
slay it there, before it breaks forth into Action; for as it is Inward and
Spiritual, it gives an Inward and Spiritual sight of the Man of Sin in all his
Wiles and Temptations in the conception thereof, and arms all who believes in
it against the Enemy's power, being greater then the Enemy, is able to subdue
his power in all mankind, and Redeem them from their vain Conversation, making
them capable to serve, worship and obey the living God, which none can do while
they are in the Evil deeds of the world. And neither Pride, Covetousness,
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Gluttony, Theft, Murder, Adultery, Idolatry, Hypocrisy,
nor any Ungodliness whatsoever can have any power or prevalency over them who
keeps the Word of Faith, which is nigh in their Hearts, such are Clothed with
the Armor of Light, and they are able to quench all the fiery Darts of the
Enemy of their Souls, and through Faith in the Son of God receives Victory over
Death, Hell and the Grave; these are Plants of Righteousness in our day, and
are daily Watered and Pruned by the Father's the Right hand, and grow up as
Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, bringing forth Fruits in due
Season to the praise of his Name, who has called them out of Darkness into his
marvelous Light.

And now I exhort you Brethren and Friends, in the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that you withdraw your selves from every Brother and Sister who walks
disorderly, and have no fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but
rather in the Authority of Gods Power and Spirit reprove them: And that you
keep not Company with Fornicators, for some are already turned aside into
Fornication: If any that is Called a Friend or a Brother, be a Fornicator, or
Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with
such a one not to Eat; And if any obey not this Gospel-Precept, Note that
Person, and have no fellowship with him or her, that they may be ashamed: And
if any have fellowship or society with such before they Repent, after Friends
(in Gods Power and Wisdom) have given a Testimony against them, they are to be
reproved and testified against, as out of the Order of the Gospel, and Practice
of the Holy Men of God in former Ages. For we cannot expect to stand clear as a
people before our Enemics, till we have faithfully endeavored that all our
Meetings and Camp may be cleansed of all Ungodliness whatsoever; for God is
pure and Holy, and will have a People so; and no unclean thing or person can
stand in his Court or Presence, and in this his glorious Gospel Day of Life,
Light and Glory, the most Spiritual Ministration, and the Last and Greatest
that ever the World shall be visi^ed withal, which in tender Mercy and
Loving Kindness he has caused to dawn in us, he will be glorisied in, by and
through us; or without us, and against us; for his Name he will Exalt in
Righteousness over Nations, and he will overturn and overturn, till he come to
whose right it is, in the Hearts and Consciences of the Sons of men.

And dear Friends, have a care of the Love of the World, and the Riches
thereof; do not choke the good Seed of the Kingdom of Righteousness sown in
you, for the Enemy lies near many in that respect, their Care, Labor and
Industry being more for the Meat that perishes, then for that which nourishes
to Eternal Life; and many grows Cold in their Love, Zeal and Affection to those
weighty Duties which God requires of us, in meeting often together to wait upon
him, to feel the operation of his Divine Power and his Comfortable Presence
which has often opened Life and the treasures of it to our Souls; and we have
waited upon the Lord, we have renewed our strength, and in meeting often
together we have selt the Lords presence in the midst of us, so that we have
not sought his Face in vain; all Holy Praises be returned to him for evermore.

And now beloved Friends and Brethren, as the Lord in tender Mercy has called
us out of Darkness, to be Children of his Gospel-Day, let us not sleep as do
others. but with girded Loins watch and be sober, casting off all the
unfruitful Works of Darkness, and put on the Armor of Light, that we may be
valient Soldiers in the Army of the Lamb, and to be able quench all the Fiery
Darts of the Enemy; for of a truth, the Lord is arisen to search his Jerusalem
with Candles, and he will assuredly find out the Hypocrite and the Unclean, and
him who has saved the Wedge of Gold and the Babylonish Garment, though never
so close hid in his Tent; for all things are naked and bare to his All-seeing
Eye; and woe to him who is covered, and not with the Spirit of the Lord, for he
will be left naked to his own Shame to the view of all beholders.

And all Young Friends, both Male and Female, who have believed in the Truth,
and are coming up in the World, beware of a Wanton Loose Spirit, for it will
lay you open to many Snares and Temptations, where by you will be betrayed by
the Enemy of your Souls into many noisome Lusts, which will drown you in
Perdition, if you give way thereto; but first seek the Kingdom of God, and the
Righteousness thereof, by walking in the Truth that you have believed in, and
then all other things needful for you will be given you of God, and the
Blessing withal, which will make you Rich and add no Sorrow with it: And take
heed of seeking Lawful things by Unlawful means, for if you so obtain them,
they will wither under your Hands: And make not haste to be Rich in this World,
nor to lay up great things for your Children, least it prove their Snare and
your Sorrow: for some of us have been Young, and now are grown Old, yet in all
our days we never saw the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed (who has walked in
the Way thereof to the End) begging their Bread; the way to be Happy and
Prosperous in this World, and that which is to Come, is first to breath after
Righteousness, and walk in its Way, though for it you drink a bitter Cup from
the Hands of Men, which if you are willing to drink for a time, the sweet Cup
of Blessing and Consolation will be given you of God, who keeps the best Wine
till last, and he will Crown your Gray Hairs with Honor and Immortallity: So
let not out your Affections after the foolish, vain and frivolous Fashions and
Customs of this World, for they will wither as the Grass, and fade as the
Flower thereof. So God Almighty direct your Way, and keep you under the Wing of
hi^ Power, in the pure Religion which keeps Unspotted of the World, that the
honorable Name by which you are called, and in which you have been preserved,
as you have trusted in it, may be your Rock, Refuge, and Tower to the End of
your Days; Amen.

Written and Signed in the behalf of the said Meeting, By Ambrose Rigge.

THE END.

