THE Stage Condemned, AND The Encouragement given to the Immoralities and
Profaneness of the Theater, by the English Schools, Universities and Pulpits,
Censured. King Charles I. Sundays Mask and Declaration for Sports and Pastimes
on the Sabbath, largely Related and Animadverted upon. The Arguments of all the
Authors that have Writ in Defense of the Stage against Mr. Collier, Considered.
AND The Sense of the Fathers, Councils, Ancient Philosophers and Poets, and of
the Greek and Roman States, and of the First Christian Emperors concerning the
DRAMA, Faithfully Delivered. Together with The Censure of the English State and
of several Ancient and Modern Divines of the Church of England upon the STAGE.
AND Remarks on diverse late Plays, as also on those presented by the two
Universities to King Charles I.

LONDON: Printed for John Salusbury, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard.
School.

To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons of ENGLAND, in Parliament
Assembled.
THE Corruption of Our Stage, most Noble Senators, is so very Palpable and
Notorious, that the Authors themselves who Live by it, and have lately writ in
Defense of it, are forced to acknowledge it wants a Reformation. Pref. to
Beauty in Distress. Defense of Dramatick Poetry. Usefulness of the Stage, etc.


But when they come to Particulars, every one stand^ upon his own Defense, and
refuses to acknowledge, that the Plays of his Writing contain any thing
Culpable or Blame^worthy.

All of them write in Defense of the Stage, and some of them plead, the
Usefulness and Absolute Necessity of it, at the Expense of the Honor and
Credit of the Nation, whom they Charge as the most Splenetick and Rebellious
People in Europe Mr. Dennis in his Usefulness of the Stage.
; and that they stand in need of the Drama, as a Sovereign Preservative against
the Mischievous Effects of that Distemper.

At Your Feet therefore, most Noble Senators, the following Sheets are humbly
laid, as containing, (amongst other things) a Vindication of the Brave and
Generous People whom You Represent, from that Foul Slander: and Charging the
Guilt upon the True Criminals, who endeavored to tear Our Constitution in
pieces, by setting Our Kings and Parliaments at Variance, and endeavoring to
have Liberty and Property swallowed up by Prerogative, to which wicked Design,
the Stage has not a little Contributed.

The Bleeding Morals of this Gallant Nation, are past the Cure of all
Quack-pretenders; It is His Majesty and Your Honors alone, who are capable of
applying the Sovereign Remedy, by obliging Magistrates and Ministers to perform
their Duty, or enabling them to do it by New Laws, if those we have already be
not sufficient. Our Gracious Sovereign has not only rescued us from Popery and
Tyranny, but out of his Fatherly Care, to prevent our future Danger, has again
and again recommended it to His People to take Effectual Methods for the
Suppressing of Profaneness and Immorality, which the Enemies of our Religion
and Liberty made use of, as the most successful Engines to Ruin both.

The Author of this Treatise has endeavored to prove, That the Corruption of
the Stage is in a great measure owing to the Method of Educating our Youth in
Schools; from whence the Infection spreads into the Universities and Pulpits:
And having been Encouraged by the late Reigns and part of the Clergy, has at
last proved so fatal to the Manners of (...) ^^^ople, that the Stage is become
a general (...), and has been complained of as such, (...) by Puritans and
those who opposed King Charles I. as the Advocates of the Theater do falsely
pretend, but by Ancient and Modern Church of England Divines, and has been
sometimes Restrained, and at other times entirely Banished, by the States of
England in Parliament Assembled.

Whether the Merits of the present Stage, be such as may deserve a more
favorable Censure at Your Hands, is Submitted (as is fit it should) to Your
Great Wisdom.

In the following Treatise, there is the Opinion of the Jewish and Christian
Church, of the Greatest of the Heathen Philosophers and Poets, of the Heathen,
Greek and Roman State, of the first Christian Emperors, etc. and of Our
English State, against the Theater fairly exhibited: But seeing the Defenders
of the Playhouse argue the Usefulness of it to the English Nation in general,
and to the present Govenment in particular, it is reasonable the Appeal should
be to Our Honorable Representatives, and that the Arguments pro and con should
be laid before them, not doubting (if they think fit at all to take it into
Consideration) but they will give a True and Righteous Judgment in the Matter.

It is not in England alone, where the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of the Stage,
and the Immorality and Profaneness of it, is the present Subject of
Controversy. But in France and Italy, nay at Rome it self, where as well as at
Paris, the Stage has of late, as all the Public Intelligences inform us,
received a Check, though the Prefa^^r to the Play called, Beauty in Distress,
says, the French Stage is so Reformed as not to fall under the Censure of the
Ancient Fathers. The Honor of our Nation and Religion would therefore seem to
require, that our Theaters should come under Examination, as well as theirs;
but the Time when, and the Method how, must be left to the Wisdom of the King
and Parliament to determine.

In the mean time it were to be wished that our English Ladies and Gentlewomen,
whose Encouragement and Presence is the most powerful Argument (after all) for
the Defense of the Stage (and by whose absenting themselves it must fall in
Course without Law or Statute) would be pleased to consider, That the wise
Roman Senate approved the Divorce which Sempronius Sophus gave to his Wife for
no other Reason, but that she resorted to the Cirques and Playhouses without
his Consent; the very sight of which might make her an Adultress, and cause her
to defile his Bed Valor. Max. l. 6. c. 3. 12.
. And the Christian Emperor Justinian made the following Constitution, That a
Man might lawfully put away his Wife, if she resort to Cirques, to Playhouses
or Stage Plays without his Privity and Consent, because her Chastity might
thereby be endangered Justin. Cod. l. 5. Tit. 17. De Repud. and Novella. 22.
and 117.
.

If Our Stage then be so much Corrupted as its Advocates themselves are forced
to confess, its influence upon the Morals of the Audience must needs be
dangerous, and therefore its hoped our English Senators will be as careful of
the Chastity of the English Ladies, as the Ancient Roman Senators were of
theirs, and that our English Women, whose Beauty is every where admired, will
readily Consent to any thing that may preserve their Modesty too from being so
much as Questioned.

Advertisement to the Reader.
THE Heads treated on in this Book don't follow in the same order as they are
set down in the Title Page, because the Author was obliged to take them as they
occurred in the Books, that he answers; but all of them may easily be found out
by the Running Titles.

The Reader is also desired to take Notice, that the Author designed at first,
only to have Writ against teaching the Heathen Poets in Schools, without
e^punging those Passages that have a tendency to promote Uncleanness, and that
is the Reason why nothing but the Schools is mentioned in the Introduction.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. Line 22. dele the (.) and put, after Versails,

p. 35. l. 13, dele the (,) after Journey.

p. 40. l. 10. r. ^^vitus.

p. 128. l. 25. r. Epimantus.

p. 140. l. 5. r. adjur'd instead of abjured.

p. 162. l. 13. Genselarics.

p. 172. l. 20. r. Personae instead of Personal.

p. 194. l. 34. r. were instead of there.

p. 198. l. 34. r. Moses instead of Samuel.

Some may perhaps object against what is said p. 200* that Oliver made Richlieu
to tremble, whereas Richlieu died soon after (...) began to appear, the Author
owns that this slipped his Observation till the Sheet was printed off, but the
Argument holds good as to the French Nation, and his Successor Mazarin.

Books Printed for J. Salusbury, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard. School.
A Complete French Master for Ladies and Gentlemen, or a most exact new
Grammar, to learn with Ease and delight the French Tongue, as it is now spoken
in the Court of France; wherein is to be seen an Extraordinary and Methodical
Order for the Acquisition of that Tongue. Enriched with new Words, and the most
modish Pronounciation, and all the Advantages and Improvements of that famous
Language. Written for the Use of his Highness the Duke of Gloucester. Price 2 s.

A Most complete Compen^um of Geography, General and Special, describing all
the Empires, Kingdoms and Dominions in the whole World, showing their Bounds,
Situation, Dimensions, History, Government, Religions, Languages, Commodities,
Cities, Rivers, Mountains, Lakes, Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, and
Universities, in a most plain and easy Method, etc. The Fourth Edition,
Corrected and much Improved. By Laurence Echard, M. A. of Christ's College in
Cambridge. Price 1 s. 6 d.

EAchard's Gazetteer, or Newsman's Interpreter: Being a Geographical Index, of
all Cities, Towns, etc. in Europe; with their Distances from each other, and to
what Prince they are now subject; very necessary for the right understanding of
all Foreign and Domestic News-Letters, and Gazettes, 12^. Price 2 s.

THE Changeableness of this World; with Respect to Nations, Families, and
particular Persons; with a practical Application thereof, to the various
Conditions of this Mortal Life. By T. Rogers, M. A. p. 1 s.

MR. Oughtred's Key of the Mathematics newly Translated, with Notes, rendering
it Easy and Intelligible* absolutely necessary for all Gagers, Surveyors,
Gunners, Military Officers, and Mariners, etc. Recommended by Mr. E. Halley,
Fellow of the Royal Society.

THE Happiness of a Quiet Mind, both in Youth and Old Age; with the Way to
attain it. In a Discourse occasioned by the death of Mrs. Martha Hasselbor^. By
T. Rogers. pr. 1 s.

A Dialogue between two young Ladies lately Married, concerning the Management
of Husbands; showing how to make that Honorable State more Easy and
Comfortable. The Third Edition, Revised and Co^rected, By the said Young
Ladies. Price 6 d. where the Second Part may be had. Price 6 d.

FINIS.
Introduction.
WE have had lately a Curious and Learned Survey of the Immorality and
Profaness of the Stage; but, though that Author has done excellently well, there
may still be some Gleanings left for another. Mr. Collier strikes directly at
the Miscarriages of the Stage, because they were most obvious and nearest to
View; but this ought not supersede the Endeavors of others, nor to put a stop
to their Inquiry into the Root of the Mischief.

If the Foundation be sapp'd, the Superstructures must ^umble of course; and it
signifies little to patch the Roof, or to tell us that it Rains in at the
Sky-Lights, when an Inundation comes in at Doors and Windows.

There Is none can be fit to write for the Stage, that has not first been at
School; and if we be instructed there in Plays and Romances, its but natural we
should think our selves good Proficients, and that we have in a great measure
answered the End of our Education, when we can oblige the World with those of
our own Composure. -- If the Amorous Passages of Ovid, Terence, Plautus, etc.
be thought commendable Patterns, fit to be put into the hands of Youth, and by
them imbibed as proper Nourishment, why should not the Harvest answer the
Seed-time* or why should the Scholar be blamed to Vi^ with his Masters Copy? or
when time and opportunity serves, to set up for a Master himself?

CAP. I.
The Stage Encouraged by the Clergy.
IF our Shepherds have no better Morals than to feed their Lambs with the Milk
of Goats, why should they not expect that their Flocks in time should come to
smell P^nk, and where is the Justice to bait and worry them when they do so?

If the Pulpits be so grossly negligent, as not to tell us with Tertullian De
Spe^lac. c. 24.
, that Stage Plays are the Chief of those Pomps that we abjure at Baptism; or
if they will needs Canonize one as a Martyr and Saint, who by Royal Authority
introduced the Use of Masks and Plays into his Court and Dominions on Sundays,
and never testified his Repentance for it to the World; why should not they who
write and frequent Plays think they are in the Path Road to Heaven as well as
he? and why may not they who distinguish themselves from others by such like
performances, hope some time or other to bear him company in the Calendar?

If the Head and Fathers of the Church did prosecute Mr. Prin for his
Histriomastrix, and condemn those for Schismatics who would not Comply with
Laud's Book of Sports and Pastimes on Sundays, whereof Masks and Opera's at
Court led the Van, why should not the Writing and Haunting of Plays be reckoned
genuine Marks of a true Son of the Church, and the contrary the Badge of one
that is no true Churchman? as a certain Clergyman thought fit to express it
in relation to K. William because of his not frequenting the Playhouse.

Let the Clergy, if they seriously design a Reform in this particular, strike
St. Ch -- s out of their Calender, or declare their opposition to St.
Chrysostom Hom. 6. in Matt.
, Tertullian Tertul. de spectaculis
, and many others that might be named, who thought the writing and frequenting
of Plays to be damnable without Repentance, and much more the commanding and
patron^^ing them.

It cannot be denied but Mr. Collier has writ ingeniously, and has taken a
great deal of pains to hew and lop off the Branches; and considering how much
the Playhouse was favored in the Reign of Charles I. by some of the highest
Dignity in the Church, we have more reason to wonder that he has said so much,
than that he has said any thing too little, because that part of the Sense of
Antiquity, which he has repeated to us in this Matter, does obliquely condemn
that Prince whom so many Ecclesiastics of great Note, have always accounted a
Martyr: Besides, his writing against Plays at present, and some of the
principal Authors of them, is not like to be accounted an extraordinary piece
of Service to the Courts of St. Germains and Versails. If we consider that the
Restoring and Encouraging of Playhouses, was one of the chief Expedients of
those who were resolved to put Cardinal Mazarins Advice in Execution, which was
to debauch the Nation, in order to the better Introducing of Po^ory and
Slavery; and therefore those who reflect upon Mr. Collier Defense of Dramatick
Poetry. p. 30, 37.
for his Nonjurancy, for his Book, called, A Persuasive to Consideration: and
for his Absolving Sir William Perkins and Sir John Friend at Tyburn, ought not
to be angry with him for writing against the Stage.

If all our Churchmen had done their Duty as well as Mr. Collier has done his,
in this Matter, Stage Plays had never been suffered in the Nation, nor had
there been the least pretense for their Usefulness: But in K. Charles I. Time,
they were necessary to Ridicule the Puritans, and run down the Patrons of
Liberty and Property. And in K. Char. II. Reign, they were no less wanted to
lash the Dissenters and Whiggs that opposed Tyranny, and needful to promote the
Glorious Design of Debauching the Nation, and to baffle the Evidence of the
Popish Plots. And now, by the just Judgment of God, the Clergy, who did but too
much Countenance the Proceedings of those Reigns, are lashed and exposed in the
Play Houses themselves, which Mr. Collier complains of* This it is hoped will
cure their Itch of Adorning or rather disguising the Doctrines of the Gospel,
with the Phrase of the Stage, and their fondness of Reading Plays for refining
their Style.

No Clergyman can propose to himself any justifiable End in Reading Plays, but
that which Mr. Collier has excellently performed, to wit, the exposing their
Immorality and Profaneness, and to discover their Failure in their pretended
Designs.

It is altogether unsufferable to hear a sort of young Divines, Regale our Ears
from the Pulpit, with the Rhetoric of a Play, while at the same time they
Treat the Phrase of the Scripture, and the Language of Ancient and Learned
Divines as Unintelligible Cant; and yet that this has been, and is still too
common amongst some of our Clergymen, cannot be denied: So long as those
Writings of Parkers and others, which call the New Birth a Fantastical Iargon,
or those Sermons which treat the Doctrine of St. Austin, Calvin and Beza, nay,
and of the Articles of the Church of England too, as Stuff and Cant, have an
Existence.

Mr. Collier and others may write Volumes against the Stage as long as they
please, but they will find it to little purpose, whilst the Plays are so much
read and encouraged by the Clergy, and by 'em retail'd again to the People. If
the Language of the Playhouse be thought fit to be made use of, as an Ornament
to a Sermon, the Hearers will be apt to conclude that the Stage is not so
Criminal a Thing as some Men would have it accounted. And seeing Mr. Collier
has been so much approved for lashing the Poets and the Stage, there is no
reason to think that it should be taken amiss in another, to censure the vanity
of such of the Clergy as write Plays or Preach in that Dialect, and have
neglected to inform their People of the Danger of the Playhouse.

Had they taken due care to instruct their Auditors in this Matter at Church,
the Audiences would never have been so numerous at the Stage: For why should I
think there is any hurt in the Theater, when I see that its ordinary for our
Gallants on a Saturday to prepare themselves by a Play for Hea^ing a Sermon on
Sunday: Nay, sometimes it may be for the Sacrament. And yet the Parson has not
the Courage or Honesty to reprove it; but perhaps chooses it as the most proper
way to recommend himself to the Applause of his Hearers, to deliver his
Preachment in the style of a Comedy.

Our Wits indeed, when passing their Judgment on a Sermon, think they give the
Preacher a large Encomium, when they say he has read abundance of Play-Books.
Which let our Youngsters in Divinity value as they please, I should think it
the most picquant Satyr that could be put upon me, were I worthy of bearing the
Indelible Character.

But that those flanting Preachers may have no occasion to say that I am alone
in this Matter, I shall pray them to consider the following Authorities.
Prosper says to such De Vita Contemp. lib. 3. cap. 6. fol. 105.
, Whilst they would seem Nice and Elegant, they grow perfectly Mad with fulsom
Expressions. St. Ierom writing to Nepotianus, Advises him when he is Preaching
in the Church, To labor for the Groans and not for the Applause of his
Hearers. -- Not to behave himself like a Declaimer of feigned Orations, or a
pretended Advocate, and to talk without Measure. The Sermon of a Minister ought
to be seasoned with Quotations from Scripture Epist. 22. c. 15.
. Prosper Aquitanicus says, That a Preacher ought not to value himself upon the
Accuracy of his Style, except he have more mind to show his own Learning, than
to edify the Church of God. That his Sermon ought to be so plain, that the
most ignorant Persons may understand it; the business of Declaimers or Makers
of Orations being one thing, and that of Preachers another: The former
endeavor to set off the ^omp of an Elaborate Speech, with the utmost strength
of their Eloquence: The latter seek after the Glory of God, in a sober and
plain Discourse De Vita Contemp. lib. 1. c. 23, 24, 25.
. Of the same Opinion are St. ^erom, Ambrose, Theodoret, Theophylact, and
others; as appears by their Commentaries on 1 Cor. 2. 1. etc.

Isidorus Pelusiot a taxes some Monks of his time for their affected Style in
Preaching. Who can abstain from Satyrs against you ( says he) when they hear
your Sermons crammed with Heathen Historians and Poets? Pray what is there in
them preferable to our Religion? -- Therefore either let your Sermons be Grave,
and prefer a Modest Style to big swelling Words and pompous Rhetoric, or give
me leave to say, That you are fitter for the Stage than the Pulpit Epist. l. 1.
Epist. 62, 63
.

The Bishop of Chemnis in his Onus Ecclesiae Cap. 16.
, has very remarkable Sa^ings to this purpose; and amongst others those that
follow. In these last days -- the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures is utterly
lost; the Preachers being puffed up with Knowledge, teach their own Notions.
They extol the Learning of the Heathen Philosophers, and thereby darken the
Sunshine of Christian Wisdom: And now most of the Schools, where Divinity was
formerly taught, are filled with Poetical ^ictions, Empty Trifles and Monstrous
Fables. The Preachers hunt after their own Applause, and study to gratify the
Ears of their Auditors with Ornat and Polite Discourses; But true Sermons are
better than those that are Elegant. And let those Eloquent Doctors know, that
our Savior says of them, In vain do ye Worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men.

To conclude this Point with the Authority of the Apostle St. Paul 1 Cor. 2. 4.
; he commends his own Sermons because his Speech and his Preaching was not with
enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of Power;
yet this great Apostle of the Gentiles was brought up at the Feet of Gamaliel,
and had more humane Learning than 20 of our fluttering Doctors.

It is not my design to cry down Eloquence in a Preacher, nor to commend a
rough way of Expression from the Pulpit. Eloquence is the Gift of God, and
commended in the Preacher Apollos; but at the same time we are told, That he
was mighty in the Scriptures and taught diligently the things of the Lord Acts
18. 24, 25.
.

It Is reckoned highly profane (and Mr. Collier has smartly reproved it) for
Poets to apply the Phrase of the Scripture to the use of the Stage; and I see
no reason why Vice Versa, it should not be liable to that same Censure, to
adopt the Phrase of the Stage, for the Language of the Pulpit, not that it is
absolutely Unlawful for a Preache^ to quote an apposite Sentence or Verse,
either from Greek, Latin or other Poets. The Apostle himself has taught us
the contrary by his own Example, when he tells the Cretians that one of their
own Poets says, (...) Tit. 1. 12.
.

But it is an intolerable Affectation of Novelty, when a New Word or a Quaint
Phrase is no sooner published in a Play or Gazzette, but we shall the next
Sunday after hear it out of the Pulpit. This is so far from holding fast the
Form of sound Words, as St. Paul enjoined Timothy 2 Timothy 1. 13.
, that it is rather the profane and vain Babbling, he commanded him to avoid;
and which 1 Timothy 6. 20.
Calvin upon the place, says is, Inanis tinnitus and profanus -- Simulatque
Doctores it a inflant suas tibias ad suam Eloquentiam Venditandam: A profane
and empty Jingle which the Doctors make use of to set off their Eloquence.

It were an easy matter to quote as many Sermons, guilty of these Vanities, as
Mr. Collier has quoted Plays guilty of abusing Scripture; but for obvious
Reasons I forbear it. The only cause why I mention it, is to show that it is
not the Poets alone, that support the Credit of the Stage, and that what is
Criminal in a Poet, is ten times worse in a Priest; and therefore they ought
not to pass without a Reproof.

It Is known, there are many godly Persons amongst our Clergy, who bewail those
things, and oppose them as much as they can; but there is a mighty Neglect
somewhere, and the World will hardly be persuaded that our Church of England is
unanimous in this Matter, else it were easy for them, who shook King James out
of his Throne, to overturn the Stage.

It is not to be supposed that the King and Parliament would deny the Clergy
such a Request, if it were duly presented; and considering how much the Nation
has* suffered in its Morals and Religion, by the Licentiousness of the Stage,
it is high time that some effectual Course should be taken to suppress it.

But there is reason to fear that the Faction begun by Archbishop Laud, has
still too great an interest amongst our Clergy; for scarcely can any other
reason be imagined, why, after so many Years Experience of the Mischief of the
Stage, the Church should be so silent in this Matter. That there is something
in this, I am very apt to think, because of the Deference many of the Clergy
men pay to the Memory of that Prelate, and of his Master King Charles I. whom
he helped to mislead. In those Times, as Mr. Prin acquaints us in his
Histriomastix, none were accounted Enemies to the Playhouse but Puritans and
Precisians, and in opposition to them it probably was that Laud and his Clergy
became its Patrons; and it is not unlike that many of the Less-thinking
Churchmen continue still to favor it on that Account, as being unwilling to
condemn that, for which King Charles I. and Archbishop Laud testified so much
Passion; but these Gentlemen would do well to remember, That the Defense of the
Stage was never so much the Characteristick of their church, as was the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience; and seeing the Majority of them have
relinquished that, they are infinitely the more to blame for still adhering to
this.

If a Petition of the Londoners had so much Influence on Queen Elizabeth, as to
get the Play Houses suppressed, and if the Stage was expressly condemned by a
Statute of King James I. we have no reason to despair of obtaining the same now
upon the like Application. And methinks the Clergy are more concerned to stir
in it than ever, seeing it would appear by Mr. Collier's third Chapter, Of the
Clergy abused by the Stage, that the Theater is now become a Nusano^ to
themselves.

It is apparent enough from what has been said already, that the Clergy are
chargeable with the Mischief of the Stage, by the omitting of what their
Character obliges them to do against it, and that many of them are also
Culpable by seeming to hallow its Phrase in the Pulpit; but this is not all, as
will appear by what follows.

We have heard that the Stage was condemned by Act of Parliament in King James
I. Time, but revived again in the Reign of K. Charles, contrary to Law; and
that Operas were practiced in his own Court, by his Royal Authority on Sundays.
Now considering how much that Prince was devoted to the Interest of the Clergy,
it is highly improbable that he would have atttempted any such thing, had the
then Governing part of the Church given him faithful warning against it, but
Laud and the other topping Churchmen of that time, were so far from opposing
it, that they concurred with him, and imposed a Book of Sports and Pastimes,
upon all their Clergy, to be read to the People on Sundays, which was a fair
step toward converting all the Churches of the Nation into Play Houses.

This great Example did so much encourage the Stage, that Mr. Prin tells us in
his Book beforementioned, in two Years time there were above 40000 Play-Books
printed: They became more vendible than the choicest Sermons: Grew up from
Quarto's to Folio's; were printed on far better Paper than most of the Octavo
or Quarto Bibles, and were more saleable than they. And Shackspeers Plays in
particular were printed in the best^ Paper. -- The two old Play Houses were
rebuilt and enlarged, and a new Theater erected; so that there were then six
Play Houses in London, twice the number of those in Rome in Nero's Time, which
though a much more spacious City, Seneca complains of as being too many. That
Faction of the Clergy became at last so enamored of the Stage, that the same
Author informs us page 935.
, He had heard some Preachers call their Text a Land-skip or Picture, and
others a Play or Spectacle, dividing their Texts into Actors, Spectators,
Scenes, etc. as if they had been Acting a Play. Upon which he complains of
their using Playhouse Phrases, Clinches and strong Lines, as they called them;
and that it was to to frequent to have Sermons in respect of their Divisions,
Language, Action, Style and Subject Matter, fitter for the Stage from whence
they were borrowed, than for the Pulpit. He tells us page 929.
further, That one Atkinson a Minister in Bedford, did the Christtide before,
Act a private Interlude in the Commissaries House there, where he made a Prayer
on the Stage; chose the Words, Acts 10. 14. I have never eaten any thing that
is common or unclean, for his Text; preached profanely upon it, and jested to
the shame and grief of most that heard him. In that same place he complains
that in private as well as in popular Stage Plays, they represented Ministers
Preaching and Praying, and brought the Sacred Bible and the Stories of it on
the Stage, contrary to the Statute of 3. Iac. Cap. 21.

The same Author tells us likewise page 241.
, That one Giles Widows in a Sermon at Carfolkes in Oxford, on Psalm 68.
verse 25. did avowedly justify the Lawfulness of mixed Dancing at Church-ales
and Maypoles upon the Lords Day, and confirmed his Doctrine by his own
Practice. And page 700. he informs us of three Doctors of Divinity, viz. Dr.
Gager, Dr. Gentiles and Dr. Case, who writ in Defense of Stage Plays. And page
979. he insinuates, that diverse of the Clergy had acted and danced on public
and private Stages.

The Theater having thus made so large a Conquest, as to get the Court and the
Governing part of the Church on its side, grew Rampant, and as if it disdained
to have any less Adversary than God himself, did boldly usurp on the Sabbath
Afternoons. And thus in the Year 1637. Masks were set up at Court on Sundays,
by His Majesty's Authority, while at the same time Laud and his Faction forbad
Preaching any oftener than once a day, and that the common People who could not
bear the Expense, nor have the Opportunities of Stage Plays, might not want one
however to profane the Sabbath, the Book of Sports and Pastimes was enjoined
by the Bishops to be read in the Churches by their Inferior Clergy on pain of
Deprivation.

CAP. II.
The Stage Encouraged by King Charles I. Sundays MASKS.
THAT the World may see what a Noble Exchange we had for our Afternoon Sermons
and Evening Lectures, I shall here give an Account of the Mask that was
presented by the Kings Majesty at Whitehall, in 1637. on the Sunday after
Twelfth-night, Entitled, BRITANNIA TRIUMPHANS, by Inigo Jones Surveyer of His
Majesty's Works, and William Davenant Her Majesty's Servant.

We are told in the Introduction, That for these three Years their Majecties
had intermitted those Masks and Shows, because the Room where they were
formerly presented, having the Seeling richly adorned since, with Painting of
great Value, Figuring the Acts of K. James of blessed Memory, they were afraid
it might suffer by the Smoke of the Lights, but His Majesty having now ordered
a New Room to be made on purpose, which was performed in two Months, the Scenes
for this Mask were prepared. Now who can say but these were Reasons becoming a
Martyr? and that this was a frugal way of spending his Treasure, when at the
same time he extorted Money from his Subjects in a Tyrannical manner by
Ship Money, Loans, etc.

We come now to the Subject of the Mask.

Britanocles, the Glory of the Western World, has by his Wisdom, Valor and
Piety, not only vindicated his own, but far distant Seas infested with Pirates,
and reduced the Land by his Example to a real knowledge of all good Arts and
Sciences. These Eminent Acts Bellerophon in a wise Pity, willingly would
preserve from devouring time, and therefore to make them last to our Posterity,
gives a command to Fame, who has already spread them abroad) that she should
now at home (if there can be any maliciously insensible) awake them from theif
pretended Sleep, that even they, with the large, yet still increasing Number of
the Good and Loyal, may mutually admire and rejoice in our happiness.

This makes it evident enough, that the subject was K. Charles himself, who had
gained some advantage against the Pirates of Barbary, the praise of which there
was none would have envied him* but this was a new way of singing Te Deum; no
great Argument of Religion, and far less any Presage that he should become a
Martyr for it, to order a Masque for his own praise, upon that day, which by
Divine Institution was set apart for the praise of our Redeemer.

The next thing we have an Account of is, That the Queen being sat under the
State, and the Room filled with Spectators of Quality, a Stage was raised at
the lower end with an Oval Stair down into the Room. The first thing which
presented it self to the Eye, was the Ornament that enclosed the Scene. In the
under part of which were two Pedestals of a solid Order, whereon the Captives
lay bound; above sat two Figures in Neeches; on the right hand a Woman in a
Watchet Drapery, heightened with Silver; on her Head a Corona Rostrata, with
one Hand holding the Rudder of a Ship, and in the other a little winged Figure,
with a branch of Palm and a Garland. This Woman was to represent Naval Victory.
In the other Neech on the left, sat the Figure of a Man, bearing a Scepter,
with a Hand and an Eye in the Palm, and in the other hand a Book; on his Head a
Garland of Amaranthus; his Curace was of Gold with a Palludamentum of Blue,
and* Antic Bases of Crimson; his Foot treading on the Head of a Serpent. This
Figure was to represent Right Government: Above these were Ornaments cut out
like Cloth of Silver, tied up in Knots, with Scarsings all touched with Gold.

These Pillasters bore up a large Freese, with a Sea-Triumph of naked Children
riding on Sea-Horses, and Fishes, and young Trito^^ with writhen Trumpets, and
other Maritime Fancies. In the midst was placed a great Compartiment of Gold,
with branches of Palm coming out of the Scrols; and within that a lesser of
Silver, with this Inscription, Virtutis Opus, proper to the Subject of this
Mask, and alluding to that of Virgil, Sed famam Extendere fuctis; from this
came a Drapery of Crimson, which being tied up with great Knots in the Corners,
hung down in Foulds on the sides of the Pillasters.

A Curtain flying up discovered the first Scene, wherein were English Houses of
the old and newer Forms, intermixed with Trees, and a far off, a prospect of
London and the River of Thames.

So much for the Pomp of this Sunday's Theater. And let any Man who has the
least sense of Religion judge, whether it does not smell strong of that Pomp
and Vanity of the World, which Christians abjure at Baptism, and was by
consequence the most unbecoming Exercise for a Sabbath that could be invented,
as having an unavoidable Tendency to take up the Thoughts of the Actors and
Spectators throughout the whole day, and to wear off the Impressions of any
Sermons, they might have heard in the former part of it.

But we come now to the Opera it self.

From different parts of the Scene came Action and Imposture. Action a Young
Man in a rich Habit down to his Knees, with a large Guard of Purple about the
Skirt, wherein was written with Silver Letters Medio tutissima; on his Head a
Garland of Laurel, and in one Hand a branch of Willow. Imposture came in a Coat
of Hanging-Sleeves and great skirts, little Breeches, an high crowned Hat one
side pined up, ^ little Ruff, and a formal Beard; an Angling-ro^ in his Hand,
with a Fish at the Hook, and a Bag and Horn at his Girdle.

It is easy to discern, that the design of this was to represent the graver
sort of People in those times, as Impostors and Cheats, and that they only
pretended to Gravity and Religion the better to hide their Covetousness and
other Lusts; but methinks the High-crown'd Hat turned up on one side, the
little Ruff and the formal Beard, might have been forborne out of respect to the
King and his Father; the latter in most of his Pictures is represented to us in
such a Hat and Ruff, and a Beard formal to the utmost; and the Son is always
drawn with his Collar-Band, and a Beard so formal, that were it not for his
Armor and Battoon of Command, we should take him sooner for a Bishop than a
King. But we must remember it was a Mask! The Court made haste enough to pull
off the Vizard afterward.

Action enters first, and I suppose this Name was given him, because he must be
thought to practice what the other only pretended to. He rants at Imposture,
not with an Oath! that was not King Charles's Crime; for to give him his due,
they say he abhorred Swearing; and therefore Action, like one that would keep
the middle, betwixt the Dammee Ruffian, and the Precise Puritan, falls upon
Imposture, with an Adjuration; as follows,

My variable Sir; in the Name of Heaven
What makes your falsehood here where fame intends
Her Triumphs all of Truth? --
-- Thou art so useless to the World
That thou art impudent when thou do share
What is most cheap, and common unto all
The Air, and Light; I do beseech thee my
Fine, false Artificer, hide both thy Faces
(For thou art double every where) steal hence
And I Will take care, thou shall no more be missed
Than Shadows are at Night.
Considering how our Poets dressed. Imposture, as before observed, the Scope of
this is plain enough, to persuade the Spectators of Quality, that such Persons
as blamed and opposed those Sund^y-Revels (and that was the best of the
Bishops, Benefie'd Clergy, and People, as well as the professed Dissenters, who
were then but few) did not deserve to live in the Nation; and that those who
would not comply with the Book of Sports, and other Innovations then on foot,
were justly prosecuted as Hypocrites and Impostors.

Imposture Answers at first, with disdain and contempt of this Rant; -- and
then says,

-- I hide my self?
The Reason shall be strong that must persuade
Me under Ground: The Badger loves his Hole,
Yet is not so bashful, but dares look out
And show himself, when there is prey abroad.
I smile at thee (the graver way of scorn)
For should I laugh, I fear 'twold make thee think
Thy Impudence had somewhat in it of wit.
Then a little lower,
Wisely the jealous Scepticks did suspect
Reality in every thing, for every thing but seems
And borrows the Existence it appears
To have: Imposture governs all, even from
The gilded Ethnic Mitre, to the painted Staff:
O the Christian Constable, all but pretend
The resemblance of that power, which inwardly
They but deride, and whisper merry Questions to themselves
Which way it comes.
And after.
That universally shall take which most
does please --.
-- Is it not fit
And almost safest to cosen all, when all
Delight still to be cousen'd.
Here the Poet explains whom he meant by Imposture, when he brings him in
attacking the Episcopal Dignity, and would persuade the Audience, that he was
for Anarchy too; so that the Constable shall not escape his lash, though he
moves in the very lowest Orb of Civil Authority. This was calculated for the
then Meridian of Lambeth, to represent those that were against Archbishop
Laud's Prid^ and Innovations in the Church, as Enemies likewise to the State.

But, by the Poets leave, he makes his Imposture speak quite out of Character,
when he brings him to an open Profession of his design to cheat Mankind.
Impostors are more cunning than to do so; they put on Sheeps Clothing, though
they be inwardly Ravening Wolves: So that he should rather have called him a
professed Atheist, than an Imposter, when he appears thus in his proper
Colors, and that to his professed Enemy too.

Action Replys,

These Lectures would
Subdue a numerous Sect, were thou to preach
To young soft Courtisans, unpracticed Heirs
Of over-practis'd Usurers --
But Fate takes not so little care of those
For whom it does preserve the Elements:
That what is chief within us should be quite
Depraved, as if we were only born to aim
At Trifles here, like Children in their first
Estate of using Legs, to run at sight
Of Bubbles, and to leap at noise of Bells.
Here Is a jerk at the Citizens whom the Court Characterized thus in those
Times, and a flout at Original Sin, denying our Depravation by Nature; a
practice very becoming the Head of the Church, to run down her Doctrine: But
more of this Anon.

Imposture Answers,

Even to believed, and in their chiefest growth
They follow but my Grandsire Mahomets
Divinity, who does allow the good a handsome Girl
Or Earth, the Valiant two in paradise.
Here again Imposture talks out of Character, when he owns his lascivious
Principles, but a little Amor must be pulled in by Head and Shoulders, the
better to edify the young Gallants after Sermon.

Action upbraids Imposture in his Reply, thus,

Thou art so read in humane Appetites,
That were the Devil licensed to assume
A Body, thou might be his Cook, yet know
-- There are some few amongst Men
That as our making is erect, look up
To face the Stars, and fancy nobler hopes
Than you allow, not down-ward hang their Heads
Like Beasts to meditate on Earth, on abject Things
Beneath their Feet.
Here Action becomes a stout Champion for Virtue to insinuate to the
Spectators, that it was lodged at Court, and not amongst its Opposers.

Imposture Answers, with a severe scoff upon the Clergy.

It Is a thin number sure
And much dispersed, for they will hardly meet
In Councils and in Synods to enact
Their Doctrine by Consent; That the next Age
May say rhey parted Friends.
To which Action Answers.

It Is possible
Less you steal in amongst them to disturb
Their Peace, disguised in a Canonick Weed,
Nor are these such, that by their Reasons strict
And rigid Discipline, must fright nice Court
Philosophers from their belief, such as impute
A Tyrannous intent to Heavenly Powers
And that their Tyranny alone did Point
At Men, as if the Faun and Kid were made
To frisk and caper out their time, and it
Were sin in us to dance, the Nightingale
To sing her Tragic Tales of Love, and we
To rec^eate our selves with groans, as if
All Persumes for the Tiger were ordained
Cause he excels in Scent: Colors and gaudy Tinctures for
The Eastern Birds, whilst all our Ornament
Are Russet Robes, like melancholy Monks.
Now Action has got his Rant out; here is whole Peals of Ordnance and
Chain-shot, against those that adhered to the Doctrine of the Church of
England, against Laud's Arminianism: The charge is no less, than that they are
Enemies to the Church, and accuse God of Tyranny toward Men. Whilst Birds and
Beasts frisk and flutter about in their gaudy Furs and Feathers, we poor
Mortals are called to Mourning, Repentance and Humiliation; a sort of Doctrine
the Stage will have nothing to do with, except it be to ridicule it. But here is
not one word all this while, that Man has sinned, and therefore must sorrow
before he can lay any solid Claim to be a sharer in Joy. That was none of the
Poets business; he was to preach up Mirth and Jollity, and to persuade to it by
an unanswerable Argument. The Beas^s and Birds are so, and therefore we should
be so too. Then at the Conclusion, comes the old false Charge against
Seriousness in Religion. It deprives us of all the Comforts of Life; and
condemns us to Rags and Melancholy; enough to make the Gallants of the Audience
out of Love with it for all their Days, and to ridicule Clergymen of all sorts;
a proper Work for the Evening of the Sabbath.

The next Entertainment is Merlin the Prophetic Magician, brought upon the
Stage by Impostures means, to conjure up from Hell the great Seducers of the
Nation, and upon Merlins striking the Air with his Rod. The whole Scene, says
our Poet, was transformed into an horrid Hell, from the Suburbs of which, enter
the several Antimasks.

I. Entry.
Of Mock-Musick of 5 Persons.

One with a Viol, the rest with Taber and Pipe, Knackers and Bells, Tongs and
Key, Gridiron and Shooing-Horn.


II. Entry.
A Ballad-singer His Companion with their Auditory. A Porter laden A Vintner's
Boy A Kitchin-Maid with a Hand-basket A Saylor.
III. Entry.
A Crier of Mouse-traps A Seller of Tinder-Boxes bearing the Engines belonging
to their Trades. A Master of Two Baboons and An Ape.


IV. Entry.
A Mountebank in the Habit of a Grave Doctor A Zany A Harlequin their Men An
old lame Chair-woman Two pale Wenches presenting their Urinals, and he
distributing his Printed Receipts out of a Budget.
V. Entry.
Four old fashioned Parasitical Courtiers.
VI. Entry.
Of Rebellious Leaders in War Cade Kett Jack Straw and Their Soldiers.
One can hardly imagine what was the design of this piece of Foolery, except it
were to turn Hell into Ridicule, by such a Representation of its Inhabitants,
or to be a pattern for the Sports and Pastimes that were enjoined upon the
Country for Sundays, by His Majesty's Declaration: But let any Man judge,
whether such a Paltry Opera as this, was becoming the Majesty of a Court on any
day, or let King Charles I. his Admirers, give us an instance if they can, that
ever any Martyr employed themselves thus before on a Sunday.

After this, Hell (says our Poet) suddenly vanishes, and there appears a vast
Forest, in which stood part of an old Castle, kept by a Giant: Who by his
Character, one of those in Guild Hall, was not big enough to be his Page. He is
described thus,

This day (a day as fair as heart could wish)
This Giant stood on shore of Sea to Fish;
For Angling-Rod he took a sturdy Oak,
For Line a Cable that in storm never broke.
His Hook was such as heads the end of Pole
To pluck down House ere Fire consumes it whole
His Hook was baited with a Dragons Tail,
And then on Rock he stood to bob for Whale:
Which straight he caught and nimbly home did pack
With ten Cart-load of Dinner on his back.
Had I been worthy to have advised the Poet, he should have saved himself the
labor of this witty Composure. The Story of Gara Gantua or Don Quixot, would
have been as diverting sure as this, and equally fit for a Digestion after
Sermon on Sunday.

The rest I Will venture briefly to tell in Prose, for the Verse is not (in my
Opinion) very charming. -- The Giant in his way home spied a Knight and a Lady
under a Hedge, within his Purlieus, and laying down his Whale goes toward them
in great fury spurning up Trees by the Roots as he went; asks the Knight how he
and his Damsel durst com^ thither? demands the Lady to be his Cook to dress his
Whale, and threatens to beat out the Knights Brains with an Oaken Tree, if he
refused her. The Lady made an Apology, That they came thither only to gather
Sloes and Bullies --. The Knight takes him up sharply for offering such a
Disgrace to his Lady; and at last by Merlin's Art, the Scuffle was turned into
Fantastic Music, and a Dance.

I pass over the rest of this impertinent Stuff, and leave Merlin to retire to
his Stygian Shade a while; though I think he could scarcely be entertained there
with greater Works of Darkness, than those that were then acted at Whitehall.

[ Merlin and Imposture being gone of]

In the further part of the Scene, the Earth opened, and there rose up a richly
adorned Palace; seeming all of Goldsmiths-work, with Portic^s Vaulted, on
Pillasters of Rustic Work; their Bases and Capitels of Gold, in the midst was
the principal Entrance, and a Gate; The Doors Leaves with Figures of Basse
Releeve, with Jambs and Frontispiece all of Gold; Above these ran an Architrave
Freese, and Coronis of the sarne; the Freese enriched with Jewels: This bore up
a Ballestrata, in the midst of which, upon an high Tower with many Windows,
stood FAME, in a Carnation-Garment trimmed with Gold, with white Wings and
flaxen Hair; in one Hand a Golden Trumpet, and in the other an Olive Garland.

In the lower part, leaning on the Rail of the Ballasters were two Persons;
that on the right Hand personating Arms with a Curace and plumed Helm, and a
broken Lance in his Hand.

On the left Hand a Woman in a Watchet Robe trimmed with Silver, on her Head a
Bend, with little Wings like those of Mercury, and a Scroul of Parchment in her
Hand, representing Science.

When this Palace was arrived to the hight, the whole Scene was changed into a
Peristilium of two Orders, Dorick and Ionick, with their several Ornaments
seeming of white Marble, the Bases and Capitels of Gold. This joining with the
former, having so many Returns, Openings and Windows, might well be known for
the Glorious Palace of Fame.

A Very odd Medley to assign one part of the Lord's Day to his own Worship, and
another for the Representation of an Heathen Goddess! This was not the practice
of the Primitive Martyrs.

But now we come to the chief Design of thi^ Mask; which was to celebrate the
Praises (...) K. Charles I. Britanocles, as Bell^rophon expresses it

This happy Hour is called to Celebrate
Britanocles, and those that in this Isle
The old with Modern Virtues Reconcile.
The Chorus of POETS, entered in Rich Habi^^ of several Colors, with Laurels on
their Heads gilt. FAME Sings. I.
BReak forth thou Treasure of our sight,
That art the hopeful Morn of every day*
Whose fair Example makes the Light,
By which Heroic Virtue finds her way.
II.
O thou our cheerful Morning rise,
And strait those misty Clouds of Error clear,
Which long have overcast our Eyes;
And else will darken all this Hemisphere.
III.
What to thy power is hard or strange,
Since not alone confined unto the Land,
Thy Scepter to a Trident Change;
And strait unruly Seas thou can Command!
IV.
How has thy Wisdom raised this Isle,
Or thee by what new Title shall we call
Since it were lessning of thy Style;
If we should Name thee Natures Admiral.
V.
Thou Universal Wonder, know
We all in Darkness mourn till thou appear,
And by thy absence dulled may grow;
To make a doubt if day were ever here.
Was not this Religiously done to convert any part of the Sabbath, wherein we
ought to Cele^rate the Praises of our Great Redeemer, to be ^mispent in such
Fulsom Praises of any Mortal Man? and was it not just from God (whatever may be
said as to the Instruments) that he whose Power they so blasphemously extol
over Sea and Land, should afterward find himself too Weak for a Party of his
own Subjects, that he should receive his first Discomsiture from them on the
Sabbath, which he had so horribly profaned, and be brought to his fatal Exit,
in that very Palace where he suffered God to be so much dishonored.

Fame having ended her Song: The Masquers came forth of the Peristilium, and
stood on each side, and at that instant the Gate of the Palace opened, and
Britanocles appeared.

The Habit of the Masquers was close Bodies of Carnation, embroidered with
Silver, their Arming Sleeves of the same, about their Waste two rows of several
fashioned Leaves, and under this their Bases of white reaching to the middle of
their Thigh; on this was an under Basis, with Labels of Carnation Embroidered
with Silver, and betwixt every pain were Pufts of Silver fastened in Knots to
the Labels: The trimming of the Shoulders was as that of the Basis; their long
Stockings set up, were Carnation, with white Shoes, and Roses; their Bands and
Cuffs made of Purles of Cu^-work, upon the Heads little Carnation Caps
embroidered as t^^ rest, with a slit turned up before, out of t^^ midst came
several falls of white Feathers dim^nishing upwards in a Pyramidical Form. Th^^
Habit they chose as beautiful, rich, and light (...) dancing, and proper for
the subject of this Mas^

The Palace being sunk, Fame remained h^vering in the Air, rose on her Wings
singing a^^ was hidden in the Clouds; then the Chor^^ sung another Song in
Praise of Britanocles. -- After which the Masquers descended into the Room and
Danced; which being ended a Ne^ Chorus of Modern Poets raised by Merlin (...)
rich Habits make their Address to the Queen thus,

I.
Our Eyes (long since dissolved to Air,)
To thee for day must now repair;
Though raised to Life by Merlin's might
Thy Stock of Beauty will supply
Enough of Sun from either Eye,
To fill the Organs of our sight.
II.
Yet first thy pity should have drawn,
A Cloud of Cipress or of Laune;
To come between thy Radiant Beams,
Our Eyes (long darkened in a shade)
When first they so much Light invade;
Must ache and sicken with Extremes.
III.
Yet wiser Reason has prevailed,
To wish thy Beauties still unvailed;
It Is better that it blind should make us,
Than we should want such Heavenly Fire
That is so useful to inspire,
Those Raptures which would else forsake us.
If Modesty would not blush at such Entertainment on any day, yet certainly
Religion would have abhorred it on a Sunday; and though the Church of Rome would
admit of it, it ill became the Head of the Church of England to approve it.

After this the Scene was changed, and in the farthest part the Sea was seen
terminating the sight with the Horizon; on the one side was a Haven with a
Citadel, and on the other broken Ground and Rocks, from whence the Sea Nymph
Galatea came waving forth, riding on the back of a Dolphin, in a loose
Snow-white Garment; above her Neck Chains of Pearl, and her Arms adorned with
Bracelets of the same; her fair Hair disheveled and mixed with Silver, and in
some part covered with a Veil, which she with one hand graciously held up,
being arrived to the midst of the Sea, the Dolphin staid, and she sung with a
Chorus of Music.

Galatea's SONG.
I.
So well Britanocles over Seas does Reign,
Reducing what was wild before,
That fairest Sea Nymphs leave the troubled Main;
And haste to visit him on shore.
II.
What are they less than Nymphs, since each make show
Of wondrous Immortality,
And each those sparkling Treasures wears that Grew
Where breathless Diverse cannot pry, etc.
The Valediction or Farewell was as follows.

I.
Wise Nature that the dew of sleep prepares,
To intermit our Joys and ease our Cares,
Invites you from these Triumphs to your rest,
May every Whisper that is made be chaste,
Each Lady slowly yield, yet yield at last,
Her Heart a Prisoner to her Lovers Breast!
II.
To wish unto our Royal Lover more,
Of youthful blessings than he had before,
Were but to tempt old Nature 'bove her might
Since all the Odor, Music beauteous Fire
We in the Spring, the Spheres, the Stars admire,
Is his renewed, and bettered every Night!
III.
To Bed to Bed may every Lady dream,
From that chief Beauty she has stolen a Beam,
Which will amaze her Lovers Eyes!
Each lawful Lover to advance his Youth,
Dream he has stolen, his Vigor Love, and Trut^
Then all will haste to Bed, but none to rise*
Thus I have brought this Mask to a Conclusion. If the Reader think I have
inserted too much of it, he may be pleased to consider that it is very rare and
sarcely to be had, and being extraordinary, because of its having been Acted on
a Sabbath day, I thought it the more necessary to give a large Account of it;
that he might see what sort of Religion or Evening Sermons, it was that the
Court and Laud's Faction of the Church then aimed at.

Let any Man that has but the least impression of Religion upon his Mind,
consider the Valediction, and declare his Opinion, whether it answer that
Character of Piety and Chastity which some Men will have K. Charles the first
to have been endowed with. There Is no Man can deny but it has an amorous*
Tendency, and must of necessity leave quite another impression upon the Minds
of the Hearers, than the blessing which they heard pronounced at Church after
Sermon ought to have done, and that the whole Interlude could serve for nothing
else but to divert their Meditations from whatever was serious; and therefore
the setting up of Masks, and Sports and Pastimes upon Sundays and Holydays, was
one of the most effectual Methods that the Enemies of Piety could have
invented, to hinder the effect of those Ordinances, which the Church of England
looks upon as necessary to promote the Salvation of her People.

CAP. III.
The S^age Encouraged by the King, and Archbishop Laud's Book of SPORTS.
YET this was not all that the then Head of the Church, King Charles the first,
and Laud, the Metropolitan of all England, did to run down the practice of
Piety and Religion. They were not satisfied to corrupt the People only by bad
Example, but enjoined also the Book of Sports and Pastimes to be read by the
Bishops and their Clergy, and took off the restraint that was laid upon the
People from following such Practices by the Laws then in being* particularly
the 1st of Car. Cap. 1. and 3d Car. Cap. 2. Forbiding all Sports or Pastimes
whatsoever on the Lord's Day: In the first it is complained of* That the Holy
keeping of the Lord's Day, in very many Places of this Realm, has been and now
(...) prosaned and neglected by a disorderly sort of People, in exercising and
frequenting Bearbaiting, Bullbaiting, Interludes, Common-plays, and other
Unlawful Exercises and Pastimes. Yet the King contrary to his own Law, sets up
Interludes and Masks in his Palace on Sundays; and by his Declaration for
Sports and Pastimes on Sundays, does perfectly dispense with the said Law, and
reflects severely upon those that would hinder the People in the Exercise of
such Sports and Pastimes as Puritans and Precisians; and Archbishop Laud, and
the governing part of the Church joined with him in prosecuting Mr. Prin for
his Histriomastix, wherein he writ against those Plays and Interludes,
(especially such as were acted on Sundays) and were so embittered against him
that on Feb. 1. 1632. Laud procured him to be sent close Prisoner to the Tower,
where he lay till the 21st of June, 1633. when an Information without
mentioning any particular Passages in his Book, was exhibited against him in
the Star Chamber, for publishing a Book concerning Interludes, Entitled,
Histriomastix, which was Licensed by a Chaplain of Dr. Abbots, Archbishop of
Canterbury. Notwithstanding which License he had this heavy Sentence passed
upon him, viz. To be imprisoned during Life, pay 5000 l. Fine, be expelled
Lincoln's Inn, disabled to exercise the profession of a Barrister, degraded by
the University of Oxford of his degrees taken there; and that done to be set in
the Pillory at Westminster, and have one of his Ears cut off; and at another
time to be se^ in the Pillory in Cheapside, and there to have his other Ear cut
off, which was accordingly executed on the 7th and 10th of May; and he remained
s^ndry Years in the Tower upon this Censure, though the Queen is said to have
interceded earnestly for the Remission of this Sentence, which was Tyrannical
to the highest degree, considering ^he Laws beforementioned against
Stage Plays, declaring the Actors to be Rogues, etc. as is evident from the
39th of Eliz. and the 7th of King James the First.

Having been so successful against Mr. Prin* Laud and his Faction took Courage
and prevailed with His Majesty to publish his Declaration concerning
Recreations on the Lord's Day after Evening Prayer, dated October. 18. in the
Ninth Year of his Reign, which was 1634.

It is observable, That he Founds this Declaration on one of his Father King
James, in Anno 1618. wherein it is said, That when that Prince returned from
Scotland he found his Subjects, but chiefly those in Lancashire, debarred from
Lawful Recreations on Sundays after Evening Prayer, for which he rebuked the
Puritans, and published his Declaration, That none should thereafter prohibit
his good Subjects from using their Lawful Recreations on that day. -- He adds
in another part of it, That his County of Lancashire to his great Regret, had
more Popish Recusants than any other County in England; but being informed by
his Judges and the Bishop of the Diocese, that they were beginning to amend, he
was very sorry to hear the general Complaint of his People, that they were
debarred from all lawful Recreations and Exercises on Sunday, after the ending
of all Divine Service: Which could not but produce two Evils, viz. the
Hindering the Conversion of many, whom their Priests will persuade, that there
is no honest Mirth or Recreation allowed in our Religion, and the setting up of
filthy Tippling and Drinking and breeds a number of idle and discontented
Speeches on those days. His express Pleasure therefore was, that no lawful
Recreation should be barred to his good People, and that the Bishops should
take strict order with all Puritans and Precisians, and either constrain 'em to
conform themselves or to leave the Country. -- And that his Pleasure was, that
his good People should not be hindered after the end of Divine Service on
Sundays, from their lawful Recreations, such as Dancing either Men or Women,
Archery, Leaping, Vaulting, nor from having of Maygames, Whitson-ales,
Morrice-dances, and setting up of Maypoles, or other Sports therewith used, and
he barred from those Sports, all Recusants that abstained from coming to Church
and Divine Service, and those that, though they conformed in Religion did not
come to Church.

Were the place proper for it, this Declaration affords a large Field for
Reflections. Here Is the Platonic KING! [ The Head of the Church!] The first
(as some say) to whom they gave the Title of Most Sacred Majesty! who, to
Convert the Papists, as he pretends, orders the Lord's Day to be profaned with
such Sports and Pasti^es as tended to debauch the Morals of the People, and yet
will not show the least favor to the stricter sort of Protestants, but brands
them with the Nicknames of Puritans and Precisians, and Orders his Bishops to
bring them to Conformity, or to expel them the Country. But the pleasantest
Jest is this, That he invites them to come to Churh, by the tempting Reward of
having Liberty to profane the Sabbath, which they perfectly abhorred.

His Son King Charles I. Corroborates this Declaration by his of the 18th of
Oct. 1634. which he begins thus,

Now out of the like pious Care for the Service of God, and Suppressing any
Humors that oppose Truth, and for the Ease, Comfort and Recreation of our
well-deserving People, we do Ratify and Publish this our Blessed Fathers
Declaration.

This Declaration did but too much verify what an old Reverend Divine of the
Church of Scotland said to King James I. when he asked his Blessing on his
Journey, to take upon him the Crown of England, viz. Pray God bless you Sir,
and make you a good Man, but he has ill stuff to make it of.

The Declaration adds, -- We command that no Man do Trouble or Molest any of
Our Loyal People, in or from their Lawful Recreations* and We further Will,
that Publication of this Our Command, be made by Order of the Bishops through
all the Parish-Churches of their several Diocesses respectively.

Here was a great difference betwixt the Exercise of the Episcopal Function in
the Reigns of the Father and the Son: or by this Declaration Chapter I. made the
Bishops Trumpeters to the Stage, and King James II, said, that in his Time they
were Trumpeters of Rebellion, because they petitioned against Reading the
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience. This Declaration for Sports was read by
most of them; and such of the Ministers as would not conform, were turned out
till the Controversies betwixt the King and Parliament, and the Civil War that
ensued put a stop to it.

Thus I have made it plain, That the governing part of the Church patronized
the Stage in the Reign of Charles I. and by the Book called Centuries of
scandalous Ministers, we find, that many of them were turned out for
frequenting the Stage in the Parliament Times, and the Theater being then
overturned, there was so great a Reform of Manners, that notwithstanding the
Libertinism which usually accompanies War, one might have walked through the
City and Suburbs without hearing an Oath; but when King Charles II. was
restored, the Play Houses were speedily re-opened, and without any Public
Check or Control from the Church, went on to that height of Immorality, which
Mr. C. complains of. Nay, they were thought very subservient to support the
Church by jerking at the Whigs and Dissenters in their Prologues and Plays, and
to infuse ^rightful Ideas of them into the Heads of the Spectators, whilst at
the same time they run down the belief of the Popish Plot, vindicated the
Traitors that had been executed for it, and dressed the true Patriots of our
Religion and Liberty in the Skins of Beasts of prey, that they might be
devoured with the better Appetite. It were easy to cram a Volume with
Instances of this sort, but they are so well known, that it is needless. There
being no Body who ^requented the Playhouse or read the Plays in the two last
Reigns, but know, that the Stage was attempered to the Lascivious and Arbitrary
^umoe^s of those Princes, and to blacken all those that opposed their
Tyrannical Designs.

Having thus made it appear that the Church has ^avoured the Stage, by their
not warning the People against it, by seeming to hallow the Phrase of it in
their Pulpits, by approving or at least conniving at the practice of it on the
Sabbath in King Charles I. by prosecuting those who writ against it, Writing
Plays themselves, by some of them practicing it in their own Persons, and
Writing in Defense of it, by enjoining the Book of Sports* by not opposing it
in the Reigns of Charles II. and James II. and (to which I shall add) by their
not opposing it in this Reign, when they might have hopes of better success,
seeing both King and Parliament have declared themselves so highly against
Immorality and Profaneness: I come now in the next place to see how far the
Schools are chargeable with the same Crime.

CAP. IV.
The Stage Encouraged by the Schools.
THIS Subject has not been so much ^reated on as the former, and by
Consequence is a sign that the danger of it, has not ^een so much perceived,
yet it has not been altogether overlooked, for Authors both Ancient and
Modern have taken Notice of it: Cons^itu. Apost. l. 1. c. 8.
Clemens Romanus, de Recta Edu. ad Selucum. p. 1063.
Nazianzen, de I^ololat. c. 1^.
Tertullian, in Luc. lib. 1. v. 1.
Ambrose, Epist. 22. cap. 13. and Epist. 146. ad Da^as.
Ierom, de falsa Relig. c. 12. 15.
Lactantius, de Civit. Dei. l. 2. c, 1. 8.
Augustine, and others of the Ancients: The 4th Council of Carthage Can. 16.
and diverse other Councils. Bishop Babington, Bishop Hooper, Perkins, Do^nham,
Williams, and all other Commentators on the 7th Commandment have Condemned and
Forbid the Writing, Printing, Selling or Teaching any Amorous Wanton
Play-books, Histories or Heathen Authors, especially Ovids wanton Epistles and
Books of Love, Catullus, Tib^^lus, Propertius, Martial, Plautus, and Teren^^ as
may be seen in the Places quoted in the Ma^^gin.

The Reasons why they should not be read (...) Youth are given us by Osorius,
De Regum Institut. l. 4. p. 120.
) thus: (...) Poets are Obscene, Petulant, Effeminate, and (...) their
Lascivious and impure Verses, divert the Mind from Shamfastness and Industry to
Lust an^ Sloth; and so much the smoother they are, (...) much the more Noxious,
and like so man^ Sirens ruin all those that give Ear to them The more
ingeniously any of them write (...) amorous Subjects, they are so much the mo^^
Criminal; for we willingly Read and easil^ Learn by Heart a Fine and Elegant
Poem; an^ therefore the Poison of Lascivious Verse mak^^ a quick and speedy
Impression upon the Mind and by the Smoothness and Elegancy of the Language
kills, before an Antidote can be a^^plied. Therefore all such Poets ought not
only (...) be banished the C^urt but also the Country.

Nay, Aeneas Silvius, afterward Pope Pius (...) in his Treatise of Education,
dedicated to Ladisl^^^ King of Hungary and Bohemia, Discoursing wh^^ Authors
and Poets are to be read to Children, r^solves it thus:

Ovid writes many times in a Melancholl^ Strain, and as often Sweetly; but is
in mo^^ places too Lascivious, Horace, though an A^thor of admirable Eloquence,
yet has man^ things I would neither have Read nor expou^^ded to you, Martial is
a Pernicious, though Flori^ and Ornat Poet, but so full of Prickles, that hi^
Roses are not to be gathered without dange^* Those who write Elegies are
altogether to (...) kept up from the Boys; for they are too Sof^ and
Effeminate, Tibullus, Propertius, Catulli^^ and Sappho, which we have now
translated, abound with amorous Subjects, and are full of complaints of
unfortunate Amors. Your Preceptor ought to take special Care, that whilst he
reads the Comical and Tragical Poets to you, he does not seem to instruct you
in something that is Vicious.

It is still more remarkable, that Ignatius Loyola, the Founder of the Order
of the Jesuits, who are as little recommendable to the World for their
Chastity, as for their other Virtues, forbad the Reading of Terence in Schools
to Children and Youth, before his Obscenities were expunged, lest he should
more corrupt their Manners by his Wantonness, than help their Wits by his
Mas^aus in Vit. Ignat. l. 4. ^. 8.
Latin.

The Jews, a People noted enough for their Uncleanness, yet did not permit
their Children and Youth, in Ancient Times, to read the Canticles, till they
arrived at 30 Years of Age, for fear they should draw those Spiritual Passages
of the Love betwixt Christ and his Church, to a Carnal Sense, and make them
Instruments of inflaming their own Lusts: And upon the same Account Origin
advi^eth such as are of an amorous Temper, to forbear Reading it Homil in ^ant.
Proem in Ezech.
.

How much more Reason is there to forbid the Reading of the Lascivious Heathen
Poets, and Plays, seeing it is found to be true by Experience, as Agrippa in
his Discourse of Uncleanness, has excellently expressed it, That there is no
more powerful Engine to attaque and vanquish the Chastity of any Matron, Girl
or Widow, or of any Male or Female whatever, than the Reading of Lascivious
Stories or Poems. There Is none of them, let their Disposition be never so good,
but are in danger of being corrupted by this Method, and I should look on it as
next akin to a Miracle, if there were any Virgin or Matron so Religiously
Chaste, as not to have their Lusts inflamed almost to madness by Reading such
kind of Books and Poems. De Vanit. Scienti. cap. 64.


In this Case even the Heathen Lecher Ovid, who is much more ingenuous than our
pretended Christian Poets, gives Judgment against his own Amorous POEMS, and
those of Tibullus, etc.

Eloquar in vitus, teneros ne tange Poetas,
Summon^o dot^s impias esse meas,
Callimachum ^ugito, non est inimicus amori
Et cum Callimacho tu quoque Coe Noces.
Carmina quis potuit tuto legisse Tibulli,
Vel tita cujus opus Cynthea sola suit,
Quis potuit lecto durus discedere Gallo
Et mea nescio quid carmina tale sonant.
De Remedio amoris. lib. 3. p. 230. It will appear plain from the very Nature
and Design of Christian Schools, That such things ought not to be taught in
them. The end of all such Schools is to teach Wisdom and Virtue, that we may
know God and our selves; and how to Worship God aright; whereas the quite
contrary is taught by those Authors. Homer, Hesiod, Pindar, Aristophanes,
Virgil, Horace, and the rest of those Heathen Authors, arrived to that height
of Impiety and Madness, that they feigned such lewd things to be acted by their
Gods, as a modest Man cannot but be ashamed to reh^arse before Youth; for they
represent their Gods and Goddesses to be such, as no honest or well-governed
Commonwealth, would have admitted them for Citizens, so that Palingenius
writes truly of them.

In c^elo est Meretrix, in coelo est turpis adulter.
Lib. I. There Is no doubt but the Heathen Poets were influenced by Satan, to
feign such Monstrous and Horrid Things concerning their Deities, that they
might thereby promote and Authorize Whoredom and Uncleanness among Men, and add
Fuel to the Flames of Corrupt Nature. Certainly those Fables in Ovid's
Metamorphosis, concerning the Amous, nay, Rapes of the Gods and others, cannot
leave any Chaste Impressions upon the Minds of Youth. What a fulsom Expression
is that of Virgil, Aneid. 7. Mista Deo Mulier. The danger of teaching such
things to Youth was seen by the very Heathen Philosophers: And therefore Plato
says, That those fabulous Stories of the Poets, were not to be received into a
City, as if the Gods waged War, and formed Ambushes against one another, etc.
whether they be taken in an Allegorical Sense or not; For Children (says he)
cannot distinguish betwixt what is spoke figuratively or otherwise, and such
Opinions as they drink in when they are young, they can hardly ever lay aside.
To feign that God, who is altogether Good, is the Cause of Evil, is an Error
that ought to be refuted; and therefore the Poets should be compelled to write
and speak things that are honest Lib. de Re^pub. 2.
.

Tha^ same Author says in Theage, I know not what any Man in his Right Wits,
ought to be more solicitous about, than how to have his Son made as good as
possible; and therefore he advises, that care be taken that Nurses don't
entertain them with old Wives Fables, lest they be corrupted with Madness and
Folly from their very Infancy.

Seeing those poor Heathens who had nothin^ but the Light of Nature to direct
them, could give such excellent Precepts, what a shame (...) it for Christian
Schoolmasters to spend more tim^ in teaching their Youth who Jupiter, Vulca^*
Neptune and Saturn were, than who Jesus Christ is, and to teach them those
Lascivious Heathen Po^ts in direct Opposition to the Seventh Co^^mand.

St. Augustine in his Book of Con^ession Cap. 15.
, (...) out, Oh that when I was a young Man, I ha^^ been instructed in
profitable Books! Whilst I w^^ a Youth at School I heard them talk of Iupit^^
darting Thunder and committing Adultery at t^^ same time.

The Jews were commanded to teach the La^^ of God to their Children diligently,
to talk (...) them when they sat in their Houses, when th^^ walked by the way,
when they lay down an^ when they rose up, to write them upon the Pos^ of their
Houses and on their Gates, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7* ^ The Roy^l Prophet David taught
them, The young Men were to purify their way, by takin^ heed thereunto
according to the Word of Go^ Psalm. 119. 9. And the wise King Solomon co^^manded
Children to be trained up in the Way t^^ they should go, and when they were old
they wo^^ not depart from it, Prove. 22. 6. The Apostle (...) joins, that our
Children should be brought up (...) the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord,
Ephesians. 6* And commands Timothy to avoid Profane and (...) Wives Fables, 1 Timothy 4.
7.

The only Objection of any weight that can (...) raised against this, is, That
in those Heathen Poe^ there are abundance of excellent Moral Sentenc^ and that
Youth learn the Purity of the Lati^^ Tongue from them. To which it may be
answer^ That put them all together, they come infinite^ short of those Moral
Instructions that are to be found in the Proverbs of Solomon, and the
Ecclesiastes, that its evident what Moral Sayings of worth, any of those
Heathen Authors have, they borrowed them from Moses and others of the divinely
inspired Writers, and we may with more safety and purity drink from the same
Founta^ns, than from their polluted Streams; And as for the purity of the
Latin Tongue, it may as well be learnt from others, as from the Poets. The
Roman Histories are excellent for that end; and if their Poets were purged from
their Obscenities, etc. and so put into the Hands of Youth, there could be
nothing to object against 'em. Nor are there wanting excellent Latin Poems by
Christian Authors, which might be equally serviceable for instructing our Youth
in the purity of the Latin Tongue, and inspring them also with true Christian
Sentiments, such as the famous Ancient Poems of Tertullian, Arator,
Apollinaris, Nazianzen, Prudentius, Prosper and other Christian Worthies, and
the later ones of Du Bartas, Beza, Scaliger, Buchanan, Heinsius, etc.

That a Reform of the Schools in this Point has been so long neglected,
reflects Shame upon the Church who ought to have chiefly concerned themselves
in it, and is one main Reason why so many Persons of good parts have applied
themselves to write for the Stage, and that too with more Wantonness and
Latitude than most of the Hea^hen Poets ever dared to allow themselves: and the
Corruption has spread so far as to in^ect our Universities, who though formerly
they condemned the Stage, are now become its Admirers, and to the Scandal of
the Nation, obscene Poems are writ at their Public Acts.

CAP. V.
An Answer to M. Motteuxes Defense of the STAGE.
I Come next to consider what is offered in Defense of the Stage, by a Divine
of the Church of England, from the Authority of a Divine of the Church of Rome,
viz. by Father Ca^^aro, Divinity Professor at Paris, as I find it annexed to
Mr. Motteuxes Play called, Beauty in Distress.

Before I come directly to the Point, it may not be improper to observe, that
considering the palpable Influence, which the Stage has had upon the
Corruption of Manners, so much complained of. It seems no very suitable
Employment for one Divine of the Church of England to espouse the Defense of
the Stage against another. Nor is it very much for the Defendants Honor to
make use of Arrows from a Popish Quiver; for we have no Reason to think that a
Popish Divine will be a Cordial Enemy to the Stage; when the Worship of* their
Church does so much resemble the Pomp of the Theater.

The Doctors first Argument is, That the Scripture has no express and
particular Precept against PLAYS, [Page 10.] Which admitted to be True, is an
Argument of no Weight; for Consequences naturally deduced from Scripture, have
the same Authority with the Text, otherwise it could never be a Rule of Faith
and Manners, there being many thousands of things for which it serves as a
Rule, that it does not particularly express: So that the Doctors Argument would
be equally servic^able to the Great Turk: There Is no Express nor particular
Precept against receiving Mohome^, as a Prophet ergo. But it is Naturally and
Plainly inferred from the Scriptures, that because we are not to receive any
other Doctrine than is there taught us, therefore we are not to receive Mahomet
as a Prophet.

By Consequences of like force, and every whit as plain, we shall find
Stage Plays condemned in Scripture; I mean not only those that are guilty of
Immorality, Profaneness, Blasphemy, etc. which the greatest Patrons of the
Stage, will not offer to defend, but even Stage Plays in general, whose
Business they will have it to be, to recommend Virtue and discountenance Vice,
which I think will be very plain by the following Argument.

That which God has appointed sufficient Means to Accomplish: It is Unlawful
for Men to appoint other Means to Accomplish: But Go^ has appointed sufficient
Means for Recommending Virtue, and Discountenancing Vice without the STAGE:
Ergo, It is Unlawful for Men to appoint the Stage for Recommending Virtue and
Discountenancing Vice.

All the Controversy will lie about the first Proposition; but I think there is
no Man who has a serious Impression of the infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness
of God upon his Mind, that will call it in Question, seeing he must necessarily
by so doing, cast a Reflection upon all those Attributes, and prefer the
Wisdom, Power and Goodness of Man, to the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of GOD.

The second Proposition is clear from express Texts of Scripture. The Apostle
tells us, That Magistracy is the Ordinance of God: That Rulers are ordained by
him to be a Terror to evil Works, and to Praise those that do good: And that
they are the Ministers of God, continually attending upon this very thing, Romans
13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Whence it is evident, That the Original End and Design of
Magistracy, is to Encourage Virtue and to Punish Vice.

And hence it is equally clear, That seeing Commending is a Species of Reward,
and Lashing and Exposing a sort of Punishment, the pretended Service of the
Stage, for those Ends is wholly needless; God having sufficiently provided for
that, by appointing Magistrates.

This being so, the Patrons of the Stage have no other Pretenses left them, but
such as Mr. Collier enumerates briefly in his Introduction, viz. That the Stage
is useful to show the uncertainty of Humane Greatness; The sudden turns of
Fate, and the unhappy Conclusions of Violence and Injustice; To expose the
Singularities of Pride and Fancy; To make Folly and Falshhood Contemptible; And
to bring every thing that is Ill, under Infamy and Neglect.

But we are infinitely better provided for those Ends, by the Word of GOD, and
the Ordinance of the Ministry. We are taught, That the former is able to make
us wise unto Salvation: I^ given us by Inspiration of God, for Doctrine,
Reproof, Correction and Instruction in Righteousness; that we may be perfect,
and thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, 2 Timoth. 2. So that we have no
need of the Instruction of the Stage, for any of the Ends above^ mentioned.

Are any of our Authors for the Theater, able to give such a Description of the
Uncertainty of Humane Greatness and the Vanity of all Sublunary Things, as
Solomon has given in his Ecclesiastes?

Can any of them give us more surprising Instances of the sudden Turns of Fate
and Revolutions of Providence, than the Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, of
Pharaoh and his Host, Sennacherib and his Army, and many others related in the
Scriptures, with reference not only to the Public, but to particular Persons?
Nay, are we not i^finitely better accommodated with real Instance^ of that
Nature, even from profane History, than we possibly can be from their forged
ones on the Stage?

Can our Poets show us more unhappy Conclusions of Violence and Injustice, than
those that attended Pharaoh and the other Tyrants that persecuted the People of
God?

Are they able to give us Instances of the Singularity of Pride and Tyranny,
equal to those of that same Pharaoh, who said, Who is the Lord that I should
obey Him? Of Nebuchad^nezzer, who ^or his Pride was turned a grazing with the
Beasts of the Field? Or of Herod, who for his Fantastical Apparel and Pride was
eat up of Worms?

Are they able to expose Folly and Falshhood to more Contempt, than the Sacred
Scripture does, which tells us, That a Poor and a Wise Child, is better than an
Old and a Foolish King, Eccl. 4. 13. And that though the Bread of Deceit and
Falsehood be sweet to a Man, yet afterward his Mouth shall be filled with
Gravel, Prove. 20. 17.

Has not God appointed the Ministry, To teach all Nations to observe
whatsoever he has command^d, Matthew. 28. 19. To distinguish betwixt the
Precious and the Vile, Jer. 15. 19. To use sharpness according to the Power
that God has given them, 2 Corinthians. 13. 8, 9, 10. To be instant in Season and
out of Season; To Reprove, Reb^ke, Exhort; To Teach us to deny Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts; and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present Evil
World, Tit. 2. 12.

Thus the second Proposition is plainly proved, That God has provided
sufficient Means for Recommending Virtue and Discountenancing Vice without the
STAGE: Ergo it is Unlawful to Appoint the Stage for Recommending Virtue and
Discountenancing Vice.

It may perhaps be objected, That by this Argument the Exhortations and
Reproofs of Parents, Masters and Neighbors, are also proved to be needless: To
which the Answer is ready, That those Duties are enjoined by the Scriptures on
Parents, Masters and Neighbors; therefore it is the Ministers Duty to urge
them, and the Magistrates Duty to see them performed; but no such thing can be
said of the Stage.

It may perhaps be further objected, That the Magistrate being left at Liberty,
as to the Means of Recommending Virtue and Discountenancing Vice, he may
appoint the Stage for that End. To which I Answer; The Magistrate is infinitely
better provided of Means already: He has the Ministers to preach the Gospel
from the Pulpit; and Judges to explain his Laws from the Bench* and is provided
with a Sword to protect Virtue and punish Vice.

And therefore to spend Time and Money in that which is needless, would be not
only contrary to Scripture Rule, but to Common-sense. Nor can the Patrons of
the Stage, give us an Instance, that ever any Magistrate appointed the Stage
for those Ends they mention.

We are told in the Introduction to Britania Triumphens, Acted on a Sunday at
Whitehall in 1637. as before^mentioned, That Princes of Sweet and Humane
Natures have ever, both amongst the Ancients and Moderns in the best times
presented Spectacles and Personal Representation to recreate their Spirits,
wasted in Grave Affairs of State, and for the Entertainment of their Nobility,
Ladies and Courts. That was the only End, according to the then Poets* that the
Stage pretended to; but now it seems that they would usurp, both upon the Bench
and the Pulpit.

CAP. VI.
The Fathers against the Stage; and mistaker^ by Aquinas.
THE next Argument is page 11.
from Thomas A. quinas, who in his Question of Sports and Diversions says, That
it is the part of a wise Man sometimes to unbend his Mind by diverting Words or
Actions: Whence the Dr. concludes, That St. Thomas approved the Drama.

This Man may perhaps be a Professor of Divinity, but it would seem he was
never a Professor of Logic, else he would not put more into the Conclusion
than is found in the Premises, as here he has done, except he can prove that
there are no diverting Words or Actions but in Plays; and the straining of this
Conclusion is so much the more needless, that he brings in Aquinas afterward,
expressly giving his Opinion for Plays, provided the Players and Spectators he
not guilty of Excess, or Speak and Act nothing that is Unlawful, etc.(page 12.)

But as the Dr. brings in Aquinas to reconcile the Fathers with the Schoolmen
in this Point; or indeed rather to contradict the Fathers by the Schoolmen;
what if we bring in Aquinas contradicting the Dr. himself.

If either the Paris Doctor, or the Doctor of the Church of England, who
applauds his Performance, please to look into Aquinas his Secunda, Secund^
Quaest. 168. Art. 3. ad 3m. it will appear, That they make the Angelical Dr.
speak otherwise than he really does: Aquinas 's words are, Si qui autem
super^lue^ sua in tales consumunt veletiam sustentant illos Histriones qui
illicitis Ludis utuntur, peccant, quali ^os in peccato foventes, unde
Augustinus dicit super Iohannem, quod donare res suas Histrionibus, vitium est
immane, non virtus, nisi forte aliquis Histrio esset in extrema necessitate, in
qua esset ei subveniendum, dicit enim Ambrosius in Libro de O^^iciis, pasce
same Morientem. Quisquis enim pascendo hominem Servare poteris si non paveris
Occidi^ti.

It Is plain, that the Paris Dr. or his Translator make Aquinas say what he
never intended. The Angelical Dr. says, It is a Crime to give Super^luously ^r
lavishly to Stage Players. But it seems nothing is Criminal with the Parisian
Dr. or his Englisher, except they give them their whole Estates. Besides, they
injure St. Austin mightily. They would make the World believe, That the African
Father was only against giving whole Estates to Players too; when the honest
Man says expressly, That to give any thing to a Stage Player except at the Point
of Starving, is a monstrous Crime or First^rate Sin, Immane Vitium, and the
Reason of the Exception he brings from St. Ambrose, That whosoever is in a
Condition to give a Man Bread, and yet lets him starve, kills him. And how well
Aquinas reconciles the Schoolmen with the Fathers, in this Point of the Stage,
may be seen by the very following Article, where he quote^ St. Augustine in his
Book of True and False Repentance; charging those that would obtain
Forgiveness, to abstain from the Plays and Shows of the Age; Which being
compared with his former Advice, not to give any thing to the Stage Player,
except he were at the point of starving, shows plainly for all the Angelical
Doctors nice Distinction (of St. Augustine's only forbidding Plays to Men under
Penance) that he wrests his Words. The Truth of which will be proved by St.
Austin himself, who says, That had there been none but honest Men in Rome, they
would never have admitted Stage^Plays De Civi^. Dei. l. 4. c. 1.
. And elsewhere he says, The Roman Virtue knew nothing of those Theatrical Acts
for almost 400 Years; and when they were introduced for the Recreation of
Sensualists, and admitted by the dissolute Morals of the time, the Heathen
Idols de^ued they might be dedicated to them Ib. l. 2. c. 13.
.

He likewise takes notice, That being brought into Rome to assuage the Plague
which afflicted their Bodies; the crafty Devils who knew that the Disease would
in its proper time come to a Period, did thence take occasion to infect their
Morals, with a far greater Contagion. And adds, That their Pontif Scip^ dreaded
that Plague and Infection upon their Minds, when he forbad the Building of
Theaters, well knowing that the Re-publick could not be preserved by the
standing of their Walls, if their ^orals failed; but they were more prevailed
on by the Allurements of Impious Devils, than by the Precautions of Provident
Statemen Ibid. l. 1. c. 32, 33
.

Nor is there any of the Fathers more Pathetical and Pressing in their
Exhortations to Christians to avoid the Stage, than this Excellent Person, as
may be seen in his Homilies, and other Writings.

Then as to the whim of the Revelation to Paphnutius, That a certain Player
should be his Partner in Glory, by which Aquinas would prove that Players are
not in a State of Sin. However it may relish with the Paris Doctor, it sounds
but ill to be quoted by a Divine of the Church of England; But admitting the
Revelation to be true, it will not prove what they would have it, for the
Player mentioned, might have abandoned the Stage, and become a true Penitent;
otherwise by this way of arguing, Thieves may conclude, that they are not in a
State of Sin, because our Savior said to one on the Cross, This day shall thou
be with me in Paradise.

Besides, Aquinas's Words are, Quod quidam Iocu^ator ^uturus erat sibi Consors
in vita fu^ura. Now the Doctor knows, that Ioculator and Histrio, are not
convertible Terms. There are many Jocose Men, that would think the Stage below
them; or if Ioculator must needs be a Stage Player, let it be translated the
Merry Andrew, or Fool in the Play; there is no reason why such should be denied
the Benefit of Pap^^utius's Evidence for Heaven, it being but seldom, that
their part of the Play is the most Criminal.

In the next Place, it ought to be observed what sort of Plays they are, which
St. Thomas approves; he says, O^^icium Histrionum quod ordinatur ad solatium
hominibus Exhibendum non est secundum se illicitum. ibid. ad 3m. i. e. That
StagePlays which are directed to recreat or solace Men, are not unlawful in
themselves. This is quite another Work than our Stage now assumes to it self,
as Mr. Collier mentions in his Introduction; and had the Stage held there, and
been regular and moderate in its practice, it would not have been so culpable
as now it is, but all this is merely a covering its Nakedness with Fig Leaves:
that was not the Original Design of the Stage. It was invented by the Devil, if
we may believe Tertullian D^ spe^^ac. cap. 24. to 28.
, and therefore has all along been true to its Founder in pursuing its primary
Design of Debauching instead of Diverting Mankind.

Before I go further, I must observe two Things; The first is, That St. Thomas
however, condemns the present practice of the English Stage, in jesting with
Scripture, using obscene Words or Actions, and Men and Women's putting on
Apparel of the contrary Sex Ib. Art. 2. ad ^ ^* art 3 Resp. Prim^ secundae, q.
102. art. 6. ad sextum secunda secundae, q. 162. art. 2, 3
. And the next is, That it looks somewhat odd that a Dr. of the Church of Rome,
and a Divine of the Church of England, should offer to shake the Authority of
the Fathers for the sake of the Playhouse, seeing they are the principal
Quivers, whence the former draws her Arrows against the Protestants, and whence
the latter pulls Darts to hurl against the Pu^itaus.

In the next place they bring us St. Thomas's Answer to Chrysostom, which they
will have to be sufficient to all the Passages of the Fathers, viz. That they
declaim only against the Excess in Plays Beauty in distress, page 4.
; because the Excess of the Drama in their time, was Criminal and Immoderate.

To this let St. Chrysostom Answer for himself; And we shall soon see whether
he had any Reason ^o peep down from Heaven, and tell Aquinas, Ben^ Scripsisti
de me Thoma, as they foolishly tell us our Savior did to that same Agelical
Doctor.

St. Chrysostom against the STAGE.
He calls Stage Plays, The Devils Solemnities or Pomps; Satanical Fables,
Diabolical Mysteries, the impure Food of Devils, Hellish Conventicles Hom. de
David and Saul. Tom. 1. Col. 511. de verbis Isaiae, Vidi D^m. Him. 1. Col. 1283
Orat. 6. Tom. 5. Col. 1471.
. And tells his Hearers, That if they continue to go to Plays, he will never
give over, but use a sharper Style, and wound them deeper, till he had pulled
in pieces the Devilish Theater, that the Assemblies of the Church might be
puri^ied and cleansed.

In another place he says, Every thing acted on the Stage is most Filthy and
Obscene, the Words, the Apparel, the Tonsure, the Gestures, the Music, the
Glancings of the Eyes, nay, the very Subject of the Plays Hom. 38. in Matthew.
Tom. 2. Col. 298.
. Whence they infuse so much Lascivousness into the Minds of the Audience, as
if* they conspired together to root all Modesty out of their Hearts, and to
drench them in pernicious Sensuality.

In his Homily of Saul and David, he writes thus, That it is dangerous to go to
Stage Plays, because it makes them complete Adulterers; wishes he knew who they
were that left the Church Yesterday, and went to those Spectacles of Iniquity,
that he might Excommunicate them, they having impudently defiled themselves
with Adultery. And if so be (says he) you desire to know the kind of Adultery,
I will not rehearse my own Words, but the Words of him who is to be our Judge
M^tth. 5. 28.
: That Man (says he) who looks upon a Woman to lust after her, has committed
Adultery in his Heart. If then a Woman accidentally passing the Street, and but
carelessly dressed does frequently ensnare a Man, with one single look, with
what confidence can those that purposely run to the Playhouse, and sit there a
whole day together, with their Eyes fixed on the Faces of Women, say they have
not looked upon them, so as to lust after them? where there are the Enticements
of Lafcivious Words, whorish Songs, painted Faces, and enticing Dresses to
allure the Beholders. -- If here where there are Psalms and the Preaching of
God's Word, Concupiscence does frequently creep in like a crafty Thief, how can
those who sit idle in Play Houses, where they neither see nor hear any thing
that is good, and where their Eyes and Ears are beset on every side, overcome
their Lus^? And if they cannot conquer it, how can they be acquitted from the
Charge of Adultery? -- Then how can those who are chargeable with this Crime,
come to these Sacred Assemblies, without Repenrance. --

If a Servant should put his Nas^y and Lousy Apparel, amongst his Masters Rich
and Costly Robes, would you bear with it patiently? If he should throw Dung
into a Vessel of Gold where your Precious Ointments are kept, would you not
Cudgel him for it? Shall we then be so careful of our Clothes and our Vessels,
and put so low a value upon our Souls: Tell me, how you think God can endure
this, when there is not so much Difference between Ointment and Dirt, nor the
Clothes of Master and Servant, as betwixt the Grace of the Spirit and this
perverse Action? Do thou not tremble whilst thou beholdest this Holy Table,
where dreadful Mysteries are administered, with the self same Eyes that thou
did behold the Bed on the Stage; where the detestable Fables of Adultery are
Acted, whilst with the same Ears thou hear an Adulterer speaking Obscenely,
and a Prophet and an Apostle leading thee into the Mysteries of the Scripture,
whilst with the same Heart thou receivedst deadly Poison, and this Holy and
Blessed Sacrament?

Are not these Plays the Subversion of Life, the Corruption of Manners, the
Destruction of Marriage, the Cause of Wars, of Fightings and Brawls in Houses?
When thou returnest from the Stage more Dissolute, Wanton and Effeminate, the
sight of thy Wife will be less pleasing to thee, let her be what she will. What
do I speak of a Wife or Family, when as afterward thou will be less willing to
come to Church, and wilt hear a Sermon of Modesty and Chas^ity with Irksomness.

Wherefore I entreat you all to avoid the wicked Remembrances in Stage Plays,
and to draw back others from them, who have been led unto them; for whatever is
there done, is not Delight or Recreation, but Destruction.

In his first Homily on Psalm 50. speaking of David, he saw Bathsheba (says
he) was wounded in his Eye, and struck with a Dart. Let them take notice of
this who are mad upon Stage Plays, where they may contemplate the Beauties. Let
them observe this, who say they can look upon them without Hurt. David was
wounded, and are you like to escape? he was overcome, and can I trust to your
Strength? he that had so much Grace was struck through, and do thou deny that
thou are wounded?

In his seventeenth Homily on Matthew 5. If thy Right Eye offend thee; He
writes thus, Let them take notice of this, who frequent the Playhouse so much,
and de^ile themselves almost daily with Adultery: How can they be defended who
by their stay at Playhouses, contract Acquaintance with Lewd Persons, that they
knew not before? Upon Psalm 119. v. 151. He says, We cannot serve two Masters,
but he serves two, who goes to Church one Day, and to Stage Plays another. On
Psalm 4. 2. Why do you love Vanity in Stage Plays, and seek after Leasing in
Stage Players? On Psalm 66. 1. Nothing brings the Oracles of God into so great
Contempt, as those Stage Plays and the Spectacles there showed; wherefore I
have often exhorted you, that none of those who enjoy the Divine Doctrine, and
partake of the dreadful Sacrament, go to those Stage Plays. Yet some are become
so mad, that though they profess Religion, and are grown white with Old Age,
they run to them notwithstanding; and say, they reap much profit from 'em, by
seeing Examples of the Victory and Crowns which shall be in the World to come.
But this is a rotten and deceitful Saying: Whence can thou reap Profit there,
from Contentions, from rash Oaths, from the Abuses, Reviling and Scoffs which
the Spectators throw upon one another?

In his sixth Homily on Matthew, he says, God never taught Men to Play, but the
Devil; who has formed Jests and Plays into an Art; that by these he might draw
the Soldiers of Christ to himself: He has erected Theaters in Cities; and
proposed those Incentives of Laughter and Filthy Pleasure. It is not the part
of those who are called to an everlasting Kingdom, to Effeminate themselves
with Delight, and let loose the R^ins to loud Laughter and Derision, for those
who applaud the Writers of Blasphemous and Filthy Things, persuade them to act
them; He that Personates those things, does not s^n so much as thou that
command them to be done. But thou say, this is only feigning not
committing a Crime, but certainly those Men deserve a thousand Deaths, who are
not afraid to Imitate that which all Laws do most strictly for^bid. If Adultery
be Evil in it self, the Imitation of it must certainly be Unlawful.

I say nothing how many Adulterers they may make, who Personate Adulteries upon
the Stage nor how they render Spectators Impudent; for there is nothing more
Filthy nor Lascivious, than that Eye that can patiently behold such Things.

In his thirty eighth Homily on Matthew, He answers the Question: What then
shall we shut up the Playhouse? thus, Yea verily: These Stage Plays being
overturned, you shall not overthrow the Law; but Iniquity, and extinguish all
the Plagues and Mischiefs of the City? T^ou wilt say, shall we then pull down
the Playhouses? Would to God they were pulled down; yet I command you not to
pull them down; the Magnifccence of the Houses may stand, and the Plays and
Dancing cease. Take at least Example from the Barbarians, who have none of
those Stage Plays. What Excuse can you bring for your selves, who are registered
in Heaven, to be the Companions and Coheirs with Angels if you be found worse
than the Barbarians in this, especially when thou may procure to thy self
better Comfort elsewhere? for when thou would refresh thy Mind, thou may
go into Gardens, behold running Rivers, contemplate great Lakes, look upon
pleasant Places, etc. thou have a Wife and Children, thou aboundest in Friends,
all which may afford thee Honest Delight and Profit.

The Barbarians themselves when they heard of these Stage Plays, uttered
Expressions worthy of the greatest Philosophers; What say they, have the Romans
no Wives nor Children? But thou will say, these Playhouses do no Hurt. Yes,
verily they do, in that thou spendest thy time there Idly and to no purpose,
and give cause of Scandal to others. For though thou by Fortitude and
Sublimeness of Mind have escaped the Infection, yet by giving Example to others
who are weaker, thou have occasioned their committing of Evil.

In his seventy fourth Homily on Matthew, he says, Many come to Church to
behold the Beauties of Men and Women; do ye not therefore wonder, that
Thunderbolts are not darted forth on every side? but these things ye have
learned from the unchaste Theater, that most contagious Plague, that unavoidable
Snare of Idle Persons. Such is the accursed Fruits of Stage Plays, not only to
make the Playhouse, but the very Church of God a Brothel.

In his sixty ninth Homily on that same Evange^ist, he expresses himself thus,
Where are those who sit daily in the Playhouse to hear pernicious Songs, and to
see the Dances of the Devil. I must say unto you as St. Paul said, As you have
hitherto given up your Members to serve Uncleanness, even so now give up your
Members as Servants of Rightcousness unto Holiness. Let Us compa^e the Lives of
the Harlo^s, and corrupt young Men who sit together in the Pits and Boxes, with
the Life of those Blessed ones, even as to the Point of Pleasure. We shall find
the Difference to be as great betwixt the one and the other, ^s betwixt the
Songs of Angels and the Grunting of Swine wallowing in the Mire. Christ speaks
out of the one, but the Devil speaks out of the other. From the Songs of
Harlots, a flame of Lust does presently set the Hearers on fire; and as if the
Sight and Face of a Woman were not sufficient to inflame the Mind, they have
found out the Plague of Voice too; but by the Divine Prai^es of Holy M^^ if any
such Disease does vex the Mind, it soon extinguished.

In his 17th Homily to the People of Anti^^ where the Emperor Theodosius had
shut up (...) Playhouse, he says, Would to God it may ne^ be opened again!
Hence the Works of D^^ness flowed out into the City! Hence came the who were
Criminal in their Manners! But n^^ our City looks like a Beautiful, Fair and
M^^dest Woman. Let us not then lament with (...) feminate Sorrow, as I have
heard many do. (...) unto thee Antioch! What has befallen thee^ And how art
thou deprived of Honor? (...) when thou shall see Dancers, Players, Drinke^
Blasphemers, Swearers, Liars, then make (...) of those Expressions, Woe unto
thee, O Antioc^

In his 62d Homily to that People, he sa^^ Prisons are better than Play Houses;
because (...) the former there is Sorrow, Fear, Humility, and^ but in the
latter, there is Laughter, Wantonne^^ Diabolical Pride, Prodigality, Expense of
Tim^ the Plotting of Adultery, the School of Fo^^ cation, the Examples of
Lewdness, etc.

There are abundance of other Excellent Thin^ to this purpose, in this Eloquent
Fathers Homil^^ directly against the Stage in general; but this (...) enough
and more than enough to convict (...) Parisian Doctor, and Church of England
Divi^^ of Misrepresenting St. Chrysostom, when they sa^ He is only against the
[Excess] of the Stage* And I have been the larger upon him, not only (...)
confute that Groundless Assertion, but because (...) Declamations against the
Stage in those Days, loo^ as if they were adapted to the Stage in ours. (...)
shall only add one Observation, That he no when speaks of [ Resorming] the
Stage, but of (...) down and Over-turning it, as the Inventio^ of the DEVIL,
whice he would never have done, had he only thought the Excess of it Culpable.

Tertullian against the STAGE.
The Parisian Doctor will likewise have it, That Tertullian is only against the
[Excess] of Plays Beauty in distress, p. XV.
, but how truly will quickly be seen from the following Quotations of that
Father.

In his Book of Spectacles Cap. 4, 5, 6. and 24.
, he tells us, That Stage Plays are the Pomps of the Devil, which we renounce
at Baptism, because their Original and the Materials of which they are
composed, is wholly patched up of Idolatry. He calls Play Houses, The Devils
Church and Temple Cap. 7. 25
, and says Cap. 17.
, We are commanded to put far from us all manner of Uncleanness or Wantonness;
and by consequence are forbid the Theater, which is a private Conventicle of
Lewdness, where nothing is approved, but what is disapproved every where else,
whose chief Beauty or Grace consists for the most part in Obscenity, which the
Stage Player Acts, and is represented by Females* who have abandoned the
Modesty of their Sex. Nay, the very Stews themselves the Sacrifices of Public
Lust, are brought forth on the S^age, and that which is yet worse, in the
presence of Women, and Persons of all Ages and Degrees, where the Place, the
Hire, and the Incentives to them are represented to those that have no need of
such Tentations. Let the Senate be ashamed! Let all ranks of People blush at
this! -- If all Uncleanness ought to be held in Execration by us, can it be
lawful for us to hear those Things, which it is unlawful to speak, and seeing
we know that all scurrilous Language and Vain Words, are condemned by God, how
can it be lawful ^or us to Hear thos^ things, which it is unlawful to Act?
Thos^ things which pollute a Man when uttered by his Mouth, must they not
pollute him, when they enter into his Soul, with his own consent by his Eyes
and Ears? Thou art therefore commanded to abstain from the Stage when tho^ art
forbid to be Unclean.

This Passage is so full, and contains suc^ weighty Arguments against the
Theater, deduced from Scripture Consequences, that we may justly wonder at the
height of those Clergy-Mens Assurance, who assert that this Father is only
against the Excess of the Stage, and that it is not for^ bidden by Scripture
because not expressed by Name.

In another place, he says, That Tragedies and Comedies are the Augmenters of
Villainy and Lust, Bloody, Lascivious, Impious and Wasteful De spec^ac. c. 18.
, They de^ile the Eye and Ear with Uncleanness Ib. cap. 17.
, and blow up the Sparkles of Lust Ibid. cap. 25.
: Upon which Account he calls Playhouses, The Chapels of Venus; The Houses of
Leachery, and Conven^icles of Incontinence Ibid. cap. 10.
, and informs us, That all the Christians in the Primitive Church had utterly
le^t off frequenting the Theater Apol. adv. Gent. c. 38.
.

He tells us likewise De spect. c. 17. and 24.
, That Stage Plays make the Souls of the Spectators to appear Polluted in the
Sight of God, that none of those things deputed unto Stage Plays, are pleasing
unto God, or becoming the Servants of God; because they were all instituted for
the Devil, and furnished out of his Treasury, for every thing that is not of
God, or displeasing unto him, is of the Devil. -- Stage Plays are the Pomp of
the Devil, against which we have protested at Baptism. That therefore which we
renounce, we ought not to partake of neither in Deed, Word nor Sight; and do we
not then renounce and tear off the Seal of Baptism, when we cut off the
Attestation of it? Shall we ask the very Heathens themselves, Whether it be
lawful for Christians to frequent Stage Plays? They will tell you, that they
chiefly know a Man to be a Christian, by his renouncing the Stage. He therefore
manifestly denies himself to be a Christian, who throws off the Badge by which
he should be known. What hope then is there of such a Man? There Is no Man runs
over to the Enemies Camp, but he first throws away his Arms, forsakes his
Colors, and the Allegiance of his Prince, and resolves to run the same fate
with his Enemies. Will he think earnestly of God there, where there is nothing
at all of God to be heard? will ^e thoroughly learn Chastity who admires the
Stage Players? will he remember the Exhortations of the Prophets, amidst the
Exclamations of the Tragedians? will he think upon Psalms in the middlle of
Effeminate Songs? -- Can he be of a Compassionate Nature, who delights in the
baiting of Bears?

D^st thou doubt but at that very Moment when thou art in the Church of the
Devil, all the Angels look down from Heaven, and take special notice of every
one there present, observing who he is that speaks Blasphemy, who it is that
hears it, and who they are that lend their Ears and Tongues to the Devil? Will thou not therefore fly those Seats of the Enemies of Christ, that Pestilential
Chair; nay and the very Air over the Place, which is defiled with filthy
Speeches. Ib. cap. 25, 26, 27.
.

He tells us yet more expressly, That the Scripture has forbidden all Plays and
Interlude^, under the Prohibition of Lewdness and Lasciviousness; and that
those Texts which condemn worldy Concupiscence, idle Words, foolish, filthy
Talking and Jesting, all standing in t^^ way of Sinners, and sitting in the
Seat of t^^ Scornful, together with Hypocrisy and Diss^^^^mulation, and the
putting on of Women's Apparel by Men, do expressly condemn both Plays themselves,
resort to Playhouses, and the Acting and Beholding all Theatrical Interludes.
Ib. c. 17.
.

This I hope is sufficient to demonstrate to the Reader, that Tertullian was
against all Stage Plays and Interludes, not only upon the Account of the Excess
or Abuse of them, but also because he looked upon them to be the Inventions of
the Devil, and contrary to Scripture^ So falsely have the P^^isian and English
Doctors represented him, in their Preface to Beauty in Distress.

St. Cyprian against the STAGE.
The next that they quote; is St. Cyprian, who they say does not absolutely
condemn Opera's and Comedies; but only those Shows, that represent Fables;
after the Manner of the Greeks. Beauty in Distress. page XVI.
.

How truly this is asserted by the Popish and Protestant Doctors; let St.
Cyprian Inform you himself.

That Father in his Epistles Epist. l. 1. Epist. 10. Eucratio.
, writes thus concerning the Stage: The Stage Player who still goes on amongst
you in his disgraceful Art, is not an Instructor but Destroyer of Youth; that
which he has wickedly learned himself he teaches others; and therefore he
writes to Eucratius, That he ought not to be received into Communion; saying,
That it was neither consistent with the Majesty of God, nor the Dis^ipline of
the Gospel, that the Chastity and Honor of the Church should be defiled with
such an Infamous and filthy Contagion. Had St. Cyprian approved the Stage as
Lawful, he would have advised the Reforming of it, and not to Excom^nunicate a
Man because he was a Stage Player.

In another place he tells us, That Theaters are the Seats of Uncleanness, the
Mastership of Obscenity; which teach those Sins in Public, that Men may more
easily commit them in private: What then has a Christian to do there? says he,
to whom it is not so much as lawful to think upon any Vice, should he delight
himself in those Representations of Lust, that laying a^ide his Modesty, he may
be the more bold to commit the Crimes themselves: He learns to Act those
Crimes, who accustoms himself to see them.

Those common Strumpets, whose Misfortunes have prostituted them to the Slavery
of the public Stews, conceal the place; and comfort themselves with this, that
their Disgrace is acted in private, and those who have exposed their Chastity
to sale, are ashamed to be seen in public; but thisopen Wickedness of the
Stage, is acted in the View of all Men, where the Impudence of common
Prostitutes is surpassed.

Therefore it is utterly unlawful for good Christians to be present at those
Plays, because we s^on accustom our selves to the Practice of that Wickedness
which we hear and see: For since the Minds of Men are easily induced to those
Vices of their own accord: What will they not do, when they have unchaste
Examples both of Body and Nature?

Then as to Tragedy. He tell us, That it is a Tragedians part to relate to us
in Verse, the Wickedness of the Ancients: The Horror of ancient Parricides and
Incests are by them represented to the Life, lest those Wickednesses that were
committed in former Age^, should grow Obsolet in the pr^sent times, for by this
the present Age is Admonished, that whatever Villainy was committed in former
times, may be committed still. Thus is Adultery learned whilst it is beheld;
and she who at first came perchance a chaste Matron to the Play, returns unchaste
from the Playhouse: What a foul Corruption of Manners, what a Nourishment is it
to reproachful Actions? and what ^ Fuel of Vice is it, to be polluted with
Histrionical Gestures, and to see filthy Incest elaborately acted, against the
very Law and Right of Nature? Lib. de spectac. Ep. l. 2. Ep. 2. donato.
.

That same Author in another of his Works, says, That many Virgins by
frequenting Play Houses blas^ed the Flower of their Virginity, made shipwreck
of their Chastity, and degenerated into common Strumpets; being Widows before
they were Wives, and Mothers before they had Husbands; whose miserable falls
the Church did much lament. De habitu Virgin. page 242.
.

He tells us further, That the Scripture has forbid, that to be beheld, which
it has forbid to be acted, and has condemned all those ki^ds of Spectacles;
when it condemns Idolatry the Mother of all Plays, and which gave Birth to
those Monsters of Lightness and Vanity; and that it might allure Christians to
be Idolaters, flatters them with the Pleasures of the Eyes and Ears. Romulus at
first did consecrate Stage Plays to Consus, as the God of Counsel, for the
Sabine Women that were to be ravished; and whatever else there is in
Stage Plays, which either affects the Eyes or pleases the Ears; if its Original
be enquired into, has either an Idol or a Devil for its Founder. De spect. p.
243, 244
.

Thus we see that Cyprian agrees with Tertul^^^, that Stage Plays were invented
by the Devil, and are forbid by the Scriptures.

Lactantius against the STAGE.
Our Doctors in the next place quote Lactantius and Salvian, as being of
Opinion, that 'twas only the Excess and Abuse of the Stage that was Criminal.
Beauty in Distress p. 14.
. But with how little Reason, we shall see immediately.

Lact^ntius falls upon Stage Players in general, without exception; and accuses
them of teaching and provoking Lust, by their unchaste Gestures and Actions, and
that they resemble unchaste Women by enervating their Bodies, and in their
effemina^e Pace and Habit. De Ver^ Cultu. cap. 20. lib. 6.
. They teach Adulteries whilst they feign them, and by counterfeit
Representations instruct Men how to commit real Uncleanness. What is it that
Youngmen and Virgins may not be tempted to do? when they see those things acted
without a Blush, and willingly beheld by all sorts of People? They are thereby
taught what they may do themselves, and have their Lusts inflamed; which are
^^ost readily set on fire by beholding such things: They approve them whilst
they laugh at them, and return more corrupt to their Chambers by those Vices,
which adhere to them.

Therefore all Shows and Stage Plays are wholly to be avoided, lest Vice should
take Possession of our Hearts, which ought to be calm and quiet, and ^est our
accustoming our selves to Pleasures should render us effeminate, and turn us
away from God and good Works. Those Enterludes and Plays, because they are the
greatest Provocatives to Vice, and have a mighty Influence to debauch the Minds
of Men, ought to be abolished, seeing they are not only useless toward the
Happiness of Life, but likewise do a world of Mischief.

The same Authors says elsewhere, What is the Playhouse? Div^n^rum Instit.
Epitome, cap. 6.
is it any thing Holier than those Sword-Plays; when a Comedy treats of Rapes
and Amors, and Tragedy of Incests and Murders --. Is not then a Player the
corruption of Discipline, should those Youngmen see those things, whose
slippery Youth, which ought to be restrained and governed, is instructed to
commit Sin and Wickedness by those Representations --. Therefore we ought to
fly from all Plays, that we may enjoy Serenity of Mind: Those destructive
Pleasures ought to be renounced, lest being delighted with their pestilential
Sweetness, we should thereby fall into the snares of Death.

Salvian against the STAGE.
Then as to Salvian Bishop of Marcelles, his Opinion of Plays is thus delivered
by himself De Gubernati^ne Dei, lib. 6. p. 193, 194.
. In Stage Plays there is a certain Apostasy from the Faith; for at Baptism we
renounce the Devil, his Pomps, his Spectacles and Works --. How is it then O
Christian! that thou do follow Stage Plays after Baptism? thou have once
renounced the Devil, and by this thou must needs know, that thou do return to
the Devil, when thou returnest to the Stage.

He tells us in another place, Ib. p. 185, 186.
. Such things are acted at Plays and Theaters, as cannot be thought of, and
much less uttered without defilement: For other Vices challenge their several
parts in us, as filthy Thoughts seize the Mind, unchaste Sights posses the Eyes,
and wicked Speeches lay hold on the Ear, so that when one of those does Offend,
the other may be without Blame: But at the Stage they all become Guilty, for
the Mind is polluted with Lust, the ^^ars with Hearing, and the Eyes with
Seeing. Who without breaking the Rules of Modesty, can utter those Imitations
of lewd Things, those obs^^ne Motions and lustful Gestures that are there used,
the extraordinary sinfulness of which, may be inferred from this, that they
cannot lawfully be named --. All other Crimes pollute the Doers only, and not
the Spectators and Hea^ers: For a Man may hear a Blasphemer, and not partake of
his Sacrilege, because he dissents in his Mind: A Man may see a Robbery and
not be guilty, because he abhors the Fact: But the Pollution of the Theater and
Stage Plays are such, as make the Actors and Spectators equally Guilty; for
whilst they willingly look on, and by that means approve them, they become
Actors themselves by Sight and Assent, so that this saying of the Apostle, may
be properly applied to them, That not only thos^ who commit such things are
worthy of Death, but they also that take Pleasure in those that do them. He
further tells the ancient Romans, That Stage Plays polluted their Souls,
depraved their Manners, provoked God and offended their Savior, dishonored
their Christian Profession, and drew down Gods Judgments on their State, then
miserably wasted by the Goths and Vandals; therefore he advises them eternally
to abandon Theaters, which would bring their Souls, their Bodies, their Church
and their State to utter Ruin.

This is so full a Proof of his being against Stag^-Plays in general, and those
too not polluted with Heathen Idolatries, but when Church and State were both
Christian; that certainly our Doctors can never quote Salvian any more for
their purpose.

I pass over their other Popish Saints and Schoolmen, that they quote for their
Opinion, which I suppose will have as little weight with any true Protestant,
as if they had quoted St. Garnet or St. Coleman, but shall take notice of an
Argument (page xxi.) that the Canons of Counc^ls brought against the Stage,
relate only to Scandalous Plays or Immodest Actors; -- and here also the
COUNCILS shall speak for themselves.

CAP. VII.
Councils against the STAGE.
THE Council of Eliberis in Spain, held Anno Dom. 305. ordered those who lent
their Garments to adorn Plays, to be Excommunicated for three Years Can. 57.
. That no Stage Player should be received into the Church, unless they renounce
their Art; and if they returned to it again, they should be cast out Can. 62.
. That no Believer should marry a Stage Player, on pain of Excommunication Can.
67.
.

The Council of Arles, held at Narbon in France, about the Year of our Lord
314. in the Time of Constantine the Great, ordered, That all Stage Players
should be Excommunicated, so long as they continued to Act Can. 5.
.

The Council of Arles in that same Kingdom, held Anno 326. Enacted the like
Can. 5.
.

The Council of Laodicea in Phrygia Pacatiania, held about 364. where most of
the Bis^ops of Asia were present, Enacted, That no Clergyman should be present
at any Stage Play Can. 20.
.

The Council of Hippo Can. 13, and 35.
, held An. 393. and the Council of Carthage in Africa, held An. 399. whereof
St. ^ustin was a Member, forbad the Clergy and Laity the use of Stage Plays;
but ordered them to be re-admit^ed into the Church upon Repentance Can. 11, and
35.
.

The Council of Carthage, held An. 401. Enacted, That those who were newly
Baptized or Converted, should abstain from Stage Plays, and that those who upon
any solemn Festival omitted the Ass^mbly of the Church, and resorted to Stage
Plays should be Excommunicated Can. 68, and 88.
.

The Council of Africa held An. 408. decreed, That Reconciliation with the
Church, should not be denied to Stage Players and Common-Actors, in case of
Repentance, and abandoning their Professions Can. 12.
. That Stage Plays are against the Comm^ndments of God Can. 28.
. And that Stage Players should not be admitted as Evidences against any
Person, but in their proper Causes Can. 96.
.

The Council of Carthage, held An. 419. declared all Stage Players to be
infamous Persons, and incapable of bearing Evidence Can. 2.
.

The Council of Constantinople, held An. 680. and reputed both by Protestants
and Papists to ^e O^cumenical, ordered Clergymen that frequented Stage Plays,
to be deprived, and Laymen to be Excommunicated Can. 8.
.

The ^d Council of Nice, held about 787. and commonly reputed the 7th
Ecumenical Council, forbids Stage Plays, as being accursed by the Prophet
Isaiah Can. 22.
, Cap. 5. v. 11, 12. And forbid by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

The Synod of Tours, held in the time of Char^emain, An. 813. forbad to
frequent Stage Plays, and ordered them to teach others to avoid them Can. 7.
.

The second Synod of Cabilon, held in the sa^^ Year, forbad them in like manner.

The Council of Mentz and Rheimns, held under that same Emperor, did in the
same manner fo^bid Stage Plays to the Clergy.

The Council of Cologn, held An. 1549. forbids Comedies to be Acted in
Nunneries, for though they consisted of Sacred and Pious Subjects, they can
notwithstanding leave little good, but much hurt in the Minds of holy Virgins,
who behold and admire the External Gestures, therefore they forbad the Acting
of Comedies in Monastries, or that Virgins should be Spectators of them.

The Council of Milan held, An. 1560. in the Chapter concerning the Stage and
the Dice, admonishes Princes, to banish out of their Teritories all
Stage Players, Tumblers, Jugglers and Jesters, and to punish such Public
Houses as entertain them.

Thus we find Synods, Ancient and Modern, and some of them, during the very
Darkness of Popery, expressly condemning the Stage, and that of the Council of
Cologn is very remarkable, which forbids Virgins the seeing of Comedies, though
the Subject be Sacred and Pious, because of the bad Impressions which the
External Gesture might leave upon their Minds.

Nay, the very Council of Trent declared so far against Stage Plays, as to
forbid them to the Clergy Sess. 24. Surius Tom. 4. p. 979.
. Then what a shame is it that the Church of England, should not only be so
remiss in declaring against the Stage, but that any of her Clergy should appear
to defend it, as that Dr. does, who sent the Letter to M. Motteux, to prefix to
his Beauty in Distress. And much more that any of them should be Authors to
write Plays for the Stage, as Jasper Main, and others of a latter date, as the
Author of the Innocent Impostors, etc. whom out of Respect I forbear to Name.

To these Ancient and Modern Councils, I shall add, that of the Protestant
Church of France, held at Rochel, An. 1571. Where this Canon was unanimously
agreed upon, viz.

All Congregations shall be admonished by their Ministers seriously to
Reprehend and Suppress all Dances, Mummeries and Enterludes; and it shall not
be lawful for any Christians to act or be present at any Comedies, Tragedies,
Plays, Enterludes, or any other such Sports, either in public or private;
considering that they have always been opposed, condemned and suppresse^ in and
by the Church, as bringing along with them the Corruption of good Manners. This
methinks ought to have more weight with M. Motteu^, and his Church of England
Divine; than the Letter of a Popish Doctor of Paris.

I shall insist no further on the Defense of the Stage, by the Prefacer to
Beauty in Distress; those I have already touched being his principal Arguments.
As for his Hints of other things, being condemned by those Fathers and
Councils, which are now generally held to be Innocent, they are me^r trifles:
No Protestant ever held, that either Men or Councils were Infallible: But the
Arguments here adduced, by those Fathers and Councils against the Stage, being
founded upon general Scripture Rules, ought to direct us in our Faith and
Practice, as to this Matter

Yet seeing our Parisian Doctor thinks it a mighty Argument for the Stage, That
Bishops, Cardinals and Nuncios make no Scruple to be present at Plays Beauty in
Distress page 21.
, though the same has been forbid by so many Councils. Mr. Motteux or his
Church of England Divine, may acquaint him if they please; That the Council of
Lateran, held by the Authority of Pope Innocent the third, in the year 1215.
consisting of two Patriarchs, seventy Archbishops, four hundred twelve
Bishops, and eight hundred Abbots and Priors, did forbid Clergymen to be
present at Stage Plays, or to encourage Tumblers or Jesters. Can. 15. 16.
Surius, Tom. 3. p. 734.
So that if neither the Authority of Councils alone, nor that of ^ Pope and
Council together, be sufficient to (...) the Paris Doctor of the Unlawfulness
of Clergymens frequenting the Stage; then I mus^ make bold to tell him, That he
has made a Sacrifice of the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, to the Chapel
of the Devil, the Playhouse; Tertulli^n de Spectaculis.
as Mr. Mot^^ux ^as Sacrificed the Authority of the Protestant Church of
France, to the Pleasure and Profit he reaps from the Theater and Drama.

What a horrid shame is it, that Iuli^n the Apostate, should have had more
Regard to the Honor of his Pagan Priests, than our present Patrons of the
Stage, have either to the Credit of Popish or Protestant Divines; when as
Zozamen tell us, he ordered the Priests to be exhorted, not to be seen in the
Theater on Pain of Disgrace. Eccles. Hi^^ l. 5. c. 17.


AN ANSWER TO THE DEFENSE OF Dramatick Poetry.
CAP. VIII.
Church of England Divines against the STAGE.
I Come next to consider the Arguments of that Book, called, A Defense of
Dramatick Poetry: Or, Review of Mr. Collier; and must in the Threshold declare
my Agreement with the Ingenious Author, in his PREFACE, That if the Sufferance
of the Theater, be so fatally destructive to Morality, Virtue and Religion as
Mr. Collier has endeavored to render it, he has more Satyriz'd the Pulpit than
the Stage; and that this Universal Silence of the whole Clergy must conclude
their neglect of their Christian Duty: But I (...) beg leave to inform him,
that he is mistaken (...) he says, Mr. Collier is the first Pulpit or (...)
Sermon upon that Text: For though it be true, (...) the Church of England Clergy
in general, (...) been guilty of a Culpable Silence, as to (...) Head, since
the Restoration of King Charl^^ yet others have not. Nor is Mr. Collier the
(...) Church of England Divine, who since that (...) has attacked the Stage
from the Pulpit. (...) Wesley in a Reformation-Sermon, preached in (...)
James's Church Westminster, Feb. 13. and (...) wards at St. Brides, must be
allowed to have (...) the start of him. Wherein he expresses himsel^^ [page 20,
etc.] thus:

Our Infamous Cheatres seem to have do^ more Mischief than Hobbs himself, or
our (...) Atheistical Clubs, to the Faith and Morals (...) the Nation. Moral
Representations are own^^ to be in their own Nature, not only Innocent but even
useful as well as pleasant; but what (...) this to those which have no Morals
or Morali^^ at all in them, and which are the most Immora^ Things in the World,
which the more any good Man is acquainted with them, the less he mus^ still
like them, and at which Modest Heathen^ would blush to be present. If we ever
hope for an entire Reformation of Manners, even our Iails and our Theaters must
have their shares With as much Reason may we exclaim against our Modern Plays
and Interludes, as did the ol^ Zealous Fathers against the Pagan Spectacles,
and as justly rank these, as they did the others among those Pomps and Vanities
of this wicked World, which our Baptism obliges us to ^^nounce and to abhor.
What Communion has the Temple of God with Idols, with those Abominable
Mysteries of Iniquity, which out do the old Fescennina of the Heathens, the
lewd (...) of Baccus, and the impious Feasts of (...) and Priapus? I know not
how any Persons can profitably or indeed decently present themselves here
before God's Holy Oracle, who are ^^equently present at those Schools of Vice,
and Nurseries of Profaneness and Lewdness, to unlearn there, what they are here
taught out of God's Holy Word. -- Would you suffer your Friend or your Child to
resort every day to a Pesthous, or a place infected with any Contagious or
Deadly Disease, whence you had seen many Persons carried out dead before you.
If (...) would do this, who pretended to be in his Right Senses. What excuse
can be made for those who do worse, and are themselves frequently present, as
well as suffer others to be so, at that place which is so nearly allied to
Hers, which Solomon describes, Whose House is the Way to Hell, and her Gates
lead down to the Chambers of Death? -- How can such Persons pray every day,
Lead us not into Temptation, when they themselves wilfully rush into the very
Mouth of it? It Is true the Stage pretends to Reform Manners, but let them tell
us how many Converts they can Name by their means to Virtue and Religion,
during these last thirty or forty Years, and we can give Numerous and sad
Instances to the contrary, even of a Brave and Virtuous Nation too generally
depraved and corrupted, to which there cannot perhaps be any one thing
assigned, which has more highly contributed than these unsufferable and
abominable Representations, the Authors of which, though the public should
continue to take notice of them, would either be forced so far to alter them*
that they would hardly be known, or else they would fall of themselves. If Men
would but withdraw their Company from the^^ as their presence there does
actually encoura^^ and support them. To close the Head whereo^ ^am sorry
there is so much cause of insisting, (...) there are too many of whom we may
without breach of Charity, believe that they would rath^^ forsake the Church than
the Theater, by (...) being so much more frequently and delightfull^ present at
the latter, than they are at the for mer.

If Oaths, if Blasphemy, if perpetual Profa^ tion of the Glorious Name of God
and our Blesed Redeemer, if making a Scoff and a Laught^^ at his Holy Word and
Institutions, and I know not why I should not add, his Ministers too which is
the very Salt and almost Imprimatur to most of the Comedies of the present Age.
If Filthiness and foolish Talking, and profan^ or immodest Jesting, and
insulting over the Miseries, and excusing, and representing, and reco^mending
the Vices of Mankind, either by not p^nishing them at all, or slightly
punishing them, or even making them prosperous and happy, and teaching others,
first how to be wicked, and then to defend or hide their Wickedness, or at
least to think Virtue ridiculous and unfashionable, and Religion and Piety sit
for none but old People* Fools and Lunaticks.

If contempt of Superiors, if false Notions of Honor, if height of Lewdness
and Pride, and Revenge, and even Murder, be those Lessons which are daily
taught at these public Playhouses, to the disgrace of our Age, corruption of
our M^rals, and scandal and Odium of our Nation; for the Truth of which, we may
appeal to all the Unprejudiced, and Virtuous part of Mankind* Then we may
further ask, Whether these are ^it place* for the Education of Youth? the
Diversion of those of Riper-Age, or indeed so much as ^^llerabl^, as they now
are; and without a great and unexpected Reformation under any Christian
Government. If they are so, they may then continue in their present State, and
we may still frequent them; but in the mean time, how can we presume to come
hither unto Gods House, and his Holy Table? unless we could answer that
pathetick Expostulation of God to his own People, who lived not answerable to
their Profession. What have thou to do to tread in my Courts, or take my Name
into thy Lips; seeing thou hate to be Reformed, and have cast my Words behind
thy Back, and were Partaker with the A^ulterer?

Thus Mr. Wesley, who our Author knows is none of the most Contemptible of our
Poets himself, and is no Enemy to the Stage, but only aims at its Reformation.
Yet its plain, his Charge is as heavy against the English Stage, as that of Mr.
Collier; though he is for making use of the Pruning-Hook and not of the Ax.

Dr. Horneck against the STAGE.
Dr. Horneck, whose Remembrance is still savory, because of his Eminent Piety,
did several years before Mr. Wesley, in his Book, entitled the Sirenes: or
Delight and Judgment. Edit. 2. Printed in 1690. bring as heavy a Charge against
the Stage, as can well be drawn up: which is so much the more remarkable; That
he does not cry down all Representations of History, or of Men's Actions in the
World as Unlawful; but would seem to allow of such at are restrained altogether
to Virtue and Goodness, and such Accomplishments of the Soul, which the wisest
and holiest Men in all Ages, have been desirous and ambitious of --. And say^
Though Virtue cannot be well either disco^sed of, or represented without its
opposite Vice, yet such is the Nature of Vice, such the unhappy Consequencies
of it; that if either the Pleasure, or Ease, or Prosperity and Success of it be
shown and acted, though but for a few Minutes, whatever Fate it ends in, its so
agreeable to the corrupted Tempers of Men, that it leaves a pleasing Impression
behind it, nor is the After Clap or doleful Exit of it, strong enough to
prevent ^ liking or satisfaction, especially in the younger sort, who are
generally more taken with its present Content and Titillations, than frighted
with its dull and muddy Conclusion: For while its present Success and Sweetness
is acting, the C^pid strikes the Heart, and lays such a Foundation there, as
Mocks all the Death and Ruin, it after some time does end in.

Therefore he says a little lower, Nothing of the present amiableness of Vice
ought to be mingled with the Scenes; for though Vice must almost necessarily be
named in these Living Landskips; yet it should be only named, and never named
but with Horror, and the Generosity and Grandeur of Virtue acted to the Life.
Vice should never appear but in its ugly Shape, for if you dress it in its
shining Robes, though it be but for a quarter of an Hour, such is the Venom of
this Basilisk, it breaths a poisonous Vapor both on the Actor and Spectator.

This is the Scheme of the Reformation Dr. Horneck proposes for the Drama,
which if it took effect, the Playhouses would be little esteemed by those who
now frequent them most, for according to this Proposal, the Plays would be
perfect Historical Lectures upon the Virtues and Vices of Mankind, without any
thing of those Amorous Representations and Intreagues, which (...) recommend
them so much to our Gallants.

But to come to the Doctors Opinion of the Modern Plays, we find it thus, That
they are sitted for Vani^y and Luxury; for though they represent the Punishment
of Vice, and the Reward of Ver^^ to the Life, yet it is done rather with
Advantage to the former, than to raise the Credit of the latter; and the effect
shows it, viz. the Corruption and Debauchery of Youth, and Persons of all sorts
and sizes.

They are suited says he, to the loose Humor of the Age, which seems to hate
all things that are ser^ous, as much as Ratshane, and delights in nothing so
much as in Jests and Fooleries, and seeing the most venerable things turned
into ridicule. Here no Play relishes but what is stuffed with Love Tricks, and
that which makes People laugh most, is the best written Comedy.

Wantonness is set out in its glittering Garb, and the melting Expressions that
drop from its Lips, are so charming to a carnal Appetite, that the young Lad
wishes himself almost in the same Passion and Intreague of Love, he sees acted
on the Stage; it looks so pleasant and Ravishing.

Here Religion is too often traduced, and thorough the sides of Men that differ
from our Church, the very Foundation of Christianity is shaken and undermined
--. Here few sacred things are spared, if they serve to make up the Decorum of
the Act.

Here the supreme Creator is too often reviled, through the ill Language given to
the Heathen Numens, and things that savor of real Piety rendered flat, insipid
and impertiment, Here all that may ^aise the Flesh into Action and Desire is
advanced. -- Here all those wanton Looks and ^estures, and Postures that be in
the Mode are practiced according to Art, and you may remember you have seen
People when (...) from a Play, strive to get that Grace and (...) they saw in
the Mimiek on the Stage.

Here Men Swear and Curse; and actually imprecate themselves; and though they
do it under the Name of the Person they act, yet then own Tongue speaks their
Sin, and their Body is the Agent that commits it; and thus they dam^ themselves
for a Man in Imagination.

And are these things fit for a Christian to be hold? is this a sight agreeable
to the Strait-Way, and the Narrow Gate which leads to Life? (...) there any
thing in the Gospel more plainly forbid, than conforming to the World, and what
(...) that Prohibition import, if Conformity to the World in beholding those
dangerous Sights, (...) not in a great Measure meant by it. We man put forced
Glosses upon the Words, but does no^ this look like the natural Sense of them.

Holiness, for without it no Man shall see (...) Lord, is the very Character of
Men who name the Name of Christ, if they bear not that Nam^ in vain; and will
any Man of Sense be so bo^^ as to say, that Shows which have so much (...) in
them, are suitable to that Holiness. We know who said, Turn away mine Eyes from
beholdi^^ Vanity, and who sees not that he who delights (...) such Shows,
neither dares Pray that Prayer, no^ can have any desire to Imitate David in his
Holiness, for he is pleased with Vanity, fixes his Eye upon it, makes it the
pleasing Object of his Sig^ and consequently instead of turning his Eyes aw^^
from it, turns them to it.

If thy right Eye offend thee pluck it out, and (...) it from thee, etc. said
our Savior. Mat. 5. 29.
If there any Sense in this Passage, the meaning must (...) cessarily be, that
if the Eye or beholding an (...) prove an Occasion of evil; the Eye must be so
carefully and so totally withdrawn from the Object as if it were actually
plucked out, or were of no use in the Body. What an occasion of evil the
beholding of such scurrilous Shows is, none can judge so well as he who takes
notice, ^ow by these sights the horror which attended some Sius is taken off,
and Men are tempted to entertain a more favorable Opinion of them, how apt
upon these Occasions they are to laugh at those S^ns, which require Rivers of
Tears, and to smile at the Jest they hear, which deserves their most rigid
Censures.

God would not suffer the Israelites to take the Name of the Heathen Gods in
their Mouth Exodus 23. 13.
for fear their frequ^nt naming of them should lessen their Awful Apprehensions
of the supreme Deity, or be tempted through that Familiarity to think there was
no great harm in worshipping of them. The Substance of this Precept is Moral
and consequently cannot be supposed to be abolished by the Death of Christ, and
since God would not permit i^ to the Jews, how should he be supposed ^o give
leave to Christians, of whom he requires greater strictness. -- How in our
modern Plays in most Addresses, Wishes and Imprecations, the Heathen Deities
are brought in, I need not tell you. The Actors swear by God in the singular
number, but in their Entire Harangues or Witty Sentences, which they intend
shall move most, the Gods are called in, and that is the Grace of their part. --
The Truth is, such Men seek to turn Religion again into Paganism, and the S^ile
they use in their respective Speeches about things above, is fitted for that
purpose.

Flatter not your self Sir, with a Fancy that (...) Plays are no where forbid
in the Bible, and (...) therefore it may be lawful to see them, for the Word
(...), Revelling, to which the Apostle threatens Exclusion out of the Kingdom
of He^^ven, Gal. 5. 21. and from which the word Comedy is in all probability
derived; though I know others fetch it from (...), a Village: because in
ancient times they did sing Songs about Country Towns: I say this word includes
all such Vain, Lascivious, Ludicrous and Jocular Representations, not only
Dancing and Luxurious Feasting, but Wanton, Light and Amorous Interludes. Vid.
Gerh. Ioh. Voss. de Idol. l. 2. c. 8.


The Word is very comprehensive, and be^^^ so, one would think should fright
every serio^^ Person, from coming within the Guilt of that which has so fevere
a Threatening annexed there^

Let us but consider the Nature, Scope (...) Drift of our Religion; it commands
us De^^ cy, Modesty, Sobriety, Vigilance or Watch^^ness over our Thoughts, and
Words and Acti^^ Simplicity in the inward and outward Man, (...) deeming the
Time, employing the Hours (...) has lent us, in profitable Discourses, and
thi^^ useful and tending to Edification. It hids us ^ stain from fleshly Lusts,
which War against (...) Soul, it condemns all Rioting, Chambering, W^ tonness,
and making Provision for the Flesh, fulfill the Lusts thereof. It commands us to
(...) after the Spirit, to be Heavenly Minded, to (...) the same Mind and
Temper in us, which w^^ so in Christ Jesus, to grow in Grace, to adv^^ in
Goodness, to grow Strong in the Lord, and the power of his Might. It bids us to
stand for the Glory of our God, and to be conc^^ when his Name or Religion, or
things Sacred abused. It bids us avoid Scandal, and take we do not by our
Example, either draw p^ into Errors, or confirm them in their Sins bids us take
heed of discouraging our Neigh^ from Goodness, and of laying a Stumbling^ in
the way of weaker Christians. It bids us exhort one another daily, and beware
lest any of us be ha^dened through the deceitfulness of Sin. These are some of
the principal Rules, -- but how they can be observed, by Persons that delight
in those Shows, I cannot apprehend.

Is it Modesty to hear that Ribaldry and filthy Communication, which some Plays
are stuffed with, or to be a Spectator of so many undecent and wanton Gestures,
Postures and Actions, which in some Comedies make up the greatest part of the
Show? Is this Sobriety to stand by and hear Men Curse and Swear, and talk of
things which should not be so much as named, among Christians? Is this Decency
to afford your presence in a Place, where the most debauched Persons assemble
themselves, for ill Ends and Purposes? Is this your Fear of God, to go and hear
the most solemn Ordinances of God railled and undervalu'd; such as Marriage and
Living up to the strict Rules of Reason and Conscience? Is this your
Watchfulness over your Thoughts, and Words and Actions, to go and expose your
selves to Temptation, to run into the Devils Arms, and give him an Opportunity
to incline your Heart, to sinful Delights, and being pleased with things that
God abhors? Is this that Godly Simplicity? the Gospel presses, to pay, for your
being affected with the vain Shows of this sinful World, and to take Liberty,
to hear and see what Men of little o^ no Religion, shall think fit to represent
unto you? Is this redeeming of your time, to throw away so many Hours upon
Fooling, and seeing Men^ ridiculous Postures, Gestures and Behaviors? Is this
the way to grow in Grace, and to advance in Goodness, and to abound more and
more in the Love of God, which your Christianity obliges you to? Is not this to
clog your Soul and throw Impediments in her way to Felicity? Is not this the
way to make her enamored with the World; from which a Christian is to run
away, as much as he can? By your Saviors Rule, though you are in the World,
yetyou are not to be of the World.

These Shows alienate other Men's Affections from the best of Objects, and what
security have you, that they will not alienate yours. -- As you are a
Christian, you are to bring your Flesh into Subjection, and to keep under your
Body; and do not these Shows signally help toward is Power, and Dominion over
the nobler part. -- Who sees not that those Sights are mere Incentives to Lust,
and Fuel to feed the Impurer Fire in our Breasts? And is this to walk after
the Spirit? If they that walk after the Flesh cannot please God, how can you
hope to please him, while you allow yourself in this Work of the Flesh? Is the
Stage likely to produce vigorous Apprehensions of Gods Grace and Favor; you
know it damps and obscures them? Is this to have the same Mind in you, which
was also in Christ Jesus: Can you imagine that in frequenting the Stage, you
imitate his Example, did he ever encourage such empty things? Is there any
thing in all the History of his Life, that may be said to countenance such
doings, could he applaud those follies, do you think, whose Life was a perfect
Pattern of Holiness, nay are not all his Precepts levelled against these
Scurrilities. He who preached up the Doctrine of the Cross, could he have any
liking to to that which is directly contrary to that Doctrine? Would any Man
that looks upon the Jolly assembly in a Playhouse, think that these are
Disciples of the Crucified God? do they not look liker Mahomets Votaries, or
Epicurus his Followers. Would not one think that they are ^ather Disciples of
some Heathen Jupiter, or Venus or Flora, or some such wanton Minion; than of
the Grave, the Austere, and the Serious Jesus, for such he would have his
Followers to be; these he would have known by Actions and a Behavior like his
own; and is a Play likely to plant this noble Temper in you.

As a Christian you are to shun the very Appearances of Evil, and is this your
Obedience, to del^ght in that which is Evil, to applaud it with your Smiles, to
commend it with your Tongue, and to encourage it by your Presence.

As a Christian you are the salt of the Earth Mat. 5. 13.
and consequently are to preserve your Neighbor from Corruption, and is this
the way to preserve him from Infection, by your Presence in such Places, and
being as vain as he, to encourage not only the Actors in their unlawful
Profession, but the Spectators too in their Disobedience to the Gospel. Woe to
that Man by whom the Offense comes, it had been better for him that a
Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and he drowned in the midst of the Sea,
Matthew 18. 6.
says our great Master,

What is your going to a Playhouse, but giving Offense? What is it but
hardening other Men in their Sins? Is not this tempting young People, to those
Extravagancies they should detest? Is not this justifying the Players
Profession, and to make them think, that you approve of t^eir Ludicrous
Vocations.

Did Christ come down from Heaven and Die, and Spill his Blood for you, that
you might securely Indulge your carnal Genius? Did he sacrifice himself for
you, that you might please your self with such Fooleries. -- To delight in such
Vanities is a Disparagement to his Love, a Blemish to his Charity, a Disgrace
to his Condescension, and an Undervaluing of so great a Mercy.

Have you not observed it, have you not taken notice, how Men and Women, who
have had some Zeal for Religion, and very Pious Inclinations; how that Zeal
has decreased upon their frequenting those Houses, how their Goodness has
decayed, how flat they are grown in Devotion, how weak in their Holy
Performances. -- May be they have kept up some outward Shows, some external
Formality, some earnestness for the Fringes of Religion, or for the ceremonial
Part of Christianity: But have you not seen, how they are become Strangers to
that Life which must adorn it.

With what face dare you approach the Table of your Lord, who have been a
Spectator of such Shows but a little before? If you come to the Lords Table one
day, and run to a Playhouse another, do not you destroy all you built the day
before.

In this Sacrament you profess to imitate your Lord in despising the World, and
is this Imitation to go one day into the House of the Lord, and the next into a
Den of Thieves? for so the Stage may justly be called, where Men are robbed of
their Relish of Spiritual Objects.

Whence has come that Atheism, that Looseness, that Indifferency in things
Divine, that low Esteem of the Tremendous Mysteries of Christianity, which of
late like a Land-Flood, has overcome us? Have they not derived their boldness
from these places, have not the Vices represented there in jest, been practiced
by the forward Youth at home in good earnest? And can a Christian have a good
Opinion of those Houses, where so many have lost their Virtue? Can any Man of
reason think that after all this Mischief, they may be safely hugged and
applauded. Those many Notorious Fornications and Adulteries, we have heard and
know of, those barefaced Cheats, Men's boasting of their Sins, and glorying in
their Shame, their Impudence, their Courage to do Evil, their daring to do
things which sober Heathens have detested; whence have they come in a great
Measure, but from those poisoned Fountains?

If Wanton, Lustful and Obscene Jests, are expressly forbid by the great
Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 4. Nay, are not so much as to be named among Christians, how
can a Man that makes Profession of that Religion hear them, or be taken with
them when God's Name is profaned in such Houses, when Religion is mocked, when
Virtue is rendered Odious.

Do but take a View of the Writings of the Primit^ve Fathers, and you will find
them Unanimous in this Assertion, that in our Baptism when we renounce the
Devil and his Works, and the Pomp and Glory of the World, we do particularly
renounce Stage Plays, and such Ludicrous Representations. They that lived
nearest to the Apostolical Times, in all probability knew what was meant by
this Renunciation; and this they profess to be the sense of it; this they
assure us is meant by those Pomps and Glories: And why should we presume to put
a new sense upon that Vow? They received this Interpretation from the Apostles,
and propagated it to Posterity; and in this Sense we make the Abjurations.

Of the same Opinion is Dr. Bray, in his Discourse on the Baptismal Covenant,
[Printed in 1697. and Dedicated to his Highness the D. of Gloucester;] where he
Comments thus on the Pomps abjured in Baptism page 11.
.

Thereby were anciently meant those Pompo^s Spectacles, Plays and Scenical
Representations exhibited in the Roman Theaters; which because they were so
Lewd, Cruel and Impious, the Primitive Churches strictly enjoined all
Christians at their Baptism, not to frequent, or so much as to be once present,
or ever-seen at them. -- And answerable to those, are our Modern Plays acted in
the Play Houses, which are no thing inferior to the Ancient Ones, in Impiety
and Lewdness, and having such a Malignant Influence upon Faith and Manners, as
is owned by almost all Persons, and is generally complained that they have,
they ought never to be frequented by Christians, and it may very well be looked
upon as a breach of your Baptismal Vow and Covenant, for any of you to be
hereafter present at them.

Nor is it unworthy our Observation that those commendable Religions Societies
of Youngmen and others of the Communion of the Church so much countenaced by
the late Queen Mary of Blessed Memory, and the best of the Bishops, have laid
it down as part of their Ninth Order that all of their Societies should wholly
avoid Le^d Play Houses Rise and Progress of Religious Societies. p. 125.
.

Sir Richard Blackmore against the STAGE.
ANother late Author I shall produce against them is Sir Richard Blackmore, in
his Preface to his Excellent Poem, called Prince Arthur; whose Testimony is so
much the less to be excepted against, because he seems to be for a Reformation,
and not for the Abolition of the Stage: His Words are as follows,

Ou^ Poets (says he) seem engaged in a geneneral Confederacy to Ruin the end
of their own Art, to expose Religion and Virtue, and bring Vice and Corruption
of Manners into Esteem and Reputation. The Poets that write for the Stage (at
least a great part of them) seem deeply concerned in this Conspiracy. These are
the Champions that Charge Religion with such desperate Resolution, and have
given it so many deep and ghastly Wounds. The Stage was an Out-work or Fort
raised for the Protection and Security of the Temple, but the Poets that kept
it, have revolted and basely betrayed it; and what is worse, have turned all
their Force and discharged all their Artillery against the Place their Duty was
to defend. If any Man thinks this an unjust Charge, I desire him to read any of
our Modern Comedies, and I believe he will soon be convinced of the Truth of
what I have said.

The Man of Sense, and the ^ine Gentleman in the Comedy, who as the chiefest
Person proposed to the Esteem and Imitation of the Audience, is enriched with
all the Sense and Wit the Poet can bestow. This extraordinary Person you will
find to be a Derider of Religion, a great Admirer of Lucretius, not so much for
his Le^^ning as Irreligion; a Person wholly Idle, dissolved in Luxury,
abandoned to his Pleasure, ^ great Debaucher of Women, profuse and extravagant
in his Expenses. And in short, this furnished Gentleman will appear a finished
Libertine. The young Lady that must support the Character of a Virtuous
well-manner'd sensible Woman, the most perfect Creature that can be, and the
very Flower of her Sex, this Accomplished Person entertains the Audience with
confident Discourses immodest Repartees, and profane Railery. She is thoroughly
instructed in Intreagues and Assignations, a great Scoffe^ at the prudent
Reservedness and Modesty of the best of her Sex, she despises the wise
Instructions of her Parents or Guardians, is disobedient to their Authority,
and at last without their Knowledge or Consent, marries her self to the
Gentleman above ment^oned: And can any one imagine, but that our young Ladies
and Gentlewomen, are admirably instructed by such Patterns of Sense and Virtue.

If a Clergyman be introduced, as he often is, it is seldom for any other
Purpose, but to abuse him, to expose his very Character and Profession; He must
needs be a Pimp, a Blockhead, a Hypocrite, some wretched Figure he must make,
and almost ever, be so managed as to bring his Order into Contempt. This indeed
is a very common, but yet so gross an Abuse of Wit, as was never endured on a
Pagan Theater, at least in the ancient Primitive Times of Poetry, before its
Purity and Simplicity became corrupted, with the Inventions of after Ages.
Poets then taught Men to Reverence their Gods, and those who ^erv'd them, none
had so little regard for his Religion as to expose it publicly, or if any had,
their Governments were too Wise to suffer the Wors^ip of their Gods, to be
treated on the Stage with Contempt.

In our Comedies, the Wives of our Citizens are highly encouraged, to despise
their Husbands, and to make great Friendship with some such Virtuous Gentleman,
and Man of Sense, above described: This is their way of Recommending Chastity
and Fidelity; and that Diligence and Frugality may be sufficiently exposed,
though the two Virtues, that chiefly support the being of any State; to deter
Men from being Industrious, and Wealthy, the diligent and thriving Citizen is
made the most wretched, contemptible thing in ^he World: And as the Alderman
that makes the best Figure in the City, makes the worst on the Stage; So under
the Character of a Justice of Peace, you have all the Prudence and Virtues of
the Country, most unmercifully insulted over.

And as these Characters are set up on purpose to ruin all Opinion and Esteem
of Virtue; so the Conduct throughout, the Language, the Fable and Contrivance
seem evidently designed for the same noble end. There are few fine Conceits few
strains of wit, or extraordinary pieces of Railery; but are either Immodest or
Irreligious and very few Scenes but have some spiteful and envious Stroke at
Sobriety and good Manners. Whence the Youth of the Nation, have apparently
received very bad Impressions. The universal Corruption of Manners and
Irreligious Disposition of Mind that Infects the Kingdom, seems to have been in
a great Measure, derived from the Stage, or has at least been highly promoted
by it; and it is great pity that those (...) whose power it is, have not
restrained the (...) centiousness of it, and obliged the Writers to observe
more decorum. It were to be wished that Poets, as Preachers are in some
Countries, were Paid and Licensed by the State, and that none were suffered to
write in prejudice of Religion and the Government; but that all such Offenders,
as public Enemies of Mankind should be silenced and duly punished. Sure some
effectual Care should be taken that these Men might not be suffered by
debauching our Youth, to help on the Destruction of a brave Nation.

But seeing the Author of the DEFENSE, says without any limitation, that Mr.
Collier is the first who appeared from the Pulpit or Press upon this Subject. I
must put him in mind of others that have Writ and Preached against the Stage
long before those I have already mentioned: And I think Mr. Prin, Author of the
Histriomastix, deserves the Honor of being named with the first. His Treatise
being perhaps the Largest, Learned and most Elaborate of any that ever was
writ upon the Subject, and to which Mr. Collier has been very much obliged for
many things in his ingenious Book, as I own here once for all, I am highly
obliged my self for not a few, though I have made use of them in a different
Method.

I have already agreed with the Author of the Defense, That the general Silence
of the Clergy of late against the Stage, is a Neglect of their Christian Duty;
but shall now make it appear, that it has not always been thus with the Clergy,
which will be a further Confutation of our Authors Proposition, That Mr.
Collier is the first that broke Silence in this Matter, and serve as a Reproof
to the generality of the Church of England Divines of the present times, that
they come so much short of those of the former, in their Zeal against the Stage.

Ancient Church of England Divines against the STAGE.
IT may perhaps be reckoned needless to go so far back as the famous
Bradwardin, Archbishop of Canterbury, who wrote against the De causa Dei l. 1.
c. 1. Coroll. 20.
Stage in 1345. or Wickliff the Morning Star of our Reformation, who wrote
against Dialog. l. 3. cap. 1.
Plays in 1380. and therefore we shall descend to those times, when the
Reformation was arrived to a good hight: And thus we find in 1572. Dr. Matthew
Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury, in his Book De Antiquitate Ecclesiae
Britannicae, [Page 445.] asserts.

That Stage Plays are not to be suffered in any Christian or well governed
Commonwealth.

Dr. George Alley Bishop of Exeter, and Divinity Lecturer at St. Paul's in 1571.
the second year of Queen Elizabeth, declaims against, PlayBooks and
Stage Plays, as the Fomenters and Fuel of Lust, the occasion of Adultery and
other intolerable Evils. Poor man's Library part 1. fol. 13, 39.
And in that same Book, Part 1. Miscel. 6. prelect. 2. fol. 46, etc.
which its sit to observe by the way, was Printed by her Majesty's Authority,
he Inveighs against wanton and impure Books, as being then too frequent, and
wishes the Authors of of them the same Punishment, that the Emper or Severus
inflicted upon Vetromus Turinus his Fa^iliar, viz. That they might perish by
Smoke who lived by it.

A little further he says, That many of these who profess Christianity, are in
respect of reading Lascivious Books, worse by far than the Heathens: The People
called Massilienses, before they knew Christ, were of such pure and incorrupt
Morals, that their Manners were accout the best; and amongst other good Laws in
their City this was one; That there should be no Comedy acted there, because
their Arguments were for the most part of wanton and dissolute Love, But alas,
all Places in our days are filled with Juglers; Scoffers, Jesters, Players, who
may s^^ and do what they list, be it never so fleshly and filthy, and yet are
applauded with laughing and clapping of Hands. Epicharmus was punished by Hiero
of Syracuse, for rehearsing some wanton Verses in the presence of his Wife:
Sophocles rebuked Pericles for launching out in the Commendation of the Beauty
of a Boy that passed by him; and was told, that not only the Hand of a Praetor
ought to be free from Bribes, but their Eyes clear from wanton Looks; that the
Athenians would suffer none of their Judges to write any Comedy or Play: But I
speak it with Sorrow, our vicious Balladmakers, and Composers of lewd Songs and
Plays, go not only unpunished but are largely Rewarded.

There was no Adulterer in Sparta, because the Citizens were not suffered to be
present at any Comedy or other Play, lest they should hear and see those things
that were contrary to their Laws.

The next we shall mention, is Bishop Bahingto^, who in his Exposition on the
seventh Commandment says, Those Profane, Wanton Stage Plays and Enterludes;
what an occasion th^^ are of Adultery and Uncleanness, by Gesture, Speech,
Conveyance, and Devices to attain ungodly Desires, the World knows by long
Experience, Vanities they are if we make the best of them' and the Prophet
prays to have his Eyes turned away from beholding Vanity, evil Communication
corrupts good Manners, and they abound with it. They are always full of
dangerous Sights, and we must abstain from all appearance of Evil: They corrupt
the Eyes with alluring Gestures, the Eyes corrupt the Heart, and the Heart
corrupts the Body till all be horrible before the Lord: All things are polluted
by Histrionical Gestures, says Chrysostom: And Plays says he, are the Feasts
of Satan, the Inventions of the Devil. Councils have decreed very sharply
against them, those who have been desil'd by them, have on their Death Beds
confessed the danger of them, and warned others for ever to avoid them. -- The
Bishop adds, that Play Haunters, carry away with them the Ideas and Similitudes
of the lewd Representations they behold in Stage Plays, which sink deep into
their Minds; That they suck in the Poison of Stage Plays with great Delight,
and practice the Speeches and Conveyances of Love, which there they see and
learn, and having once polluted their Speech with the Language of the Theater
(for I will never call it polishing) they are never well but when they have
Company, to whom they may impart the Stories and Salutations, they have learned
at the Stage.

Bishop Andrews in his Exposition of the seventh Commandment. Bishop Baily in
his Preface to the Practice of Piety, and Bishop Hall in in his Epistles, agree
with the former in condemning Stage Plays: Of the same Mind is Doctor Reynolds
in his overthrow of Stage Plays, Doctor Griffit^, Doctor Williams, Doctor El^on
and Mr. Dod on the seventh Commandment. Doctor Sparks in his Rehearsal Sermon,
at Paul's Cross, April 29. 1579. Doctor Whites Sermon there, March 24. 1615.
Dr. Bond of the Sab^ath in 1595. and as many more Doctors, as would serve to
make up a Convocation; whence it is evident, that the Divines of the Church in
those Days, were far from being silent against the Stage Nay we are told, in
the Preface to the second and third Blast of Retreat, from Plays and Theaters,
Printed in 1580. That many Godly Ministers did from Day to Day, in all Places
of greatest Resort, denounce the Vengeance of God against all such be they high
or low, that favored Players, Theaters, or Plays.

Mr. Northbrook a learned Divine, in his Treatise against Vain Plays and
Enterludes: Printed by Authority in 1579. says, That to speak his Mind and
Conscience plainly, and in the fear of God; Players and Plays are not
tolerable, not to be suffered in any Commonwealth; because they are the
Occasion of much Sin and Wickedness, corrupting both the Minds and the Manners
of the Spectators.

There Is one Book more, writ in those times against the Stage, that I cannot
omit, because of the singularity of its Title, viz. The Church of evil Men and
Women, whereof Lucifer is the Head, and Players and Play-haunters, the Members.
And in 1625. a Treatise against Stage. Plays was dedicated to the Parliament,
from all which it will appear, that the Author of the Defense of Dramatick
Poetry, spoke without Book* when he said, Mr. Collier, was the first that
appeared from the Press or the Pulpit, against ou^ Stage, and that the present
Divines of the Church, who have betrayed the Cause by their Silence, or
encouraged the Stage by their Pens and Practice, come not only short of their
Ancestors, but are directly opposite to them.

Nor was it the Divines alone, who in those days attacked the Theater: But
Poets of their own, who being touched with remorse for writing to the Stage,
turned their Pens against it, and made such Discoveries of its Lewdness, as no
other Persons were able to do.

CAP. IX.
The Stage Condemned and Anatomized by Play-Poets.
THE First we shall name is Mr. Stephen Gosson, formerly a Stage-Poet, for
which he says himself, in the Epistle to his School of Abuse: Printed by
Authority, and dedicated to Sir Philip Sidney, in 1578. That his Eyes had shed
many Tears of Sorrow, and his Heart had sweat many drops of Blood, when he
remembered Stage Plays, to which he was once so much addicted.

This Penitent Stage-Poet in the Book just now men^ioned, and in another
called, His Plays Confuted: Printed in 1581. and Dedicated to Sir Francis
Walsingham, writes to this Effect; I will show you says he what I saw, and
inform you what I read of Plays. Ovid said, That Romulus built his Theater as a
Horse-Fair for Whores, made Triumphs, and set up Plays to gather fair Women
together, that every one of his Soldiers might take where he liked, a snatch
for his Share. It would seem that the Abuse of such Pl^ces was so great, that
for any chaste Liver to haunt them was a black Swan, and a white Crow. Dion so
straightly forbideth the ancient Families of Rome, and Gentlewomen that tender
their Name and Honor to come to Theaters, and rebukes them so sharply when he
takes them Napping, that if they be but once seen there, he judges it
sufficient cause to speak ill of them, and to think worse. The Shadow of a
Knave hurts an honest Man, the Scent of a Stews an honest Matron, and the Show
of Theaters a mere Spectator. Cooks don't show more Art in their Junkets to
vanquish the Taste, nor Painters in Shadow to allare the Eye, than Poets in
Theaters to wound the Conscience? there set they abroach strange Consorts of
Melody to tickle the Ear; costly Apparel to flatter the Sight, effeminate
Gestures to ravish the Sense, and wanton Speech to whet inordinate Lust; these
by the privy Entries of the Ear slip down into the Heart, and with Gunshot of
Affection gall the Mind. Domitian suffered Playing and Dancing so long in
Theaters, that Paris debauched his Domitia, and Menster did the like by
Messalina. Ovid in his Art Amandi, charge his Pilgrims to keep close to the
Saints whom they serve, and to show their double Diligence, to list the
Gentlewomens Robes from the Ground, to prevent their soyling in the Dust, to
sweep Moats from their Ki^tles, to keep their Fingers in Ure, to lay their
Hands at their Backs for an easy stay, to praise that which they commend, to
present them Pomegranates to pick as they sit, and when all is over to wait on
them mannerly to their Houses.

In our Playhouses at London, you shall see such heaving and shoving, such
itching and shouldring to sit by Women, such care for their Garments, that they
be not trod on, such eying their Laps that no Chipslight in them, such Pillows
to their Backs that they take no hurt, such whispering in their Ears, I don't
know what, such giving them Pippins to pass the time, such playing at
Foot-Saunt without Cards, such ticking, such toying, such smiling, such
winking, and such manning them Home when the Sports are ended, that it is a
perfect Comedy to mark their Behavior, and is as good as a Course at the Game
it self to dog them a little, or to follow aloof by the print of their Feet,
and so discover by slot where the Deer takes soil. If this were as well noted
as it is ill seen, or as openly punished as secretly practiced, I have no doubt
but the Cause would be seared to dry up the Effect, and those pretty Rabbets
ferreted from their Burrows.

For they that lack Customers all the W^^ either because their haunt is
unknown, or the Co^stables and Officers watch them so narrowly, that they dare
not queatch, to celebrate the Sabbath, ^lock to Theaters and there keep a
general Market of Baudry. Not that any ^ilthiness indeed is committed within
the compass of that Ground, as was done in Rome; but that every Wanton and his
Paramour, every Man and his Mistress, every Jack and his Joan, every Knave and
his Queen, are there first acquainted, and cheapen the Merchandise in that
place, which they pay for elsewhere, as they can agree. I design not to show
you all that I saw, nor half that I have heard of those Abuses, lest you should
judge me more willing to teach than to forbid them.

The next is the Author of, The Third Blast of Retreat from Plays and Theaters,
who had formerly been a Stage-Poet, but tells us he renounced that wicked
Profession, as being Incompatible with the Christian Religion, or his own
Salvation. He gives his Opinion of Plays thus p. 43, 44*
, That they are not to be suffered in a Christian Commonwealth, because they
are Enemies to Nature and Religion, Allurements unto sin, Corrupters of good
Manners, the Cause of Security and Carelessness in Religion, and mere
Brothel-houses of Bawdry: They bring a Scandal upon the Gospel, the Sabbath
into Contempt, Men's Souls into danger, and the whole Commonwealth into
Disorder. -- These are bitter and heinous Expressions you will say, no doubt;
yet they are nothing so bitter as the Cause requires. It were ill to paint the
Devil like an Angel, he must be drawn as he is, that he may be the better known
-- Therefore that others should not be deceived with that wherewith I have been
deceived my self, I thought it my Duty to expose the Abuse of the Plays and
Actors both, that every Man might refrain from their Wickedness, and that the
Magistrate being informed of it, might take effectual Methods utterly to
suppress them; for if they still be permitted to make Sale of Sin, we shall
pull the Vengeance of God upon our Heads, and bring the Nation to Confusion. --
What I speak of Plays from my own Knowledge, may be affirmed by Hundreds more,
who know those Matters as well as my self. -- Some Citizens Wives, upon whom
God has laid his Hand for an Example to others, have confessed on their
Deathbed with Tears, that at those Spectacles they have received such
Infection, as of honest Women made them light Huswifes: By them they have
dishonored the Vessels of Holiness, brought their Husbands into Contempt,
their Children in Question, their Bodies into Sickness, and their Souls into
Danger.

It must be owned, that this is an heavy Charge upon the Stage, nor can the
Truth of it be questioned, seeing it comes from the Hand of a penitent
Stage-Poet, who delivers it as his own certain Knowledge, but if his Testimony
and that of Mr. Gosson before exhibited be not enough; The Patrons of the Stage
may be pleased to consider, that their Evidence is confirmed by Bishop
Babington on the VII. Commandment and Dr. Layton, in his Speculum Belli Sacri.

But to return to our Author, he goes on thus,

The repair of such as are honest to those Places of Evil Resort, makes their
own Good Life to be called in Question; for that Place bree^s Suspicion as well
of the Good as the Bad; for who can see a Man or a Woman Resort to an House
that is notoriously Wicked, but will judge them to be of the Crew of the
Ungodly. The honestest Woman is the soonest assaulted, and has such Snares
laid to entrap her, as if God assist her not, she must needs be taken. When I
gave my self first to observe the Abuse of Common-plays, I found my Heart sore
smitten with Sorrow; Sin did there so much abound, and was so openly committed,
that I looked when God in his Justice and Wrath would have presently confounded
the Beholders. The Theater I found to be an appointed Place of Baudry: mine own
Ears have heard honest Women allured with abominable Speeches. Sometimes I have
seen two Knaves at once importuning one Light Huswife, whence a Quarrel has
ensued to the Disquieting of many. There are Intrigues carried on to debauch
Married Women from their Husbands, and Places appointed for Meeting and
Conference.

When I took notice of those Abuses, and saw that the Theater was become
Satan's CouncilHouse, I resolved never to employ my Pen to so vile a Purpose,
nor to be an Instrument of gathering the Wicked together. -- It may perhaps be
said, I am too lavish of my Discourse, and that what I have now said might have
been forborne; but he that dissembles Ungodliness is a Traitor to God, and as
guilty of the Offense as the Offenders themselves. Since therefore the Cause is
Gods, I dare put my self forth to be an Advocate against Satan to the rooting
out of Sin. Are not our Eyes at Plays carried away with Pride and Vanity, our
Ears abused with Amorous and Filthy Discourse, our Tongues employed in
Blaspheming God or commending that which is Wicked? Are not our Hearts through
the Pleasure of the Flesh, the Delight of the Eye, and the fond Motions of the
Mind, withdrawn from the Service of God, and the Meditation of his Goodness. --
There Is no Zealous Heart but must needs bleed to see how many Christian Souls
are there swallowed up in the Whirlpool of Devilish Impudence. Whosoever shall
visit the Chapel of Satan [I mean the Theatre] shall find there no want of
young Russians, nor lack of Harlots, utterly void of Shame; who by their Wanton
Gestures and Shameless Behavior discover what they are, -- Let Magistrates
assure themselves that without speedy Redress all things will grow so much out
of order that they will be past remedy. Our young Men are thereby made
Shameless, Stubborn and Impudent. Tell them of Scripture, they will turn it
into Ridicule: Rebuke them for breaking the Sabbath, they will call you a
Precisian. --

He that is virtuously disposed, shall find lewd Persons enough in the
Playhouse to withdraw him from Virtue by Promises of Pleasure and Pastime. The
Playhouse is the School of Satan, the Chapple of ill Council, where he shall
see so much of Iniquity and Looseness; so great Outrage and Scope of Sin, that
it is a wonder if he return not either wounded in Conscience or changed in
Life. I would wish therefore all Masters to withdraw themselves and their
Servants from such Assemblies. Youth needs not seek after Schoolmasters, they
can learn Evil too fast of themselves. Many young Men of honest Natures and
tractable Dispositions, have been changed by those Shows and Spectacles, and
become Monsters.

It is wonderful to consider, of what force the Gestures of a Player (which
Tully calls the Eloquence of the Body) are to move and prepare a Man for that
which is evil. -- Nothing entre^h more effectually into the Memory than that
which comes by seeing; things heard do lightly pass away, but the Ideas of
what we have seen, says Petrarch, stick fast in us whether we will or not.

Those Enchantments have vanquished the Chastity of many Women, some by taking
pity of the deceitful Tears of the Lover on the Stage, have been moved by their
Complaint, to compassionate their secret Friends, whom they thought to have
felt the like Torment. Some having observed the Examples, how young Women being
restrained from the Marriage of those their Friends have mislik'd, have there
learned the Art to Steal them away; others observing by the Example of the
Stage, how another Man's Wife has been assaulted and overcome, have not failed
to practice those tricks in earrest, that were shown before them in Jest: Yet
the cunning Craft of the Stage, is surpassed by that of the Scaffolds without,
for they which are evil disposed, no sooner hear any thing spoken that may
serve their turns, but they apply it: Alas! say they to the Gentlewomen by
them, Is it not pity this passionate Lover should be so martyred? and if they
find them inclined to foolish pi^y, then they apply the matter to themselves,
and pray that they would extend the same Compassion toward them, as they
seemed to show to the afflicted Lover on the Stage. Those running headed
Lovers, are grown such perfect Scholars, by long continuance at this School,
that there is not almost one word spoken, but they can make use of it to serve
their own turn.

Believe me, there can be no stronger Engine found, to batter the Honesty of
married and unmarried Women; than the hearing of common Plays. There wanton
Fables, and pastoral Songs of Love, which they use in their comical Discourses,
and are all taken out of the Secret Armory of Venus, overturn Chastity, and
corrupt the Manners of Youth, insomuch, that it is a Miracle if there be found
any Woman or Maid, which with those Spectacles of strange Lust, is not
frequently inflamed to down right Fury.

Don't we use in those Discourses to Counterfeit Witchcraft, Charming Draughts
and Amorous Potions, to stir up Men to Lust, by which Examples the ignorant
multitude are provoked to seek after the unlawful Love of others. The Device of
carrying Letters by Laundresses, and practicing with Pedlars to carry their
Tokens under color of selling their Merchandise, and other kinds of Intreagues
to bereave Fathers of their Children, Husbands of their Wives, Guardians of
their Wards, and Mistresses of their Servants, are aptly taught in those
Schools of Abuse [^he STAGE] Therefore I am sorry they are not plucked down,
and the School masters banished the City.

Thus much I will tell them, if they suffer those Brothel-Houses to continue:
The Lord will say unto them, as the Psalmist says, If thou sa^vest a Thief
thou consentedst with him, and have been partaker with Adulterers. Psalm 50, 18.


This I hope is more than enough to convince the Author of The Defense of
Dramatick Poe^ry, That Mr. Collier' s was neither the First Pulpit nor
Press-Sermon against the STAGE; and tha^ though the Silence of the Clergy
against the Playhouse, has been but too universal of late; it has not been
always so from the beginning.

By this that Author may likewise perceive, That Men of a different Kidney and
Principle from those of the Calves-Head-Feasts, or that acted the Tragedy at
Whitehall, and accounted Regicide and Rebellion, Religion and Sanc^ity page 13.
Defense of Dramatick Poetry.
, strain as much at the Gnat of the Stage as others.

I would also desire him to consider, Whether the Opinion of those Reverend
Bishops and Divines I have quoted at large, and the Evidence of two repenting
Stage-Poets, as to the Danger of the Stage, be not more than enough to outweigh
his Banter and Flouts, in denying that the Passions represented on the Stage
imprints the same Passion into the Audience, because a Man when he sees a
Hercules Furens, d^es not grow so mad and pull up'Oaks as fast as he; that our
Gallants don't presently fall a Ravishing like a lustful Tarq^in, upon the
Representation of that Lascivious Prince; and that our Ladies don't immediately
take Taint and Play the Wanton upon the sight of lewd Thais. page 19.


The Instances of the Play-Poet, just now quoted, fall but little short of
this; and Mr. Gosson^ Paris and Domitia, and Menster and Messalin formerly
mentioned School of Abuse.
, are enough to confirm i^

But, because I hate to be nigardly, he sha^^ have another from Xenophon
Convivium apud Xenophon. Oper. Graec. Lat. Francofurti p. 893, etc.
. That Author gives us an Account of the Acting of Bacchus (...) Ariadne by a
Syracusian Boy and a Girls, thus,

The Syracusian entered like Bacchus, with Pipe before him, playing a rioting
Tune. The^ Entered Ariadne gorgeously apparrel'd like a Brid^ and sat down
before the Company; She (...) not go to meet Bacchus as a dancing, nor ro^^
from her Seat, but made such Signs as discovered he might have an easy
Conquest. When Bacchus beheld her, he expressed his Passion as much as possible
in his Dance, and drawing near her fell down on his Knees, embraced an^ kissed
her; she though with some faint resemblance of Coyness and Modesty embraced him
again. At this the Spectators gave shouts of Applause. Then Bacchus rose up,
and taking Ariadne with him, there was nothing to be seen but Hugging and
Kissing. The Spectators perceiving that both of them were Handsome, and that
they kissed and embraced in good Earnest, they be held them with great
Attention; and hearing Bacchus ask her, If she loved him; and she affirming
with an Oath that she did; The whole Audience swore, That the Boy and the Girl
loved one another in Reality; for they did not Act like those who had been
taught only to persona^^ those Gestures, but like such as had a mind to perform
that which they had of a long time earnestly desired. At last when the Company
perceived that they were clasped in one another Arms. Those that had no Wives
swore they would Marry, and those that were Married, took Horse and went Home
to their Wives immediately.

CAP. X.
The English State against the STAGE.
THE Author of The Defense of Dramamatick Poetry, endeavors in the next place
to ward of the Blow given to the Stage by English Statutes; and alleges that
the (...) of Ia^^ was but a Temporary Act to hold in ^orce but that Sessions of
Parliament page 3.
Which by (...) leave is a mistake, the Words being, That it should continue to
the end of the next Parliament. And it was afterward continued again by the 3d
of Car. Cap. 4. to the end of the 1st Session of the ^ext Parliament.

And I must also here take leave to tell him, that Mr. Prin, who it is supposed
understood the ^aw as well as he, was of Opinion that the Stage Players might
have been punished in the Year 1633. by Virtue of that Act, which was many
Years after the 1st of James.

But be that how it will, thus much we have ^^n'd at least; That Stage Players
were declared, ^o be Rogues and Vagabonds, by the three Estates of England met
in Parliament; and ordered to be ^ent to the House of Correction, to be
Imprisoned, (...) on the Stocks and Whipped, and if they continued (...) Play
notwithstanding, that they should be burnt (...) an Hot Iron, of the breadth of
an English S^^lling, with a great Roman R in the le^t Shoul^er, which should
there remain as a perpetual Mark of a Rogue: If they still continued Obstinate,
they were to be Banished, and if they returned ag^^ and continued incorrigible,
they were to be exe^^ted as Felons.

This is the more remarkable, that by this Act the Licenses allowed to be given
by Peers, (...) Players of Interludes by the 39th of Eliz. were taken away, and
no reserve made for any Play^^^ whatever, and the occasion of the making this
Act was, the doubts that arose upon the 39th. (...) Eliz. and that former
Statutes were not so e^^^^tual for suppressing those Plays and Interludes, ^s
was expected.

Our Author in the next place, seems to call (...) Question the Truth, of that
Petition of the Lo^doners to Q. Elizabeth, about 1580 for suppressing the
Playhouses. Makes some Raileries upon Mr. Collier, for Rawlidge his Author,
because (...) known to the Booksellers in St. Paul's Church Yard, or
Little-Brittain; makes himself Spo^^ with the Godly Citizens that were the
Petitioners quotes Stow, to prove that Queen Elizabeth, e^couraged the Darlings
of the Stage, allowed the^ Liveries and Wages, as Grooms of the Chamber and
insinuates, that the Playhouses mentioned i^ the Petition, were only
Gaming-Houses Defense of Dramatick Poetry page 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
.

I answer, That Mr. Prin, from whom I suppose Mr. Collier had the Account of
this Petition quotes as his Author, Mr. Richard Rawlidge, (...) Monster lately
found out: Printed in London 1628. p. 2, 3, 4. Hist. Mastix. p. 492.
Which, though it may perhaps (...) hard to be met with; it does not therefore
arg^^ that there never was any such Author, -- an^ because Mr. Collier has been
somewhat desecti^^ in his Quotation here; our Author may be ple^sed to know,
that Rawlidge says in the same place, That all the Play Houses within the City
we^e Pulled down, by Order of Her Majesty and Co^^cil upon this Petition, viz.
One in Grace-Churc^ Street, one in Bishops-Gate-Street, one near Paul's, one on
Ludgate Hill, and one in White-Friers.

As to the Favor showed afterward to some of the Stage Players by Queen
Elizabeth, it argues only a Change at Court, but says nothing for the
Lawful^ess of the Stage. K. Charles ^. who there is no doubt, our Author reckons
nothing Inferior to Queen Elizabeth in Piety, made a Law in the first year of
his Reign, condemning Stage Plays, and yet afte^wards set up Enterludes at
Whitehall, on the Sabbath Day, which I suppose there is very few will commend
him for. If Queen Elizabeth designed to Reform the Stage as she had done the
Church, as our Author would seem to insinuate p. 11. The Event has proved,
that the Success was not alike. There Is few that read Plays or frequent the
Playhouse, but must own if they will speak Truth, that the Reformation there
goes Retrograde, which verifies an Observation of them that I have heard often;
That when you have Reformed the Stage all you can, it will be good for nothing:
But as one says of Cucumbers, after you have added Oil, Vinegar and Pepper,
they are fitter to be thrown to the Dunghill, than taken into the Body.

Upon the whole, however our Author may please himself with his Raileries, this
will appear uncontrovertibly true; that the Laws of England have many times
restrained, and some times totally discharged the Stage, whereas he cannot
bring one Statute that ever Commanded or Commended it. By the 4th of Hen. 4.
Cap. 27. -- All Players, Minstrels and Vagabonds, were Banished out of Wales,
because they had occasioned Mischiefs there; They were forbid by the 12th of
Richard 2. C. 6, 11. By the 17th of Edward 4. C. 3. By the 11th and 19th of Hen
7. Cap. 12. And by the 33d. of Hen. 8. C. 9. Together with Dicing Houses, and
other unlawful Games, hecause of Seditions, Conspiracies, Robberies and other
Misdemeanors that had ensued upon them. By the 3d of Henry 8. C. 9. All
Mummers, or Persons disguising themselves with Visors or otherwise, should be
seized and punished as Vagabonds, upon which Polydor Virgil, who wrote about 10
years after, says, That the English who in this are wiser than other Nations,
have made it Capital for any Person to put on a Visor, or a Players Habit.

It is evident likewise, that the Stage was restrained by the 14th and 39th of
Eliz. That it was more severely restricted, if not totally discharged by the
first and third of James, and first of Charles. -- And that the Stage was
culpable in those times, as well as now: For Jesting with Scripture, and
profanely using the Name of God and the Trinity: From all which it will appear
to any unprejudiced Person, that whatever Opinion might have been sometimes
entertained of it by the Court, the Opinion of the English State, which
includes the Court and Parliament too, has not at any time been very
favorable to it.

CAP. XI.
Sediti^ns and Tumults occasioned by the^^ STAGE.
OUR Author [Page 13.] upbraids Mr. Collier, For not quoting a more Modern
National Opinion against the Stage, when it lay under a more Universal
Abdication, viz. in the Reign of those later Powers at the Helm; who with no
little Activity leaped over the Block, and the whole Whitehall-Stage it stood
upon, and yet stumbled at the Straw, etc. A prosane Comedy and Tragedy, were
all Heathen and Antichristian; but pious Regicide and Rebellion were Religion
and Sanctity with them. The Camel would go down, but the Gnat stuck in their
Throats. -- He ought by all means to have quoted this National Opinion of the
Stage in pure Gratitude to the Patrons of his Book, the Gentlemen of the
Calves-Head-Feast, who have made it their particular bosom Favorite, etc.

Here Is a great deal more of ill Nature than Wit, whether we take it with
respect to the Nation, to Mr. Collier, or to the particular Party he reflects
upon. It Is a Malicious, False and Unmannerly Reflection upon the Nation, to
insinuate that King Charles I. was cut off by their Authority, when the World
knows, that it was the Act of a prevailing Headstrong Faction, contrary to the
Sense of the Nation, and of that very Parliamen^, who began the Opposition to
King Charles for his Tyranny and Oppression: if Levying of Money without
Consent of Parliament, and forcing the Citizens of London, and others, that
would not lend him the Sums he demanded, to serve as Soldiers in his Fleet and
Army, and a hundred other such things may be called by that Name. It is
Malicious upon Mr. Collier to the highest degree, who is known to the World to
be for Passive Obedience, the opposite Extreme: It is as full of Spite, against
those who are Enemies to the Stage, many of whom abhor the Memory of that Fact,
and are zealous Sons of the Church of England; though at the same time they
detest Tyranny be it in Prince or Prelate.

But to repay our Author in his own Coin, we have had a later instance of
Friends to the Stage, as Goodman and others engaged in a Design of as black a
Nature; if the Assassination of the bravest Prince in the Universe may be so
accounted. But lest they object, That this is but one instance we shall bring
Antiquity in for further Evidence; and in the first Place St. Chrysostom, who
Hom. 38. in Mat. Tom. 2.
tells us, That the Players and Play haunte^s of his time were most notorious
Adulterers, the Authors of many Tumults and Seditions, setting People together
by the Ears with idle Rumors, filling Cities with Commotions, and were more
savage than the most cruel Beasts.

Tertullian De Spect. ^ 17, 18.
, Cyprian De Spect. l. 2. Ep. 2.
, and Clemens Alexanandrinus Paedagogi. l. 3. c. 11.
, declaim against Tragedies and Comedies, As Bloody, Impious and Prodigal
Pastimes, which occasion Tumults and Seditions.

Gregory Nazianzen informs us, That Plays and Interludes disturbed Cities,
raised Sedition among the People, taught Men how to Quarrel, sharpened ill
Tongues, destroyed the mutual Love of Citizens, and set Families at Variance De
rect^ Educatione ad Seleucum p. 1063.


Cornelius Tacitus acquaints us in his Annals, That the Stage Players in Rome
grew so Seditious that after many renewed Complaints against them by the
Pretors, Tiberius and the Senate ba^ished them out of Italy Annal. Lib. 4. c. 3.
.

Marcus Aurelius testifies, That because of the Adulteries, Rapes, Murders,
Tumults, and other Outrages, occasioned and committed by Stage Players, he was
forced to banish them out of Italy into Hellespont, where he commanded Lambert
his Deputy to keep them hard at Work Marcus Aurelius. Lib. 1. Cap. 14. and lib
2. ^p. 12 ^d Lamber^
.

Suetonius tells us Sueton in vit. Nero. Sect. 16, 26.
That in Nero's Time there were so many Seditions, Quarrels, Com. motions and
Misdemeanors in the Roman Theater, That Nero himself, though he took great
delight in them, suppressed all Plays by a solenan Edict.

Caesar Bulengerus informs us, That under Hypatius and Belisarius there were at
least 35000 Men slain in a Commotion and Tumult raised at a Cirque Play De
Circo. Romano. c. 47.
.

In the time of Theodorick King of Italy we are im^ormed by Cassiodorus
Variarum L. 1. Epist. 20, 30. L. 3. Ep. 51. and Lib. 7. Epist. 10.
, That there were so many Tumults, Quarrels and Commotions raised at Stage.
Plays, that he was forced upon the complaint of the People to write to the
Senate to punish the Mutineers and suppress their Insolences: But there being
no reforming of them, he gave Orders wholly to suppress them.

We have heard already that the Statute of the 4th of Henry 4. Cap. 27.
restrained them in Wales, because of the Commotions, Murders, and Rebellions
they occasioned there.

The Statute of the 3d of Henry 8. Cap. 9. against Mummers proceeded from the
like Cause. -- And we are informed, That Kets Rebellion in the 3d of Edward VI.
was concerted at, and partly occasioned by a Meeting at a Stage Play at
Wimonham to which the Country- people resorting, were by the Instigation of one
John Flowerdew, first encouraged to pull down the Enclosures, and then to rebel
Holinshead. p. 1028. N^. 20, and. ^0. Nevils Hist. of Ket's Stirs.
.

Nay I refer our Author to his own Stow in his Survey of London Cap. 16.
, where he shall find an Account of diverse Tumults and Riots occasioned by
Stage Plays.

Those Tumults, Seditions and Rebellions being by the forementioned Authors
charged upon the Stage, let the Defender of Dramatick Poetry wipe off the
Imputation if he can, or give us as good Authorities to prove that Enmity to
the Stage did ever produce such Effects.

CAP. XII.
The Grecian and Roman State, against the STAGE.
THE Defender [Page 14.] triumphs over Mr. Collier for telling us, That the
Athenians thought Comedy so unreputable a Performance, that they made a Law,
That no Judge of the Areopagus should write one, beca^se that only prohibited a
Judge from writing a Co^^edy, An Argument (says our Author) enough to set
Heraclitus himself a smiling.

But I would pray the Reviewer not to insult, lest the Athenians themselves
should give him a rebuke, and speak their Mind more freely than Mr. Collier has
done for them: For if we may believe Plutarch De Gloria Atheniensium.
; Though the Athenians put great Honout upon Actors and Play-Poets at first,
yet growing Wiser by dear bought Experience at last, when they found that the
Stage had effeminated their Spirits, exhausted their Treasures, and brought
sundry Mischiefs upon them; they abandoned the same, and enacted a public Law
against it, that no Man should thenceforth presume to Pen or Act a Comedy, and
declared all common Actors Infamous from that time forward.

The Defender owns page 14.
, That the Lacedaemonians passed a positive Bill of Exclusion against the Stage,
and I shall make hold to add their Reasons from Plutarch Lacon. Institut.
, which Mr. Collier and he have both omitted, viz. Lest their Youth should be
corrupted, and their Laws derided, and brought into Contempt.

In the next page he ^louts at Mr. Collier, for relating from Tully, That the
ancient Romans counted Stage Plays uncreditable and scandalous; insomuch that
any Roman who turned Actor was not only degraded, but likewise as it were
disincorporated and unnaturaliz'd, by the Order of the Censors. -- This says
he, is almost as doughty a Quotation, as his Athenians are; and adds, that
their kinder Successors were of a contrary Opinion; for the uncreditable Player
was afterward set Rectus in Curia.

If our Author will be pleased to look a little back, add consider the
Instances there given him, of the Stages being Banished from Rome, by Tiberius,
Nero, and Marcus Aurelius; he will find that the Stage Player was not then very
Rectus in Curia; but in the hight of Disgrace, for Reasons of the greatest
weight.

But to let him see, that there may be more State Memoirs furnished against the
Stage, than Mr. Collier has done, though our Author seems to question the
possibility of it page 17.
. He may consult Livy, who will tell him That Scipio Nasica, that great Roman
General, did by a public Decree of the Senate, demolish the Roman Theaters,
and forbid their Stage Plays; as the Bane of their Morals and Valor, the
Seminaries of Lewdness, Effeminacy, Idleness, Vice and Wickedness, and
inconsistent with the Welfare of the Commonwealth; for which he is very much
applauded by Livy, Tully, St. Augustine, and others Live. l. 48. Aug. de Civit.
Dei l. 1 c. 31, etc. and lib. 2. c. 12, etc..
.

The Emperor Augustus, though once very much delighted with Plays himself,
banished all the Players and Jesters out of Rome, for those intolerable
Mischiefs they did occasion Marcus Aur. c. 14.
. It is also very remarkable, that this great Emperor, ordered Stephanio an
Eminent Player, to be thrice whipped for coming to his Palace on a Holy Day, in
hopes of a great Reward; first in the Attire of a Page, and next in that of a
Roman Matron, and personated both of them with so much Art, that he seemed to
^e the very Person he represented. The Actor complaining, that he ordered him
to be whipped three times, whereas he commanded Vagabonds to be whiped but once;
he replied, Thou shall be whipped the first time, for the Injury done to the
Roman Matron, whom thou did represent. The second time, for thy Presumption
in doing it in my Presence, and the third time, for the loss of Times which
thou have occasioned, to those that heard and saw thee Dien. Cas^^^ Romans (...).
l, 5^.
.

The saying of this Mighty Prince is yet more remarkable: When great
Intercession was made, for Pilas or Pilades the Player, whom he had ordered
first to be whipped, and then banished out of the Country, viz. That Rome had
been powerful enough to make her Enemies stoop, and now she is not able to
banish Jesters and Fools, and that which is worst of all, they have the
Presumption to vey us, and yet we have not the Courage to reprove (...).

The Emperor Trajan, when entreated by his Courtiers to hear a noted Player,
replied thus, It did not become the Majesty of a Prince, that any such vain
thing should be acted in his Pre^ence, -- That those who move Princes to behold
such Enterludes, deserve as great Punishment as those that act them; seeing
none ought to present before Princes, such things as may move them to Vice, b^t
rather those that may influence them to Amendment. And afterward this worthy
Emperor, partly out of his own Disposition and partly at the Peoples Desire,
abolished Stage Plays, as effeminate Arts and Exercises, which dishonored and
corrupted the Roman State, for which, Pliny the second commends him highly, in
his Panygerick Dia in vit. Traja^^.
.

We are likewise informed by Tacitus A^nal. li^ 14. c. 3.
, That when Pompey erected his Theater at Rome, he was blamed for it by the
Senators; because it would be a means to make the People spend their time in
beholding Plays, and utterly overthrow their Hereditary Manners and Discipline,
by new acquired Lasciviousness.

This I hope is enough to satisfy our Author, as to the Opinion of the Roman
State concerning the Stage; but if he still object, that it was at other times
set Rectum in Curia. I shall answer him in the Words of Guevara, That such
Roman Princes as were good, did always overturn the Stage; but those that were
otherwise maintained it; so that one of the ways, to know which of those
Princes were Virtuous or Vicious, was to observe whether they maintained
Players, Jesters and Jugglers among the People, or not Guevara his Dial of
Princes.
.

CAP. XIII.
Christian Roman Emperors against the STAGE.
THE Author of the Defense says further, page 17.
, That as scandalous as the Civil Law had rendered Players, their scandal was so
little a public Nuisance, that the Christian Government even in its primitive
Luster, always suffered them amongst them.

This is so far from being true, that Constanline the Great, who is owned by
all, to have been the first Christian Emperor withdrew himself from the Stage
Plays, made in the third year of his Consulship, to drive away the Pestilence
and other Diseases, and contemned and rejected those Enterludes, which grieved
the Pagans exceedingly -- and when he was established in the Empire, he
abolished the Plays and Enterludes, as intolerable and pernicious Zos^n. l. 2
Baron. Spondan. A^no 303.. 3. Eusebius. de vit. Constan. lib. 3. cap. 52, 56.
.

Theodosius the Great, banished all Players by a public Edict, As the Plagues
of those Places where they were permitted, and shut up the Cirques and Theaters
at Antioch as the Fountains of all. Wickedness, and the Nurseries of all
Mischief Eutrop. Rer. Romans Hist. L. 13. Page 173. Baron. Spondan. An 385. Sect.
9. Chrysostom. Hom. 17. ad pop. Antioch.
.

The Emperors Valentinian and Gratian, and Valens, Enacted; That Stage Players
should be debarred from the Sacrament, as long as they continued their Playing,
and that it should not be administered unto them in their Extremity; when on
their Deathbeds, though they desired it, unless they first renounced their
lewd Profession, and protested solemnly, that they would not return to it
again in case of Recovery Codex Theodos^i. Lib. 15. Tit. 5. (...) spect. Lex.
2, 4. Tit. 7. de Scenici. Lex. 1. Spondan. Epit. Baron. An. 371. Sect. 10.
.

Justinian the Emperor published an Edict, Justin. Cod. l. 1. Tit. 6. de Episc.
Lex. 17, 18.
That all Christians should retrain from Acting and Beholding of Stage Plays,
because they were not the least of those Pomps of the Devil, which Christians
solemnly renounce at Baptism.

CAP. XIV.
The Ancient Philosophers against the STAGE.
THE Author of the DEFENSE goes on to ridicule Mr. Collier for his Quotations,
from Aristotle, Plato, Plutarch Livy, Valerius Maximus, Seneca and Tacitus P.
18, etc.
.

Aristotle (he says) did not carry Matters so high as to a total Exculsion, but
allows them as an innocent Diversion to Persons of Mature Age and Discretion.

In Answer to which I shall, (as I have already in other Cases) supply the
defect of Mr. Collier's Quotations, and bring Aristotle to Answer for himself,
who in his Rhetoric Lib. 2. c. 6.
speaks of Comedians thus, viz. That their whole Employment is to survey and
deride the Vices of other Men, which they proclaim upon the Stage, and
therefore they are to be numbered amongst Traducers and Evil-speakers.

In his Politics he says, That those who behold the G^stures and Actions of
Stage Players, though they be neither accompanied with. Music nor Poems, are
notwithstanding moved and affected according to the Nature of the things they
see acted; And though he allows those of riper Years to be admitted to offer
Sacrifice at such Plays, where Lasciviousness was allowed to the Gods by the
Laws; yet he says, Magistrates must take care that nothing filthy or obscene be
allowed either in Shows or Pictures Polit. Lib. 8. c. 5. N^. 21. and 78. Lib.
7. c. 17.
; and excludes those Stage Plays out of his Republic, as being apt to debauch
the Minds and Manners of Youth, with their Scurrility and Lasciviousness.

The Reviewer Page 26.
is angry with Plato, as quoted by Mr. Collier, for telling us in a Line and an
half, That Plays raise the Passions and pervert the use of them, and by
consequence are dangerous to Morality: He thinks that Plato owed that Justice
to the World a^round him and Posterity after him to read a little longer
Esculapian Lecture upon so Epidemick a Disease Dial^g. ^, 10.
.

To gr^tifie our Author, and again to supply Mr. Collier's defect, I Will make
bold to acquaint him with some of Plato's Sermon^ work upon that Text, as he is
pleased to call it in the page before quoted.

This great Philosopher in his Book De Republica, says, That Comical and
Tragical Poets and Poems. render Men Effeminate, corrupt their Judgments, treat
of Leacherous Subjects, noutish those Lusts that ought to be dried up, and give
them a Commanding-power over Men, wherea^ they ought to be kept in Subjection;
and for those Reasons, and because he knew they would corrupt Men's Manners, and
bring the Gods into Contempt, he banished them out of his Commonwealth.

I am mistaken if our Author don't think this Sermon sharp enough, though it be
but short; And whereas he objects, that we have only the bare word of those
Philosophers, for the heavy Charge they bring against the Stage; the Reply is
easy, that their Charge is verified by the concurring Testimonies, and
Experience of all Ages, and I wish in my Heart, that we could give them the Lie
from our own.

Then as to Tully and Plutarch: The Desender will have '^m To ^e only for
Checking of Stage Plays, when too Licentious; as the Bane of Sobri^ty, and an
Excitation to Lewdness Page 20.
.

But if Tully and Plutarch may be heard speak for themselves, it will appear
otherwise: The former de Officiis Lib. 2. about the middle.
, calls them Prodigals, who lay out their Money upon the Stage; In other
Pla^^s, he condemns all Amorous Plays and Poets, as infecting Men's Minds and
Manners; and therefore advises the Romans to abandon (not to reform) them,
lest they should effeminate and corrup: them, as they had done the Grecians,
and so subvert the Empire Tusculan. Quest. Lib 4 near the end. De Leg. Lib. 1.
the like.
. And in his Oration for Quintius Page 225.
, speaking of the Skill of Roscius the Actor, he says, that he was only fit to
appear on the Stage; but when he considered his other Qualities; he says, It
was pity he should ever come there: Which, as St Austin descants on it, was a
plain declaration, that a good Man ought not to come to the Stage* and that
Stage Players were accounted infamous amongst the very Pagans De Consensu
Evangelistar. c. 2.
: And with him Tertullian agrees, in his Book, De Corona Militis Cap. 5. P. 75.
.

As to Plutarch, that famous Moralist and Historian, he disapproves all
Stage Plays, not only as lascivious Vanities, occasioning much prodigal and
fruitless Expense, to the great damage of the Commonwealth, but as contagious
Mischiefs which blast the Virtues, mar the i^genious Education, and corrupt the
Lives and Manners of all those that frequent them Plutarchi Solon. Lacon
Ins^ituta.
.

This Champion of the Drama, makes himself Merry in the next Place, with Mr.
Collier's Quotations, from Livy and Valerius Maximus Page 21.
. But whether he mistake Mr. Collier or not, I am sure he mistakes his Authors:
For Livy says in express terms, That the Plays though instituted to appease the
Gods, did neither deliver the Peoples Minds from their superstitious Fears, nor
their Bodies from their infectious Diseases; but on the contrary, the Tiber
overflowed the Cirque in the midst of their Sport; whence the People concluded,
that the Gods were displeased with the Atonement Live. dec. 1. L. 7. 3.
; so that our Author has lost all his sine Raillery, on his taking it for
granted, That the Plays made Peace in Heaven, though Valerius Maximus says,
they raised Wars on Earth.

The next Scost is on S^n^ca, for quarrelling with the Stage, because it gained
Ground on the Philosophy School, and berest him of his Scholars P. 22, 23.
. But the Gentleman might have seen from Mr. Colliers Quotation, that Seneca
had other Causes of Quarrel, viz. That the Stage occasioned a mispending of
time, the decrease of knowledge, the sinking of Reason, and the destruction of
good Manners; because there Vice made a sensible approach, and stole upon the
Audience in the disguise of a Pleasure, or words to that effect Short View. p.
236.
.

But if we will hear Seneca speak for himself, he is yet more plain, and tells
us expressly, That when Men and Women have tipp'd their Foreheads with Brass by
long ^requenting the Stage; the next News we hear of them is, that they take up
their Lodging in a Bawdy House; or (because I would do him no wrong) take it in
his own words. In hoc Mares, in hoc Feminae tripudiant, deinde sub Persona cum
diu trita ^rons est, transitur ad Ganeam Natural Quest. l. 7.
.

And therefore he advises Lucilliu^s to avoid the Playhouse, and the Company
that haunted it, because they were able to corrupt a Socrates, a Cato, or a
Laelius. He adds, There is nothing so destructive to good Manners, as to sit
idling in the Playhouse; and hence takes occasion to bewail the great
Concourse of the Roman Youth to the Theater, as a fatal Symptom of a declining
State Epist. 7.
.

The Defender of the Drama, would Vindicate Nero against Tacitus Page 23.
, for hiring decayed Gentlemen to play on the Stage, because he thought it no
Degradation to his imperial Dignity, personally to ac^: Plays himself; and
seems to think it a mighty Honor to the Stage, that Nero was pleased to be an
Actor in Person: But takes no notice, of what Tacitus tells us, That Flavius
and other noble Romans, conspired the Death of that Monster, and effected it
too for that very Reason, lest the Commonwealth should be utterly ruined, by
the Peoples addicting themselves any longer to the Theater Annal. Lib. 15. 9,
10.
.

To these I shall add the Testimony of some other Ancient Philosophers, because
our Author upbraids Mr. Collier with the smallness of the number he has quoted,
and the first shall be Solon.

Who being accounted the Wisest of the Ancient Greek Legislators, his Opinion
must reasonably be accounted valuable; and what that was we are informed by
Plutarch, viz. That he rejected Stage Plays as lying and deceitful Fictions,
which would quickly teach the People, to Cheat and to Steal, to play the
Hypocrite and Dissemble, to Circumvent Men in their Dealings, to the prejudice
of the Public, therefore were not to be tolerated in a Commonwealth Plutarchi
Solon. Page 31.
.

His Dialogue with Thespis the Tragedian is Remarkable, When Solon blamed him
(after having seen him act his Tragedy) for Lying and Cheating so egregiously
before a Multitude. Thespis thought it a good Excuse when he told him It was
but a Play: at which the Philosopher struck his Staff upon the Ground with
great Indignation, and replied to him smartly, If we approve this Play of
yours, we shall quickly find the Effects of it in our Bargains: And therefore
forbad him to Act any further; telling him his Tragedies were a parcel of
unprofitable Lies.

The next is Lycurgus the famous Spartan Lawgiver, Who (we are informed by the
same Author) excluded all Stage Plays out of the Commonwealth, lest they should
corrupt their Youth and bring their Laws into Contempt -- The Answer of a
Lacedemonian to the Ambassador of Rhodes, who asked The occasion of this Severe
Law? is no less observable, viz. That Lycurgus foresaw the great Damage that
Players and Jesters might do in a Commonwealth: But however that was, this I
know, (says he) That it is better for us Greeks to weep with our Philosophers,
than for the Romans to laugh with their Fools Pluta^ohl Apotheg.
.

To these we may add the Opinion of Socrates, so famous for his Wisdom among
the Greeks, Who (by the express Resolution of the Oracle of Delphos,) condemned
all Comedies, as Pernicious, Lascivious, Scurrillous and unseemly Diversions;
and of the great Orator Isocrates, who declaims against all Plays and Actors,
as Hurtful, Scurrilous, Fabulous, Ridiculous, Invective and Expensive Pastimes,
and therefore not ^it to be tolerated in a City Plato, Socrates, Apolog. Page
12. and Diog. Laert. l. 2.
.

These being Men of the greatest Repute for Wisdom, Learning and Moral
Instructions in all the Heathen Antiquity. It must needs be allowed, that though
they be few in number, yet their Opinion in this Matter is of more Weight,
because agreeable to the Dictates of Resin'd Reason than those of 100 others
that approve the Stage, and other Licentious Practices, which always issue in
the Ruin of their Followers.

The Reasons they have exhib^ted for their Aversion to the Stage are not to be
Answered by our Authors Scoff*, That the particular Opinions of not half a
Score of these Dissenting Ethnic Doctors, out of at least half as many hundred
of that Fraternity, especially too at their rate of talking, or Mr. Collier for
them, is no more a Conclusive Argument, in my simple Judgment, against the
Stage, than a Diogenes in his Tub and his Rags, or an Epimantus at his Roots
and his Water, should persuade any Rational Man from a clean Shirt upon his
Back and a good House over his Head, or a good Dish of Meat and a Bottle of
Wine for his Dinner, viz. If he be able to purchase it.

If our Author can produce for his opinion, but an equal number of Ethnic
Doctors of the like Authority with those we have quoted against it, he will
oblige the learned World, more than any Man has hitherto been able to pretend
to; but much more if he can bring us half a Score Hundreds, I must also desire
him to consider, that most of the Authors here mentioned, bear a gre^ter
Character than that of particular Persons, Plato, Aristotle and Seneca, were
the great Lights of the Gentile World in their time, and their moral Dictates
were received as Laws.

Lycurgus and Solon were Legislators, and their Doctrine embraced as the Laws
of famous Commonwealths: Add to these, the Laws of the Roman Emperors and
Senators, and of the several Republics of Greece against the Stage; and we
shall find, that the Theater was not condemned by a few dissenting Ethnic
Doctors: But by the greatest Men of the World, in their time, and the w^sest
and most polite Nations upon the Face of the Earth.

As to Diogenes's Rags and Tub, and Epiamantus's Roots and Water; Our Author
very well knows, they cannot infer the Prohibition of a moderate use of Houses
and Raiment, or of good Meat and Drink; because those things are allowed by the
Laws of God, Nature and Nations; which cannot be said of the Stage, though at
the same time, I must crave leave to tell him, that the mortified Lives of such
Heathen Philosophers, will rise up in Judgment against the Debauches and Riots,
of most of those who frequent and patronize the Playhouse.

CAP. XV.
The Ancient Poets against the STAGE.
OUR Author falls next on Mr. Collier's Quotations from the Poets, and in the
first place charges him with quoting ovid's following Lines impertinently,

Sed tu praecipue curvis venare Theatris
Haec loca sunt votis fertiliora tuis;
-- ruit ad celebres cultissima femina Ludos:
Copia Iudicium saepe morata meum est;
Spect^tum veniunt, veniunt spectenter ut ipsae
Ille locus Casti damna pudoris habet.
Ovid. de Art Amandi. Lib. 1. The Reviewer is in the right, that Ovid does not
here design to reflect upon the Stage, because then it was his darling
Recreation, but he must at the same time own its a fair Confession that the
Playhouse was the properest place for a Lecher to forage in, which fully
answers Mr. Collier's design, and had our Author but turned his Eye to the very
next page, he might have found a Quotation from Ovid for pulling down the
Theater, as a Nursery of Villainy.

Ut t^men hoc fatear: Ludi quoque semina praebent
Nequitie, tolli tota Theatra jube,
Peccand^ ca^sam quam multis saepe dederunt:
Marria cum durum sternit arena solum?
Tollatur Circus non tua Licentia Circi est
Hic sedet Ignoto jun^ta puella Viro
Cum quaedam spatientur in hac ut amator eodem
Conveniat: quare (...) ulla patet?
Trist. Lib. 2. Such was the difference betwixt Ovid when he was carried
headlong by the Impetuous (...) of his Lust, and when he was an Exile and
(...) time to reflect upon his former lewd way of Living.

Being willing to atone for the Mischief (...) had done by his Lascivious Poem
[ De (...) Amandi] he composed another [ De Remedi^ Amoris] wherein as one of
the chief Receipts, he prescribes Abstinence from the Stage, and from Reading
the Amorous Versos writ by himself and others, thus,

At tanti tibi sit non indulgere Theatris,
Dum been de vacuo pectore ^^dat amor:
Enervant animos cytharae cantusque lyr (...)
Et vox and numer is brachia mota suis
Illic assidue ^icti saltantur Amantes
Quid cavens, Actor, quid Iuvet art docet.
Eloquar invitus teneros ne tange Po^tas
Summoneo dotes Impias csse me as, etc.
Nor is Ovid the only Roman Poet that has thus censured the Frequenters of the
Theater. Any Man that peruses Iuvenal and Horace, will find they had no
honorable Opinion of it neither.

The former gives an Elegant Description how the prodigal Dames in his time
consumed their Husbands Estates, by frequenting the Playhouse, as follows,

Ut (...) Ludos conducit Ogulnia Vestem
Conduc^ comites cellam, cervical Amicas,
Nutricem and flavam cui det mandata puellam
Haec ta^ten argenti superest quodcunque paterni:
Levibu^ Athletis ac vasa novissima donat, etc.
Prodiga non sentit pereuntem faemina censum, etc.
Non unquam reputant quantum sibi gaudiae constant.
Satyr VI. Nor had he any better Opinion of the Chas^^ty than of the good
Huswifry of those Playhaunting Ladies, as appears by the following Lines,

-- Cuneis an habent Spectacula totis
Quod Securus ames, quodque inde expetere possis, etc.
Where he describes their Lewdness in such a manner as would offend chaste Ears
to hear it.

Horace expresses himself much at the same rate, as to the practice of the
Stage, and its Frequenters.

Ut quondam Marsaeus amator Origenis illi
Qui patriam mimae donat fundumque laremque
Nil ^uit mi inquit cum uxoribus unquam alienis
Verum est cum Mimis and cum Meretricibus unde
Fama malum gravius, etc.
Sermo. Lib. I. Sat. II. So that both of them put the Haunters of the Theater,
and of the Bawdy House in the same Category.

The Reviewer's Reflection, That lewd Persons do also frequent the Church Page
29^
, is no Apology for the Stage. We have a positive command to meet for the
Worship of God, but none to frequent the Playhouse: And if a Carrion-Crow may
be caught in a Flock of Doves, as he is pleased to express it, it will not
thence follow that the ^geons must flock to the Rendevouze of the Crows, but
the quite contrary, and I must take leave to tell him, that so long as our
Stage is kept up, it will be impossible to keep our public Assemblies pure.
They learn such lewd Practices, and wanton Behavior at the Playhouse, that
they smell strong of the Infection, when they come to Church. This was the
Complaint of Eloquent Chrysostom, against those that frequented the Playhouse
in his time 74. Hom. on Mat.
. And we find Ovid of the same Mind, that there is no reforming the Uncleanness
of the Town, so long as the Theaters are suffered to stand:

Quid faciet Custos? cum (...) tot in Urbe Theatra,
Cum spectet junctos illa libenter Equos.
De Art Amandi. Lib. 3. If our Author object, that this Satyr is not directed
against the Stage, but levelled at the Pits, the Boxes and Galleries. I reply,
that the Company discovers the Entertainment, the Carrio^ Crows will scarcely
resort to a Banquet of Sweetmeats, but the scent of a dead Carcass will tempt
them hugely. The Poets already quoted, say nothing in Vindication of the
Theater, and Ovid in express terms enjoins the pulling it down.

The Reviewer it seems, has a great Mind to fasten all the Guilt upon the
Audience; and therefore it must be allowed as a just Reprisal, to charge the
Poets and Actors with their sha^e of the Crimes. We have already heard the
Opinion of the Fathers and Councils, of the Grecian, Roman and English States,
and of the chief of the Heathen Philosophers and Poets, by which it is evident.
that they charge the Guilt upon the Theater it self, as well as on the Actors
and Spectators; and I have likewise brought in the Evidence of Foreign and
Domestic Historians, to prove that those concerned in the Stage, have
frequently broke the Peace, by Tumults, Seditions, and other Villainous
Disorders; by all which it appears, that the Playhouse ever since its first
Institution, has been a common Nuisance, and shall now take the Liberty, to give
a brief Character of their Writers and Actors, from Authors of unquestionable
Credit, and the two repenting Poets, that have already obliged us with an
Anatomy of the Stage.

CAP. XV.
The Character of the Stage-Poets and Players.
THE ancient Romans held Players in so much Disgrace and Contempt, because of
their vicious and dissolute Lives, that they dis-franchis'd and removed them
from their Tribes, as being a dishonor to the Roman Blood, and the noble
Parentage from whence they derived their Original, and totally Banished them at
last Valerius Maximus lib. 2. c. 4.. 4. Suet. in Triberius
. The Grecians drove them out of their Country, upon the same account, as we
have already heard from Plutarch and others. The Primitive Church threw them
out of her Communion, and the first Christian Emperors threw them out of the
Commonwealth, as has been proved before.

Gregory Nazianzen said of the Players in his time, that they were ashamed of
nothing but Honesty and Modesty; promoted Lewdness, and boasted of their Skill
to act and suffer, all manner of Brutal Villainies, even in the Face of the Sun
Ad Seleuc. de recta Educatione.
.

St. Chrysostom says, They are infamous Persons and deserve a thousand Deaths,
because they Personate those Villainies which the Laws of all Nations command
Men to avoid Hom. in Matthew. 6.
, -- Cyprian calls them, Masters of Wickedness, wishes that Eucratius could see
their Secrets, and their Chamber Doors open: He accuses them of Sodomy, and all
manner of Villainies, and of condemning that abroad, which they commit at home
Epist. l. 2 Epist. 2. Donato.
.

St. Augustine calls them, most villainous Fellows, and commends the Prudence of
the Romans, for dis-franchising them De Civit. Dei l. 2. c. 4
. -- Nicolaus Cabasila says, there can be nothing more wicked or villainous than
a Stage Player De vit. in Christol. 2.
. -- Bodin writes, That their Profession is nothing else but an Apprentiship of
Sin, and a Trade of Wickedness, which leads to Hell De Repub lib. 6. c. 1.
.

Ludovicus Vives says, that the Roman Stage Players must needs have been
dissolute Villains, given up to all manner of Wickedness, when they could not
be suffered to live in that City, where there were so many thousands of
profligate Citizens Notae in Aug. de civ. Dei, l. 2. c. 13
.

The Author of the third Blast of Retre^t, (...) of our penit^nt Poets,
Characterizes the Stage Players thus; That their Conversation is like their
Profession; they are as skilful in the Practice of Uncleanness, as in acting
it; That their talk on the Stage, declares the inward disposition of their
Minds, and that every one of them chooses that part, which is most agreeable to
his own inclination; That he could not but lament to see them bring up youth in
filthy Discourses, unnatural and unseemly Gestures, and in Ba^dry and Idleness;
That he wondered how any Father could delight, to see his Son hereft of Modesty
and trained up in Impudence. -- He calls the Actors, the Schoolmasters of Sin
in the School of Abuse. -- They are ^otoriously known to be the same in their
Life, as they are on the Stage, that is Roisters, Brawlers, Illdealers,
Boasters, Stallions, Ruffians, etc. and love nothing that is Virtuous.

Mr. Gosson, the other Repenting Stage Prodigal, gives the Players the
Character following Plays confuted, and School of Abuse.
, viz. That they are uncircumcifed Philistines, who nourish a Canker in their
own Souls; ungodly Masters, whose Example does rather Poison than instruct, and
therefore advises People, if not for Religion, yet for Shame, lest the Gentiles
should judge them at the last; to withdraw from the Theaters with noble Marius;
to appoint a Punishment for Players, with the Roman Censors, and to show
themselves to be Christians, not to be drawn by wicked Spectators, from Virtue
to Vice, from God to Mammon; and that so they should fill up the Gulf, that
the Devil by Plays had dug to swallow them up.

This I think is sufficient Evidence to prove, that the Crime is not altogether
chargeable on the Pits, Galleries and Boxes, but that the Poets and Actors,
have the principal Share of the Wickedness; and I hope the Frequenters of the
Playhouse, will take notice of this Gentleman's Ingratitude, and avoid
frequenting the Stage, seeing the very Patrons of the Theater, charge the
Wickedness of it upon them.

CAP. XVI.
The Fathers defended, against the Defender of the Drama.
HE falls next upon Mr. Collier's Quotations from the Fathers, the Defects of
which I shall not now offer to supply, having quoted the Fathers, whose meaning
the Advocates of the Stage would pervert, at large already; I shall only
therefore take notice of the Reviewers Assertion; That Tertullians Arguments
are chiefly upon these two Heads, viz, That Pleasure was a bewitching thing,
and that the Magistrates discountenanced the Players, and crampt their Freedoms.

The Falsehood of this Assertion will be obvious to every one, that reads what I
have quoted from Tertullian, under the Head, of the Fathers against the Stage;
but as a further answer, I shall give him Dr. Hornecks excellent Abridgment of
Tertullians Arguments, page 227.
in his Book of Delight and Judgment, as follows.

I know what is commonly objected, That the Reasons why the Fathers, are so
much against the Christians seeing of a Play, was because the Heathenish
Idolatries were acted to the Life, upon the Stage, and that Proselites might
not be in danger of being enticed to Idolatry, was a great Motive why they
inveighed so much against Sights of that Nature: But those that use this Plea,
must certainly not have read the Fathers, or if they have read them, have not
considered all their Arguments; for to go no farther than Tertullian; after he
had condemned those Sights, for the Idolatries committed on the Stage; he
produces other Reasons, for which they are utterly unlawful Tertul. de Spec. c.
15.
. As,

I. Because the Spirit of the Gospel is a Spirit of Gentleness; but the Actors
are forced to put themselves into a Posture of Wrath, and Anger, and Fury, and
the Spectators themselves cannot behold them, without being put into a Passion.

II. Because Vanity, which is proper to the Stage, is altogether Foreign to
Christianity.

III. Because we are not to consent to Peoples Sins. ^ap. 16.


IV. Because Men are abused in these Places, and neither Princes nor People
spared, and this bieng unlawful else where, must be unlawful too upon the
Stage. cap. 17.


V. Because all Immodesty and Scurrillity is forbid, by the Law of the Gospel,
and not only acting it, but seeing and hearing it acted.

VI. Because all Players are Hypocrites cap. 23.
, seem to be what they are not, and all Hypocrisy is condemned by the Gospel.

VII. Because the Actors very often belie their Sex, and put on Women's Apparel;
which is forbid by the Law of God.

VIII. Because these Plays dull and damp Devotion and Seriousness, which is and
ought to be the indelible Character of Christians cap. 25.
.

IX. Because it is a Disparagement to God, to lift up those Hands to applaud a
Player, which we use to lift up to the Throne of Grace.

X. Because Experience shows, how the Devil has sometimes possessed Christians
in a Playhouse, and being afterward cast out, confessed that he had reason to
enter into them, because he found them in his own Place cap. 27.
.

XI. Because no Man can serve two Masters, God and the World, as those
Christians pretend to do, that frequent both the Church and Stage.

XII. Because though some Speeches in a Play are Witty and Ingenious, yet there
is poison at the Bottom, and Vice is only colored and gilded with fine
Language and curious Emblems; that it may go down more glib, and ruin the Soul
more artificially.

The Reviewer comes next Page 36.
to play all the Artillery of his Wit and Banter against ^ertullian's instance
of the Devil's having given it as a Reason of his possessing a Christian Woman,
that he found her on his own Ground, [ viz. the Play-house] -- Such a
Discovery, he thinks the Devil would be the last that would make. But had he
considered those several Passages of the Gospel, where the Devil was forced to
own our Savior to be the Son of God; though he came into the World to destroy
his Kingdom, and to Subvert his Tyrannical Empire over the Children of Men,
this Confession of Satan would have been no such matter of Wonder to him.

I hope our Author is not a Manichee, to believe that the Devil has an infinite
Power, or derives his Existence from himself. If Scripture Authority have any
Weight with him, there he may find it revealed, That the Devil can neither do
all the Mischief he would, nor yet resist the Commission of the Almighty, though
Rebellion be the very Essence of the Diabolical Nature. He could not so much as
destroy one of Job's Cows or Sheep without a Permission, though he would
willingly have ruined that Holy Person, and all that belonged to him Job c. 1.
2.
. Nor could he forbear to destroy Ahab by his Lies when the Almighty commanded
it 1 K. 22.
, though it had been more his Interest to have had that Monster of Wickedness
continued on the Throne, and therefore I must take the liberty t^ acquaint the
Reviewer, that his Banter is propnane, and occa^ioned merely by want of
thought, when he says, That if the Sworn Enemy of Man, have any such generous
Principle in him; Dives had no occasion to supplicate Abraham to send a
Messenger to caution his Friends on Earth, but might e'ne have begged the civil
favor of that kind Errant, from one of his own Tormentors page 37.
. The Almighty never Commissioned the Devil, nor yet his Chaplains of the Stage
to Preach, Repentance unto the World, that work he reserved for more hallowed
Instruments. -- I shall hasten to absolve this point, when I have told our
Author, that it ill becomes any Man who calls himself a Christian, to question
Tertullian's Veracity in a Matter of Fact like this, that the Enemies of our
Holy Religion could (...) have disproved, had it been false, and that the
Credit of that Learned Father, for the great Service he did to the Christian
Cause, has set him above the Snarls and Banter of the Playhouse, or its
Advocates: As for his Scost that this is the only instance of Seizure of that
kind, amongst all the Millions of Christians, who since that day have
frequented the Playhouse; Its of a piece with the rest. I have proved that the
Devil, though he be the God of this World, is far from being absolute, his
Reign is consm'd to the Children of Disobedience, and those he leads Captive a^
his own Will; so that his Seizures of this kind, consists of infinite numbers,
though his Seizures of the other sort be restrained to a few: And by the
concurring Testimonies of the Fathers, Councils, and best of Christians in all
Ages, as has been already made out: He triumphs no where more visibly, than
upon the Stage; This I have proved by the Confession of the two Penitent
Play-Poets above mentioned, but that in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses
every thing may be established: I shall add that of an Actor, who dying at the
Bath about 1630. sent for his Son, whom he had bred up to that same way of
Living. and abjured him with his last Breath, and floods of Tears, that as he
tendered the eternal Happiness of his Soul, he should abjure and for sake (...)
ungodly Profession, which would enthral him to the Devils Vassalage for the
present, and plunge hi^ for ever into Hell at last Hi^^r. Mastix 910
.

If our Author consider it, he will soon be convinced, that the Seizure of the
Soul is incomparably more dreadful, than that of the Body; and of this, I shall
put him in Mind of one Instance that was frightful enough, as it is recorded by
Mr. Braithwait, who was present and saw it His Eng. Gentlewoman Printed in 1631
p. 53, etc.
.

An English Gentlewoman of good Note, who daily spent the best of her time upon
the Stage, falling into a dangerous Sickness, her Friends sent for a Minister
to prepare her for her End; but whilst he exhorted her to Repent, and to call
upon God for Mercy, instead of listening to his wholesome Instructions, she
redoubled her Cries, to let her see Hieronimo acted, and as she had lived so
she died.

Now I would refer it to our Authors own Conscience, whether he would be
willing to make such an Exit. And if this was not a more dreadful Possession,
than those mentioned in the Gospel, when the Devil threw the Bodies of those he
had made a Scizure of, into the Fire or Water. But to conclude this point, I
must crave leave to inform him, that the Devil has renewed his claim to the
Stage, oftener than once since the days of Tertullian, and particularly in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign; when he visibly appeared on it, in the Bell-Savage
Playhouse, as they were profanely acting, the Story of Faustus, to the Terror
and Amazement of all the Spectators, and the seizing of some of them with a
Distraction page 38.
.

The Reviewer's Argument Histr. Mastix page 556.
, That 'twas the general Opinion of Christians that Plays were a lawful
Diversion, because St. Cyprian, Tertullian, St. Augustine, etc. made it their
business to refute that Opinion, is just as consequential as if he should say,
that it is the general Opinion of the People of England, that Immorality and
Profanness is lawful, because their Preachers Labor to prove the contrary, as
to every individual Species of it in all their Sermons and Books on that
Subject: -- and no less false is his Assertion, That the Appearance of that
general Innocence in those Entertainments, gave them that Reception among
Christians that they could not believe them Criminal without some express
Divine Precept against them; for nothing could be more odious than those
Practices, and Postures, etc. which the Fathers every where Charge upon the
Stage, as I have already proved; and herein also the Reviewer contradicts M.
Motteux, and his Parisian and Church of England Divine, who tell us the Father;
were against the Stage, because of the Idolatry, Blasphemy, and other Infamous
Practices there Preface to Beauty in Distress p. 14, 15, etc.
, which were very far from Innocence. -- Thus these Champions of a bad Cause,
like Troops in disorder, fall foul upon one another.

CAP. XVII.
The Scripture not silent against the STAGE.
I Come next to the mighty Counter-B^^^, which the Reviewer has raised for the
Defense of the Stage, and that is his more ^^rious Speculations (as he calls
them) upon the Scriptural Silence in that Case, than any that the Fathers have
been pleased to make page 39.
.

First then ( says he) as our blessed Sav^our was born in the Days of Augustus,
it is known by all Historians, that the shutting up of Ia^^ Temple doors in his
Reign, universally opened those of the Play Houses; -- and so they continued
throughout the Empire many Reigns after him.

If any Man should say, that when our Savior was born, the Devil and the World
kept Holy Day for Joy, he would be foully mistaken, and yet according to this
Author, it would seem they did so; For at our Saviors Birth ( says he)
Play Houses were opened throughout the whole Empire. But what if I should tell
him, that the Devil, finding himself disarmed by our Saviors Birth, and bereft
of the Sword which he had influenced Men to sheath in one another Bowels for a
long time, betook himself to another Weapon, and that was the Lusts of the
Flesh, to make War upon their Souls.

This Speculation may not perhaps be so curlous as that of our Author; but I am
of Opinion it may be every whit as solid; seeing not only the Ancient Fathers,
but even the Heathen Roman Historians, charge the Play Houses with all Manner
of Lewdness, and Augustus himself (as I have already said) banished the
Stage Players out of Rome because of the Mischiefs they occasioned.

The Reviewor must not pretend that the opening of the Theater was an Effect of
our Savior's Birth, or a suitable way of Rojoycing for it; his Foretur^ner
John the Baptist, taught a contrary Doctrine, and prepared the Jews to receive
him by Repentance and Mortification.

When our Savior came himself at the fullness of time the way of his Entrance
into the World, was the severest Reproof that ever was given to the P^mps and
Vanities of it. His Childhood and Youth, were wholly estranged from all those
^^othy Diversions, and when he entered on the Ministry, he taught a subli^e and
refined Purity, that was absolutely inconsistent with the Practice of the
Stage. He instructed his Followers in the full Extent of the Law, that it did
not so much as allow a Wanton Glance or a Lewd Thought, than which there cannot
be a more effectual Condemnation of the Theater, which by the Testimony of all
Historians and Ages, has ever been a Nursery of Impurity, and chiefly supported
by Persons of a dissolute Life.

But to return to our Author.

Now it may raise a little Wonder (says he) why the Apostles that went forth by
a Special Command of the Almighty, to Convertall Nations, Preaching Repentance
and the Kingdom of Heaven, they that so exactly performed that great Commission
as to arraign and censure Vice and Impiety from the highest to the lowest, in
all its several Branches, not only pronounced their louder Anathema's against
the more crying Sins, but read Divinity Lectures even upon the Wardrobe and
Dressing Box, correcting the very Indecencies of the Hair, the Apparel, and
each uncomly Gesture, that these Missioners of Salvation should travel through
so many Heathen Nations (the Gentiles they were sent to call) and meet at every
turn the Theater, and the Stage. Players staring them in the very Face, and not
make one Reprimand against them, is a Ma^^ of very serious Reflection.

Had the Playhouse been as St. Cyprian calls it, The Seat of Infection; or as
Clemens Alexandrinus, much to the same Sense calls it, The chair of Pestilence;
and to join the Authority of the Unclean Spirit along with them, The Devil's
own Ground: I am of Opinion in this case, that those Divine Monitors the
Apostles that set Bars to the Eye, the Ear, the Tongue, to every smallest
Avenue that might let in the Tempter, would hardly have left the broad Gates to
the Playhouse so open, without one Warning to the unwary Christian in so
direct a Road to Perdition. Such a Discovery I believe would have been rather
the Earlier Cautionary Favor of some of our kind Evangelical Guardians, than
the Extorted Confession of our greatest Infernal Enemy 200 Years after.

To Answer the Reviever in his own way of Argument.

Had the Stage been so useful to the Happiness of Mankind, to Government and to
Religion, as Mr. Dennis pretends to prove it in his late Book, or had it been
such an Excellent Mean for Recommending Virtue and Discountenancing Vice, as
others of its Advocates would ^^ve it to be, then certainly it may raise a
little wonder, that those kind Evangelical Guardians should not have somewhere
or other dropped one Expression at least in its favor, as well as they (...)
made use of the pertinent Expressions of ^me of the Poets; and therefore their
profound Evangelical Silence upon this Head, gives us just cause to suspect
that they had a far other Opinion of the Design and Nature of the Theater.

But to come closer to our Author; had he but seriously reflected upon his own
Matter of serious Reflection, it would soon have abated the height of his
Wonder; for if the Apostles Preached Re^^ntance, censured Vice and Impiety from
the highest to the lowest, read Divinity Lectures upon the Wardrobe and
Dressing-Box, corrected the Indecencies of the Hair and Apparel, and each
uncomly Gesture, they must by necessary consequence have Preached against the
Stage, which is charged with the height of Impiety and Vice, ^uperfluous
prodigality of Apparel, unlawful disguising of the Sex, and obscene and uncomly
postures, not only by the Fathers of the Church, but even by Ovid, Iuvenal,
Horace, and other Heathen Poets and Historians of those times, as I have proved
before; so that our Reviewers Battery is fairly dismounted, and his Cannon
pointed against himself: for by a Conclusion lawfully deduced from his own
Premises, it infallibly appears that the Apostles did not only give one, but
many Reprimands to the Theater, though they did not express it by name.

And I will make bold to tell him further, that the Apostles in those very
Injunctions by which they set Bars to the Eye, the Ear, and the Tongue, did as
infallibly shut up all the Avenues of the Theater, as they barricado'd those
that might let in the Tempter, if beholding Vanity, hearing Blasphemy, and
speaking Lies in hypocrisy come within the reach of their Inspired
Prohibitions. And therefore well might St. Cyprian say, that the Divine Wisdom
would have had a low Opinion of Christians, had it descended to be more
particular in this Case; when the Stage was known to abound with Idolatry,
Profanity, Cruelty, Blasphemy, Sodomy, and such other Impur^ties, as were not
so much as once to be named amongst Christians.

I pass over his Remarks on the Inconsistency betwixt Mr. Colliers Defense of
the Modesty and Chastity of the Ancient Heathen Poets and Stage, and his
quotations of the Fathers that imply the contrary. Mr. Collier is able to
defend himself, and an Over-match for him on this Subject. There Is no doubt,
but the Stage at its first Institution, was chaster than ours, and if we may
give credit to Livy; The Plays at first, were plain Country-Dances, where the
Youth jok'd upon one another in Artless Verse, and their Gestures were as plain
and simple as the rest of the performance. The Poets that Mr. Collier quoted
are modester than ours, and yet it will not follow that the horrid Impieties
charged upon the Stage by the Christian Fathers and Roman Historians, is all
slander; or that the Innocence of the Primitive Stage was the cause of the
Scriptural silence against Plays.

The Theater was opposed by the Jews before the Coming of Christ; though no where
condemned by name in the Old Testament: Yet that People to whom the Oracles of
God were committed, understood it to be contrary to the Law of Moses, and the
Discipline of their Nation; and therefore they conspired to cut off Herod the
Great in the Theater which he had built at Jerusalem, whilst he was beholding
his Stage Plays Josephus Antiq. Iud lib. 15. c. 11.
, which they had certainly effected, had not the Plot been discovered, whereof
Herod taking the advantage he brought in his Theatrical Enterludes, which at
first were pleasing to none but the Heathens that sojourned there, and were at
last attended with an Apostasy from the Laws of their Ancesto^s, a corruption
of Discipline, and dissolution of Manners. And a remarkable Judgment followed
on Herod Agrippa, who appearing on the Stage in a Silver Robe of admirable
workmanship, and being received by the Acclamations of the People as a God,
because of the beams which darted from his Apparel by the Reflection of the Sun,
was immediately smitten with a grievous Disease by something that appeared in
the shape of an Owl hovering over his head; and being tormented for five days
with an intolerable pain in his Bowels, was at last miserably devoured by
Worms. From this opposition of the jews to the Stage, we may reasonably infer,
that (...) such method of pastime or diversion, or of recommending Virtue, and
discouraging Vice, was allowed by the Church of God under the Old Testament,
and that therefore there is much less reason to think that any such thing was
allowed or approved by the Christian Church under the New Testament, whose
Worship has less of External Pomp, but much more of the Spirit and Truth than
that of the Jews had.

From hence likewise we gain another Argument, that if the Jews thought the
Stage discharged under the General Prohibition, To take the Names of the
Heathen Gods in their mouths, and the Article of their Law which forbad Men and
Women the promiscuous use of one another Apparel, the Primitive Church had
much greater Reason to conclude that the Theater was forbid to them under the
General Terms of Idolatry, Sacrifices of Idols, Vanities of the Gentiles,
Rudiments and Customs of the World, corrupt Communication, Bitterness and Evil
Speaking, keeping company with Fornicators, fellowship with the unfruitful
Works of Darkness, Filthiness, Foolish Talking and Jesting which was not
convenient, being partakers with the Children of Disobedience, Rioting,
Chambering and Wantonness, etc. all which the Stage was infected with, as has
been proved already. So that the Advocates of the Playhouse may with as much
reason infer, that Apostasy, Atheism, Incest and other Crimes are not forbidden
by the Scriptures, because not expressly named there, as argue that the
Playhouse is not discharged because it is not particularly mentioned in Sacred
Writ.

If it be objected, That all those Arguments are against the Corruption of the
Stage, but not against the Original innocent Constitution of Plays Defense of
Dramatick Poetry. p. 54.
. I answer, that there never was a time, when the Stage was free from all or
part of those Corruptions, that it was of an Heathenish and Diabolical
Institution, as has been already proved -- That at the very first, if we may
credit Livy in the place before quoted, the Diversion of the Stage consisted in
Revelling, Dancing and Foolish Jesting, and gradually grew worse and worse, and
though the Romans had Censors to restrain its Abuses, and the Greeks admired and
promoted it at first, yet both those Wise Nations found themselves under a
necessity of overturning it at last: And I have already showed that the Ends
for which the best of its Patrons pretend it was Erected, are better provided
for by the Almighty; and therefore we cannot pretend any necessity for it,
except we reflect on his Wisdom and Power.

The Reviewer comes next to argue, that the Dram^ was not censured by the
Gospel, because St. Paul quotes a Saying of the Comic Poet Menander, viz. Evil
Communication Corrupts good Manners, and likewise those of other Poets, in the
Acts of the Apostle, and Epistle to Titus, viz. In him we live, and move, and
have our Being, as certain of your own Poets have said, for we are also his
Offspring. -- and even a Prophet of their own, said the Cretians, are always
Liars, Evil Beasts, slow Bellies, etc. Page 55, 56.


But I must beg leave to tell him, that the Premises will not bear his
Conclusion, and that he might with as much strength of Reason argue, that the
Apostle did not censure the Idolatry of the Ephesians, because he quoted the
Inscription on one of their Altars TO THE UNKNOWN GOD, and thence took occasion
to instruct them in the Knowledge of the true God, who alone was
Incomprehensible. Can any Man, though but of a 5t^ rate sense, allow this to be a
good Argument, the Apostle from their own Poets convicts them of their
Epidemical Wickedness, the mischief of bad Company, and that they owe their
Being and Preservation to the Almighty: -- Therefore he did not censure the
S^age. Certainly such a Logician would be hissed out of the Schools. Our Author
by the same sort of Argument may prove, that I approve his Book, because I have
quoted his Arguments, and turned them against himself, as the Apostle turned
the Conces^ions of the Heathen Poets, against those that followed and admired
them.

Of the same Nature is his Inference, That because the Holy Ghost himself has
spoke in the Words of a Menander and Epimenides: It Is surely a little
Vindication of the Innocence of the Pro^ession Page 57.
. If he mean the Art of Poesy, there is no Man of Sense disputes its being
Innocent and Useful; but if he means a Stage-Poet, it is just such another
Argument as this, Maro picked Gold out of Ennius 's Dunghill, therefore Ennius
's Dunghill was an excellent Gold^mine. -- Does not our Author know, That it is
the Light of the Holy Ghost, which enlighteneth every Man that comes into the
World John 1. ^9.
, and that Gifts as well as Graces proceed from him? must the Holy Ghost
therefore, because he again makes use of some of those Divine Beams, which he
had graciously darted into the Minds of the Heathen Philosophers and Poets,
give his Imprimatur to their Pagan Fancies and lewd Theology? Out Author's
Argument will conclude as strongly for this, as for the Defense of the Stage.

He comes next to Enquire into the Reason of this over-violent Zeal of the
primitive Fathers against the Stage, which he finds to be the unseasonableness
of it, because it was then a time of persecution, and that by frequenting the
Stage, they herded with their Persecutors and Murderers p. 57, 58.
.

The Falsehood of this will appear from the Quotations of the Fathers themselves
under that Head: These are some of their Reasons, but not all, they laid the
Stage under a perpetual Interdict by Arguments naturally deduced from the
Scriptures. The Christian Councils condemned them for the same Cause, and the
first Christian Emperors condemned them by their Imperial Laws, upon that same
Account, as has been already said; so that our Author discovers his want of
Reading or something that is better, when he asserts the contrary From page 59,
to 67.
.

I shall conclude this Head with the Opinion of the Reverend, Learned and Pious
Mr. Richard Baxter, as to the Stage and Reading of Plays and Romances, as I
find it in his Christian Directory: Thus,

I think I never knew or heard of a Lawful-Stage Play, Comedy or Tragedy in the
Age that I have lived in, and that those now commonly used are not only Sins,
but heinous aggravated Sins; for these Reasons, I. They personate odious Vices
commonly Vitiously, that is, 1. Without need reciting sinful Words, and
representing sinful Actions, which as they were Evil in the first committing,
so they are in the needless Repetition, Ephesians. 5. 3, 12. But Fornication and all
Uncleanness or Covetousness (or Lust) let it not be once named among you, as
becomes Saints; neither Filthiness nor foolish Talking nor Jesting, which are
not convenient, but rather giving of Thanks. -- For it is a shame even to speak
of those things which are done of them in Secret. 2. Because they are spoken
and acted commonly without that Shame, and Hatred, and Grief which should
rightly affect the Hearers with an Abhorrence of them, and therefore tend to
reco^cile Men to sin, and to tempt them to take it but for a matter of Sport.
II. There are usually so many Words materially false (though not proper Lies)
used in such Actings of Good and Evil, as is unsavory, and tends to tempt
Men to Fiction and false speaking. III. There are* usually such multitudes of
vain Words poured out on the Circumstantials as are a sin themselves, and tempt
the Hearers to the like. IV. They usually mix such amorous or other such
ensnaring Expressions or Actions as are fitted to kindle Men's sinful Lusts,
and to be Temptations to the Evils which they pretend to cure. V. A great deal
of precious Time is wasted in them, which might have been much better spent, to
all the lawful Ends which they can intend. VI. It is the preferring of an
unmeet and dangerous Recreation, before many fitter; God having allowed us so
great a choice of better, it cannot be lawful to choose a worse. The Body which
most needs Exercise with most of the Spectators, has no exercise at all, and
the mind might be much more fruitfully Recreated many ways by variety of Books
or Converse, by contemplating God and his Works, by the Forethoughts of the
heavenly Glory, etc. So that it is unlawful as unfitted to its pretended Ends.
VII. It Is usually best suited with the most carnal Minds and more corrupts
the Affections and Passions, as full Experience proves. Those that most love
and use them, are not reformed by them; but commonly are the most loose,
ungodly, sensual People. VIII. The best and wisest Persons least relish them,
and are commonly most against them; and they are best able to make Experiment,
what does most help or hurt the Soul. Therefore when the sensual say, We profit
by them as much as by Sermons, they do but speak according to their Sense and
Lust: As one that has the Green Sickness may say Coals, and Clay, and Ashes do
me more good than Meat, because they are not so sit to judge as those that have
a healthful State and Appetite. And it seldom ple^sed the Conscience of a dying
Man, to remember the time he had spent at Stage Plays. IX. Usually there is
much cost bestowed on them, which might be better employed, and therefore is
unlawful. X. God has appointed a stated means of instructing Souls by Parents,
Ministers, etc. which is much more fit and powerful. Therefore that time were
better spent; and it is doubtful whether Play Houses be not a stated means of
Man's Institution* set up to the same pretended use as the Church and Ministry
of Christ, and so be not against the second Commandment. For my part I cannot
defend them, if any shall say that the Devil has apishly made these his
Churches in Competition with the Churches of Christ. XI. It seems to me a
heinous Sin for Players to live upon this as a Trade and Function, and to be
educated for it, and maintained in it; that which might be used as a
Recreation, may not always be made a Trade of. XII. There is no mention that
ever such Plays were used in Scripturetimes, by any godly Persons. XIII. The
Primitive Christians and Churches were commonly against them: Many Canons are
yet to be seen by which they did condemn them. [Read but Dr. Io. Reinolds
against Albericus Gentilis, and you shall see unanswerable Testimonies from
Councils, Fathers, Emperors, Kings and all sober Antiquity against them. XIV.
Thousands of Young People in our time have been undone. by them; some at the
Gallows, and many Servants* who run out in their Accounts, neglect their
Masters Business and turn to Drunkenness and ^hordom and Debauchery, do confess
that Stage Plays were not the last or least of the Temptations, which did
overthrow them. XV. The best that can be said of these Plays is, that they are
controverted and of doubtful Lawfulness; but there are other means enough of
undoubtful and uncontroverted Lawfulness, for the same honest ends; and
therefore it is a sin to do that which is doubtful without need. Upon all these
Reasons, I advise all that love their Time, their Souls, their God and
Happiness, ^o turn away from these Nurseries of Vice, and to delight themselves
in the Law and Ordinances of their Savior, Ps. 1. 2, 3.

As for Play-Books, and Romances, and Idle Tales, I have already showed in my
Book of Self-denial, how pernicious they are, especially to Youth, and to
frothy empty idle Wits, that know not what a Man is, not what he has to do in
the World; they are powerful Baits of the Devil, to keep more necessary things
out of their minds, and better Books out of their hands, and to poison the mind
so much the more dangerously, as they are read with more delight and pleasure,
and to fill the minds of sensual people with such idle fumes and intoxicating
fancies, as may divert them from the serious thoughts of their Salvation, and
(which is no small loss) to Rob them of abundance of that precious time which
was given them for more important business, and which they will wish and wish
again at last, that they had spent more wisely. I know the Fantastic will say,
that these things are innocent, and may teach men much good (like him that must
go to a Whore-house to learn to hate Uncleanness, and him that would go out
with Robbers to learn to hate Thievery.) But I shall now only ask them, as in
the presence of God, 1. Whether they could spend that time no better? 2.
Whether better Books and Practices would not edisie them more? 3. Whether the
greatest Lovers of Romances and Plays he the greatest Lovers of the Book of
God, and of a holy Life? 4. Whether they feel in themselves that the Love of
these Vanities does increase their Love to the Word of God, and kill their sin,
and prepare them for the Life to come, or clean contrary? And I would desire
men not to prate against their own Experience and Reason, nor to dispute
themselves into damnable impe^tinency, nor to befool their Souls by a few silly
words, which any but a Sensualist may perceive to be mere dece^t and falsehood:
If this will not serve, they shall be shortly convinced and answered in another
manner.

CAP. XVIII.
Reflections on some late PLAYS.
First on Beauty in Distress.
I Come next to make some Remarks on M. Motteux's Play called, Beauty in
Distress, which it seems he and his Friend Mr. Dryden, propose as a pattern of
Reformation. It were e^sie in the first place to observe from Mr. Dryden's
Poetical Epistle to the Author, that it contains an unmannerly and malicious
Reflection upon the Clergy in general.

Rebellion worse than Witch^raft they pursued
The Pulpit preached the Crime, the People ru'd
The Stage was silenced, for the Saints would see
In Fields performed their plotted Tragedy.
Mr. Dryden's Wit and Extraordinary Talent of Poetry are uncontrovertible; but
his turning Renegado from the Protestant Religion, which abhors the Doctrine of
Killing KINGS, and running over to the Church of Rome, which has advanced that
Practice to the Dignity of Merit, render^ him as unfit as any Man alive to
charge his Neighbors with Rebellion, and is no convincing Proof of his
extraordinary Judgment, either as to Divinity or Politics.

If his Charge had been levelled against Sibthorp and Manwaring, and their
Disciples on the one side, or against Hugh Peter's and the Tub^Preachers of
those Times on the other side, there is few Men of Sense would have thought
themselves concerned in the Reflection; but as it is levelled against all the
Clergy without distinction, he must give me leave to tell him that it may
easily be proved, that Sibthorp, and Manwaring, and the rest of their passive
Obedience-Doctors, who taught, That the King was above Law, and might dispose
of our Estates Lives and Liberties, without Consent of Parliament, were the
chief Firebrarnds of the Rebellion, and set the two Constituent parts of our
Government [the King and Parliament] together by the Ears: And were by
consequence chargeable with the Reveries of Hugh Peter's and the rest of the
Enthusiastical Tribe, who carried things to the other Extreme, when the People
were rendered Mad by Oppression. But as for the Body of the English Clergy,
either Episcopal or Presbyterian, the Charge is Malicious and Injurious. The
best of the Church of England Clergy opposed the Stage in those times, as well
as the Presbyterians, yet it is known that both of them opposed the carrying on
of things to that height which they afterward came to. And I must beg leave to
tell him that his Brethren of the Stage by usurping upon the Sabbath, and
ridiculing the Pretensions of the People to their Liberty and Property had no
small share in bringing on the Calamities he speaks of. Or if he be for a later
Instance, I can oblige him with one that is still fresh in Memory, Viz. That
the Nonjurant Clergy in this Reign, the Pupils or Followers of Sibthorp and
Manwaring in that of King Charles, were so zealous for the lately intended
French Invasion, that no less than a Troop of them did offer their Service to
hallow the Rebellion, and some of them did so little abhor the Assassinating of
Crown'd-Heads, that they absolved the Assassiens at Tyburn, without any
Declaration of their Repentance for that horrid Crime.

But to come to the Play it self.

I leave it to the Consideration of the Author, whether the following Lines of
the Prologue, don't come under the Apostolical Prohibition of f^^ thy Talking
and foolish Jesting, which is not convenient:

-- 'Twas studied to be paid in Lent,
A time when some of you so nice were grown
^'u abst^in'd from every kind of Flesh but one.
And a little lower.

You know a Reformation's coming on,
Then bear these Moral Scenes with Resignation,
T^inure you to be weaned from darling Fornication.
The wisest of Princes and Men has branded them with the Character of FOOLS,
that make a mock at sin Prove. 14. ver. 9.
, and whether these Lines be adapted for any thing else, but to make the
Audience laugh instead of being sorrowful for sin, let any Man judge. Nor is
the Jerk at the Reformation very becoming, especially considering how much it
has been recommended of late both by King and Parliament.

Then as to the Epilogue spoken by Mrs. Bracegirdle.
Poys'ning and Stabbing you have seen me'scape
And* what you think no mighty thing, a Rape:
But can poor Poet escape --
-- What shall he do?
H'as sent me a Petition here for you,
That Is it -- cry mercy! that is a Bille^ (...)
Before I go any further, I must beg leave to make some Remarks. Here Is one
great difference, I perceive betwixt the Church of Christ and the Playhouse,
which Tertullian and others (...) the Church of the Devil.

In the former Women are by Apostolical Prohibition forbid to speak, and
commanded to lea^ in silence 1 Timothy 2. ver. 11, 12.
but in the latter their Discourses Songs and Parts are the principal
Entertainm^^ which is certainly inconsistent with the Natural Modesty of the
Sex, especially when they are not ashamed to speak openly of those things which
the Apostle says, it is a shame even to mention Ephesians. 5. 12.
Let any modest person judge if this look like a Scheme of a Reformed Play, to
bring a Woman upon the Stage to charge the Audience with accounting a Rape but
a small thing, which the Law of Nations makes capital, and then impudently to
produce a Billet doux, or in plain English, an appointment to meet some Cullie.

Then he goes on with the Petition thus.

To you Great Wits, dread Critics, nicest Beaux,
Gay Sparks with borrowed Wit, and Masks with (borrowed Clothes,
You who to chat or ogle fill yond Benches,
Or tempt with Love our modest Orange Wenches*
Rakes, Cuckolds, Citts, Squires, Cullies great and small*
I think Sirs this Petition's to you all.
It cannot be denied but here is a great deal of truth spoken in jest, and that
this is a just enough description of most of those that constantly haunt the
Stage, and of their end of coming thither, a plain confession, that most of
them are Carrion Crows, as the Reviewer words it, and frequent the Theater, as
the Ordinary where they can best ^nit their Appetite, but it must at the same
time be owned that this sort of Reproof is more accommodated to inflame than to
quench their Lusts, which is demonstrable by this, that if the Crows did not
find Carrion there, they would soon grow weary of the Haunt.

I pass over the other Scoff at the Reformation, and come to her description of
the Devotion of the Poet.

But 'twe^e in vain to mention every Head;
I guess a Poet's Prayers are quickly said;
He seldom prays but to avoid his Curse;
^n empty Play house, and an empty Purse.
A great deal of truth again, and a confirmation of the Character given of the
Stage-Authors, by Mr. Goss^n, and the other Repenting Poets for^erly mentioned.
But is this Horrid Neglect of Devotion, and especially making sport with it,
suitable ^o the Character of one who pretends by his Poems to reform others?
and does it look any thing like deference to that Apostolical command of
praying without ceasing 1 These. 5. 17.
? which imports at least a constant aptitude, for that necessary Duty, and a
co^scienceious frequency in it. And does not the Experience of all Ages
testify that the Stage is so far from being a proper Motive to that or any
other Christian Duty, that it does rather make its frequenters negligent in all
Duties.

But now to come to the Play it self.

It may, if compared with many others, deserv^ to be called Chaste and Modest;
yet I do not see what edification could redound to the Audience from the
Pattern set them by the Fond Laura, who Courts Don Richardo with so much
importunity, that it must needs make the Females blush, and the young Widows,
if there were any there, ashamed of their Representative, and serve as a Lesson
to teach the young necessitous Sparks of the Town to Entrap Rich Widows in the
like manner. Her Expression to Richardo, that they would live like Gods, smells
too rank of the Libertine, and can leave but a sorry Impression upon the
Audience. Richardo's Cunning, dissembling Expressions and Tricks in his
Courtship, are no very proper Lessons to be taught our Young Men, who are but
too much depraved already; nor has the last Line of his Dialogue with Laura,
when the Monks diverted them, so much of a Chaste Tendency as becomes a Play
that is proposed as a Pattern of Reformation.

Then as to the Maiden Ladies, Morella and Melinda, in the second Act, their
Conference about Fabiano and Placentia, savours not of so much Innocence as
becomes persons of their Character, but is plainly accommodated to please the
Amorous Gusto of those that frequent the Stage. Neither does Placentia behave
her self with such Extraordinary Modesty as to deserve the name, of a Pattern
of Virtue or Prudence. Nor does her Lover Fabiano act the part of an Obedient
and Prudent Son; such Examples cannot be very edify^ng to the Spectators, but
on the contrary, teach Young Gentlemen the way how to gratify their passions,
to the ruin of themselves, and the grief of their Parents.

Richardo's attempt to Ravish Placentia in the fifth Act, with so many
circumstances, sometimes ^ving mad with anger, and at other times burnt up with
raging Lust, which flames out into bru^^sh Expressions and Actions, is so very
gross, that such a Representation cannot be defended, but must expressly fall
under the condemnation of ^^thy talking, the appearance of Evil and corrupt
Communication, which could have no tendency to the Edification of the Hearers,
but rather to inflame Inordinate Lust. If there be such things done in secrer,
whereof it is a shame for Christians to speak, certainly a Rape with its odious
circumstances must be of the number. The very name of such kinds of Vice is
infectious to corrupt Nature, but much more must such a Representation of it be
I know our Author will have recourse to the common Apology, that he brings the
Vicious Person ^o a Tragical Exit, and displays his Crime only to expose it;
but that is a poor pretense; we must not do evil that good may come of it,
especially when the fatal Experience of our own and former Ages is enough to
convince us that those Theatrical Representations nourish Vice instead of
curbing it. The Holy Ghost, who knows the ^^ailty of Humane Nature, has forbid
that For^ication or Uncleanness should be named amongst Saints, without
abhorrence, and much more such Representations of it as may any way tend to
corrupt the Mind. Many other Remarks might be made upon this Tragedy, but these
are enough to show, that whatsoever our Author may pretend, his Reformation
comes short of the Scripture Rule, and is liable to the Exceptions of those
very Fathers whom he and his Church of England Divine would reconcile to the
Stage, and particularly St. Chysostom, who as I have mentioned already, says,
That Stage Players deserve a thousand deaths, because they personate those
Villainies, Obscenities and Adulteries which the Laws of all Nations command men
to avoid.

Remarks on the Rape, or Innocent Impostors.
In the next place I shall take notice of a Play, entitled, The Rape, or
Innocent Impostor, Printed in 1692. And whereof I understand the Author is a
Clergyman, of good Reputation, and therefore am bound in Charity to think that
he designed to correct, and not to encourage Vice by his Play; but as the
Pulpit, and not the Stage was his business, he was out of his Road when he
meddled with Plays; and though it be more modest and chaste than that called
Beauty in Distress, yet I dare refer it to his own serious thoughts, whether
Genselarius premediated Rape upon Eurione, his glorying in it after the
commission of the foul Crime, and insisting so much upon the satisfaction he
had in it, even to the last moment when he was to die for it, be agreeable to
the strict Rules of Modesty; or whether it has not rather a tendency to
encourage Lustful Youth to dangerous attempts. Nor is Euriones practice, who
killed her self after the Rape, to be proposed as a Pattern in such cases. Our
Author knows that the Fathers disallowed of all such Representations, that they
looked upon them to be contrary to the Scriptures, which methinks should have
hindered him from employing himself that way, and so much the more, that he
knows the mischief that has been done to our Morals and Religion by the
Theater, and that others might be influenced to take a greater Liberty by his
Example.

We need go no further for an instance than Mr. Durfey, in his Comedy called,
The Campaigners, who values himself so much upon his Conversation with several
eminent Men of the Church, and the Assurance of their good Word to prove his
good Behavior, that he thinks it sufficient to ward off the heavy Charge Mr.
Collier has brought against his Comical History of Don Quixo^ Preface to
Campaigners, p. 3.
Nay, a Page or two further, he Triumphs, and thinks he has sufficiently
answered Mr. Collier, when he tells him, that Mr. Thomas Randolph, a Gown-man
of Wit and Learning, makes it his whole Moral, in his piece called, The Muses
Looking-glass, to vindicate the Stage ibid. p. 7.
. Of such mischievous Consequences is it for Clergymen to give countenance to
the Playhouse either by Writing for the Stage themselves, keeping Company with
Play-Poets, or Defending the Drama. I shall not any further urge the Sense of
Antiquity against their Practice in that Matter, but would humbly propose to
their Consideration, Whether it be suitable to their Character thus to
Countenance such Men as have by our Statute Law been declared Rogues; whose
Profession the best of the Church of England Divines since the Reformation have
writ against as Unlawful, and which Repenting, nay Heathen Po^ts themselves
have condemned and abhorred, as has heen already proved.

Though they may please themselves with the Lashes which that sort of Men have
given to Dissenters, from the Stage, which Mr. Dur^^y argues as a piece of
Merit in his Collins's Walk through London and Westminster ibid. p. 3.
, and by which he confirms my Conjecture, as to the Reason of the general
Silence of the Clergy against the Theater; yet they will find at last, that
they themselves shall not escape, but must partake of the Chastisement, through
the Backs and Sides of Clergymen of other Denominations. -- The Opprobrious
Terms of Say grace, Cuff^cushion, etc. in the Play called, The Relapse, are as
applicable to those of the Church of England as to others, and can serve to no
other end, but to render the Ministry Ridiculous; and therefore it is but just
that such of the Clergy as have been pleased with injurious Reflections upon
their Brethren [the Dissenters] should come in their turn to feel the Lash.

It is not to be denied but the Clergy have their Faults as well as others; and
so had the blessed Apostles, who own that the Treasure of the Gospel is
committed to Earthen Vessels 2 Cor. 4. ver. 7.
. And that they had their Humane Frailties like other Men; but it would
scarcely be allowed in any Christian State, that the Theater should make sport
with Peter's Swearing and Denying his Master, Paul' s Thorn in the Flesh, or
Barnabas' s Dissension. Nor by parity of Reason ought it to be allowed, that
the Ministers of the Gospel, should be so treated now, for though they have not
the same Power with the Apostles, nor their pretensions to infallibility in
Doctrine, yet their Ofsice is stamped with the same Authority; and they are
commissioned by one and the same Master.

Reflections on the Campaigners.
I come next to View the Campaigners, a Comedy writ by Mr. Dursey, who, it
would seem, thinks himself above Reformation.

I am no way concerned to take notice of his Preface upon Mr. Collier, because
I find nothing of Argument in it, but merely Recrimination, which is nothing at
all to the purpose. But this I am sure of, that Mr. Dursey's Comedy could have
as little good Influence upon the Morals of his Audience, as Mr. Collier's
Books can have upon the Principles of his Readers.

But to come to his Play.

The Dialogue betwixt Van Scopen and Mas^arillo in his first Act, can have no
other tendency, but to harden such Fellows in their Impiety and to teach them
the Art of Drunkenness, Filching and Playing the Pimp.

His Conference betwixt Dorange and Kinglove is adapted to nothing else but to
nourish Vice, and to teach the Method of Debauching Ladies; and how they on the
other hand, may carry on their Intreagues with their Gallants. There Is no doubt
but Mr. Durfey blesses himself for the happiness of his Invention in making
Kinglove say, That an Hundred Pistols was enough for an Hundred Princesses, a
Price sit for none but a Goddess; and that Jove himself who was the first
Whoremaster we read of, that ever gave Money, gave his Mistress Danne not a
Farthing more. This is enough to confirm what I have said before, that the
amorous Poems of Ovid, and other Heathen Authors, are no^ sit to be put into
the Hands of Youth, till they be reformed and purged from their Lascivious
Impurities; for till that be done, we can expect no other Improvement of them,
than such a profane one as Mr. Durfey has here presented us with. In the mean
time here is very Civil Treatment for Princesses and Ladies of Quality, that
P^stoles a-piece is purchase enough for their Honors.

His Letter too, is a Noble Exemplar for his Ladies to Copy; when they have a
mind to treat with a Cully, and his delicate Oaths of Gad and I Gad, Gadzooks
and Gadzoons, and Swearing by Heaven, are mighty Ornaments for the Discourse of
his Gallants; so that they may save themselves the trouble of Learning any
other Rhetoric.

His Banter upon the French Marquis's broken English is a Copy for the Gallican
Stage to bring in English Gentlemen speaking barbarous French, with your
Heumble Servityour Monseer.

His Dutch Burgomaster and English Merchant are admirably fitted to make Trade
and Commerce Ridiculous; though England and Holland have by that means risen to
their present Grandeur.

His Dialogue betwixt those Merchants representing the Soldiery, as Rogues
with long Chines, full Calves, Varlets, Poltroons, Cuckoldmaking Rascals that
huff and strut about with our Money, that they should all be hanged when the
Wars are done, is very civil to the Gentlemen of the Sword, and calculated no
doubt to give them a good Impression of our Merchants and Tradesmen, and to
create a good understanding betwixt them.

His Ragg-carrier of a Regiment is an honorable Title for Ensigns and Cornets;
Robbing of Hen-roosts is as Noble an Employment he has found out for the
Soldiers, and his jerk at the Government for letting their Pay fall into
Arrears, considering the Difficulties the Nation has labored under for want
of Money, is of admirable use too.

I come now to his Second Act.

Where we have Miin Here Tomas and Aniky his Wife exposed to our View, as a
choice instance no doubt of the Happiness of a Married State. This must needs
have been very charming to the Ladies, especially such of them as are
inclinable to be fat, to hear this modest Reflection upon Aniky, That she
importuned her Husband so much for his Benevolence, yet so fat was she, and so
incapable of Childing, that an Irishman may as soon get a Bantling out of a
Bagg. But by Mr. Durfey's leave, Harlem Mere, or the Marshes about Dort, had
been nearer at hand for a Dutchman; though by the way I must tell him, that all
National Reflections are unmanly, as well as unmar^nerly, and were never
attended with good Consequences.

Annikys accusing her Husband of Frigidity, and swearing as she was a
Calvinist, if she lived a month longer she would have one to connive with her
too, is Mr. Durfey's Civility to the Ladies of the Audience, and a Genteel
Complement to the Reformation beyond Sea.

Miin here Thomas's Reply, That as the Government gave Toleration of Conscience
for their Souls, he would give her one for her Body too, is a handsome Allusion,
a neat Raillery on the Liberty granted to the Dissenters here in England, and
an admirable Pattern of a Good Natured Wittal. Well, let us go on to the
Conclusion of Thomas's supersine Answer Gadsbores (says he) I fancy we Lie
always like two Udders in a Dish without ere a Tongue. This is an admirable
proof of the Modesty of the English Stage; and enough to choke Mr. Collier with
a Lie for accusing it of Immorality and Profaness.

Aniky Replies; Queazy Fellows that have no Appetites, cannot relish the finest
Haunch of Verison, when a strong healthy stomach would feed heartily and be
glad of it. And Thomas answers; But if he were to feed upon it ten and twenty
Years, as it is the case of us miserable Husbands, he would be glad to change it
for the Haunch of a Horse. This is admirable encouragement for Married Persons
to frequent the Theater, where they may have such excellent Lessons of Conjugal
Affection and Chastity. These are the Curious Representations that edify our
Beaus more than the best Sermons, and contribute so much to the happiness of
Mankind.

But to conclude this Noble Lecture of Chastity, Thomas tells her, that she is a
gross Barren Hen, that is so rank fed, she is incapable of Breed, and yet so
greedy on it, that she is eternally Cackling, that he would Lock her up over the
Stable, where she should have Heirs, and the great Gib Catt there should Father
them; and she tells him, that she Roosts among Cravens that have got the Pip:
If Cocks were good, Hens would have Chickens. Now I leave it to the Reader that
has any sense of Religion to judge, whether the Evil Spirit of Uncleanness
himself could express things in a more fulsom and undecent manner; yet these
are the Men, and those are their Methods that are to recommend Virtue and
discourage Vice.

I am come next to his Nurses Song, Scene II, which with his Scotch Song, and
his Reformation Song, will help to Compose a Psalter for the Devil's Church, as
the Fathers call the Playhouse. The first Song is an admirable Lesson of
Chastity, fit to be sung to Mr. Durfy's Lyre, and may vye for Modesty with any
that is to be found in Ovid or Martial. It Is a delicate Sonnet for Nurses to
sing to their Young ones, that they may suck in Virtue like Mother's Milk, and
must needs tend highly to the Edification of the Sisters and Brothers in their
Teens, when they take a step into the Nursery to see and divert themselves with
their Infant Brothers or Sisters. It must needs leave a Chaste Impression upon
them to hear Nurse tune out these Modest Lines.

And when in due season my Billy shall wed,
And lead a young Lady from Church to her Bed;
Ah! welfare the losing of her --
When Billy comes near her to kiss, kiss, kiss.
They that would have their Nurses taught to sing Virtuous Songs, had best send
them to Mr. Durfey, who can furnish them with admirable Samplars.

But to proceed; That our Author may make his Comedy all of a piece. His Fable
of Doranges getting into Angelica's Bed in a Woman's Dress, includes a very
good Lesson for instructing a wild extravagant Beau, how to debauch and steal a
Fortune. Such a Representation as this cannot fail of raising very Chaste
Passions among the Audience; and the other part of the Fable endeavoring to
match her with Bondevelt under the notion of a pure Virgin, contains an
excellent Pattern of Moral Honesty, and teaches an Intrigue of special use for
imitation.

Then again in the third Scene we have a commendable Character of the English
Gentry, That their Right business is nothing but pleasure, and that I suppose
is frequenting the Stage; for there, says Mr. Dennis, is the greatest pleasure.
But if this be the true Character of the English Gentry, how comes it to pass,
that so many of them have raised Vast Fortunes by application to Law, Physic,
Divinity and Merchandice?

I shall meddle no further with this Lewd Comedy, nor can what I have done
already, be justified by any other Argument; but that it is sit the World should
see what an useful thing the Stage is for Reformation of Manners.

CAP. XIX.
Answer to Mr. Dennis's Usefulness of the STAGE.
I Come next to consider Mr. Dennis's Arguments in his Book Entitled, The
Usefulness of the Stage to the Happiness of Mankind, to Government and to
Religion.

The Title is sufficient to discover, that I am to combat a Man of Assurance,
who like another Goliath bids Defiance to the Armies of Fathers, Councils,
Scriptures, etc. and all that have bra^ndished their Swords against the Theater.

His first Argument is, That the Stage is Instrumental to the Happiness of
Mankind in general, because it pleases them, and Happiness consists in Pleasure
Page 1, 2.
.

The Gentleman not having obliged us so far, as to draw his Argument into Form,
he must pardon my Presumption if I do it for him, and then I think it will
stand thus,

Whatsoever pleases Men makes them happy;
But the Stage pleases Men,
Ergo.
The Falsehood of the first Proposition is so manifest from the Experience of
all Men, that I cannot but wonder at our Author's Confidence to advance it. The
Libertine is pleased with his Paramour, and yet is so far from being happy in
his Pleasure that it wastes his Conscience, consumes his Body and ruins his
Estate. The Drunkard is pleased with his Bottle, yet is so far from being happy
in it, that it has the same dismal effects upon him, as Uncleaness has upon the
Wanton. -- The Glutton is pleased with his costly Cates and riotous Banquets,
but is so far from being happy in his Pleasure, that he Entails Diseases upon
himself and diggs his Grave with his own Teeth. -- The Miser is pleased with
his Baggs, yet is so far from being happy in them, that he is eat up with
carking cares how to preserve them, or to lay them out to the best advantage.

To prove this Argument Mr. Dennis says, That by Happiness he could never
understand any thing but Pleasure, and that he could never possibly conceive
how any one can be happy without being pleased, or pleased without being happy.

Let him but take a turn to Bedlam, and there he may have convincing Instances
of poor Wretches being extremely pleased with their foolish Conceits, that are
far from being happy; or let him visit some of his Friends in a raging Fever,
and perhaps he may hear them express a great deal of Pleasure and Delight in
many things, and yet poor Creatures fall much short of being hapy.

His own Assertion [p. 8.] That a Man cannot be happy without or against
Reason, perfectly destroys his Proposition, for in all the Cases
abovementioned, those Persons are pleased both without and against Reason,
which plainly proves that it is not pleasure, but a Rational Pleasure or none
at all that makes a Man happy, otherwise the Brutebeasts, are more happy than
the happiest of Men.

So that if this be granted, which no reasonable Man or good Christian can
deny, that our Pleasures ought to be ruled by Reason, his Argument will prove
but a feeble Support to the Stage it being highly unreasonable to take pleasure
in that which is not only needless, to the ends for which it is pretended,
there being other meansap pointed for that, as I have proved already, but comes
so far short of them, that by the concurring Testimony of all Ages, it is
condemned for producing the contrary Effects.

To set this matter in a Clearer Light, let us take a View of those Pleasures
which are to b^ reaped from the Stage; Spiritual Pleasures they are not, for
Divinity and Religion are seldom or never mentioned there, but in order to be
ridiculed: Rational Pleasures they cannot be, seeing it is contrary to Reason
for Mankind to please themselves with the Representations of Rapes, Murders,
and all manner of Villainies, which is the principal part of the Entertainment;
the Punishments allotted them take up the least part of the time, for most of
that is spent in representing the Intrigues that the Personal Dramatis carry on
for obtaining their lwed Ends, and the pleasure they take in the Enjoyment of
their desires, and the Impression of the Tragical Catastrophe is generally
defaced by some Comical Conclusion at last. So that upon the whole the
Pleasures that are reaped from the Stage must needs be sensual; and if
wallowing in them conduce any thing to the happiness of Mankind, then Reason
and Religion too have put a horrid Cheat upon us, ought to be banished out of
the World, and the only Deity we are to invoke is some Circe or other to
transform us into Dogs and Swine, that we may be completely happy. For Mr.
Dennis says (page 6 and 7.) The Philosophers were Fools to ascribe their
Happiness to Reason, for that may often afflict us, and make us miserable, is
an impediment to our pleasure, and nothing but Passion can please us. The
natural consequence of which must be that none but Beasts, Fools and Madmen
are happy in this World.

He tell us, page 8. That it is plain that the Happiness both of this Life and
the other, is owing to Passion, and not to Reason; so that he must be the only
happy man here that wallows in his pleasures, and indulges his passions. And in
the other World he informs us, we shall be delivered from those Mortal Organs,
and Reason shall then be no more: We shall lead the Glorious Life of Angels, a
Life exalted above all Reason, a Life consisting of Ecstasy and Intelligence.
If this be not a Rhapsody of downright contradictions, there can be no such
thing as a contradictions, there can be no such thing as a contradiction in
nature; a Rational Soul without Reason; Understanding without Reason; and
Reason dying with Mortal Organs. Nay, there is another Position in the bottom of
the 7th page as extraordinary as any of those, and that is, That the very
height and fullness of pleasure which we are promised in another Life, must, we
are told, proceed from Passion, or something that resembles Passion; at least no
man (...) so much as pretended that it will be the result of Reason. Who it is
that has told our Author thus, he would do well to inform us; for I believe
this Revelation is peculiar to himself. The Scriptures do indeed say, That in
the presence of the Lord there is fullness of Joy, and at his Right hand there
are Pleasures for evermore Psa. 16. 1^.
; but are so far from hinting at any thing like Joy without Reason, that the
Works of Creation, Redemption and Providence and the Beatifical Vision of God
in his perfections, seem to be plainly revealed, to be the Reason of all the
Hallelujahs and Raptures of Praise and Joy which the Saints shall Echo forth
in Heaven to all Eternity. Abr^^ham is represented to us in Heaven with the use
of his Reason, and arguing with Dives. We are told that there is Joy in Heaven,
by reason of the Conversion of Sinners; there is no doubt that those Ecstasies of
Joy are above what our Reason is now able to comprehend, but that Reason and
Reflection should there cease, there is not the least ground to imagine. Our
Author owns, that we shall lead the Glorious Life of Angels, as to whom it is
plain from the Scriptures, that they are reasonable Beings, they make use of
their Reason to pry into the Mystery of Redemption, and sung Songs of Praise at
our Savior's Birth; for this very Reason, that God had manifested Peace upon
the Earth and Good Will toward Men; from all which it is plain, that our
Happiness in Heaven will not proceed from Passion, but from our uninterrupted
Enjoyment of God, the Reflection upon which with our Reason will occasion
eternal and unspeakable joy.

This I conceive will appear yet more plain from the following Consideration,
viz. That a Man cannot be happy except he know himself to be so, and if we have
not the use of our Reason and Reflection, we can never know that we are happy,
nor be sensible of the Dangers we have escaped; so that for Mr. Dennis's Heaven
we had as good be reduced to our first nothing as to enjoy it, seeing,
according to his Notion, we must there be deprived of the Faculty of reflecting
upon our past Dangers and present Enjoyments, which cannot afford a Rational
Soul so much Delight, as it may have in a pleasant Dream.

I shall only add, That to conceive a humane Soul without Reason after death,
is to suppose the very Essence of it annihilated, which is a fair step toward
denying the Resurrection and the Eternity of Punishment and Reward; a Doctrine
fitted to the Palate of the Libertines of the Age, the principal Rule of whose
Faith and Manners is,

Ede, bibe, dormi, post mortem nulla Volupta^;
Or as the Scripture expresses it,

Let us eat and drink, for to Morrow we must die 1 Cor. 15. 32.
.

If we have not the Exercise of Reason in Heaven we cannot Act Faith upon the
promise of God for the Eternity of our Happiness there, which our Reason will
tell us we may ^^st assured of, because he is the God of truth that cannot lie,
and with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of turning. Nor can our
service, which is Songs of Praise and Everlasting Delight in the Enjoyment of
his Presence be reasonable there, which will make i^ less perfect than the
Service that we are called to here on Earth, which the Apostle tells us is a
reasonable Service Romans 12. 1.
, nor without it can we contemplate God the Author and Fountain of our
Happiness with Delight; for according to Mr. Dennis's Notion, there can be no
dif^erence betwixt those unconceiveable Transports of Joy which the Blessed
have in Heaven, and the Raptures of a Madman, who can give no reason for what
he does or what he says; and how this can be acceptable Service to God, let any
Man, that has but the least Impression of Religion judge. -- Our Savior tells
us, That Mary loved much because much was forgiven her; Is it then consistent
with reason, that we shall be filled with Raptures of Love and Joy in Heaven,
and not know the reason of it there, as well as we know the reason of our Love
to the Almighty here on Earth; which is his Pardoning Grace, through our blessed
Redeemer,

But to return to Mr. D's Argument, That it is Pleasure only that makes a man
happy: He is guilty of a great omission in not explaining his terms, and
telling us what sort of Pleasure he means; though to do him Justice there seems
to be no great need of it, when we consider that the Stage is the Subject he
treats of, whence those Pleasures are to be reaped; so that we cannot expect to
reap any other Pleasures but those of Sin from such an unhallowed Soil.

But allowing him, That a Moderate Pleasure in our Lawful Enjoyments here is a
happiness, and a gracious Gift of God, as without doubt it is, that will not
prove that we ought to create our selves feigned Objects of Pleasure, as all
those Theatrical Representations are, seeing God allows us those that are real.
Much less will it prove that we ought to hunt after Pleasure, by having our
Passions rai'd; when there is no occasion o^ proper Object for them, for that in
plain terms is a perverting the use of 'em, and forcing them beyond the Intent
of Nature. God has endowed us with Love, and Hatred, and inspired Reasonable
Creatures with a desire to propagate their own kind in pursuance of that
primitive Command, that they should increase and multiply; but at the same time
he has confined that desire to certain Limits, That every Man should have his
own Wife, and every Woman her own Husband; whence it is evident, that it is
unlawful for us to frequent the Stage to have that Passion raised toward we
know not who, or to endanger its being diverted from the Right Object. And as
for Young Persons who are unmarried, the Theater is the most improper place in
the World to seek a suitable Match in, and I believe seldom frequented on that
account. I am afraid Iuvenal's Observation holds too true of the Modern Theater.

-- Cuneis an habent spectacula totis;
Quod securus ames quodque inde expetere possis.
And if they frequent them upon any other a^count, the raising of their
Passions endangers their Chastity.

The like may be said of the other Passions, to have our Anger and Indignation
excited against we know not who in a Tragedy, is far from the Divine Precept,
of being angry and sin not. It was never the End for which God endowed us with
that Passion, to be angry at Wickedness in show, but at Wickedness in reality.
The same Rule serves for Pity and Compassion; we are to extend that toward Men
in real distress, and not to have our Compassion excited toward a Chimerical
object in a Theater that needs it not. It will hold the same as to Mirth and
Delight; we are not to make sport, or to take pleasure either in the sin or
misery of others; from all which it is apparent, that we ought not to frequent
the Stage for ^^citing our Passions: But admitting that the raising of the
Passions makes a man happy; by Mr. Dennis's own concession, P. 16. the
frequenting of the Stage is a very improper mean for it, for there he owns,
that the longer any man frequents Plays, the harder he is to be moved; and
therefore we may very well conclude from his own Premises, that the seeing of
so many unchaste and bloody Representations, is the ready way to take off and
dull that Horror which all men ought to ^ntertain against the real practice of
Uncleanness, Cruelty, and the other Vices there represeated. This may be
likewise proved by a very familiar Instance: Butchers, though but accustomed to
the killing of Beasts, have less horror generally for Murder than other men;
and Soldiers, who are accustomed to behold Slaughter and Bloodshed, are not
generally so compassionate and tenderhearted as those who never were in a Field.

I must observe one thing by the way before I go any further, viz. that Mr.
Dennis and the Author of the Review contradict one another in this matter. The
Reviewer maintains against Mr. Collier, that the Representations of the Stage,
don't impress the same Passions upon the Audience p. 19. 67, etc.
, whereas Mr. Dennis asserts it, and thinks it the Glory of the Theater that it
does so, seeing raising the Passions is the only way to make a man happy. I
must declare my Agreement with Mr. Dennis as to the influence of those
Representations upon the Spectators, but at the same time must tell him, that
the Iniquites there represented, especially irregular Amors, have so strong a
party in every man's corrupt Nature, that those Lascivious Representations,
Intrigues of Courtship, and Amorous Speeches, have ten to one odds against our
Virtue, which taking in Religion to its assistance, is often found too weak,
and many times foiled by corrupt Nature, as appears by the Instances of David
and Solomon, the holiest and wisest of men, and therefore it is that the
reproofs and punishments allotted to Vice by the Stage, have never been able to
obtain those Ends which its Patrons pretend to, viz. the Encouragement of
Virtue, and discountenancing of Vice, but has always produced the contrary
Effect.

But to take a further View of Mr. Dennis's Notion, that we are made happy by
Pleasures, let us examine it a little by Sacred Writ. There we find Solomon, who
had made the largest Experiment of it, declaring, that all the Pleasures this
World can afford (even those refined ones of Wisdom and Knowledge not excepted)
to be nothing but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit Ecclesiastes ^hroughout
.

If we take in the Suffrage of the New Testament, there we find our Savior and
his Apostles, condemning this Passion for worldly Pleasures, as the Lust of the
Eye, the Lust of the Flesh and the Pride of Life Joh. 2. 16.
, they expressly forbid us to make any Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the
Lusts thereof To. 13. 14.
, command us to set our Assections on things above, and not on things below,
and to mortifi^ inordinate Affections Col. 3. 2, ^
, tells us, that those that are Christ's crucify the Flesh with its Lusts and
Affections Gal. 5. 24.
, condemn those that are Lovers of Pleasure^, more than Lovers of God 2 Timothy 3.
4
, number those who serve their Lusts and Pleasures among Fools and Rebels to
Heaven Tit. 3. 3.
, tell us, that our Prayers are denied because we ask things to consume upon
our Lusts, or Pleasures, as it is read in the Margin* Jam. 4. 3.
, and inform us, that the Word of God is choa^ed by the Pleasures of the World
Luke 8. 14.
.

So much as to Pleasure in general; and then if we come to Particulars, --
Inordinate Pleasure in Riches or Covetousness, is condem^. as Iaolatry Col. 3.
^.
, a Lustful Look after a Woman is censured as Adultery Mat. 5. 28.
. If we consider our Apparel, there we are commanded to be modest 1 Timothy 2. 9.
. If we look to our Diet, the Scripture informs us, that a Glatton shall come
to Poverty Pro. 23. 1.
, and strictly forbids us, Rioting and Drunkenness To. 13. 13.
. If we consider our Discourse, there is no corrupt Communication to proo^^d out
of our Mouth Col. 3. 8.
, but our Speech ought always to be with Grace, and s^asoned with Salt Col. 4.
6.
, foolish Jesting and filthy Talking is also discharged Ephesians. 5. 4.
. And in the whole, the Apostle tells us expressly, That those who live in
Pleas^res, are dead while they live 1 Timothy 5. 6.
: (which though spoken particularly of Widows, does by parity of Reason extend to
all Christians.) We are commanded to rejoice, as if we rejoiced not, to use
this World, as not abusing it 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31.
, to behave our selves as Strangers and Pilgrims in the World Heb. 11. verse 13.
, and to avoid all Bitterness, Malice and Evil-speaking. Ephesians. 4. 31.
*

Then seeing it is so, how can any Christian indulge themselves in Passion, or
Transports of Pleasure in any sublunary Thing? How can they allow themselves in
those foolish Jests, filthy Discourses, and immoderate Laughters that are
occasioned by Comedies; or in that Wrath, Clamor, Malice and Revenge which
breath forth every where in Tragedies? How can they that are call'^ to Mourn
over their own Sins, and those of others, laugh at the Follies and Lewdness of
Whoremongers represented on the Stage, or how can they in Conscience take
pleasure in the Representations of those things to the Eye in Public, that
they ought to be ashamed to hear spoken of, as committed in Secret? How dare
they that are commanded to work out their Salvation with fear and Trembling,
delight in such Wantonness, Jollity and Revelling? With what Conscience can
they that are commanded to redeem their time, mispend it so unconscionably in
the lewd Theater, or with what Peace of Conscience can they lavish out Money
in such needless Pleasures, when so many of the poor Saints and Servants of God
are starving for want of Necessaries.

Mr. Dennis in the latter part of his first Chapter seems to recant his
Epicurean Lecture in the rest of it, and tells us Page 8.
, the Passions must be raised in such manner as to take reason along with them,
which how he will reconcile to his former Positions, that Reason often afflicts
and makes us miserable, hinders our Pleasures, and Combats our Passions Page 6.
, and that nothing but Passion in effect can please us, and nothing but
Pleasure can make us happy Page 7.
. Let him see to it. Perhaps he was exalted to his own Heaven, and wrote those
Contradictions when he was delivered from his Mortal Organs, and his Reason had
left him Page 8.
. And if it was so, he had as good have concealed his Ex^atical Raptures, for
any great Feats, they are like to do in the World, they may perhaps make
Quakers; but sure I am they can never make Christians: And thus I leave it to
the Judicious Reader to consider, whether he has proved that the Stage is
Useful to the Happiness of Mankind.

In his Second Chapter he attempts to prove, That the Stage is more
particularly Instrumental to the Happiness of Englishmen, -- and the Argument
he makes use of is, That the English are the most Splenetick People in Europe,
of a gloomy sullen Temper, uneasy to themselves and dangerous to the
Government. This is enough in all Conscience to give them a fit of the Spleen,
were they never so good Natured; but to alleviate our Anger, he tells us, it is
the fault of Heaven, the reigning Distemper of our Clime; and to oblige us
further, he directs us to the Drama, as our Remedy.

I am afraid our Author is neither a Traveller, Historian nor Politician, else
he would scarcely have v^ntur'd on such a Reflection: Let him but waft himself
over for a Month into Spain, and take a ^urn through France into the Empire of
Germany, don't let him forget to take Holland in his way Home; and then let him
spend some Weeks in turning over the Histories of those several Countries, and
I am much mistaken if he don't find himself convinced by Experience and
Authority, that our Neighbors are as sullen and morose as we, have been as
uneasy to one another, and endangered their Governments as oft^^, and yet all
of them have had the Enjoyment of the Drama.

I must likewise beg leave to tell him, That the good Nature of Englishmen has
been for a long time taken notice of, and that I have read it as an Observation
from as good an Author as himself, that there is no other Language has a word to
express it.

I must likewise desire him to give a Reason, Why the Splenetick Temper of the
Nation should not make the Government as dangerous to the People, as it renders
the People dangerous to the Government, seeing the Administration must always
be in the Hands of Englishmen; and I would pray him if he can to give me an
Instance where he has read of a better Understanding betwixt Prince and People
than there was betwixt Queen Elizabeth and her English Subjects; or if he can
parallel the Instance of the present Government, that any Monarch did ever
venture to leave his Dominions so frequently, and with ^o much Confidence and
Security, as his present Majesty has done, notwithstanding the Faction of a
dethroned Prince in the midst of us, and a powerful Enemy at War with us
abroad, at all times ready to Encourage them to rebel: And then ^ shall yield
him the Point, That the English are more Splenetick than their Neighbors.

But now as to his Remedy [the Drama.]

He tells us, That the Passions are seldom any where so pleasing, and no where
so safe as in Tragedy Page 10.
. But seeing the Representations there are generally contrived to represent the
sudden t^rns of Fate, the unhappy result of Violence and Injustice, and (...)
Intrigues carried on for the suppressing of Tyrants, I am afraid it will scarce
be proper for a Splenetick People: And thus we see how well he has proved, That
the Stage is more particularly Instrumental to the Happiness of Englishmen.

In his third Chapter he pretends to answer the Objections from Reason, and
denies that the more the Passions in any Man are moved, the more obnoxious they
are to be moved, and the more unruly they grow p. 16.
. This he says is contrary to common Experience, because-the more any person
frequents Plays, the harder he is to be pleased and moved. But by Mr. Dennis's
favor, his Answer is nothing to the purpose, or just no more than this, that
the longer a man eats Beef, the less he cares for it: He knows the old saying,
Iucundissima Voluptas quam rarior usus commendat, a man may be cloyed with the
greatest Dainties. But can he deny that the more a Choleric Man's Passion is
moved, the more peevish and outrageous he grows; and the more the Letcher's
Passion is moved, the more lustful and brutish he grows, so long as Nature will
keep pace; or the more the Miser's Avarice is moved, the more covetous he
grows, till his mouth is filled with dust. If he can deny this, he is fit for
his own Heaven, where his Reason shall be no more p. 8.
.

In the next place he denies that Corruption of Manners proceeded from the
establishment of the Drama upon the Restoration of K. Charles the 2d. ^st. Says
he, Because we never heard any Complaint of the like Corruption of Manners
before the Restoration of K. Charles the II. though the Drama flourished in the
Reign of K. James I. as Mr. Collier tells us, with the like Licentiousness Page
19.
. By Mr. Dennis's leave here is a contradiction in Terms, a Stage as licentious
as ours at present, whose Abuses he owns in the same page to be palpable, and
yet no Complaint of Corruption of Manners. But because I will give him a better
Authority than his own, let him read Mr. Prin's Histriomastix, and there he
will find Complaint enough before the Restoration of K. Charles II. and
sufficient cause for it too.

The ^d Argument, That the Corruption of Manners is greater in France, though
their Theaters are less licentious than ours, will stand him in little stead;
for supposing it true that the Manners of the French are more corrupted than
ours, which I am afraid will scarcely be granted: though their Theaters be less
licentious, their Religion is more, which allows them to be as wicked as the
Devil can make them, provided they have but Money enough to pay for a Pardon,
or fury enough to persecute the Protestants. That the Germans are greater
Drinkers, and the Italians more inclinable to Unnatural Lust, though they have
less of the Drama than we: Perhaps they will charge the Cause upon Heaven as he
does, and impute it to their Clime; but can he say that if they had more of the
Drama, they would not be more addicted to those Crimes than at present they
are. If he will give himself the trouble of reading the Authorities I have
formerly quoted, he will find both those Crimes, and particularly the latter
charged upon the Stage: Nor can Mr. Dennis assign any Reason why going from the
Theater to the Tavern with a Miss, or other lewd company, as is but too too
common, should not occasion Drunkenness and Sodomy both.

His 3d Argument is p. 20.
, That the Corruption of Manners upon the Restoration appeared with all the
fury of Libertinism before the Playhouse was re-established. And that the
Cause of that Corruption could be nothing but that beastly Reformation, which
in the time of the Late Civil Wars, begun at the Tail instead of the Head and
Heart, and which oppressed and persecuted Men's Inclinations, instead of
correcting and converting them, which afterward broke out with the same
Violence that a Raging Fire does upon its first getting Vent: And that which
gave it so liscentious a Vent, was not only the Permission but the Example of
the Court. Which having sojourned for a considerable time both at Paris and in
the Low Countries, united the Spirit of the French Whoring to the fury of the
Dutch Drinking.

Here Is Civil Treatment to the Parliament of England, a parcel of beastly
reforming fellows, aad a reforming Tail too. But by Mr. Dennis's leave,
whoever's the Head, the Parliament is the Brains; they have all the trouble of
Contriving, and one half, nay some say two thirds of the Authority of Enacting
Laws, and no small share in putting them in Execution; so that for them to
attempt a Reformation when the Court would not, proves them to have been the
Men, and some body else the Beast. But to pass that, I must entreat Mr. Dennis
to be merciful to his own Arguments, and not always to cut their Throats with
his own Hands. For first, he tells us, That the Cause of that Libertinism, was
nothing but that beastly Reformation. And then he informs us, that it was
permitted and encouraged by the example of the Court, who had united the Spirit
of the French Whoring to the fury of the Dutch Drinking; so that he is resolved
the Court and Parliament shall have it betwixt them, and not a Farthing matter
which, so the Stage be but clear on it. And he has also obliged the World with
a very important Discovery, that persecuting and oppressing of Libertinism, was
the Cause of Corruption of Manners.

But alas! the poor man in one of his heavenly Ecstasies, when he was delivered
from the Mortal Organs of his Reason, turns Cat in Pan, plays Sir Martin
Marr-all, and falls foul upon his Friends of the Stage; for in the very next
words he tells us, That the Poets who writ imm^diately after the Restoration,
were obliged to humor the depraved tastes of their Audience. For if the Poets
of those times had writ without any mixture of Lewdness, the Appeties of the
Audience were so debauched, that they would have judged the Entertainment
insipid. So that here is a fair Confession, that the Stage promoted and
encouraged the Corruption of Manners. But then being sorry that he has done his
Friends this diskindness, he makes them amends, and concludes this Paragraph
thus, That it is evident that the Corruption of the Nation is so far from
proceeding from the Playhouse, that it partly proceeds from having no Plays at
all.

-- Risum teneatis amici.
His fourth Argument is, ^That the Stage cannot possibly encourage or incline
Men to Drunkenness, Gaming and Unnatural Sins, and that the Love of Women is
fomented by the Corruption, and not by the Genuine Art of the Stage P. 25, 26.
.

To prove this Argument, he alleges, That Drunkards are always rendered Odious
and Ridiculous by the Stage, Gamsters are never shown there, but either as
Fools or Rascals, and that of those four Reigning Vices, the Stage only
Encourages Love to Women, which is the least, the least Contagious, and least
Universal, and is a Check upon the other three; and particularly upon Unnatural
Lust, which is the most destructive to the Happiness of Mankind Page 25, 26, 27.
.

I answer in the first place, that Mr. Dennis's Argument and his Topics to
prove it, are founded merely on his own Authority: and in the next place, that
here, as elsewhere he is guilty of Contradictions. -- The Stage (he says) does
not encourage the Corruption of Manners; and yet owns (...) incourages the Love
of Women. -- Then again, that the Love of Women is least Contagious; -- and yet
owns [pag. 26.] That it has more of Nature, and consequently more Tentation. --
So that his Arguments like Cadmus's Earthborn-men [in Ovid] fall foul upon and
destroy one another.

But for a further Answer, I must tell him, that those Sins have generally a
Dependence, and are mutually productive of one another; and the Theater being
the Common Rendevouz of lewd Company, the Contagion spreads, and they are
frequently infected with one another Crimes.

Our Author has owned that the Theater incourages the Love of Women; and Ovid
who was a very good Judge in the Matter, tells us, that Venus inclines Men to
Idleness, Gaming and Quaffing, or at least that those Vices are usually
Compa^ions.

Quam platanus rivo gaudet, quam populus unda,
Er quam Limosa canna palustris humo
Tam Venus Otia amat, qui finem quaeris Amoris,
C^dat Amor rebus, res age tutus eris,
Languor and immodici sub nullo vindice Somni,
Aleaque and multo tempora quassa mero
Eripiant omnes animo sine vulnere vires,
A^^luit incautis desidiosus Amor.
De Remedio Amoris. Lib. I. If we may believe Historians, Stage Plays were
first devised by a parcel of Drunken Grecians in Honor of Bacchus Athenaeus,
Dipnosoph. Lib. 2. c. 1.
, to whom they were consecrated Plutarch. Roman. Quaest. Quest. 107.
, and hence Tertullian calls the Theater, The Temple of Bacchus De spectae.
. Salvian joins the Roman Stage, their Epicurism and their Drunkenness
together, as mutually producing one another Hon. 62. ad Pop. Antioche^um.
. -- The Roman Emperors, Caligula, Heliogabalus, Nero, Commodus, Galienus, and
others who delighted most in the Stage, were the most Debauched, Luxurious and
Drunken of all others, as may be seen in Suetonius.

It was usual for the Heathen Greeks and Romans to have Stage Plays at all
their Drunken Riotous Feasts, on purpose to draw Men on to more Intemperance
and Drunkenness Plutarch. de Gloria ^theniensium and Sympos. (...). 7.
. Thus we see that Drunkenness was both the Parent and Offspring of the
Ancient Stage; nor can our Author give us an instance, that our Modern Theaters
have reformed those that frequent them, from Gaming and Drunkenness.

The Author of The Third Blast of Retreat from Plays, complains, That in his
Time, the Actors and Play-haunters were the greatest Frequenters of Taverns,
Alehouses, Brandy-shops, etc. and mighty Quaffers, Health-Drinkers and
Epicurers, that 'twas their usual Practice to haunt the Playhouse, the
Bawdy House and Publick-houses by turns, and to go from the one to the other,
and that the Playhouse was the common Place where their Riotous Meetings at
Taverns were appointed, and the Reason he gives of it is this, because
Drunkenness, Epicurism, Luxury and Profuseness were Rhetorically applauded on
the Stage, and set off with the highest Encomiums; and those who spent their
Estates this way, were dignified by the Poets, with the Title of Brave,
Generous, Liberal and Jovial Sparks; as Iuvenal expresses it:

-- Haec tamen illi
Omnia cum faciant hilares nitidique vocantur.
Satyr II. As to Mr. Dennis's seeming to think uncleanness a less Sin than
Gaming, and that the Love of W^men encouraged by the Stage is a good
Preservative against Sodomy, it is ridiculous. To allow one sin to prevent
another, is Playhouse Divinity, and to advance that the inflaming of Lust is a
proper way to prevent it is exerting it self upon unnatural Objects is an odd
kind of Philosophy.

If the Playhouse have this Effect now, its more than it had formerly, when we
find that the profligate Custom of Men, and Women's putting one another Apparel
promiscuously on the Stage, was a mighty incentive to that sort of Villainy.

Sophocles the famous Greek Tragedian, whom Mr. Dennis calls Divine, is accused
by Athaeneus Athaeneus Dipnos. l. 13.
; Plutarch Plutarch. Amar.
and many other Authors for this Impiety. St. Cyprian charges the same upon the
Pantomimes and Players of his time in his 3d Epistle to Donatus, where he
expresses it thus, Libidinibus insanis in viros, viri prorunt, etc. St.
Chrysostom brings the same Accusation against the Stage in his time in his 12th
Homily on the ^st Epistle to the Corinthians, where he says, The Theaters
gather together Troops of Harlots, and Boys turned Ganymeds, who offer Violence
to Nature it self. And that our English Stage has not been free of this horrid
Crime, we are informed by Mr. Stubbs, in his Anatomy of Abuses Page 105.
, where he affirms, that Players, and those that frequented the Stage, played
the Sodomite in their secret Conclaves.

Mr. Dennis in his 4th Chapter pretends to answer Mr. Collier's Objections from
Authority. His Exceptions as to most of 'em I have already taken notice of in
my Answer to the Reviewer, and therefore shall only Answer what Mr. Dennis has
advanced that is new; and the first is, that the Stage is of admirable
advantage to Learning, and that the Theater is certainly the best School in the
World for History, Poetry and Eloquence P. 35, 36.
.

Enough has been said already to prove that it can be of no solid advantage to
Learning; for when Men's Minds are infected with Vice, they are not fit for any
profitable or generous Study, as appears by Seneca's Complaint, that the Stage
diverted the People from attending on his Philosophical Lectures. As to
History, the falsehood of the Assertion is plain; for we may learn more of that
by reading the Greek, Roman, and other Historians, than by all the Plays that
have ever been writ, which for a mangled scrap now and then of true History,
have ten times more of Fable.

Then as to the point of Eloquence: We have Quintilian the famous Orator
against him, who in his Directions, How an Orator should frame his Speech,
Voice and Gesture, enjoins frequent declaiming, and the often repeating of
Eloquent Orations, but expressly forbids him, to imitate Players or the Custom
of the Stage, or (...) express or act the Slaves, the Drunkards, Lovers or any
such Playhouse part, because they were no ways necessary for an Orator, but
would rather corrupt his Mind and Manners than any way help his Elocution or
Action Instit. Orat. ^. 1. c. 18, 19
. And I would very fain know of Mr. Dennis, which of all the Admirers of the
Stage can be compared for Eloquence to St. Chrysostom, Tertullian, St. Ierom,
and the rest of the Fathers that never frequented the Stage but wrote against
it.

But granting it to be true, that the Theater promoted Eloquence, we may very
well say with St. Ierom, Melius est aliquid Nescire, quam cum periculo discere
Epist. 2^. c. 13.
. Better never learn it, than run such a risk for it. Besides, an Orator ought
to be Grave and Serious, whereas the Stage is Light, Wanton and Lewd. If Cicero
that great Master of Eloquence had thought the Stage necessary for promoting
that desirable Attainment, or had he owed his Formation to it, in so great a
measure, as Mr. Dennis says he did Page 36.
, certainly he would never have been so much an Enemy to Eloq^ence or so
ungrateful to the School, whence he learned it himself, as to advise the Romans
to abandon it, lest it should render them Effeminate and Corrupt, and so
overturn their Empire, as it had done that of the Greeks Tusculan Quaest. l. 4.
, he would rather have advised the Reforming of it, as Mr. Dennis does, but
that he saw 'twas impracticable, and would turn to as little account as Plowing
the Sand: Nor can he ever prove, that Demoshenes acquired his Oratry by
frequenting the Stage. Plutarch tells us he repeated his Speeches before a
large Looking^Glass to regulate his Gestures. But admitting once for all, that
there is a great deal of Eloquence, Wit, Invention, History and other parts of
Learning in Stage Plays, there is so much Obscenity, Scurrility and Lewdness
mixed with it, that it only serves as a Tincture of Sugar or a Glass of Cordial
to convey a venomous Potion, and the stronger the Wine, or the better the
Conserves that are tempered with the Poison, the more* effectually and
indiscernibly it kills. -- For (as Tertullian says on this very Subject,) no
Man mixes Poison with Gall and Hellebore, but with the sweetest, most savory
and best relishing Ingredients. -- Therefore ( says he) look upon those strong
Lines, those moral Sentenc^s those pompous Expressions, and witty Sayings as
Honey distilling from a poisnous Limb^ck, and don't let the Pleasure of your
Palate betray you to the endangering your Lives Despectac c. 27.
.

I shall conclude this Point with the pertinent Expression of Salvian on the
same Subject. -- Stage-Poets ( says he) have rather damned than illustrated
their Wits and Parts.

Mr. Dennis alleges [pag. 36.] that before Thespis appeared in Attica, and
reduced the Drama to some sort of Form, they had neither Author nor Knowledge
among them that could be esteemed by Posterity, which is notoriously False; For
Thales who is reckond the first of the 7 Wisemen of Greece was before him; and
Solon another of them, who is justly accounted the wisest of the Ancient Greek
Legislators, after having seen one of his Tragedies, opposed him to his Face,
forbad him Acting any more, upbraided him for the Lies uttered in his Play; and
told him if his Drama were approved, they should quickly find Lying and
Cheating in their Contracts and Bargains, as has been noted already; so that
her^ the Stage was nipp'd in the bud, and yet I must tell our Author, that it
was not then managed in so lewd a manner as it is now (though bad enough it
seems to be censured by Solon) for Diogenes Laertius informs us, That Tragedy
was then carried on by a Set of Musicians, who sung Hymns in the Praise of
Bacchus (which confirms what I have already said, That the Stage had a Drunken
Original) and then betwixt those Hymns Thespis Introduced an Actor, who
repeated some Discourse on a Tragical Subject, and afterward brought in Satyrs
in open Charets, having their Faces daubed with the Dreggs of Wine to resemble
the high colored Visage of the Satyrs.

Mr. Dennis had as good have forborne mentioning those Philosopers and
Historians Socrates, Plato, Xe^ophon, Aristotle, etc. whom he calls the Wonders
of all Posterity, for it will appear from what ^as been said of them already
under the Head of Philosophers against the Stage that most of them disproved
it, even Socrates himself who he says, first began to form their Manners out of
the Theater.

As to his Objection of some of them having writ Tragedies, its nothing to his
Purpose; It Is very well known, that Tragedies were then repeated for the
Instruction of the Audience, but not acted with profane and villainous Gestures
to corrupt the Morals of the Spectators; and thus the Comedies and Tragedies of
the Ancients, such as Soph^^les, Euripides, ^eschylus, Menander, Seneca, and
others were read by the Poets themselves, or some that they appointed, it being
accounted a disgrace for the Authors to have them acted in Stage Plays, as
appears plainly by that of Horac^,

-- An tua demens
Vilibus in Ludis dictari carmina malis?
Sermon. L. I. 10. D^odorus Siculus Bib. Hist. l. 14. 11^.
, Quintillian De Orator. Dia. 1, 6, (...).
, and others testify the same, which is quite another thing than Acting of
Plays, there being no Body against Writing a Poem in Nature of a Tragedy or
Poetical Dialogue, with several Acts and Parts to add Life and Luster to it. --
Thus Apolinaris the Elder, when he was forbid Preaching by Julian the Apostate,
or to educate Chrisitian Youth in Learning and Poetry, composed diverse
Tragedies in Imitation of Euripides, and Comedies in Imitatio^ of Menander and
Pindarus, consis^ing only of Divine Arguments and Scripture Stories, by which
he instructed those to whom he could not have Liberty to Preach. -- Thus about
the time of the Reformation here in England several good Christians, propagated
the Protestant Doctrine under the Veil of Dialogues by way of Comedy and
Tragedy, insomuch that the Popish Clergy got them forbidden by the 34 and 35 of
Henry 8. c. I. The famous Du Plessis Mornay, writ a Tragedy of Ieptha's
Daughter: The great Poet Buchanan did the like; he wrote also another called
Baptistes, and translated into Latin the Medea and Alcestis of Euripides, but
it will not therefore follow that those great Men approved the Stage. Buchanan
in his Dedication of Alcestis to Margaret of France Sister of Henry II.
recommends that Tragedy to her, because there is no mention in it of Parricid,
Witchraft or other Crimes with which Tragedians, commonly abound; so that by
this he rather Censures than approves the Theater.

Our Author's Assertion, That the Stage was Established in Queen Elizabeth's
Time, and flourished in that of K. James, upon which Spencer, Bacon and
Raleigh, three Prodigies of Wit, appeared all at once, and that we had no
first-rate Writer till Henry VIII. is like the rest of his Learning and
Confidence. It was so far from being established in Queen Elizabeth's Time, though
it had then but too much Encouragement, that all the Play Houses in London were
suppressed upon a Petition to that Queen in 1580. -- The Stage was restrained
by the 14th and 39th of her Reign, and Books against it, there dedicated to her
Secretary Walsingham, and it was so far from flourishing in King James I. time,
that in the 1st Year of his Reign, Stage Players were by Act of Parliament
declared Rogues and Vagabonds, etc. as has been already said under the Head of
The English State against the Stage.

As to the Learning of Bacon and Raleigh, it surpasses Mr. Dennis's Skill to
prove that it was any way owing to the Stage, and indeed according to his solid
way of Writing, he owns as much himself, when he says, immediately upon the
Establishment of the Drama, those three Prodigies of Wit appeared.

And I must likewise observe, That Bacon and Raleigh (as he calls them)
employed themselves in more generous and manly Studies, than any the Stage can
boast of, as appears by the Learned Works they have left behind them.

As to the other part of his Assertion, that we had no first-rate Writer on any
Subject before Henry VIII. it is an injury to the Nation, and a proof of his own
Assurance and Ignorance. To name but a few.

What does he say to Rog. Bacon who lived in the 13th Centry, and for his skill
in the Mathematics, was esteemed a Conjurer, and summoned to appear at Rome on
that account, where he cleared himself and was sent back again. To go a little
higher.

What does he think of the Venerable Bede, who lived in the beginning of the
8th Century, from the Birth of Christ, to whose time Bale reckons but 79
British Writers? Did he never hear of Sir Thomas Littleton, the Oracle of the
Law, who lived in the Reign of Henry VI. of Bracton or Fortescue? But because I
will trouble my Reader with no more, I would advise Mr. Dennis to turn over
Bale's Centuries of English Writers, and there he will find his bold Assertion
to be shamefully False: For in the 8th Century; that Author reckons 18 more
Writers besides Bid, 7 in the 9th, 14 in the 10th, 18 in the 11th, 87 in the
12th, amongst whom were 6 of the December. Angliae Scriptores; 123 in the 13th,
244 in the 14th, 137 in the 15th; and from thence to the Year 1557. but 137
more. Not that these were all First rate Writers, but it is sufficient to show,
that the State of Learning was not so low in England as Mr. Dennis would
represent it to have been: And that the increase and decrease of Learning, has
no dependency on the Stage; all that our Plays can pretend to teach, being only
some scraps of Rheto^ick and History, which may be much better learned
elsewhere.

The Reflections which he casts on the Parliament times when the Stage was
abolished, are full of Malice and Ignorance. No Man can expect that Learning
should flourish during an Intestine War, yet those Times were not without
Eminent Scholars in all Faculties; and upon Enquiry it will be found, that most
of the great Men England can boast of, laid the Foundation of their Studies,
and formed their Thoughts before the Stage was restored by King Charles II. The
World cannot deny, but Seldom and Milton were famous for Learning, though they
were of the Parliaments side, andow'd nothing of their Education to the Stage.
Nor can our Author pretend, that the Lord Chief Justice Halcs, or the Beginners
of the Royal Society, the Doctors, Ward, Wilkins, Wallis, etc. or the famous
Mr. Boil, were any thing indebted to the Theater for their great Learning.

The slovenly Reflection he casts on the Divines of those times, sufficiently
discovers, that he is but sorrily read in Divinity.

The Doctors, Calamy, Case and Manton (whom he mentions with so much Contempt,)
are approved by better Judges than any that writes for the Theater, the good
acceptance which the latter's Volumes of Sermons have met with from the
Public, have sufficiently proclaimed their Value; and if our Author had a
little bethought himself, -- the great Archbishop Usher flourished in those
times, who was no Friend to the Stage; The most Learned Bishop of Worcester,
whom he forgets to mention, was well advanced in his Studies, and had given
sufficient proof of his Extraordinary Abilities, before the Revival of the
Stage; and I dare boldly aver, that the Theater afforded him none of those
Learned Arguments, by which of late he has baffled the Deist^ and Socinians.
The Bishop of Salisbury, whose Learning has made him famous, owes his Education
to a Country where the Stage never took root. -- The late Archbishop Tillotson
owed nothing of his great Endowments to the Theater: And I Question whether Mr.
Lock and Mr. Newton, whose Learning he mentions wi^h deserved applause, will
give it under their Hands, that they have had any Benefit by it. -- This
Venomous Reflection, That none were encouraged in the Parliament times, but
Hypocritical Fools, whose abominable Canting was Christened Gift, and their
Dullness Grace Page 42.
, is no Scandal from the Pen of an Ignorant Libertine.

It Is very well known, that some of them that are yet alive, such as Dr. Bates,
Mr. How, Mr. Also^, etc. are in general esteem by the Learned Men of all Sides;
the two former were particularly resp^cted by the late Archbishop Tillotson
for their great Learning and Worth; and the latter is sufficiently known to the
World for the Accuteness of his Pen, his admirable Talent of Preaching and
Universal Learning.

It Is need^ess to mention Dr. Owen, Mr. Baxter, Mr. C^arnock and Mr. Pool
deceased; and I had almost forgot to mention the Poly-Glot, a Laborious and
Learned Work, the Birth of which is owing to those times.

In a word: The Reflection is so malicious and ill grounded, that nothing can
justify my insisting so much upon it, but that it was necessary to Answer a
Fool according to his Folly, lest he should be wise in his own Conceit.

I come now to his Second Part.

Where in the first Chapter he asserts with his usual Confidence, That the
Stage is useful to the Government; which if true, the Ancient Greeks and
Romans, who understood Government the best of any People in the Gentile World,
were very much in the wrong when they banished the Stage by the Decree of the
State (as has been already mentioned) and the Government of England were
mightily out in their Measures in the time of King James and Charles I. when by
Act of Parliament Stage^Players were declared Rogues and Vagabonds.

If the Stage be such a Sovereign Remedy against Ambition and the Immoderate
Love of Pleasure, as Mr. Dennis would have it Page 51.
, what unlucky Stars were they that marred its Influence, and prevented its
curing of Julius Caesar, Nero and others of old, and three of our own
successive Kings of late; who encouraged and frequented it more than any of
their Predecessors? How came the Jews to be so foully mistaken, as to think
that the Stage would over-turn their Constitution, as I have already proved
from Josephus, or did old Samuel's Spirit of Prophecy forsake him when he
recommended the perusal of the Law of God to the Kings of Israel, as the
properest Method to keep them steady in their Administration Deu. 17. 18.
: Had there been such Poets amongst them in those days, who (as Mr. Dennis has
it) are sometimes by a Spirit, not their own, exalted to Divinity Page 44.
. They would have prescribed Tragedy, as the best Remedy against their
inconsiderate Ambition and immoderate love of pleasure * Page 52.
.

Nothing, says Mr. Dennis, is more capable than Tragedy, of raising the Soul,
and giving it that Greatness, that Courage, that Force, and that Constancy,
which are the Qualifications that make men deserve to command others; which is
evident from Experience. For they who in all Countries, and in all Ages, have
appeared most to feel the power of Tragedy, have been the most deserving, and
the greatest of Men. Aeschylus among the Athenians was a great Captain and
Tragic Poet. Sophocles an able States. man, and a victorious General. The very
greatest among the Romans were so far touched with the Drama, as either to
write their Plays themselves, or to build their Theaters; witness Scipio,
Lelius, Lucullus, Mecenas, Julius and Augustus. None among the French has
showed so much greatness of Mind as Richlieu; and none so much passion for the
Drama, which was so great, that he writ several Plays with that very hand which
at the same time was laying the Plan of the French Universal Monarchy.

This is one of Mr. Dennis's raptures, when exalted to Divinity, which inspired
his Pen with irresistible Arguments: But I am afraid his Divinity is not of the
right stamp; for had he looked into the Divine Records, he would have found
that Moses, Joshua, Iepthah, Samson, David and others have far outdone all
that he has named, for greatness of Courage, and qualifications for Government,
and yet never one of them saw a Tragedy. Hunniades, Scanderbeg, Tamerlan,
Zisca, Gustavus Adolphus, were equal for Valor to any of his great Samplars,
and yet not one of 'em were inspired by the Stage. Then for the mighty
Richlieu, he was so far over-match'd by his own Contemporary, Oliver the
Stage-hater, that for all the Courage of his Tragical Pen, he could not save
himself nor his Country from trembling, when the Usurper Roared. Nor was the
Theater able to cure his own Ambition: But notwithstanding Mr. Dennis's
probatum est, with the same Hand that he wrote his Plays, he laid the
foundation of the hatefullest Tyranny that Europe has known for several Ages.
I must also make bold to tell Mr. Dennis, that the countenance given to the
Stage by Julius Caesar, Pompey, and other aspiring Romans, seems rather to have
been the effect of their Ambition, than proposed as a cure for it, that by
immersing the people in Debanchery and Pleasures, they should be rendered the
less careful of their Expiring Liberties, which the Senate being aware of,
thought fit whilst they had any power left them, to cashier the Stage; and this
being the Opinion of the State, is more to be regarded than that of any
particular person how great soever. It Is likewise worthy of our observation,
that Augustus himself, and several other Emperors who favored the Stage,
were sore'd to discharge it at last as a Nursery of Lewdness and Villainy.
Scipio Nascica a great General, who by Vote of the Senate was declared the best
Man of the Commonwealth, because of his extraordinary Valor, Prudence and
Morality, suppressed the Stage as destructive to the Morals of the People.
Trajan, who if Pliny may be credited, was one of the best Roman Emperors, did
the like: And the Emperor Alexander Severus, who was none of the worlt of
them, withdrew the Pensions of the Players; so that all that were great among
the Romans, were far from favoring the Stage.

The Influence which Mr. Dennis ascribes to the Stage, in preventing Rebellions
amongst the People Page 56.
, is equally ridiculous with his other Propositions. It Is but a few of the
People at best, who have either time, opportunity or money to frequent the
Theater; so that by necessary consequence its Influence can never be universal;
but besides, he is contradicted by matter of fact, the Encouragement given to
the Stage here in England, could neither prevent the opposition made by the
Parliament and People to Charles the Is It, nor the Plots of the Papists against
Charles the IId. nor the Revolt of the Nation from the last K. James. The Stage
in France could not prevent the Rebellion against Lewis XIV during his
Minority; and it is remarkable, that the Protestants of that Kingdom, who have
declared against the Theater in a National Council, as before mentioned, were
his firmest Friends.

It Is pleasant to read how this Stage Panegyrist will in spite of History and
common Sense ascribe all the Great things done by the Greeks and Romans to the
Influence of the Stage p. 59, etc.
, when the States of both condemned them, as occasioning a dissolution of
Manners, which rendered them unfit either to defend themselves, or to conquer
others. And Themistocles in particular, who is one of the Generals he mentions,
had so low an Opinion of the Theater, that he made a Law against Magistrates
frequenting it, lest the Common wealth should seem to play and loiter in the
Stage Plutarch in Vita Themist.
. Pericles, another of them, who was joint Praetor with Sophocles, rebuked his
Companion for beholding and commending a beautiful Boy, telling him that wanton
looks did not become a Praetor Io. Sarisb. Nug. Cunal. lib. 1. cap. 8.
; what would he have said then of the Modern Stage? Our Author has forgot to
mention Alexander the Great, the Discipline and Apparel, of whose Army smelt
nothing at all of the gaudy and lascivious Theater, and yet his Conquests
exceeded all those of the other Greek Captains he has named.

Then as to his Roman Instances, Scipio Africanus was so far from approving the
Follies of the Stage, that he pitied the Commonwealth, as drawing near its
Ruin, when he saw the Children of the Nobility bred up to Dancing, and singing
to the praise of Stage Players, which their Ancestors reckoned disgraceful
Salust. Saturnal. lib. 3.
; and therefore his building, or rather advising a sort of Reform as to the
Seats of the Theater, to distinguish the Senators from the People, seems rather
to have proceeded from a Compliance with Custom, and a design to humor the
Times, than from his approbation of Stage Plays. Besides, there is no man
acquainted with Roman History, but must needs know that their Theaters were
applied to other uses, as public Orations, and the Execution of Malefactors;
so that the Erecting of a Theater, will not always infer the approbation of the
Drama.

Pompey indeed built a Theater of Stone after the former had been destroyed by
Scipio Nasica, and to prevent its being demolished by the Censors in time to
come, Erected a Temple of Venus on the top of it, which was no great proof that
it was designed for a Reformation of Manners; and this the Senate was so
sensible of, that they blamed Pompey for Building his Theater, as I have said
already.

Mr. Dennis in the same ridiculous manner ascribes the Union of the French, and
their Conquests to the Influence of the Drama, and the loss of their Conquests
to the ceasing of the spirit of Dramatick Poetry among 'em before the beginning
of the last War p. 61.
.

But if he would be pleased to look back to the Time of Charlemaigne, who was a
Mortal Enemy to the Stage, he will find that France extended her Conquests a
great deal further then, under his Conduct, than she has done by the Influence
of the Drama under Lewis XIV. and kept them longer too: And I would pray him to
observe, that our own Glorious Sovereign King William, who has obliged the
French to resign their Conquests, is no great Admirer of the Stage; so that
it is something else than the Drama that has given him the Ascendant over
France. And the World must own that his Courage and Conduct, and Qualifications
for Government are equal to any of those whom Mr. Dennis has mentioned, as the
great Patrons of the Theater.

In his Second Chapter From p. 63 to 68.
, he would persuade the World, That the Stage is particularly useful to the
English and especially the present Government, because the English are more
prone to Rebellion than any People upon the Face of the Earth; and that we have
been longer at quiet since the flourishing of the Drama, than at any time
before since the Conquest; and that the Civil War was begun by those that were
Enemies to the Stage. -- So much for its Usefulness to the English in general.

Then he proves its Usefulness to this Government in particular, Because some
of its Friends would prove averse to it, if the Stage were either suppressed or
very much discouraged, and that it diverts the Enemies of the Government,
hinders their Plotting, and frequenting Iacobite Conventicles.

Here Is another piece of Civility to the Nation again; They are the greatest
Rebels on Earth according to him; but this I have answered already. That we
have had more Peace since the flourishing of the Drama, than at any time since
the Conquest is false. It cannot be said to have flourished but since the
Restoration of Charles II. For it was restrained in Queen Elizabeth's Time, by
Act of Parliament, and banished the City of London, (as has been already said)
yet here is was a Long and a Peaceable Reign.

Stage Players were condemned as Rogues in that of King James, yet we had Peace
all his time. -- But the unanswerable Argument is this, Those that rebelled
against Charles I. were Enemies to the Stage: But if Mr. Dennis will be pleased
to look back, he will find I have proved, That the Incendiaries and Fomenters
of the Civil War, were the Friends of the Stage, who taught Rebellion against
our Constitution, set the King above all Laws, and would have trod Parliaments
under foot, who are two thirds of our Government, if the two States of Lords
and Commons may be allowed that Name. But if this will not do, what will Mr.
Dennis reply, if I tell him, that those very Men who were Enemies to the Stage,
or at least their Successors in Principle and Practice, who abhor the Tyranny
of 41, as much as Mr. Dennis abhors the Rebellion on it, are the firmest Friends
this Government has: And here I Will venture to say once for all, That it is very
dangerous to our present Establishment to have the Theater managed by such kind
of Persons as our Author and others, who exclaim with so much Malice and
Ignora^^^ against those very Maxims, which contrib^^^ (...) the Happy
Revolution; for if resisting or dethroning a Prince be in no case Lawful, which
is the common Theme and known Principle of most of the Libellers against 41, it
will by necessary Consequence, condemn the Revolution of 1688. So very useful
are some of the late Advocates and Authors for the Stage to the present
Government (I will not say all that have writ Plays) for I know that Mr. Tate,
and some others, whose Parts deserve a better Employment, are Persons of
Generous English Principles.

Our Authors Insinuation, that the Suppression or Discouraging of the Stage,
would create an Aversion in any of the Friends of the Government to the present
Constitution, is so very silly, that certainly he must be ashamed of it himself
upon second Thoughts. -- Does he think that a Prince of such Courage and
Bravery as ours, puts any Value upon the Friendship or Enmity of a parcel of
Men, who have been declared Rogues and Vagabonds by the Statute, or that the
Nation would any way resent the overturning of the Stage, which never had any
continued Footing nor settled Encouragement among us, but under the Reign of a
Luxurious Prince, especially considering how Instrumental it has been to the
debauching of our Youth? Does he think that the People, who have looked on with
Satisfaction to see several of those Non-jurant Bishops turned out of their
Sees, though once they adored them, when Petitioners against King James's
Declaration, would bestow one sigh on the lewd Stage, though it were first
pulled down, and then built up again, to make its own Funeral Pile. The
contrary would be so true that thousands of Husbands, Parents and Masters, who
have had their Wives, Children and Servants debauched by it, would gladly throw
up their Hatts at such a Bonfire, and lay such a curse upon those that should
ever attempt to erect another Stage, as Joshua laid upon the Re-builder of
Jericho. The Nation is brought to a delicate pass indeed, when we must not talk
of overturning the Stage, but a parcel of debauched Wits will threaten the
Government.

If the Thing were worthy of His Majesty's Notice, he might well answer in the
Words of Augustus, formerly mentioned in the like case, That he had been
powerful enough to make his Enemies stoop, and is he not able now to banish
Iesters and Fools.

His next Insinuation, That it diverts the Iacobites, and prevents their Plots
and Conventicles, is equally absurd: Let him but cast an Eye up to
Westminster Hall, or the City Gates, and there the Heads and Limbs of Charnock,
Perkins and Friend, etc. will tell him to his Face that he is mistaken.

His Answers to the Objections from Authority, in the Third Chapter, I shall
pass over, as having said enough on that Head already, in Answer to others. And
as for his Pretense in the rest of his Book, to show the Usefulness of the
Stage to the Advancement of Religion, it is only a further proof of his Vanity
and intolerable Confidence, seeing Fathers, Councils, and the best of Divines
in all Ages have demonstrated the contrary; to their Arguments that I have
quoted already, I refer him, and so bid him Farewell.

If he think that I have not used him with that Smoothness that he might have
expected, let him remember how he treated the whole Nation as Splenetick
Rebels, the Parliament of England in 1641. as Traitors, and all the Divines of
those Times as Blockheads and Hypocrites.

CAP. XX.
The STAGE Encouraged by the Universities.
I Come next to consider the Encouragement given to the Stage by our
Universities; which may also bear date from the Reign of King Charles I. for
before that time, I find both of them had declared themselves against the
Theater.

Dr. Reynolds, in his Book Entitled, The Overthrow of Stage Plays p. 151, etc.
affirms, That the best and gravest Divines in the University of Oxford,
condemned Stage Plays by an express Statute in a full Convocation of the whole
University in 1584. whereby the use of all Common-plays was expressly prohibited
in the University, lest the younger sort who are prone to imitate all kinds of
Vice, being Spectators of so many lewd and evil Sports, as in them are
practiced, should be corrupted by them.

And Mr. Prin informs us, Hist. Mast. page 490.
That the University of Cambridge, enacted the like, That no Common Actors
should be suffered to play within the Jurisdiction of the University, for fear
they should deprave the Manners of the Scholars.

And whereas it was objected, that the Universities approved of Private
Stage Plays acted by Scholars in private Colleges; Dr. Reynolds answe^s in the
Book abovementioned, That though they connived at them, yet they gave no public
approbation to them, that they were not received into all Colleges, but only
practiced in some private houses (perchance once in three or four years) and
that by the particular Statutes of those Houses made in times of Popery, which
require some Latin Comedies for Learning sake, only to be acted now and then;
and those Plays too were for the most part composed by idle persons, who d^^
not affect better Studies; and they were acted (...) such as preferred
Vainglory, Ostentation, and Strutting on the Stage before Learning; ^ by such
who were sent to the University, not so much to obtain Knowledge, as to keep
t^^m from the common Riotous way of living; ^s Parents send little Children to
School to kee^ them out of harms way; and their Spectators ^ the most part were
of the same sort, but the raver, better and more studious persons, especially
Divines, condemned them, censured them, and came not at them.

Thus we see that our Universities formerly condemned the Stage, and that they
came afterward to countenance them, must without doubt be ascribed to the
Influence of K. Charles, I. and A. Bishop Laud; for I find on Aug. the 30th.
1636. the Students of Christ-Church in Oxford presented a Tragi-comedy called,
The Royal Slave, to the K. and Queen, which was afterward presented again to
Their Majesty's at Hampton Court; and the 2d. Edition Printed at Oxford, by
William Turner in 1640. The Gentlemen of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge did
before that, viz. in 1634. present a Comedy to the King, called Albumazar,
Printed at London by Nicholas Oaks; upon both which I shall make some Remarks;
and first upon Albumazar.

Remarks upon the Universities Plays before King Charles I.
The Poet values himself in the Prologue upon the Dignity of his Audience, but
chiefly addresses himself to the Ladies, whose Beauties, he says, made the
whole Assembly glad. Whether the Play was altogether so pure and chaste as
became His Majesty's presence, the Gravity of the University, and the Modesty
of the Ladies we shall see afterward; but this very hint of the Beauty of the
Ladies cheering the hearts of the Assembly, will fall under our Saviors
Reproof, of not looking upon a Woman to lust after her, and is the very thing
for which St. Chrysostom declaims against Plays, as we have heard already. Nor
can it be reconcilable to the purity of the Christian Religion, which has set
a Bar upon our very Looks, for Men and Women to haunt Play Houses in order to
ogle one another, as the Stage-Poets themselves now express it.

Then for the Play it self.

The Dialogue betwixt Albumazar, Harpax and Ronca where they applaud Theft and
Robbery, as that which made the Spartans Valiant and Arabia Happy, and charge
it on all Trades and Callings, though guilt with the smooth Title of Merchant,
Lawyer or the like, could have no Natural Tendency to teach Moral Honesty.
Whether it might have any design to justify the after Practices of Levying
Money without Consent of Parliament, Ex^orting Loan Money from Merchants and
Tradesmen, as being only a better sort of Thieves; or to justify Plundering
the Country, as the Histories of those times say was very usual amongst the
King's Soldiers afterward, I know not, but the Fable seems to carry some such
Moral, and the Authority of an University would go a great way among
Libertines; so that it could but be collected by the least Innuendo, though never
so much wrested. Albumazar's insisting upon Great Necessity, as the Cardinal
Virtue, and it being Printed too in Italick, would seem to strengthen the
Conjecture, especially seeing he goes on to represent all Mankind as Thieves;
and that the very Members of Man's Body are framed by Nature, so as to steal
from one another, which is good enough Authority for the Head to steal from all
the rest.

The 2d Scene, Containing a Discourse betwixt Pandolfo, an old Fellow of 60, in
Love with Flavia, a Girl of 16, and Cricca his Servant, is far from being
Chaste. -- I cannot imagine what Edification it could afford to the Audience to
hear an old Man insist upon his Vigor and Fitness for a young Girl, and his
Servant on the other hand telling him, that one Nights Lodging would so much
enfeeble him, as Flavia would make him a Cuckold. This seems more adapted to
expose to Laughter the Dotage that old Age is now and then subject to, and to
justify the Disloyalty of a young Wife so Wedded, than to bewail or reprove
such Folly on both sides.

It had been more becoming a Supreme Magistrate to provide against such
unsuitable Matches by wholesome Laws, than to have had them represented as the
Subject of Mirth on a Stage; as it would have been more decent for an
University to have given him such Counsel, than to divert him with such
ridiculous Entertainment.

The Dialogue betwixt Albumazar, Pandolfo and Cricca, [about Astrology] is a
mere Rhapsody of studied Nonsense, which looks very unlike the Practice of
Christians, whose great Lawgiver tells them, Luke 18. 36.
They must be accountable for every idle Word.

The Courtship betwixt Trincalo a Farmer, and Armellina, Pandolfo's Maid; --
wherein Trincalo compares himself to a lusty strong Ass, and her to a Wanton
young Filly, and that they should have a race of Mules if she were willing; is
so very Coarse and throws so much Contempt upon the Country Farmers, who are so
useful to the Nation, that it can neither be reconciled to the Maxims of
Christianity nor Common Policy.

In short, the whole Comedy is far from having any thing of a tendency to
Virtue in it, except Reflections upon the City, as not affording a Dozen of
Chaste VIRGINS, and the like on Sheriffs and Justices of Peace as Cheating and
Hectoring their Neighbors, and representing Country Gentlemen, as minding
nothing but Wenching and Drinking, and young Gentlewomen talking smuttily of
their Amors, be vert^ous Representations.

If it be said as usual, that those Vices are represented in order to make them
be abhorred, and the Guilty Persons ashamed of them, it is easy to Answer,
That a Supreme Magistrate is authorized by God and the Laws of his Country, to
punish those Vices by the Sword of Justice, which will be ten times more
effectual, than making them the Subject of Diversion on a Stage.

I come next to the Royal Slave, a Tragi Comedy, presented to the King and
Queen by the Students of Christ-Church in Oxford.

The Prologue to the King and Queen is on the Representation of one of the
Person Magi, discovered in a Temple worshipping the Sun, and at the sight of a
new Majesty, he leaves the Altar and addresseth himself to the Throne. What
Moral this can include, is hard to determine, except it were that they had a
mind to insinuate that it was no Crime to Sacrifice Religion to the Court, as
too many of them attempted to do in reality, when they embraced Doctrines,
contrary to those of the Church of England, for which some of them (as Laud,
Montague and others) were censured by the Parliament afterward.

In the Prologue to the University, there is a Jerk at some that they call Late
damned Books, and which they hoped would inspire none of the University with a
harsh Opinion of the Play, which they allege was so innocent, that the ^ittle
Ruff or Careless might be present at it, without fear, and they valued
themselves highly upon the Presence of their Majesty's, as giving Life to the
Performance, and the King's Servants spoke much in the same manner, when they
presented it before them at Hampton Court.

The first Act represents a parcel of drunken Ephesian Captives, revelling in
their Chains, and calling for VVheres, but bidding their Jailer and his Wife be
sure that they did not suffer any of the Young Students of the LAW to forestal
the Market. The Jailer too has a Jerk at the Custom of Singing Psalms at the
Gallows. All which I humbly conceive was an Entertainment no way suited to the
Royal Majesty of a King, nor to the modesty of a Queen: Nor was it any thing
for the Credit of the Nation, that the Reins of Public Discipline should be so
far let loose as to suffer such Practices amongst the young Students of the
Law, if that was the Moral of the Fable.

The Rape attempted afterward upon the Persian Queen and her Ladies by those
Ephesian Captives, and their lewd Discourses from time to time, was no very
good Lesson, nor meet Entertainment for a Queen. And their bringing in the
Persian Courtiers, yielding complete Obedience to Cratander, a Mock-King for
three Days, because Arsamnes their Prince commanded it, and at the same time
divested himself of his Authority for that space, seems to teach the slavish
Doctrine^ so much then contended for by the Court, that i^ was unlawful to
resist the King or any, having his Commission under any Pretense whatsoever,
though he should even overturn the Foundations of their Constitution, as here
their Counterfeit Arsamnes did by making a Captive King of Persia.

Nay, and this Play too which they pretend was so framed as it could give no
offense to the Gravity of the University or Clergy, represents Atossa the Queen
a little inclining to the Taint of an Unlawful Amor with Cratander the
Three-Days^King, and him Entertaining it also, though at the same time he is
their chief Pattern of Virtue.

Indeed there is Praxaspis's Saying in the Second Scene, that seemed to be a
Sa^yrical hint, (though I cannot think, considering the Temper of the Stage, that
'twas so designed) Viz. that when one of the Ladies wondered that they had not
chosen Cratander a Queen for Company, to impe his Reign. Praxaspis answered,
That the Female Sex was too Imperious to Rule, and would do as much harm in a
Kingdom, as a Monkey in a Glassshop, move and remove till they had broken all.
Had her then Majesty taken the hint and forborne meddling with Affairs of State,
it is probable that Matters had not come to that fatal Exit they did, which is
one Instance more to convince our Advocates of the St^ge, that those who
frequent and admire it most, are never reformed by it.

I shall forbear any further Remarks upon those Plays, these being enough to
make good the Charge, that our Universities have encouraged the Stage, which is
so much the more Criminal in them, because they ought to instruct the Nation by
their Example as well as their Learning Methinks the Reverence they owed to the
Ancient Philosophers, Fathers and Councils, besides what our first Reformers,
the Acts of Parliament and those of their own Convocations required from them,
should have restrained them. -- But to the great Misfortune of the Nation,
neither th^se nor any Consideration whatever, were able to prevail with them;
so that the Universities became infected with the Contagion of the Stage, and
they being the Nurseries of Officers for the Church and State it was no wonder,
if the Infection spread from them, all over the Kingdom, especially being
patronized by the Court and A. B. Laud, and his Faction of the Church.

This encouraged particular Students afterward, such a; Barton Holyd^y and
Gaspar Main (both of Christ-Church, Oxford) to write Plays: The latter in his
Comedy, called, The Amorous War, is so very foul and smutty that it may well
deserve the Name of downright Lewdness; but it is supposed he thought it
Atonement sufficient to jerk at the City and Parliament, which he does there
with abundance of more Malice than Wit.

Neither Time nor Room will now allow me to enquire into later Instances of the
Theaters being Encou^ag'd by the Universities, but it is to be feared there is no
great Reform amongst them, as to this matter, which I am the more inclined to
believe by the following Prologue, which was spoke at a Musick-Act in the
University of Cambridge, about two Years ago.

PROLOGUE.
THE Doctors being always much inclined
To favor and instruct the Female kind,
Out of their wonted Goodness thought it meet,
The Ladies we in Mother Tongue should greet:
For surely Cambridge would be much to blame,
To let 'em go no wiser than they came:
Whom Nature in so fine a Mould has wrought,
So pliant and so yielding to be taught;
That in one Minute any Man may show,
And teach 'em all their Aged Mothers know.
Yet do whatever you can, they will have an itching
For further Knowledge, and some deeper Teaching:
Pity such pregnant Parts were not removed
To Colleges, and by some Helps improved.
Bless us! the Age would be extreme discerning,
If all the Females too were big with Learning.
I Am sure our Cambridge Ladies know the Art,
Can all the Learned Mystery impart;
When an old Book-learn'd Sybil, dry and lean,
With hollow Eyes, long Phiz, and withered skin;
Whose every Tooth, but that of Colt, is gone,
Can be caressed by vigorous Twenty One;
And Joy to her blessed Consort, married be,
Anno Aetatis suae 63.
And then -- we have a new trimmed Lady posted down,
To front the Country, and oblige the Town,
Who, though a love to Learning she pretends,
Yet I susupect, since here I lately saw
Some of her well-dress'd Amorous Temple-Friends,
She follows not the Gospel but the Law.
Blessed Cambridge! where it is hard to find a Maid,
Except in some old Reveren'd Doctors Bed;
For they, good Men, to study much inclined,
Among the Stars their Nightily-pleasures find,
Whilst they on Virgo all their hours bestow,
The Wife continues Virgin still b -- w.
Yet our Professors --
(What pity it is such Follies should miscarry?
Would got an Act of Parliament to marry.
How would you like a Lover, who should speak,
And kiss, and sigh and compliment in Greek?
From whose strong Loins should spring great Tau's (and Sigma's,
Black Princes, and a Noble Race of Pigmies.
FINIS.

