Layings on of Hands ASSERTED: Or, A plain discovery of the truth thereof,
under those several considerations, minded in the New Testament.

1. Upon persons for healing: with a Brief discovery of that Ordinance of
Christ, (to wit) anointing with Oil.

2. Upon persons to Office.

3. Upon Believers Baptized, as such: and that principle of Christ's Doctrine
cleared, for their obedience: With Objections Answered to each particular.

To which is annexed, A Confutation of four Chapters written by some person, or
persons, in opposition to this principle of the Doctrine of Christ, (to wit)
laying on of hands upon believers Baptized, as such; wherein the weakness of
their Reasons against the truth, is plainly discovered, and the truth further
asserted, and vindicated.

By WILLIAM RIDER, Servant to the Church of Christ.

Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by R. Moon, at the seven Stars in
Pauls-Church-yard, near the great North door. 1656.

To all those in this Nation, or elsewhere, who upon the Profession of their
faith have been Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus.
MY BRETHREN,
THough my Prayer unto God is, that what I have written, may tend to the
establishing of those, who have already been obedient; yet unto you I do
chiefly recommend this following discourse: and my Reason is, Because it does
more principally concern you, it being a discovery of part of the mind of
Christ; yea, part of the foundation of his service, whereunto the greatest
Number of you have not yet been obedient.

And now, my Brethren, you that by Baptism have declared your selves to be
followers of the Lord Jesus Christ; I do Beg and entreat of you, to Examine
your principles, and see whether or no, you have obeyed Christ, according to
the Commission he gave to his Disciples, Mat. 28. 20. Wherein you are enjoined
the Observation of all things he commanded for your obedience, according to his
Teaching; being forty days with his Apostles and Disciples, (after his
Resurrection) in which time he gave Commandments unto his Apostles, whom he had
chosen, and was speaking unto them of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of
God, Acts 1. 2, 3. verse. I beseech you consider, have you obeyed the form of
Doctrine, Romans 6. 18. which you shall find laid down, in Heb. 6. 1, 2. See, I
pray you, whether the beginning-Word of Christ is that you have received;
whether you stand upon that foundation, the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, upon which the first Churches were built, Ephesians. 2. 20. Heb. 6. 1.

Consider, God in these last days has spoken unto us by his Son, Heb. 1. 2.
the Lord Jesus Christ is our great Doctor, the Prophet whom Moses spoke of,
Acts 3. 21. therefore we must learn of him, we must hear him in all things;
Therefore know, it is your duty to be followers of God, according to your
Profession in Baptism, and to Act in no way, but what Christ has appointed
for you; Even that way, whose foundation is upon the lips of Christ, which he
also has appointed a foundation for us to build upon.

Wherefore examine if you have laid your foundation with this Cornerstone,
with Repentance from dead works, faith toward God, the Doctrine of Baptismes,
and laying on of hands, the Resurrection of the dead, and eternal Judgment:
Whether these be the principles of your Religion, Heb. 6. 1, 2. Consider
wherein you are defective in these principles: are you not in Repentance? I
wish I could not charge you herein; yet I must tell you, the Hire of the Harlot
is found amongst you, the burden of which your poor Brethren have long mourned
under, and suffered for. I know it is not the practice of all of you; yet those
that do it, were never to this day disowned by you? O! that you would therefore
try your selves: have you turned your selves from the vain worships of the men
of this World, and from such who teach for Doctrines men's traditions? are you
according to your Profession of Christ in Baptism, dead to the rudiments of
this World? Col. 2. 20. Why know, it is your duty, not only to cleanse your
selves from Temporal, but Spiritual delfiements, 2 Cor. 7. 1. and as you are
not to act any thing contrary to the Law of righteousness in your Conversation,
so to do nothing in the worship of God, but by rule: for that which has
proceeded from our Lord Jesus Christ, is the rule for Saints to walk by. Know
this, that all the misery and sin in the World came in at this door, viz. by
harkening to Reason, the wisdom of the flesh, against that which God has
spoken: it is man's deformity, to walk according to his own invention, and at
last, (as experience does teach,) will prove his own destruction. Surely God
will not endure to be prescribed by his Creatures; no, it has been wickedness
in those that have done it, and God has found it out; but he takes pleasure in
them that fear him, and teaches them in his ways, Psa. 25. 12. but when men
change his Laws and Ordinances, (although it proceeds from no wicked intent)
yet it provokes him to Judgment, as it did in Uzza, 1 Chro. 15. therefore learn
to know the voice of Christ; for his Sheep hear it, and they follow him.

It has been the work of Satan and his Instruments, such who first did forsake
the right way, whom God gave up unto strong delusions to believe lies, because
they received not the truth in the love thereof, to corrupt the Word of God,
and to change his Laws, and to set up their posts by the posts of God, or
rather in their stead: and who knows not, that knows Christ, that now all his
endeavors are to make void those truths, and the right way of the Lord; either
in whole or in part? if he cannot keep people wholly in blindness, he will
labor to ensnare them through pretended ways of light, which is indeed
darkness. O! how does he now persuade the poor soul, that either the ways of
God are not now to be practiced, or else the practice of them is but an
indifferent thing. O! let us beware of this deceit: for he that says I know
him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him,
1 John 2. 4. therefore I desire you to examine your selves, and see wherein you
are short of obeying the voice of Christ; being careful of receiving any thing,
but what is recorded the Word of the Lord; and be also as careful of rejecting
any thing that is his will.

And wherein he speaks unto you, as you are Baptized believers, know, it is
your duty to be obedient, to be followers of him, to set shoulders to his work;
for unto that this day you are called, that the foundation in Sion may again be
laid, the Walls of Jerusalem may be again repaired, and then they that be of
thee, shall build the old waste places, Isai. 58. 11.

Let not the wisdom of man beguile you, (whereby he labors,) when any truth
of God is discovered, to pervert it, or to turn you aside from following of it:
know, this is but one of Satan's old plots, and deceitful workings; and marvel
not that he works in good men in our days; for this is certain, that if
persons dissent from truth, so far they serve for his design, which is always
against the truth, which is the Law of God, that which God has commanded: thus
he wrought in the Prophet of the Lord, who told a lie in the Name of the Lord,
unto which the young Prophet yielded; contrary to what God had Commanded him, 1
King. 13. 18 and was destroyed of a Lion: know, he many times makes use of good
men to carry on his design; therefore though you may judge they are good men,
that speak against a truth of the Lord; let not that turn you aside, knowing it
is your duty to be a follower of him, in what he has spoken, that does relate
to the worship of God, or your duty in your conversation; which does concern
you, as you are believers, and would be partakers of the promises, especially
those things that are principles of your faith and Religion; yea, principles of
the worship and service of that God, whom we profess to sear; yea, and to obey.

And take heed of those who teach you, only to believe that, unto which you
ought to manifest your obedience to the great God. Such persons, who call that
which Christ taught, and whereunto believers were obedient, a Doctrine, but not
a practice, such words are corrupt: but let us know this, that so far as Christ
has taught us, we ought to be obedient; and therefore let your obedience be
manifest to all men; For the Lord is at hand to give recompense unto you: and
let not the opposition which truth meets withal, be a stumbling block unto you.
You may see how easily confusion and error take place upon the hearts of men,
this day. O, let truth have place upon your Souls! O, it grieves my Soul to
see, how easily that which has but a color or show of truth from the
Scriptures, takes place upon the hearts of men, and many Professors this day;
and yet that which is real truth, has little entertainment in the World.
What Is the Reason? was not this always; it is too low, it is too mean, it is too
plain? it is indeed without the wisdom of man; and therefore finds little
entertainment amongst men. Alas, says the Wiseman, what is a little water? this
is a poor thing: others have as low an esteem of laying on of hands; besides,
it is a riddle unto them: thus God makes foolishness the wisdom of this World.

But now some do say, Did we see these Ordinances to continue, we should
willingly obey.

I Answer, Do you think the Scribes and Pharisees would not have made as large
a Profession as this, when they rejected the Counsel of God against themselves,
being not Baptized? Luke 7. 30. or do you not think, that those who are short
of any truth, if they profess any thing, but will as readily make this
Objection as your selves? yet will this excuse them? or would the Jews
ignorance of the Lord of life, excuse their Crucifying the Lord of Glory? 1
Cor. 2. 8. surely no.

Therefore know, it is your duty to seek after truth, and to yield obedience to
it: Christ requires it of you; therefore come in unto him, and be willing to
take upon you his yoke, and despised ways; and be sure, you shall be no losers
by it.

Now the Lord help you, you that have put on Christ by Baptism, to read what I
have written in this book without prejudice, and with a heart lifted up to God
for wisdom, to direct to give you to see truth from error. And that this
truth, which I do principally mind and drive at, (to wit) laying on of hands
upon believers Baptized, as such, may have the Spirit of God, making of it
forth unto your Souls, in the Reading and Consideration thereof; that so you
may be followers of God therein, is the Prayer of him, who is willing to serve
you for truths sake:

WILLIAM RIDER.

ERRATA.
Page 1. line 8. for the Spirit, read the Holy Spirit. p. 42. l. 13. for
excuse, read enough. p. 46. l. 11. for their read then. p. 59. l. 3. for his
read this. p. 100. l. 5. for praise, read prise. p. 112. l. 7. for would, read
do. p. 147. l. 8. for do affirm, read we do affirm. p. 152. l. 14. for was
enjoined, read was there enjoined. p. 159. l. 17. for I read you.

A DISCOVERY
Of Layings on of hands, according to the wisdom of God given under the several
considerations thereof, minded in the New Testament.
THE Scripture of the New Testament speaks of laying on of hands upon three
several accounts or ends.

First, upon Baptized believers, as such; To the end they might receive the
Spirit; which is the promise of God unto them, as Acts the 8. and Acts 19.

2. On Ministers; to the end they might be separated to the work of the
Ministry, Acts 6. 6, 13, 3. 1 Timothy 4. 14, 5. 22 verse.

3. On the sick, for healing; to the end they might recover, as Mark 16. 18.
Acts 28. 8 verse.

I shall, as the Lord shall help me, speak something to the two last briefly,
and then to the first I shall be more large, it being the duty of all believers
to submit unto, and that which is chiefly in my eye in this discourse.

First, of the laying on of hands for healing, it was a particular gift of
faith, which the Lord Jesus did promise to give unto his people, as is plain
from Mark 16. 17, 18 verse. These signs shall follow them that believe; in my
Name they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues; they shall
take up Serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them;
they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover: in which enumeration
of signs, we find laying on of hands for healing: which signs, as the Spirit of
the Lord teaches us, were given for those who believed not, 1 Cor. 14. 22 verse.

But this promise of healing, by laying on of hands, as we may observe, the
Lord made good upon many of his people, as believers in the Church of Corinth,
who were partakers of this gift, which they were to go forth in the practice
thereof; according as the Apostle Paul did, Acts 28. 8 verse. yea as Christ
himself, Mark. 6. 5 verse. Luke 4. 40 verse.

Object. But now some may say, Was this practice to continue amongst believers?
to which take this twofold answer.

First, If the gift be continued, that is, of healing, then this practice; for
we cannot Act, unless we have received.

2. If any have or shall receive such a gift of faith, they are to go forth in
the practice thereof; for gifts are given to profit withal, that is, for the
good of others, 1 Cor. 12. 7 verse. therefore if any one have received such a
gift, he is to be up and doing, to administer the same.

Query. But some may say, Is there no Ordinance, that the Lord Jesus Christ
has left unto his people, to wait upon him in for healing, in the time of
sickness?

Answer. Yes, and that is prayer and anointing with Oil in the Name of the
Lord; this is left, as an Ordinance, or way unto believers, to wait upon the
Lord in, in the time of sickness; wherein the Elders of the Church of Christ
ought to administer, as is manifest from Iam. 5. 14, 15 verse. Is any sick
amongst you? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over
him; anointing him with Oil in the Name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed
sins, they shall be forgiven him.

From whence we may observe, that this duty is enjoined by the Apostle upon
those that are sick: Herein the soul ought to wait upon God, and in this way to
look up unto God for healing.

But Oh! the evil of professors in this our day, who run to the Physician, but
not to God; but few wait upon God in his way: the Lord complained of this of
old, as a great evil, as the 2 Kings 1. 16 verse. yea, we may see this was Asa's
sin, 2 Chro. 16. 12 verse. though he were in much affliction; yet he sought not
unto the Lord, but to the Physician.

And is not this the sin of many Professors in this our day? O! that God would
make them sensible thereof, and make this word of use to them, that they may
look more up unto God, that they may exercise more faith upon him for healing;
that if they can but with the poor Woman, Mark. 5. 26, 27, 28, verse. touch the
hem of Christ's garment, for there is much virtue still in him.

Object. Some will say, We cannot see this way to continue in the Church of
Christ amongst believers, unless we did see the effect thereof.

Answer. First, If you Judge of the mind of God, that which is laid down your
duty, by the effect, you may run your selves into many temptations, as the Jews
of old did: when they saw not the glory of the last Temple, to be so great as
the glory of the first Temple was, Hag. 2. 3, verse. they were discouraged in
the work of the Lord, which God required, and so indeed, this temptation got
upon them, as in the first Chapter, the second verse: The time is not come, the
time that the Lords House should be built; but the Lord for this reproves them
with Judgments, as you may see in the 4, 5, and 6 verses, and after by his
servant Haggai exhorts them unto the work, as in the 8 verse, and incourageth
them unto it, in the 13 verse. Then spoke Haggai in the Lords Message unto the
people, saying, I am with you, says the Lord: and in the second Chapter, 5
verse. According to the word that I covenanted with you, when you came up out of
Egypt; so my Spirit remains amongst you: fear you not.

So I say, God is a God in Covenant with believers; his truths are sealed by
the blood of Christ. O then take heed of questioning his faithfulness in making
good his promise: from whence does this proceed, our looking for such and such
effects, but indeed from our unbelief, not believing the promise of God?
therefore take heed of judging the mind of God by the effects: for in so
doing, you will make the way of God of no force or weight for souls obedience.

2. How can you see the effect of that, you have never yet attained unto nor
believed? therefore I may say to you, as the Lord Jesus did unto the Jews, If
you will do his will, you shall know of the Doctrine, John 7. 17.

3. What effect have you seen, of the laying on of hands upon persons to
office? it is true, as many write, and do say, laying on of hands is a
resignation of a person or persons to office; therefore they instance Moses
laying on his hands upon Joshua, Numb. 27. 23, verse. but you shall find a more
excellent effect, that which fitted him for that work, which he was called
unto, as Deuteronomy. 34. 9, verse. Joshua the Son of Nun, was full of the Spirit of
wisdom: for Moses had laid his hands upon him. Learn from hence, that as it is
Gods way, so he meets with his people therein; and as in that Ordinance of
laying on of hands upon persons to office, so also in this of anointing with
Oil. For his ways are not in vain unto his people.

4. Those who have waited upon God in this Ordinance, have found the effect
thereof; they have met with God therein, they have seen his faithfulness, been
partaker of his grace, received healing, not only to their bodies, but also to
their souls: this effect some poor souls, who waited upon God in this way, have
been partakers of; so that they are able to bear witness to this truth, and
also to set to their seals, that God is true, a faithful God; meeting with
those who wait upon him, in his way: therefore I may say of this truth of
Christ, as one may say of the new Wine in the cluster, Isai. 65. 8, verse.
Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it.

5. We do not so much mind in our waiting upon God in this way, to see an
immediate work of healing, which is that which too many dote upon, and so like
Thomas, unless they see a sign, they will not believe, John 20. 25, verse.

But we do chiefly mind our duty, believing, that it shall not be in vain our
waiting upon him therein, so leaving the effect of it unto God, who knows best
when to give in mercyes to his people.

Now this may be matter of information, especially to those, who look upon
laying on of hands for healing, to be the anointing with Oil, spoken of by the
Apostle James, that they are and were two distinct things; the one being a
particular gift of the Spirit, which a person might receive of healing,
immediately by the laying on of hands, as the Apostle Paul did, Acts 28. 8,
verse. and many others also.

The other an Ordinance of Christ, wherein the Ministry of the Church were to
act, and that not by virtue of any particular gift, but of their ministerial
office; and therefore says the Apostle, Iam. 5. Let him call for the Elders of
the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with Oil in the Name of
the Lord: wherein they ought, as in all other appointments, to look up unto the
Lord for a blessing, leaving the giving forth of his grace to the poor soul,
unto himself.

2. By what has been said, is reproved the ignorance of the people of God this
day, that have been long reading and learning of the Scripture, and yet are
ignorant of this command; and likewise those that are Teachers and Leaders of
congregations, that know the will of God, yet walk not in the practice thereof.
It likewise reproves those congregations, that have for some season, looked
upon themselves as Churches of Christ, and yet want this order among them. Oh
that they would consider the reason, why they are short in this particular,
that they might see whether or no, the Lord have not a controversy with them,
for their neglect, and their opposition against one principle of his Doctrine,
that which Christ taught, unto which believers as believers were obedient,
which is a great transgression, their neglecting to hear Christ in that saying
of his, which is the last particular of laying on of hands I have minded, as I
shall endeavor in it is place by the Lords assistance, to make forth unto you.

Secondly, Of laying on of hands upon persons to office.
THis was likewise an Ordinance, or way of God, by which those persons who were
called to office by the Church of Christ were set apart, and so indeed are to
be set apart, as it was the practice of the first Churches, and of those who
first trusted in Christ, whose footsteps we are to follow: in this way they
went: see Acts 13. 3, verse. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their
hands on them, to wit, Paul and Barnabas, they sent them away.

From whence observe, and that first, the work it was great, it was to the
Ministry, according to what the Lord had spoken concerning Paul, that he was a
chosen vessel, and that to preach the Gospel unto the Gentiles, as you may see
in the 26 of the Acts 15. 16, 17, verse. so the work was great, to the
performance of which they would need much of the power and presence of the Lord
with them; therefore they fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, etc.

2. Observe, the persons who laid on hands, they were the Prophets and Teachers
in this Church, as in the 1 and 2 verses.

So likewise, sometimes it was done by the Apostles themselves, as Acts 6. 6,
verse. so also by Paul and Barnabas, who were called as before to the office of
Apostles, to lay the foundation, to do the work of an Apostle, Acts 14. 23,
verse. so also by Timothy, who was the first Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, 1 Timothy 5. 22. verse. and also Titus, Tit. 1. 5. verse. so likewise by the
Presbytery, the Company of Eldership in the Church, who were by the Church of
Christ, called to officiate in the ways of God unto his people, by whom
Timothy was ordained a Bishop, 1 Timot. 4. 14. verse. So that we see this way of
God, and the manner of the performance thereof, in some small measure
discovered; I shall give but this touch of this second thing minded, and that
for this reason:

Because our opposers of laying on of hands upon believers, as believers, have
owned the laying on of hands upon officers, though in a disorderly manner they
have gone forth in the practice thereof, as will appear,

First, from what Mr. Collier writes in his book of Right Constitution, page
31. where says he, the qualifications of Elders and Deacons are expressed, 1
Timot. 3.

Answ. I have read of Bishops and Deacons, and of Apostles and Elders, who were
Deacons; but never of Elders and Deacons: My reason is, because a Deacon is an
Elder in the Church.

2. This discovers according to their practice, what they have set persons
apart for: as their pastoral Charge in the Church of Christ, they were set
apart for Elders; so also, as Ministers of the Gospel, they were ordained for
Elders, though their great disorder is, in building before the foundation was
rightly laid; yet observe the wise mistaken in their proceeding, though by this
practice of theirs, with fair words they have stopped the mouths of many poor
souls, who were clearing themselves from such disorder as they were in; they
stopped their consciences with this, that they are under laying on of hands, as
well as those that do practice it upon believers as believers. I say, In this,
how confused have they appeared in their setting persons apart for Elders? not
knowing, or at least not minding, that in the word Elders is comprehended all
officers in the Church, with the Ministerial work also, 1 Pet. 5. 1, verse. 2
Epistle John 1. verse. 3. 1. verse. and so Elders is distinguished into several
offices in the Church, as Bishops and Deacons: the Deacons were to be men full
of the Holy Spirit and faith; and so indeed fit for the work of the Lord among
his people, as well as Bishops, and so were Elders in the Church, see Acts 6.
6. verse. and Act. 15. 22. verse. where the Deacons spoken of in the 6 Chapter,
are called Elders in the 15 Chapter: again, Philip. 1. 1. verse. where the
Apostle writes to the Saints, with the Bishops and Deacons: so Paul to Timothy
writes of the qualifications of the Bishops and Deacons, not Elders and
Deacons; you shall never in all the Scripture find Elders and Deacons expressed.

So that I hope, this may be a word of use unto them; however it will be unto
the Church of Christ, though from a weak and unworthy instrument. I shall now
leave them as to this, but as for the ordination it self, they having now at
last, come forth in the practice thereof, they must stand to maintain it; and
therefore knowing their abilities, I shall leave them to contend for this
truth, with those (if there be any) that do oppose it, it being that I do
believe, and have allowed of, therefore I shall only take notice of one or two
objections made by some, and then proceed to the third thing minded.

Objection. Some there are, who say there are no Apostles now: they laid hands
upon persons to office then; therefore that practice is deased. To which I
shall give this twofold answer.

1. That those who were not Apostles, as to their call, But Bishops or Pastors
of Churches, were exhorted to walk in this way, Tit. 1. 5. verse. 1 Timothy 5. 22.
verse. yea Prophets and Teachers by the authority of the Church of Christ, may
lay on hands, Acts 13. 1, 2, 3, verse.

2. By this appears a great mistake in the understanding of many men,
(according to this objection;)

Object. That the Ministry of the Apostles is ceased.

I Answer, The office of an Apostle is the first office in the Church of
Christ, and that is to lay the foundation; the foundation of the service of
God; therefore says Paul, I have laid the foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 10. verse. the
foundation, that is, the Lord Jesus Christ in his Doctrine, that which Christ
and his Apostles did teach, upon which the Church of Christ was built: see
Ephesians. 2. 20. which, foundation was the beginning-Word of Christ, that which
persons ought to know, and to believe, before they are sit for the service of
God.

But now, that this, viz. (to lay the foundation,) is the first office in the
house of God: see the 1 Corint. 12. 28, verse. God has set some in the Church;
first Apostles, etc. so Christ did ascend, and gave gifts unto men, and that
some to be Apostles, as well as other offices in the Church, Ephesians. 4. 8.
compared with the 11. verse.

Object. But now some may say, Christ did choose Apostles, he chose Twelve,
which he called Apostles; therefore they ceasing, the office ceased.

Answer. To which I Answer, that this was before Christ ascended; but after he
ascended, he gave some Apostles; that is, to that work to lay the foundation,
Ephesians. 4. 11, verse. and so Paul and Barnabas were Apostles, Acts 14. 4. and 14.
verse. and others also spoken of in the 2 Cor. 8. 23. verse. 1 Cor. 14. 1.
compared with 6. and 9. verse. He that does authoritatively as the first
Apostles, or by virtue of the authority of the Church of Christ, lay the
foundation of the service of God, he is properly an Apostle, he does the work
of an Apostle: for other foundation no man can lay, that is to be approved of
by the Lord; yet other men may lay the same, even preach the same Doctrine of
Christ, which he did, etc.

Thirdly, Of laying on of hands upon Baptized believers as such, to the end
they might receive the Spirit.
THat laying on of hands upon Baptized believers, as such, is one part of their
obedience to the Lord, which he requires of them; an Ordinance of the Lord
Jesus Christ; I shall thus prove unto you:

First, because it is a saying of our Lord Jesus Christ, that which he taught,
and that for believers obedience, as well as repentance, faith and Baptism:
see Heb. 6. 1, 2. Many persons do say, If we could but see, where ever Christ
taught it; Surely, we should not gainsay it. O that now they would consider for
their conviction this Scripture, Heb. 6. 1. verse. where the Apostle calls it
the Doctrine or Teaching of Christ; and a more sufficient witness that Christ
taught it, we cannot have, then the Apostle is. The Doctrine of Christ, that
which he taught, as he did repentance, faith, resurrection and eternal
judgment: Now consider, Doctrine does imply teaching, and teaching does infer
practice, that so believers might learn, for teaching and learning are
relations as a Father and Child, the one infers the other. Now to enforce this
reason for our obedience, we may consider these three things.

First, what the Apostle says, in Acts 3. 22. verse. where we are enjoined to a
hearing of Christ in all things, and that also from the danger that will follow
our neglect, as in the 23 verse.

2. In that it is placed amongst those foundation-principles, Hebr. 6. 1, 2.
and that in the midst of them, as if the Spirit of the Lord did foresee the
opposition that would be made against this truth.

3. Because it is one of Christ's first teachings, and therefore those words in
Heb. 6. 1. may be rendered the beginning-word of Christ, the A.B.C. of a
Christian, one of those first lessons that believers then did learn, and now
should learn; which is this, to wait upon God in this way of his, for the
Spirit of promise, which is their right, whereby they might be enabled, as they
do desire, to do him service.

Object. But now unto this, some object, and say, that all things that Christ
did and said, we are not to be followers of him in, as to raise the dead, to
command the wind to cease, and the like.

Answer. To which I answer, though this may be true, yet what is this to the
purpose? Because we are not to say in all things as he did; therefore we must
say in nothing as he did, neither as he taught us: this is error with a
witness. We grant that in all things we are not to do and say as Christ did:
But yet in all things that does relate to the worship and service of God, as
repentance, faith, and Baptism; or our duty in our conversation, we are to do
as he has said, for unto this God himself commands us, see Luke 9. 35. Acts 3.
22. Him shall ye hear in all things, etc.

Object. Further, to make void this reason, some object, and say that Christ
taught the resurrection of the dead, and eternal Judgment, as well as laying on
of hands; but that is only to be believed: the resurrection and Judgment, we
know we cannot practice.

Answ. To which I answer, first; This is that we ought as believers to do, if
possible we can, to attain to the resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3. 11.

2. That Christ taught it, we grant; and that it is for our obedience, we do
also affirm, and that is so far as he requires it.

3. I do hope, you do also know, that so far as Christ has taught us, we ought
to be obedient to him: that which he taught which was Notional, we ought to
believe; that which he taught, which was practical, we ought to obey. Now
consider, laying on of hands is a practical Doctrine, as is manifest by the
Apostles actings and the Saints obedience, Acts 8. 17. Acts 19. 6. Now let the
opposers of this truth of Christ show, where ever laying on of hands was taught
by Christ, as the resurrection and eternal Judgment, only to be believed, and
then they will say and do something to their purpose.

Object. But say some, In Heb. 6. 1. the Apostle calls it a Doctrine, but not a
practice; and so by this would make void this way of God.

Answ. This objection was answered by Doctor Chamberlain in his dispute with
Captain Kiffin, as you may see in the 10th page of his book, where says Doctor
Chamberlain, Because the Apostle calls it a Doctrine, therefore so far from
being not practiced, that it ought the rather to be practiced; for without
practicing no learning.

Again, says he, you wrest this Scripture, whereas the express purpose of the
Holy Spirit is, To teach Doctrines, that so believers might do what is taught.
For the proof of which, he cites Mat. 28. 20. Mat. 7. 21, 24. Ioh. 13. 17. and
15. 14. Iam. 22. 23, 24, 25. Phil. 4. 9. and many other places: yet says he,
you wrest it to the direct contrary; and you say therefore it is called a
Doctrine, that it might not be practiced, for indeed so much such an objection
does import.

But Mr Perry in his book of Animadversions in answer to Doctor Chamberlain,
page 14. as he does therein conceive that which is true, so he does suppose
that where in he is mistaken, and that is, to think, and so to write, that
Doctor Chamberlain minded Mr Kiffens wresting of the Scriptures above
mentioned; whereas indeed, we may plainly see in his book, and in this I have
written of his words, that he minded him of wresting Heb. 6. 1. which was the
ground of this objection: and therefore we may take notice, that the Scriptures
above mentioned, do sufficient prove what Doctor Chamberlain brought them for,
which was this, that Heb. 6. 1. was wrested by Mr Kiffin from the proper true
meaning of the Spirit of God therein. Mr Perries words you may see, are these:
says Mr Perry, I conceive that every Doctrine of Christ, that he has
commanded to be taught by his Apostles, and his Disciples were commanded to
observe and practice, ought to be practiced: but if this appear not in this
particular thing in any of those Scriptures, wherein has Mr Kiffin wrested
them? I know not: but (says he) in the contrary, I suppose he does own them,
in what the Spirit of God means in them, according to what light he has
received.

To the later part of these words, I answer thus much, Who knows not what Mr
Perry says of Mr Kiffin, to be true, and so indeed of all men, unless they
walk contrary to their light?

But from the former part of his discourse, we may observe two things: 1. His
mistake, as you have already heard, etc. 2. His granting what we contend for,
viz. that every Doctrine of Christ which he commands to be taught by his
Apostles, and his Disciples were commanded to observe and practice, ought to be
practiced; this is that we do affirm; and therefore do contend for this truth
or Doctrine of Christ with him and others that do oppose it: For did Christ
teach it, as you have heard; and did the Apostles teach it, as you shall hear
in the next reason for the proof of this truth; and did Baptized believers, as
such, observe and practice it, as Acts 8. 17. Acts 19. 6. and shall not
believers now practice it? Shall not they tread in the footsteps of the flocks
of Christ, be followers of those who first trusted in him? Shall the cunning
working of Satan prevail always, (as he has done for a long time, to the
perverting and destroying of the truths of Christ,) and as he does to this day,
to the denying of them? I say, shall he always prevail? God forbid: O let God
be true, but every man a liar; for what was written afore-time, was written for
our learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might
have hope, Romans 15. 4. O therefore let not truth be destroyed: his Doctrine was
sealed with his blood, even the death of Christ, and shall we alter or deny his
will? God forbid: shall not we hope to find acceptance with God in his
appointment? Surely the contrary will discover us to be such, that little
regard his Laws, whose precepts are not our delight.


2. Reason. As Christ taught it, so the Apostles taught it, read Heb. 5. 12.
compared with Chapter 6. 1, 2. in the first Chapter 12 verse. says the Apostle;
Whereas for the time you ought to be Teachers, you have need to be taught
again, which are the first principles of the oracles of God, etc. where by
these words, you have need to be taught again, is plainly employed, they were
once taught this principle; and that this the Apostles did teach them, is also
manifest, in that they laid the foundation of this Church of the Hebrews; who
were those Jews, spoken of in Acts 2. 42. who are there said to continue in the
Apostles Doctrine: and as they taught it, so it was a way of God, wherein they
did administer unto his people, and unto which they were obedient: see Acts 8.
and Acts 19.

Object. But now some will say, In Acts 2. is not mentioned laying on of hands;
therefore believers there were not under it.

Answ. Two which I answer, as laying on of hands is not in so many words there
laid down, no more there is not the resurrection from the dead, and eternal
Judgment in so many words expressed; does that therefore prove they were not
taught them? Surely, the Apostles would not have baptized them, but upon that
profession, that their bodies should be raised, as well as Christ dyed for
them. Again, to say that the Apostles did not there preach laying on of hands,
in Acts 2. proves no more, or is to no more purpose, then to say that Philip
did not preach Baptism to the Eunuch, when we read of not one word he spoke of
it, although he Baptized him, as you may see Acts 8. 35. But now that the Jews
who did believe, were taught laying on of hands, resurrection, and eternal
Judgment, is plainly manifest, from Heb. 5. 12. compared with Heb. 6. 1, 2.
where as you have heard, he minds them of it, as one of those first lessons
they had learned, and as a principle of the foundation, or beginning-word of
Christ committed to them.

2. Consider what is written: they (to wit, those that were Baptized and added
to the Church, who gladly received the word,) continued in the Apostles
Doctrine, see Acts 2. 42. Now this they could not do, if they had not been
taught laying on of hands which was a principle thereof, part of what Christ
and his Apostles taught them, as you have already heard, or may see in the
Reasons given; unless we deny their ways to be the same in every Church, 1
Cor. 4. 17. Again consider, how can it be thought with honor to God and his
truth, that a man can be said to continue in the Doctrine of the Apostles or
word of Christ, when they were not in the practice of it? for say the
Objectors, There is no mention made of laying on of hands, no more say I there
is not of the resurrection and eternal Judgment, and yet both preached and
received by them.

3. Consider, they are here said to be added to the Church, as well as they
received the word, and were Baptized.

Object. But now some may and do say, By this you make laying on of hands to be
an Ordinance, whereby those that did believe and were Baptized, were added to
the Church.

Answ. To which I answer, Yes, and that because laying on of hands was next
administered after Baptism, and that in order to the placing of the Soul in the
house of God; it being part of its foundation, the beginning-Word of Christ;
and in this order, was both preached and practiced by the Apostles. This
likewise we may consider, that the end of this Ordinance is promised, and
applied to those that are Baptized, see Acts 2. 38. where says the Apostle,
And you shall receive the gift of Holy Spirit; for the promise is to you; yea,
says he, to as many as the Lord our God shall call; that is, the promised
Spirit should be given according to the will of God: and in the 41 verse. it is
said, They that gladly received the Word were Baptized, and the same day were
added unto them three thousand Souls: where we may take notice of this order;
1. They gladly received the Word; 2. Were Baptized; 3. Were added to the Church.

From whence we may learn thus much, that by Baptism they were not added;
because their addition to the Church followed after their Baptism: for as
their gladsome receiving of the Word went before their Baptism, so did their
Baptism before their addition; which addition was something else besides, and
more then Baptism; for so much the Text does hold forth; and being added, they
continued in the Apostles Doctrine: and so it is plain, as it is part of the
foundation, so it followed Baptism, as you may see by the practice thereof,
Acts 8. 17, 19. Chapter 6. 7.

3. Reason. Because as Christ and his Apostles did teach it, so they taught it
as a principle of the foundation of the service of God, a foundation-principle
of that service, wherein they were to live to the Glory of God, and upon which
they were to stand to go on to perfection: read Heb. 6. 1, 2.

When Moses was to build a Tabernacle unto God, he had a strict charge, that he
should do every thing according to the pattern the Lord had given him, Exodus
25. 40. and so afterward, when Solomon was to build the Temple, he likewise was
to do it according to the pattern which David had received by the Spirit; and
as it is said, which he was made to understand, by the hand of God upon him:
the first of Chron. 28. 11, 12. and 19.

Now as Moses and Solomon were not left at liberty to follow their own
understanding, but were faithful to make all things according to the pattern
of Gods will: So neither were the Apostles, but also were faithful stewards of
the will and commands of the Lord Jesus: the first of Cor. 4. 1. which Jesus
the Christ, likewise was a Messenger, and the great Prophet of the eternal God,
whose word is Gods will unto his people, Acts 7. 37. and who as a Son, even as
Moses a Servant, was faithful over his own house, Heb, 3. 2. Who was faithful
to him that appointed him, even as Moses was faithful in all his house; Even
as Moses: as Moses was faithful to do every thing, exactly according to the
pattern; so was the Lord Jesus Christ faithful unto him, who did appoint him.

And surely this considered, we may easily see, there is not less exactness and
circumspection to be used now in times of the Gospel, in building a Spiritual
house unto God, then there was under the Law, in that which was typical: for
that exactness under the Law served but as an example or shadow of Heavenly
things, that is to say, Spiritual or Gospel-things, Heb. 8. 5.

Now this being a foundation-principle, it ought to be laid in every Church of
Christ: for it is no way consonant to truth, for a man to think ever to make a
lasting building, (either in Spirituals or Civils) without a good foundation:
for says David, Psalm. 11. 3. If the foundations be destroyed, what can the
righteous do? read Luke 6. 49. This being a principle of Gods choosing, to be
laid in the beginning or foundation of his service; How does it concern us, and
all those who put to their hands to erect and constitute a Church unto Christ,
to do whatever they do, as much as in them lies, according to the pattern given
by God; and that in building they leave out no part of his foundation? for a
principle is a main support unto the building, especially where God himself
lays it.

4. Reason. Because laying on of hands is an oracle of God, one of those
commands that God gave unto his Church, read Heb. 5. 12. with Heb. 6. 1, 2.
says the Apostle, You have need to be taught again, which be the first
principles of the oracles of God, that is, of his Commands, for so the word
oracle does imply, as you may see, Acts 7. 38. This is he that was in the
Church in the Wilderness, with the Angel which spoke to him in the Mount Sinai,
and with our Fathers who received the lively oracles to give unto us; that is,
the whole word of the Law, or Commands of God, declared unto his people by the
mouth of Moses, for their obedience: as also Romans 3. 1, 2 verse. bears witness
unto this: What advantage then has the Jew? or what profit is there of
circumcision? much every way; because unto them were committed the Oracles of
God; Where by Oracles is signified the whole Law committed unto them, as in
Heb. 5. 12. the word Oracles being in the plural number, does signify the
whole will of God committed to believers, the Doctrine of Christ: and the
beginning of the Oracles of God, is the first part of Christ his Doctrine, the
things which Christ first revealed and preached to them, as the Apostle bears
witness, Heb. 6. 1, 2 verses.

Yea, the word Oracle does hold forth the counsel of God, which is the will and
mind of God unto his people, for their obedience; therefore says the Apostle,
1 Pet. 4. 11. If any man speak, let him speak as an Oracle of God; that is, as
the will and mind of God for souls obedience: the Apostle Paul tells the
Ephesians, Acts 20. 20 verse. that he kept back nothing, that was profitable
unto them; and in the 27 verse. that he had declared unto them the whole Counsel
of God: a part whereof was laying on of hands, it being that he taught and
practiced among them, as Acts 19. 6.

Object. But now to turn aside this truth, says Mr Collier in his book of
Right Constitution, in the 76 page, Oracles do not always imply commands:
though all commands are Oracles; yet all Oracles are not commands.

Answer. Two which I answer, that though all commands are Oracles, and all
Oracles are not commands; yet what is this unto the purpose? does this prove
that laying on of hands is not one of those Oracles, that are the commands of
the Lord Jesus Christ: for was it not reckoned with, and so left upon record,
as that which Christ did teach with repentance, faith, and Baptism,
resurrection and eternal Judgment, as the foundation of the service of God to
every believing Soul, Heb. 6. 1, 2. was it not that which the Apostles taught,
that unto which Baptized believers as such were obedient? as Act. 8. 17. and
19. 6. this considered, were excuse to answer this objection.

But surely the weakness of this objection is discovered, if we consider Mr
Colliers reasoning, in the 78 page of his book: says he The word truly read
both in Heb. 5. 12. and 6. 1. is not the principles; but the beginning of the
Oracles of God, and the word of the beginning of Christ; and so cites the Greek
words, to hold forth not principles of the doctrine, but beginning of the word,
the same, as in the 1 John 1. In the beginning was the word, etc.

To which I answer, that it is easily discovered, and I think upon second
consideration himself will grant, that the word signifies principles as well as
beginnings; although I do grant that in other places it may so signify, and in
this place, (to be so rendered) may not be altogether improper; Yet I must tell
him, and I would have others mind it, that as he says, if the words be truly
read, they do so signify; so I say, If the words have their proper sense given
to them, they do hold forth principles of the Doctrine of Christ. For I pray
you, what is the beginning of the words of Christ, when it is minded as the
foundation, but principles of his Doctrine? for they are such things as make a
sure foundation for the Saints to build upon: and so we may observe that these
principles put together, are the foundation of the service of Christ; and that
these principles here minded, are such things as are not temporary, but
lasting, and according to the mind and will of Christ, to be continued in by
the Saints so long as they continue in this World.

But says he further in that place of his book: There are many things that are
Doctrines and Oracles for us to believe, but not to practice; and so instanceth
the Apostles waiting at Jerusalem, till the Spirit came upon them; their
speaking with Tongues, healing the sick, raising the dead, etc. these says he
are all Doctrines of the beginning and laying of the foundation, to be
believed, but not practiced, unless in the same power.

To which I answer, first, for healing the sick, raising the dead, speaking
with Tongues immediately; we cannot do, unless we are partakers of the same
power: Neither ought we now to go and wait at Jerusalem by virtue of that
command the Apostles had: although thus much I may mind, that as the Apostles
waited at Jerusalem for the promise of the Father; so ought every believing
Soul to wait in Zion, in the ways of God, till he be fitted for the work of
God, before he go forth therein, as too many do this day.

2. Says he, they are all Doctrines of the beginning and laying the foundation.

But now say I, Where are they laid down, as laying on of hands is, Heb. 6. 2.
part of the foundation? for their waiting at Jerusalem, their speaking with
Tongues, healing the sick, raising the dead, etc. was never laid down the
foundation, or principles of the foundation, or beginning-Word of Christ; but
laying on of hands was part of the foundation, which was confirmed to be the
Word of Christ with signs, miracles, and gifts of Holy Spirit; as the speaking
with Tongues, healing the sick, raising the dead, and the like.

3. I answer, that this is but cunning reasoning, to subvert the truth: for as
to the Apostles waiting at Jerusalem, did not Christ command the so to do? and
does not our consciences tell us, that that command was temporary, ended with
the doing of the duty there required; and is of no more weight in this case,
then as if he had instanced that Christ commanded one of his Disciples to fetch
an ass upon which he did ride unto Jerusalem?

And for speaking with Tongues, healing the sick, and raising the dead, they
were particular gifts, not that which is applied to every one; to the
performance thereof, as we see, laying on of hands was applied, 1. To the Jews,
Heb. 5. 12. 2. To the Samaritans, Acts 8. 17. 3. To the Ephesians, Acts 19. 6.
and so it was minded to the Hebrews, as well as repentance, faith, Baptismes,
Resurrection, and eternal Judgment, as that which they ought to consider of,
according to their profession of Christ therein; that was, to wait upon God for
his Spirit to teach them, and to assist them in their Holy profession: without
the assistance of which Spirit, they were not able to live unto God. I say,
this Ordinance of Christ, it ought to have according to their profession of
Christ therein, an influence upon, and through their whole lives; even as its
fellow-principle Baptism, as you may see Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6.

5. Reason. Because there was no Church of Christ without this Ordinance or way
of Christ, and that as a principle in the foundation of his service; the
foundation, even the Doctrine of Christ and of the Apostles, upon which they
did stand, as first the Hebrews, who were the first Church of Christ under the
Gospel, whose pattern we ought to follow: this was that they received, Heb. 6.
2. and that when they were babes, Heb. 5. 12. which first pattern must be
followed whether we will or no, God will have it so; for he is bringing forth
his truth in righteousness, according to that prophecy, Ezekiel. 43. 10, 11, 12.

2. The Samaritans, who were the second Church of Christ we read of; this way
they went, and that next after Baptism, Acts 8. 17.

3. The Church at Ephesus were set up on this foundation-principle, Acts 19. 6.
this was part of the counsel of God committed unto them by the Apostle Paul,
Acts 20. 27.

4. A fourth witness unto this truth, and that is the Church at Derbe and
Lystra, of whom Paul laid the foundation, as Acts 14. 6. and of whom Timothy
was a member, Acts 16. 1, 2. upon whom Paul laid his hands, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
Wherefore, says the Apostle; as if he should say, Seeing thou have that
excellent grace and gift of faith, (which he speaks of in the 5 verse,) I put
thee in Remembrance, or I do admonish thee, that thou stir up the gift of God
which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands, or which God gave thee,
through the laying on of my hands: from whence it is plain, that in this way
Timothy waited upon God, which was not in vain unto him; and afterward being
approved of, was ordained to the work of the Ministry, by the laying on of
hands of the Company of the Eldership, as the first of Tim. 4. 14. does
manifest.

And so I do conclude, as these were, so were all other Churches, and that for
these two Reasons.

1. Because their ways were the same in every Church, 1 Cor. 4. 17.

2. Because they had a form of Doctrine to deliver to them, according as it is
laid down, in Heb. 6. 1, 2 the Apostle writing to the Romans, in the 6 Chapter
17 verse. says he, You have obeyed from the heart the form of Doctrine. Now
what was that, but repentance from dead works, and faith toward God, etc. even
all that our Savior taught, even a form?

Object. But now some may say, We read of it no more then in those places
administered, and therefore it was not the practice of all Churches.

Answ. To which I answer, This proves nothing, no more then this very
objection, which is made by Independents so called, against Baptism; because
they find it not administered in all, therefore all were not under the practice
thereof: but this is false, even as the Objection is untrue: for the ways of
the Apostles were the same in every Church, and the Doctrine one that was
delivered to them: and look what objections may be made against this truth, the
same, as is plainly manifested (in the discourse between Doctor Chamberlain,
and Captain Kiffin,) may be made against Baptism. Further, you may take notice
in how many Churches you read of the breaking of Bread, in as many you shall
find the laying on of hands as breaking Bread was in Judea, Trod^, Corinth; so
the laying on of hands in the Hebrews, Samaria, and Ephesia; yea, a fourth
witness we have unto this truth, which was Paul's laying on his hands upon
Timothy, as is before minded: so that I say, persons may as well object against
other truths of Christ, as against this. But this we know, In the mouth of two
or three witnesses, every Word of Christ shall be established; therefore let us
beware lest we, as many do, Kick against this truth of Christ; and as many do,
and have done against Baptism.

6. Reason. Because it is that which is milk for Babes, a beginning-Word of
Christ, read Heb. 5. 12, 13. You are (says the Apostle) such as have need of
milk, and not of strong meat. Now consider, was it for Babes then, and is it
only for strong men, now? as many persons, who deny it to believers as
believers, yet will own it for setting persons apart for office: O what deceit
is wrapped up in this! But surely, this was for Babes, and the Hebrews learnt
it in that condition: and this is certain, that which was for Babes then, is
for Babes now; and that which was for strong men then, is for strong men now;
for so the Apostle reasons, Heb. 5. 14. Strong meat belongs unto strong
men, who by reason of use have their senses excercised to discern both good and
evil.

Object. But now some object, that laying on of hands, Heb. 6. 2. may be meant
to heal the sick, according to these Scriptures, Mark 16. 18. and Acts 28. 8.
or else for setting persons apart for office, according to Acts 6. 6. or Acts
13. 3.

Answ. To which I answer, that it cannot be so meant, for this reason:

Because in none of those Scriptures, laying on of hands is laid down as a
foundation-principle, as we see here, in Heb. 6. 2. laying on of hands is so
laid down.

For consider, those Scriptures, Mark 16. 18. and Acts 28. 8. do hold forth no
such thing as a foundation-principle; but that particular men may receive such
a particular gift of God, as to heal the sick, according as Christ promised,
Mark 16. 18. and Paul received, Acts 28. 8. as also Philip, Acts 8. and many
others, as many in the Church of Corinth; which is no more a
foundation-principle, neither in the practice, milk for Babes, then laying on
of hands, (which some make mention of,) in Luke 21. 12.

So likewife those Scriptures, Acts 6. 6. and 13. 3. hold forth no more a
foundation-principle then the former; and that,

Because laying on of hands here, was upon particular men, who were set apart
for particular offices, and that for the good of the Church of Christ: this was
not to Babes, but strong men; the Apostle reckons up the Hebrews Babes, as Heb.
5. 12. but these were strong men, who were fit to be employed in the work of
the Ministry, such as the Apostle speaks of, in Heb. 5. 14. Who by reason of
use, had their senses exercised to discern both good and evil. Such who were
gone beyond those spoken of, in the 12. and 13. verse. being in a capacity of
teaching others; therefore laying on of hands in the forementioned Scriptures,
upon persons for healing, or for setting persons apart for office, cannot be
that meant, in Heb. 6. 2. as the foundation or beginning-principle, which is
milk for Babes, Heb. 5. 12.

And therefore, I do conclude that laying on of hands upon believers, as
believers, is the foundation-principle, the beginning-Word of Christ, that
which concerns every believing soul, which is food to it, and nourishment to
it; which is that they are capable of, but not of the former, they being not in
the like capacity.

Therefore my Brethren, as we find it written, we should not take away the
Childrens Bread, and give it unto Dogs; so let us not take away their milk, but
feed them with it, etc.

7. Reason. Because it is part of the Word of the Lord, that was confirmed unto
us: that it was the Word of Christ, has been plainly manifested, it being that
which he taught, his Doctrine, Heb. 6. 1. Also you may see the first reason for
the proof of this.

Now that it was confirmed to us, read Mark 16. 20. And they went forth and
Preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirmed the Word with
signs following.

Now whereas some object, that laying on of hands was for the confirmation of
the Gospel; they may now by what has been said, plainly see that it was part
of the Word of the Lord, or saying of Christ; even his teaching unto which
believers as such were obedient, one part of his Doctrine; which therefore was
(as the rest) confirmed with signs, miracles, and gifts of the Holy Spirit.

But for further answer to this objection, we may consider, that which
confirmed the Word, and the Word, were different: laying on of hands, as you
have heard, was the Word of God, the teaching of Christ; but signs, miracles,
and gifts of the Holy Spirit, were the confirmation thereof, Mark 16. 20. they
appeared, whereby this word and way of God was and is confirmed unto us to be
the steadfast Word of Christ. Miracles are no foundation-principles; they are
not any part of the Word of the beginning of Christ; but those things by which
the Word of God was and is confirmed unto us, to be the steadfast Word of
Christ; the neglect of any part thereof, God will punish: for says the
Apostle, Heb. 2. 2, 3. If the Word spoken by Angels, were steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience deserved a just recompense of reward: how shall
we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be
spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him? Therefore
my Brethren, as the same Apostle says, Heb. 12. 25. so my exhortation is unto
you; See that you refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped not, who
refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away
from him that speaks from Heaven. Now truth being declared, the Lord requires
obedience; and therefore it lies as a duty upon every believing Soul, to
consider his ways, and with the good man David, to turn his feet into the
ways of God, Psalm. 119. 59. and to set shoulders to the work of the Lord, that
the breaches in Sion may be again repaired, and the paths therein, may be again
restored (according to the Word of the Lord, Isai. 58. 12. verse. 61. 4. verse.)
and in so doing, we shall be partakers of those promises, which are annexed as
the reward of such service.

In the next place, I shall proceed to answer some objections which many
persons make further against this truth, and then shall lay down some
Encouragements unto persons to the performance of this duty: and in the last
place shall lay down some grounds of our withdrawing from those that obey not
Christ in his Ordinance, answering some objections.

Object. The first and greatest of them, is this: That we have no command for
the laying on of hands.

Answ. Now that we have a command, appears, First, from Christ's teaching of it;
there is a positive Command for what he taught, as a part of his service we are
enjoined to be obedient unto; but Christ did teach this as a part of his
service; yea, as a principal part thereof, not only relating to the building,
but to the foundation of the building, which is of more weight, as Heb. 6. 1, 2.

Now that this we are commanded to observe; see how full that Scripture comes
upon us, Acts 3. 22. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of
your Brethren, like unto me, him shall you hear in all things whatsoever he
shall say unto you; yea, this command is followed with a curse, if we obey not,
verse 23. And it shall come to pass, that every Soul which will not hear that
Prophet, shall be destroyed from amongst the people.

2. Answer. We have a command, and that also from the Apostles teaching and
practice of it: that they did teach it, and practice it, you have already heard
in the second Reason. Now as they did teach it, and practice it, see how
positive the command lies upon us, Phil. 4. 9. Those things which you have both
learned and received, and heard, and seen in me, do, and the God of love and
peace shall be with you: also mind, 2 These. 2. 15. Therefore Brethren stand
fast, and hold the Traditions which you have been taught, whether by Word or
our Epistle. Now beloved, this was one of those things, or of those traditions
the Apostles had delivered to the Churches; yea, one of those things they had
both heard, learned, and received, and seen in Paul, which the Apostle commands
them to do, to be exercised in, to hold fast: and this is Paul's exhortation
unto Timothy, and that by way of command, 2 Timothy 2. 2. The things thou have
heard of me amongst many witnesses, the same commit thou unto faithful men,
that they may be able to teach others also. Now this was one things that
Timothy had heard and learned of Paul, and that which he received from him, as
is plainly manifest in the 5 Reason.

Object. But now whereas some may object, and say, that Paul's laying on his
hands upon Timothy was to office:

Answ. I answer, that it was not to office, but for the receiving of the
promised Spirit; which promised Spirit God did so pour forth upon Timothy, that
he was made according to the Prophecies that went before of him, a good
Soldier of Christ, one fit to war in his Kingdom, to be exercised in the work
of the Lord, the ministerial office: therefore says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 18.
This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy, according to the Prophecies that
went before of thee, that thou by them might War a good warfare. This
charge, to wit, that you shall find in the 3 verse. to be this, that he should
charge some, they should preach no other Doctrine: and whereas he says,
according to the Prophesies that went before of thee, that thou by them
might War a good warfare; that was those revelations that God manifested
unto some of his people; whereby he discovered Timothy to be one whom he had
chosen to the work of the Ministry; and so by them, that was those Prophesies,
the Apostle was assured, that his calling was of God, and that his blessing
would accompany him.

So that when Paul laid his hands upon him, he received the Holy Spirit, and
that in such manner, as that he was fitted abundantly for the work of the Lord;
which when this was manifested, and he had by the people of God, or Church of
Christ, a call thereunto; he was by the laying on of hands of the Eldership or
Presbytery, set apart for the work of the Ministry, as you may see, 1 Timothy 4.
14.

So that it is plainly manifest, that by the imposition of Paul's hands, Timothy
received the Spirit in the gifts thereof, 2 Timothy 1. 6.

And by the imposition of the hands of the Eldership, he was separated to the
work of the Ministry, according to the Prophesies that went before of him, 1 Timothy 4. 14.

3. We have a command, and that from the Commission the Lord Jesus gave his
Disciples, Mat. 28. 20. Teaching them, (to wit, those that believe, and are
Baptized,) to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. From whence
this truth appears,

That if Christ did command the Apostles to lay on hands, they were to teach
those whom they should Baptize, to submit thereunto, as the words do plainly
manifest, Teaching them to observe.

But Christ did command the Apostles to lay on hands.

For what they did in any service of Christ unto believers, as such, was by the
command or authority of the Lord Jesus; and therefore say they, 1 Cor. 4. 1.
Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God: and in the 14 Chap. v. 37. If any man think himself to be a
Prophet or Spiritual, let him acknowledge the things I write unto you, are
Commandments of the Lord: this was the account they gave of their authority.
And it is observable, I never knew that opposer yet of this truth of Christ,
that durst affirm the Apostles had no command for laying on of hands.

So that I say, if they had a command for laying on of hands, the Observation
thereof was taught by them, and is that which God by virtue of his Commission
given does require of us; for says Christ, Teaching them, that is, those that
are Baptized, to observe all things, whatsoever I have Commanded you.

Object. But now some will say, Laying on of hands is not there expressed.

Answ. I answer, Though it be not expressed, it is plainly employed; for
whatsoever the Apostles did teach and practice, was by virtue of their
Commission received from Christ.

But this they did teach, Heb. 5. 12. and also practice, Acts 8. 17. and 19. 6.
and therefore it was by virtue of their Commission, received from Christ: And
their very manner of teaching and practicing, discovers it to be the mind and
Command of God unto believers, as such. 1. Because they taught it, as a first
principle, or beginning-Word of Christ unto young believers; and therefore it is
reckoned up milk for Babes, Heb. 6. 1. and 5. 12. 2. Because they taught it, as
a principle of the foundation of the service of Christ, and that as repentance,
faith, Baptism, Resurrection and eternal Judgment, Heb. 6. 1, 2. 3. Because
they taught it, as that which Christ taught unto them, or gave in charge unto
them, as he appointed them to be Stewards of the mysteries of God; and
therefore they witness it the Doctrine or teaching of Christ, Heb. 6. 1. that
which they had received from him, even the Lord Jesus Christ.


So that from the Commission, does likewise appear the force also of this
obedience; whereby those that resist the truth, may be left without excuse.

Object. But yet some will and do say, The Apostles did lay on hands by virtue
of a particular gift which God had given them, to give the Spirit.

Answ. The Apostles did never lay on hands by virtue of those particular gifts
they had received, but by virtue of their ministerial office: for laying on of
hands being an Ordinance of Christ, a way unto believers, as Baptism, or other
of his appointments; The Apostles did never officiate in them by virtue of any
particular gift, neither any other Minister of the Gospel, but by virtue of
their ministerial office, as they were called of God to administer in those
ways to his people; and so did, leaving the effect thereof unto God, etc.

Object. But some do say, the Apostles by laying on of hands, did give the
Spirit.

Answ. First, though this be one of their greatest Objections and Blocks
against which they Stumble; Yet our greatest opposers are herein divided: for
though some do affirm, that the Apostles had power to give the Spirit; yet
others of them cannot so believe: and who would think men of such parts and
wisdom as they are, should so affirm; but that indeed the carnal mind of man
will ever oppose the things of God?

2. I answer, and that positively, that the Apostles by laying on of hands, did
give the Spirit of God, no more in this Ordinance, then Peter did in the
preaching of the Word, Acts 10. 44. While he spoke the Word, the Holy Spirit
fell on all them that heard it; and they spoke with Tongues, and glorified God.

Why so it was, that while Peter, John, and Paul were exercised in this
Ordinance, even laying on of hands, God gave his Spirit to his people.

But alas, what is Peter, John and Paul, but Ministers by whom they believed?
the one may Plant, and the other Water, but it is God that must give the
increase, 1 Cor. 3. 5, 6.

And surely this, what gifts Christ is pleased to convey through Ministers, is
not by any power that is in them, as is plainly discovered from Acts 3. 12.

Neither was it ever in the Apostles power, to give the Spirit of promise unto
any man; and so the Apostle plainly declares unto me, in his answer to Simon
Magus, who certainly did think, as too many do this day, that the Apostles had
power to give the Spirit; and therefore he offered them money for that gift or
power: the Apostle thereby seeing the corruption of his heart, says unto him,
Thy money perish with thee, because thou think the gift of God may be
obtained with money, Acts 8. 18, 19, 20.

3. Further, take notice, that this power or prerogative of giving the Spirit,
the Lord Jesus Christ always keeps in his own hands, and he gives it to whom
he pleases, as you may plainly see by these Scriptures, Acts 2. 32, 33. This
Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are al witnesses; therefore being by the
right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the
Holy Spirit, he has shed forth this which you now see and hear. Mark this; he
has done it, even this Jesus, but not the Apostles.

And says our Savior, John 14. 16, 17. I will pray the Father, and he shall
give you another Comforter, Even the Spirit of truth: and in the 26 verse. But
the Comforter which is the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my Name:
the 15. 26. verse. But when the Comforter is come, whom (says Christ) I will
send unto you from the Father, Even the Spirit of truth, Luke 11. 13. and Acts
5. 32. says the Apostle, We are witnesses of these things, and so is the Holy
Spirit whom God has given to them that obey him.

By all which places it is plainly manifest, that this power or prerogative of
giving the Spirit, the Lord Jesus Christ and God the Father always keep in
their own hands, etc.

4. It is further ^anifest, that it was not in the Apostles power to give the
Holy Spirit of promise, and that from the administration of the Ordinance, Acts
8. 15. When Peter and John came down to Samaria, they prayed for them, that
they might receive the Holy Spirit.

Which does discover, it was not in their power to give it; but they prayed
for them, that so indeed God would give it to them, according to his promise.

Again, as it is manifest that this power belongs unto the Lord Jesus Christ,
he having received of his Father this promise of the Holy Spirit, and so gives
it forth upon his people:

So likewise we may observe, that he also gives the gifts or operations
thereof; or the Spirit of God does work and operate in poor Souls, according to
his wisdom.

For as there are members of the body of Christ, so every member has it is
office given him of God: this the Apostle plainly discovers, 1 Corinthians. the 12
Chapter, in the 4. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. says he, There are diversities of gifts,
but the same Spirit; and there are differences of administrations, but the same
Lord; and there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God, which
works all in all: but the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one
to profit withal; for to one is given by the Spirit the Word of wisdom: and
so he goes on making mention of the gifts and operations thereof: and in the 18
verse. thus declares; But now has God set the members in the body as it has
pleased him: again says he in the 27. and 28. verse. Now you are the body of
Christ, and members in particular; and God has set some in the Church; first,
the Apostles; secondly, Prophets, etc.

From all which, as before, we may mind, that as the Spirit of God is given to
every believing obedient Soul, and this by the Lord; so every ones gift or
office likewise proceeds from him. Again, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 7.
speaking of the Church; But unto every one of us is given grace, according to
the measure of the gift of Christ. Now if any should say, How would this
appear? the Apostle makes answer, verse. the 8. Because he ascended up on high,
he led (speaking of Christ) Captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men: and
verse. the 11. it is said, he gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, and this for the good of the
body of Christ: and this work of Christ, of giving his Spirit unto men, to be
continued so long as the Saints are to be perfected, and the body of Christ to
receive edification, as we may plainly see, from the 12. and 13. verses.

So that to say, the Apostles had power to give the Holy Spirit, or Spirit of
promise, is untrue, absurd and ridiculous.

Object. Again, some there are, who make this a great obstacle in the way,
(thereby hindering poor Souls from their obedience,) even the Words of the
Apostle, Acts 8. 16. for as yet he was fallen upon none of them.

From whence they persuade themselves, and labor to persuade others, that the
Apostles did lay on hands by virtue of a particular gift or power, which God
had given them, to give his Spirit. Now for the removing of this
stumbling block, I answer,

First, If you consider what has been spoken to the last Objection, you may
plainly see, that the Apostles did not lay on hands by virtue of any particular
gift, but of their ministerial office. Neither was it ever in their power to
give the Spirit of God to any man, as has been plainly manifested.

2. Whereas the Apostle says, for as yet he was fallen upon none of them, it
discovers to us, that it was an usual thing in the Apostles days, for the
Spirit of God to be given, and that in more then an ordinary manner; and
therefore well might Luke thus write this parenthesis, in the discourse of this
Ordinance: for as yet he was fallen upon none of them.

3. Again thirdly: Whereas Luke uses these words, for as yet he was fallen
upon none of them; it might very well be taken notice of. For though Philip had
wrought great works in the City of Samaria, as in the 6. and 7. verses of this
Chapter, Acts 8. insomuch that God bore witness from Heaven to those things
that Philip spoke, that there was great joy in that City; and that Simon Magus,
who of long time with his Sorceries had bewitched the people, believed and was
Baptized; yet there was no givings forth of the Spirit of God so immediately as
at other times: as for instance, when Peter preached the Word, Acts 10. 44.
(even while he was speaking,) the Holy Spirit fell on them that heard it.

Object. Some do say, Why did not Philip lay hands upon the Samaritans, as well
as Baptize them? and from hence they reason, that though Philip was
instrumental for their conversion; yet Peter and John must lay hands upon them:
and so by such reasonings as this, laying on of hands must be laid aside.

Answ. First, let us examine; has not this reasoning much of this nature in
it, to set up Peter, John and Paul, that so indeed we may come to think of them
above that which is meet, as if they had power to do that they had not? but for
this, some has been already reproved, 1 Cor. 1. 12. Now this I say, (says the
Apostle) that every one of you say, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, etc. and in
the 3 Chapt. 5 verse. Who is Paul, and who is Apollo; but Ministers by whom ye
believed? Even as the Lord gave to every man. Oh! that we could therefore,
cease from man, whose breath is in his Nostrils, and give glory to God, looking
up only unto him; who is the giver of every good and perfect gift.

2. May there not be, or is there not already too many, who make as great a
noise to the crying down of Baptism, as this Objection does of laying on of
hands, and that in regard of Philip, who did work Miracles, and Ananias who had
an immediate Commission to Baptize Paul, as well as the Apostles, for what they
did? O say many persons, none but those that were immediately authorized, and
did work Miracles, did Baptize; therefore your Baptism is not right, because
you work no Miracles: and hence they conceive no Baptism, but the Baptism of
the Spirit, which they think the Apostles gave unto those persons, upon whom
they laid on hands.

3. The great thing in Answer unto this question, is, to show why Philip did
not lay hands on those persons whom he converted and Baptized: and now if this
Reason, could truly be rendered, something of satisfaction possibly unto many
persons would appear.

But for my part, though persons are never satisfied, I dare not presume to
know above what is written; and therefore, why he did not lay hands upon those
persons he did Baptize, I dare not positively determine.

But this I know, and herein is my satisfaction, that the work was done; and I
do believe the Apostles are as good an example, and the thing is of as much
weight, (if not more) as if Philip had done it.

But Oh! what weak reasoning is here, yet concurring with the rest to make void
the truth.

I shall appeal to any man's conscience, whether this be a sufficient ground to
keep any soul from the doing of his duty, because he cannot see why Philip did
not lay on hands.

Surely you or I may suppose many things; but which of us is able to determine
which is truth amongst all? therefore it is good for us to keep close unto
this, that it is Gods way, that wherein the Apostles as Ministers of the Gospel
did administer; and that whereunto believers Baptized as such, were obedient;
that it was taught unto them as milk for Babes, and that it was a principle of
Christ's Doctrine, a beginning-word of Christ unto believers: and herein let us
quiet our selves, not seeking a reason for that the Lord does not give us; lest
we are carried captive by our carnal imaginations, and so split our selves
against the truth, etc.

Query. But now some may say, If we practice this Ordinance; where is the
ground for our faith, seeing whatever is not of faith is sin?

Answ. First, in all our Actions, I do grant it is good for us to have a ground
for what we do, especially in the service of God, in which service we are to
walk by rule. And here I wish that those who walk in mixed Communions, would
consider what Word of God they have to bear them out in that practice, whether
ever Christ left such a rule to walk by.

But secondly, I answer, The ground of our faith in this Ordinance, is the Word
of the Lord, which does not only as you have heard discover unto us this
Ordinance, to be the mind of God unto believers, a way wherein he requires
their obedience; but it likewise discovers the very end of this Ordinance, to
be the promise of God; which promise God first made unto Abraham, as the
Apostle bears witness Gal. 3. 14. that the blessing of Abraham might come on
the Gentiles, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit, through faith.
Why we cannot believe without the Spirit; yet through believing it is, that we
are made partakers thereof, even of the promise, which is the Spirit; which
promise God renewed, and more plainly discovered by the Prophet Joel, Joel 2.
28, 29. which the Apostle takes notice of, Acts 2. 16. this was likewise hinted
forth by John the Baptist, Mark. 1. 8. I indeed Baptize you with water, but he
shall Baptize you with the Holy Spirit: and this our Savior himself declared,
John 7. 38, 39. He that believes on me, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of
living Water: this he spoke of the Spirit, which they that did believe should
receive. Now, as has been declared, they could not believe without the Spirit;
yet, through believing, the promise of the Spirit is made good unto poor souls.

And this promise of the Spirit, the Apostle does annex unto faith and
Baptism, as the right and portion of every believing obedient soul, Acts 2.
38. Repent and be Baptized for the Remission of sins, and you shall receive the
gift of the Holy Spirit. From which Scriptures it is manifest, that the promise
of the Spirit is made unto believers Baptized, as such; and therefore the
Apostle in the 39 verse. does apply it unto believers Baptized, as such, as
their right and portion; For the promise is unto you, and to your Children, and
to all that are afar off; even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Which
promise of God in general was the ground of the Apostles assurance of faith in
this particular, that God would give his Spirit in this his own appointment to
his people. So that a better ground to Act upon in any way or service of God,
we cannot have, then the Word and promise of God is.

Therefore in the next place, for your encouragement in this Ordinance,
consider these few things: obedience to God is,

First, that which makes a soul capable of knowing the mind of God: therefore
says our Savior to the Jews; If you will do his will, you shall know of the
Doctrine.

2. Obedience unto Christ, is that whereby believers do enter friendship with
the Lord Jesus Christ; even as by their profession they do enter battle or wage
war, with the greatest Enemy; Even the Dragon spoken of, in Rev. 12. 17. who is
there said to make war with the Woman, and the Remnant of her seed, which keep
the commands of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus.

Why so I say, they do enter by their obedience unto Christ, the greatest
friendship that possible can be in the World, John 15. 14. You are my friends,
(says Christ) if you do whatsoever I command you.

3. There is much encouragement to this duty, from the end of this Ordinance.

The Spirit of God, is that the soul stands in continual need of; yea, the
usefulness of the Spirit of God, is very much discovered: First, in that it is
the Teacher of the Saints, the first Epistle of John 2. 27. But the anointing
which you have received of him, abides in you, and you need not that any man
teach you, but as the anointing teaches you: Why, it is the office of the Holy
Spirit, to be the Teacher of Gods people, John 14. 26. But the Comforter, which
is the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you
all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said
unto you. Secondly, as he is their Teacher, so he is their Comforter, yea, and
their Remembrancer, as in this 26 verse.

So likewise he is their Guide, and their Leader, Gal. 5. 18. so he is their
strength, Ephesians. 3. 16. yea, by the Spirit they have boldness at the Throne of
grace, Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your hearts, crying Abba, Father. So also it is their assistance at
the Throne of grace, Romans 8. 26. says the Apostle, We know not what to pray
for, as we ought; but the Spirit helps our infirmities. Oh! how useful is the
Spirit of God, unto poor souls! it is a quickening Spirit, and therein also it is
very useful: the people of God are apt to deadness and coldness, in the things
of God; therefore says the Apostle, Romans 8. 11. But if the Spirit of him that
raised up Christ from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the
dead, shall quicken your mortal bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you.
Again, it is by the Spirit, that we must mortify corruption, the deeds of the
body; as in the 13 verse. Many other particulars may be minded, wherein the
usefulness of the Spirit of God does consist; therefore let these
considerations encourage us, to wait upon God in this his way.

4. We have encouragement to wait upon God in his way, even in this Ordinance,
and that from the general promises in the Scripture, Gal. 3. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 20.
Luke 11. 13.

5. A fifth ground of encouragement, may be drawn from the Reasons why the
Spirit of God is given forth unto poor souls; and that first, from the souls
being in Covenant with the Lord: for among the many precious promises of the
new Covenant, this you shall find to be one, Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
Judgments, and do them: this Reason, the Apostle also Renders, Gal. 4. 6.
Because you are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son, etc.

Secondly, from souls obedience; the promise is made unto such, Acts 2. 38. and
5. 32. such as walk in obedience, shall certainly be partakers of the Spirit of
promise.

6. Another ground of encouragement I shall mention, may be taken from the
Necessity of the Spirits being given with it is gifts and fruits amongst the
people of God; and that may be, 1. Either, first, for the Glory of God, 1 Cor.
12. 3. John 4. 14. Romans 12. 11. 2. For the general good of the people of God,
according to these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 12. 7. The manifestation of the Spirit,
is given to every man, to profit withal: and so he goes on, discovering in the
8, 9, 10. verse. the several gifts and fruits of the Spirit, from whence
proceeds the usefulness of the members of the body of Christ, one unto another;
the Spirit of God dividing to every man severally as he will, as in the 11.
verse. So that the Eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee; Neither
the head to the feet, I have no need of thee, verse. 21. and the Reason is
given, verse. 25. that there should be no schism or division in the body, but
that the members should have the same care one of another: read also 14. Chapt.
12 verse. and Ephesians. 4. 12. 3. For our particular good and help, according to
these Scriptures, Iud. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 22. Gal. 5. 5. and the 16.


Therefore now, let these encourage you to make use of that means God has
appointed, even this Ordinance, wherein his people were made partakers of his
Spirit.

Query. But now some do Question, What grounds we have that practice laying on
of hands, to separate from those who are Baptized? for (say they) could you
have Communion with us, we could with you.

Answ. To which I answer, and that first: Considering the frames of your
Spirits, your denial of the truth, calling it error and delusion, a Doctrine
from beneath, an invention of the Devil, that which is our own tradition, a
post we would set up by the posts of God, that for which we have no better
ground then the Common Prayer Book, A new administration, which never was
either taught or commanded by Christ in all the new Testament: from hence,

I would Query, by what rule of Christ it is, that you could have Communion
with us; and the case being thus, we can any longer Communicate with you?

For my part, I must profess before the Lord, and before the whole World, that,
how to satisfy my conscience, and maintain the truth of God, in such
Communion, I know not: if I could, I should do it.

I know it is that they reflect upon us, that we want love to them, as the
ground why we cannot Communicate with them.

But the Lord he is Judge, and he knows that it is our love to the truth of
Christ, and the order he has prescribed in his house, that will not suffer us;
Especially as the case stands with them, as is before minded.

And therefore, if there be any love in them toward us, let us be partakers of
those weighty Reasons grounded upon the Word of truth; which may convince us,
that it is our duty still to have Communion with them, notwithstanding their
opposition against this truth.

Object. But by this some may say, It seems, that if they did not oppose the
truth, you could Communicate with them.

Answ. I answer, No, for we have no such custom, neither the Churches of
Christ: Search the Scriptures, and see if ever Christ left such a rule to walk
by, or that God allowed or approved of any such practice. We are glad to hear,
where there is any so moderate as not to oppose it; and it is not burden some
to us, to wait upon God in his way, laboring their convincement, and embracing
of the truth; for it is that which is their duty, as well as Baptism; and a
part of the foundation of the house of God, as well as repentance and faith:
and therefore to build with them, without this principle in the foundation,
were to presume to do that, we have no warrant for, and to make a breach in
that order God has appointed, and that in the very foundation of his service.

2. I Answer, that we have good ground to maintain separation from those,
though Baptized, that deny this Ordinance of laying on of hands, and that

1. Because we are Commanded to keep the Ordinances, as they were delivered, 2
These. 2. 15. Therefore Brethren, standfast, and hold the Traditions which you
have been taught, whether by Word, or our Epistle; and herein were the
Corinthians praised by the Apostle, which is also written for our Example, 1
Cor. 11. 2. Now I praise you Brethren, that you remember me in all things, and
keep the Ordinances as I delivered them unto you. From whence it is manifest,
that to keep the Ordinances as they were delivered, is that which is
praiseworthy to the Saints, well pleasing unto God, and the will and mind of
God unto his people.

But to Communicate with those, that do deny the laying on of hands, will put
us out of that capacity; this our experience does witness to us. We might
speak much unto this, and of the opposition we had, when I was in such a
condition.

2. Because from those persons, who do not hold the Ordinances as they were
delivered, we are commanded to withdraw, 2 These. 3. 6. Now we command you
Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your selves
from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after the Tradition you
have received of us: yea a good ground we have to observe this Command, from
their opposition, in that they rail, print, speak, and dispute against the
truth, calling it a Doctrine from beneath, a counterfeit thing; which gives us
a good ground to observe the Apostles Exhortation, 1 Timothy 6. 5. From such
withdraw thyself: and certainly as we are to withdraw from those, who are evil
in their Conversation, so likewise from those, who do declare against that
which is part of the worship of God, yea a foundation-principle of his service.

3. Because laying on of hands, is a foundation-Doctrine, a principle upon
which a right constituted Church of Christ is built, Heb. 6. 1, 2. A Doctrine,
which was (not notionally, as many say, but) practically embraced by the first
Churches; as the Hebrews, the Samaritans, and the Ephesians, which were exactly
built according to the direction of Christ himself. Now this is generally
received, that though there may be Communion with persons, where differences
are in circumstantials; yet not where they are in fundamentals: and for this
reason, those who are Baptized, have refused Communion with the Independants;
because they err in a fundamental point, therefore they cannot build with
them: and is not this reason strong for us, because laying on of hands is a
foundation-Doctrine or principle, as well as Repentance, faith, Baptismes, and
Resurrection, and eternal Judgment? therefore this being a
foundation-principle, we ought not to build with those, who are destroyers
thereof: and therefore for this Reason, we ought not to Communicate with them.

4. Because they live in the Breach of, and in opposion against a Command of
God, Even this beginning-word of Christ; and so indeed to partake with them,
were to make our selves guilty of their sin. Now that they are such, that they
do so live, is plainly manifest by their writing, printing, preaching, and
disputing; Thus opposing this Law and oracle of God, Heb. 5. 12. and as they do
thus live in the Breach of a Command of God, an oracle, and a principle of
Christ Doctrine; so certain it is, that we cannot have Communion with them,
without transgressing the Command of the Spirit of God, where we are exhorted
to withdraw from such, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5.

5. Because where there is not an uniting in the principles of the foundation
of the service of Christ, there can be no safe or comfortable Communion: for
indeed Union is the ground of Communion, Amos 3. 3. Can two walk together,
except they are agreed? and says our Savior, Wherein two of you shall agree
on Earth as touching any thing that you shall ask, it shall be done for them of
my Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 18. 19. from whence it is plain, that where
there is no Union, no Agreement, there can be no fellowship, no walking
together, no asking the Father for any thing: for consider, how can we ask the
Spirit of God to be given, and that according to his promise, with or among
them who do oppose the means, to wit, laying on of hands? it is abomination unto
them; and therefore how can we have Communion with them, or they with us?

Surely, if things were rightly considered, our separating from them will be
found upon as good ground, if not better, then their separating from the
Independants so called: for wherein do they differ, but in Baptizing? the
practice of Baptism they deny not, though not rightly performed, nor applied;
But the practice of laying on of hands upon believers Baptized, as such, is
denied by our opposers.

Object. But now some may say, Though I am satisfied, that laying on of hands,
is an Ordinance of Christ; yet they are good men that I have Communion with,
such among whom I have found much comfort, therefore I cannot withdraw from
them.

1. We may take notice, as this is an Objection made by some amongst the
Baptized people, so likewise by some, that are Baptized, who walk with the
Independents, so called: O say they! they are good men, and we walk lovingly
together; therefore we cannot withdraw from them; not considering that in this,
they have no rule of Christ, and that God never gave unto persons such Liberty
of loving each other, as that thereby his ways and truths should be rejected
and neglected by them.

2. To the Objection, I answer, that by this thou do discover, how little
thy love is to the Lord Jesus Christ and his ways, and how low an esteem thou
have of them, that thou preferrest thy love to the Creature, before thy love to
thy Creator.

It is true, it is that which is thy duty, to love those with whom thou have
Communion, (yea thy Enemies,) but in this thy loving of them, thou must know,
that thou art to walk according to the Law or rule of Christ toward them; for
thy love toward them, must be subordinate to thy love unto God and his truth:
and to this purpose Christ speaks, Mat. 16. Luke 14. 26. that if any man loved
Father or Mother more then him, he is not worthy of him; yea, if a man does not
hate his own life, if once it come in Competition with Christ, or any one of
his Laws, that he can rather part with truth, then deny his life, he cannot be
Christ's Disciple.

Thou ought to praise thy duty in its place, and to perform it; but if once
it come in Competition with Christ or his truth, that thou must either suffer
the truth of Christ to fall, or else be accounted of by some, that thou have
little love in thee toward them; I say, if thou preferrest thy love toward
them before the truth, that notwithstanding Christ calls upon thee to be a
follower of him, yet thou will not, because it may make a breach in thy love
toward them, thou discoverst thy self to have little love in thee toward
Christ, and that thou art mistaken in thy right loving of them.

For thou can not better love them, then to be faithful unto God, wherein
thou will give them a good example; for that which is thy duty in this
particular, ought also to be theirs, if so convinced of the truth, as thou art.

Especially in the consideration of this, that there are several persons
amongst them, that have Apostatized from this truth and Doctrine of Christ,
that have declared for it, and have been obedient unto Christ therein; but now
deny it, and are great opposers of it: which if thou had not ground from the
Scripture to maintain separation from them, upon any other account, thou
could not according to order Communicate with them.

Object. But say some, I dare not deny them to be a Church of Christ, as they
say you do; and therefore they will charge me, as they have done others, that I
do greatly sin in departing from them.

1. I Answer, do thou follow Christ in his Word, according to the form and
order appointed by him in his house; and though they charge thee with departing
from them, God will Justify thee: for it is not their crying, the Temple of
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, that will excuse their disobedience, Ier. 7. 4.
for when truth is declared, he commands all men to receive it, and therefore
when it once comes to thy Soul, he requires thy obedience.

For to what end does God manifest his truth, by any poor Soul, by any of his
people; but that others should be obedient? consider, was it not ever that,
which followed that old principle of confusion, wherewith poor Souls were
frighted by them, if possible they could, into that state, wherein both matter
and form, subjects and order, were all contrary to the mind of God? Oh! what a
noise and cry did they make after poor Souls, who for conscience toward God
did separate from them? O, say they! they leave the Church; and O! what a great
evil would they make of this? thereby possessing the people, as if they had
done very wickedly. Not to go for further instance, Was not this the practice
of the Bishops and Prelates, and after them the Presbyterians, then the
Independants? and now it is come to be the practice of the Baptized people,
whereby it is manifest, that this is but one of the last shifts of a confused
principle. When they cannot overturn the truth, they will labor to lay
stumbling blocks in the ways of Gods people.

2. I Answer, though they look upon themselves to be a Church of Christ; yet
thou by the light of truth manifested to thy Soul, do see, that they are
short in a principle of the foundation thereof. Is not the Church of Christ the
house of God? and is not Repentance, faith, Baptismes, laying on of hands, the
Resurrection of the dead, and eternal Judgment; the foundation thereof, see
Heb. 6. 1, 2. what will you say to make void this truth? will you say, as many
do, Christ is the foundation? but is he any otherwise a foundation then in his
Doctrine as he is declared? and is not this his Doctrine or Teaching? does not
the Apostle, Heb. 6. 1. call it the Doctrine of Christ? and is not his Doctrine
one with himself? Surely Christ and his truth are one: and so far as a Soul
knows Christ, he will walk in obedience to him: and does not their disobedience
to this way of the Lord, discover the disorder they are in, that indeed they
build before the foundation is rightly laid, denying a principle thereof?

3. Whereas they say, we deny them to be a Church, it is not true; For we
desire not to enter Judgment, in things that are too deep for us. But this is
that we have said, and do still say, let them prove themselves a Church of
Christ: which if they can so do, we can prove them short in a
foundation-principle of the service thereof, and so disorderly.

For consider, is it according to the rule of Christ, to admit of persons,
though Baptized, to Communion, that shall say of a principle of the foundation,
of the service of God, upon which he should stand to go on to perfection, It is
a lie, that which Christ never taught, though it be in so many words declared?
Surely such a practice God will never own; neither dare we, lest he disown us.

But here I shall take liberty to write Mr. Colliers own Argument, for the
discovering of a true Church of Christ, in the first Page of his book of Right
constitution: says he, A true visible Church of Christ, consists both of
matter and form, or of subjects and order: for, says he, it is Christ's
Kingdom, and those subjects must be such visibly as Christ owns, and that form
and order according to Christ's Rule; or else, says he, it cannot be Christ's
Church.

Surely, if what Mr. Collier writes, and this truth of Christ, to wit, laying
on of hands, were rightly weighed, what could he have spoken more against
himself, and for us in this case? therefore let us try, seeing he has thus
spoken, whether he does own the form and order of Christ's house: which is
plainly manifest he does not; for in that book, as you may see, from the 70
Page to the end thereof, he opposes a principle of his Doctrine, a part of the
foundation of the service of Christ: but I wish the Lord may give him, and
others to see this truth of Christ, and that they may be followers of him
therein. I shall now conclude, leaving what I have written, to the Judgments of
all to whom it shall come, desiring, that they would with the noble Bereans,
search the Scriptures, to see if what I have said be so or no; that they would
seriously weigh, as in the sight of God, the things laid down in this
discourse, having their Eyes up toward God; knowing what is written, That they
which seek the Lord understand all things, Prove. 28. 5.

Further, my desire is, that if in their Consciences they do find any
convictions of the truth herein asserted, they would take heed of opposing of
it, and that, lest they be found fighters against God.

The End.
An ANSWER To a discourse containing 4 Chapters in opposition to this principle
of Christ's Doctrine, (to wit) laying on of hands upon believers Baptized, as
such.
I Having almost ended my former discourse for the press; it being a discovery
and vindication of the truth; there was presented to my hands a book (having no
Name thereunto) consisting of two sheets of paper, put forth, as it does appear
unto me, by several persons in opposition to this Ordinance of the Lord Jesus
Christ (to wit) laying on of hands upon believers Baptized, as such.

To which, as the Lord shall help me, (with as much soberness and moderation,
taking as little notice as possible I can, of their reproachful speeches of us,
and of the truth) according to the measure I have received, (having this
opportunity) give a brief answer thereunto, hoping it may more tend to the
Conviction of persons, it being particularly answered; although the substance
thereof is already answered in my book: likewise not doubting, but that other
Servants of Christ, who may be more able, will, as God shall give opportunity,
more fully vindicate his truth from the opposers thereof.

Their book, as I have already said, does consist of 4 Chapters.

First, of the several ends of laying on of hands.

2. What laying on of hands is not, and cannot be meant, Heb. 6. 2 verse.

3. What laying on of hands is, and must be meant there.

4. That the laying on of hands practiced by some in these days, on all
Baptized believers, was never Instituted, Commanded, nor practiced at all by
Jesus Christ or his Apostles, in all the New Testament.

Now their first Chapter contains, (according to their Judgment,) the several
ends of laying on of hands; and they are three. 1. For healing of the sick. 2.
For ministering or giving the Extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit. 3. For
ordaining and appointing of Officers.


Unto the first and last of these, I shall not now speak; having spoken my
Judgment and Conscience of them, in the beginning of my book, which I do hope,
is according unto truth.

And therefore shall now take a little notice of what is written, as to the
other particular; desiring the Reader to consider of what I have written to the
other two, in the beginning of my book.

And now whereas they lay down, and thereby would affirm, that laying on of
hands was for giving the Extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit; and for the
proof of this, they say that Peter and John, to this end, laid their hands upon
them at Samaria, Acts 8. 17, 18, 19.

I answer, first, that the end of this Ordinance is missed by the Author or
Authors of this book: for the end of this Ordinance is the promised Spirit,
which God will give to all those, who from the heart obey his Doctrine, are
followers of his teaching: for the gift of the Spirit is the promise of God to
all those who do obey him, Acts 2. 38, and 5. 32 verse. which promise of the
Spirit is the end of this Ordinance; which end also was assigned thereunto, see
Acts 8. 15. and to which end the Apostles did administer it, that those
persons, to wit, believers, who by their obedience were under this promise of
God, might receive it of God, whose gift this was, and who alone, not the
Apostles, did communicate it unto his people, as these Scriptures do witness,
Ephesians. 4. 6. Acts 5. 32. and 2. 33. Mat. 3. 11. John 14. 16, 17. and 15. 26.
and 16. 7.

2. I Answer, that the giving the Extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, was never
propounded as an end of laying on of hands; neither can our opposers prove it,
that persons by the submission to this Ordinance should be partakers of the
miraculous gifts of the Holy Spirit, or that persons were to expect this or
that particular gift thereof; but that as before, they might be partaker of the
Spirit of promise; that whereas now they were to join themselves, according to
their profession, with the body of Christ; so they might Act in the body,
according to the will of God.

Object. But now some may say, By laying on of hands, they received the Holy
Spirit, in an Extraordinary manner.

Answ. That they did receive the Holy Spirit in more then an ordinary manner,
by laying on of hands, I do grant: but that the Extraordinary gifts of the Holy
Spirit is the end of this Ordinance, I do deny.

For did they receive the Holy Spirit, in a more then ordinary manner, through
this Ordinance? Acts 19. 6.

So they did through the preaching of the Word, Acts 10. 44. yea, and through
prayer, Acts 4. 31. which if considered, we shall find the Extraordinary gifts
of the Holy Spirit, to be the end no more of laying on of hands, then of
preaching the Word and Prayer: they may be an effect or fruit of each of them,
but not the end: for poor Souls, by their obedience unto Christ, are made
partakers of the Spirit of promise, which is the Producer of such effects, or
fruits in them.

3. We may observe, that the foundation of this discourse being missed, and in
the first place, that which is untrue affirmed, (to wit, that laying on of
hands was for giving the Extraordinary gifts of the Spirit,) it is no marvail
they should run themselves into so many mistaken understandings of those that
practice it, and the hard Censures they put upon them, with their Erroneous
Judgments about this truth, which I pray God forgive them, for they know not
what they do: and so I might put an end to their first Chapter; only

I shall take a little notice of the weight of those Reasons which they bring
to prove, that the end of this Ordinance is the miraculous gifts of the Holy
Spirit.

And their great Reason is, because the Samaritans, Acts the 8. were such as
did believe, verse. 12. and did receive the Word of God, verse. 14. and were
Baptized, verse. 16. all this, say they, could not be, unless they had already
received the ordinary measures of the Spirit.

Answ. First, I cannot but take notice, how this Reason does hold forth, that
there is no receiving of the Holy Spirit by that Soul, who is already Partaker
of the Spirit, but what is in an Extraordinary manner; which how false this is,
I shall leave to the Experience of believers to prove, yea, to the Raisers of
this Reason, if so be they have the Spirit of God.

2. Whereas they say, we cannot believe without the Spirit; I Answer, that
unto those who do believe, who receive the Word of God, and are Baptized, is
the promise of the Spirit made: see Galat. 3. 14. that the blessing of Abraham
might come on the Gentiles, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit
through faith. Why, we cannot believe without the Spirit; yet, through
believing, those that do believe, are made partakers of the promise thereof:
see likewise John 7. 38, 39. says our Savior, he that believes on me, out of
his belly shall flow Rivers of living water; this he spoke of the Spirit, which
they that did believe should receive: from whence I might Reason as before. But
further, we may observe, that this promise of the Spirit the Apostle does annex
unto faith and Baptism, Acts 2. 38. where says the Apostle, Repent and be
Baptized for the Remission of sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy
Spirit.

Query. Now I would Query of you, was this promise proper only to some
believers, or all believers? if you say, To some, as your principle must lead
you to; for you must either tie it to some in the Apostles times, or else to
the time of the first Apostles, who received the Word at the mouth of Christ,
to give unto us: then I Answer,

Answ. The following words may stop your mouths: for the promise has a larger
extent then you dream of; it was unto them, and their Children, and all that
are afar of, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call.

From whence I mind, the promise of the Spirit is as much ours, (according to
the wise disposing of God,) who knows best in what manner to bestow it on his
people, as it was theirs.

And whereas you boast of parts and gifts, beyond those that have practiced
this Ordinance; yet let me tell you, that herein is much vanity, and your
boasting is not good. For though God injoyne us to the use of Ordinances, yet
himself is not tied thereunto: therefore if your gifts be greater, learn to
make a right use of them, for Gods glory, and his peoples comfort, and not to
oppose the truth. Surely, there will be one day a sad account given of the
gifts God has given unto men, who will be found, that in stead of making a
right and good improvement of them, for Gods glory, and his peoples comfort and
encouragement; they have made a contrary use of them, and that to their trouble
and discouragement, and with their lies have made the hearts of the righteous
sad, Ezekiel. 13. 22.

I do believe, there were in the Apostles days, those that boasted as much of
gifts as your selves, which caused a disesteem of the Apostles among the
Churches, 1 Cor. 4. 10. says the Apostle Paul, (speaking of himself and of
Apollo, who were Apostles of Christ, as you may see, comparing the 6 verse. with
the 9. and 10 verse.) We are fools for Christ's sake, but you are wise in Christ;
we are weak, but you are strong; you are honorable, but we are despised. So
others, they had a Name to live, and others they said they were Rich, and had
need of nothing; but God had a reckoning with them, Rev. 3. 1, 2, 3. and the
16. and 17. verses. So there is in this our day, those who are great opposers
of some truths you your selves profess, and yet in parts and gifts not inferior
unto you; but alas, what Reasoning is this? the learned Scribes and Pharisees
in Christ's time, cried out, Ioh. 7. 49. those that knew not the Law were
cursed; as if indeed wisdom must only center in their breasts, or die with them.
Now has not your boasting of gifts, something of this nature in it, to beget a
disesteem in believers hearts of this truth? spiritual gifts are such things
believers should covet after, for they are very useful, 1 Cor. 14. 1. But
surely this parts and gifts without wisdom, which is profitable to direct to
make a right and good use of them, does but puff up the soul, as is too
apparent this day. Therefore our desire is, not so much to mind the measure of
receiving, as making a good use of what we do receive, and keeping close to the
appointments of our God, wherein is our safety; because he has there promised
his presence, and will there give forth his loves, Esa. 64. 5. Cant. 7. 12.

So that I hope those that have not their hearts prejudiced against this truth
of Christ, may plainly see your mistake, in making that the end of this
Ordinance which is not, though it may be an effect or fruit thereof, as I have
already proved it was likewise an effect or fruit of other Ordinances of
Christ, as of Preaching and Prayer. But let us further consider, is not this a
wile whereby Satan labors to make void this truth of Christ, as he has done
to others? thus cunningly he works, when Baptism, as to the right subjects and
practice thereof, is found out: O, says he, it is to believers and their
Children; and why? for circumcision was to Abraham and his seed: and thus would
keep up that old relick and Pillar of Babylon, and that practice which from the
beginning it was not so: Neither is now, blessed be God, the mystery of
Iniquity so secret, But that God has abundantly discovered her, and made bare
the skirts thereof; and it is now through the good hand of God plainly
discovered, that there is now no seed of Abraham according to the flesh, but
the natural Jews, who are beloved for their Fathers sake; yet have no right to
promise or Ordinances, without believing in our Lord Jesus Christ, until the
Word of God be fulfilled, that is, the time expired, that the fullness of the
Gentiles being come in, then all Israel shall be saved; according as it is
written, Romans 11. Chapt.

There are other reasons, which they do urge, though to as little purpose; but
the substance of them being answered in this, and fully confuted in my book; I
shall pass them over, and proceed to their second Chapter;

Which does contain (according to their Judgments,) which of those laying on of
hands is not, and cannot be meant, Heb. 6. 2.

Now before you resolve this Question, you grant that a laying on of hands is a
principle of Religion, and a part of the foundation of Christian building, Heb.
5. 12. and 6. 1, 2.

And your Reason is, because the Holy Spirit by this Penman, does Reckon it
amongst those principles of Religion, as repentance, faith, Baptism, the
Resurrection, and eternal Judgment; and these granted by all under the least
profession of Christianity, to be the foundation-Doctrines.

I have thought good to mind your Reason, because it does fully prove laying
on of hands to be a principle of Religion, and a part of the foundation of
Christian building.

And therefore in the first place, it is well that the Word of the Lord has so
much weight upon you, that you dare not deny it; but that you do confess it to
be a foundation-principle, a part of the foundation of Christian building. I am
glad to see you thus far own the truth; which makes me hope, you may in time
come to a fuller acknowledgement thereof, and to see wherein you are mistaken;
and that when your demises and denials will be found too light, being weighed
in the Balance of the Sanctuary.

2. I shall examine, which of those laying on of hands, you say is not, and
cannot be that meant, Heb. 6. 2.

And first, you say it cannot be meant, of laying on hands for healing; and
that for these Reasons. 1. Because the gift of healing, by laying on of hands,
is now ceased. But you might better have answered, because this laying on of
hands was never laid down a foundation-principle: and this is that, which if
you please may be work for you, or others, who are more of that mind then you
are, to make appear, that ever it was so laid down, as a foundation-principle.
As for laying on of hands for healing, I do grant, that no one ought to do,
unless he is partaker of that gift of healing, and so your second Reason is
very true. 2. Because a foundation-principle concerns the whole, every part of
the building, to support and uphold it. And therefore I say, if there were any
that had this particular gift of faith, the healing of one particular member
could not concern the whole body as a principle. How does this confute Mr
Harrisons Arguments in the 8 page of his book, which he draws from Mark 16. and
the 18 v. that laying on of hands for healing is the principle mentioned Heb.
6. 2. but that book of his was fully answered by Mr Griffith. 3. I would have
you know, that this was not the way those that did believe, and were Baptized,
did wait upon Christ in for healing: for amongst them, as a Church, miracles
were not wrought, but for the conviction of unbelievers, 1 Cor. 14. 22. For
signs were not for those, who did believe, but for those that believed not: But
the way of God for believers, to wait upon him in, in the time of sickness, was
prayer and anointing with Oil, as in the beginning of my book I have
discovered.


But secondly, you say, that laying on of hands for giving the Extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Spirit, cannot be here meant, and that for these Reasons: 1.
Because the power of giving the Extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit is now
ceased. 2. Because this laying on of hands cannot be the principle, Heb. 6.
because that laying on of hands is there called a Doctrine, verse. 1. and 2. 3.
Because if this laying on of hands, (to wit) upon believers Baptized, as such,
were the principle; then this Church of the Hebrews, the first constituted
Church of Christ in all the New Testament after Christ's Ascension, which is
(say you) the same with that, in Acts the first and second Chapters, had wanted
a principle in Religion; which were very absurd to Imagine. These be your
Reasons, that the laying on of hands we practice, cannot be that meant, Heb. 6.
2. Unto these Reasons, as the Lord shall help me, I shall particularly give
answer.


First, taking notice that here is still affirmed, that which never will be
proved, but is already disproved, that laying on of hands was only for the
giving the Miraculous gifts of the Holy Spirit; Therefore I say, as I have made
to appear, the giving of the Extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit, was never
assigned the end of this Ordinance.

But you say, the power of giving the Holy Spirit in the Extraordinary gifts
thereof, is now ceased.

1. To which I answer, first, if the Apostles had power to give the Holy
Spirit, through laying on of hands, then they had through the preaching of the
Word; but though through their preaching the Word, the Holy Spirit was given,
Acts 10. 44. as well as through laying on of hands, Acts 19. 6. yet it was
never in the Apostles power, to bestow it upon any, as is Ignorantly imagined,
and as I have already made to appear; and therefore so to think, were absurd
and ridiculous: for it is the gift of God, Acts 5. 32. and Acts 8. 20.

2. I answer, you do much mistake your selves, for the power of giving the Holy
Spirit, is not ceased, for Gods hand is not shortened, he is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever: he that is unchangeable, is the giver thereof;
the Lord Jesus received of his Father this promise, and this promise he has
given, and does give, and will yet make good unto his people, Ezech. 39. 29.
Acts 2. 38, 39.

But to strengthen your Reason, you say that this appears to be ceased, by the
practice thereof at this day: for though so many persons have hands laid upon
them to this end, yet those Extraordinary gifts have never followed to any one
of them; but both they and the administrators are, and remain as other men.

Answ. First, mind your absurdity: the power is not ceased, God is the same.

2. Whereas you say, we practice it to this end; I answer,

That here again you are mistaken, though in your last Chapter you are pleased
to say, that some of us do so; which is that I never yet heard to be the
Judgment of any in this practice, and therefore I suppose you wrong us.

3. But you say, For all this practice, we remain as other men. I answer,

It is very true, but we may easily see your sore, which I wish the Lord may
heal among you, and that is this; if you could see a sign or a wonder, you
would believe: But take heed you may not be as unworthy of it, as the
generation unto whom Christ spoke, Mat. 12. 38, 39. and 16, 1, 2, 3. and 4.

For my self, it was my Judgment and practice in this way of God, that I ought
to be obedient, not for what I should receive, but because the Lord Jesus
taught and left such a way for believers to wait upon him in. Yet I would have
you know, I did never yield obedience unto Christ in any of his ways, but I
did endeavor to exercise faith upon him therein, and that for his presence and
blessing with me in them: and this I must tell you, that it is a
rotten-principle, and that which God will never approve of, for any one to
yield obedience to him, merely because they shall receive such or such a gift
from him.

And I wish this may not be an evil of many Professors in this our day; not
only those, who have been in our practice, but in yours also; who have upon
such grounds submitted, propounding such or such benefits to themselves: then
missing of their ends, they have been offended, and so have rejected the Word
of the Lord, and the good ways of God.

Alas, we may say, when we have done all, we are unprofitable Servants, and
having done the whole will of God, we have need of patience.

We do confess we are weak, and possible may come under that reproof the
Apostle gives the Hebrew Church, (who were under this principle of Christ's
Doctrine, as well as we,) that for the time we might have been Teachers; yet we
have need to be taught again: but this is our Comfort, that God does in any
measure accept of us; and though we have but a little strength, yet it is our
duty to hold fast the Word of the Lord; and in so doing, we are confident he
will approve of us, Rev. 3. 8, 9, 10. But this we know, that the people of God,
though never so much endued with his wisdom, were still fools in the wise
Worlds account, as possible we may be in your eyes: and though we are so
accounted by you, yet learn to know, that God makes use of foolish instruments.

And therefore farther to this, I may say, that what God bestows upon us in
this, or any of his ways, It is our duty to be thankful to him for: and if we
can learn this lesson, to make a right use of what we have received, we may be
confident of receiving more from God.

Likewise to call this a principle, (to wit, laying on of hands upon believers
Baptized, as such) is not to grant, as you say, that one of the
foundation-stones is now lost; but is indeed again restored, and that to it is
right use, which has been for a long season in a wrong manner applied, and now
by you wholly rejected.

Your second Reason is, that this laying on of hands cannot be the principle,
because this laying on of hands is there called a Doctrine; but that laying on
of hands to give the Holy Spirit, was never once taught in all the New
Testament, no not by them that practiced it.

I answer, first, taking notice that the opposers of this truth of Christ agree
not; for Mr Harrison in his Touchstone, as he calls it, of this truth, affirms
the laying on of hands, in Heb. 6. 2. to be meant upon persons for healing,
which is the laying on of hands spoken of and promised, in Mark 16. 18. verse.
and Mr Kiffin, he affirmed in his dispute with Doctor Chamberlain, that laying
on of hands, in Acts 8. and Acts 19. 6. is not a Doctrine practicable to all
Saints; but was dispensed for the confirmation of the Gospel: and this is Mr
Per^yes Judgment, as you may see in the 19 page of his book; and so they
understand Heb. 6. 2. verse. to hold forth: so that the one holds forth laying
on of hands for healing, to be the foundation-principle, Heb. 6. 2. and the
other two, to be for the Confirmation of the Gospel, and so a
foundation-principle, as minded to the Hebrews.

But now as Mr. Harrison and Mr. Kiffin differ each from other; so do these
differ likewise from them: for say they, laying on of hands here, in Heb. 6. 2.
was upon persons to office. All which, as you have heard, and may plainly see,
comparing Spiritual things together, are untrue; but more of this in the next
Chapter.

2. You say, this laying on of hands (to wit, upon believers as such) cannot be
the principle, and that because the laying on of hands, in Heb. 6. 1, 2. is
there called a Doctrine; which laying on of hands, you mind was upon persons
to office.

Answ. I do grant, that laying on of hands upon persons to office, is the
Doctrine or Teaching of Christ, his will and mind unto his people; wherein
they ought, as they have occasion, to be exercised, and that for the good of
the body of Christ: But I do deny it, according to the answers already given in
my book; and yet shall mind unto this, in the 3 Chapt. that laying on of hands
upon persons to office, was ever laid down a foundation-principle; Neither is
it your Reasons in your 3 Chapt. that will make it so to appear, and therefore
cannot be that meant, Heb. 6. 2.

3. You say, the laying on of hands upon believers as such, for the receiving
of the Spirit, was never once taught in all the New Testament; no not by them
that practiced it.

Answ. First, that the Apostles did teach this unto believers as such, see the
second Reason or ground, in my book, laid down for the proof of this truth of
Christ, which you may take notice of for the Confutation of this Assertion.

2. I answer further, that this were very strange, that the Apostles should
administer in this way unto believers, whereunto believers as such were
obedient, (as I have sufficiently proved,) and yet this way or practice by the
Apostles was never taught them; they not once (say you) taught or instructed
thereunto: what may we gather from this Teaching of yours? why surely this,
that there were some ways, wherein the Apostles did administer, and whereunto
believers as such were obedient; wherein they knew their duty, and the Apostles
meanings, without their Teaching. O! that you might see your weakness in this
your striving against truth.

3. That the Apostles did administer unto believers in this way, and that this
practice of theirs believers were obedient to, I think you dare not deny. Now
this being that as has been plainly manifested to be the teaching, not only
of the Apoles, but of Christ himself, from whom they received their authority
for what they did; then this being so, for you to affirm the Apostles never
taught this unto believers, Now what is this, but to put a lie upon the Spirit
of God, and lay a stumbling block in the ways of his people?

4. Let Us mind further, was this Ordinance performed without prayer? Acts 8.
15. they prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Spirit. Now were
these believers at Samaria in the Expectation and practice of that the Apostles
never taught them? Surely, you have cause to be humbled for this your wresting
of, and deceitful dealing with the Word of the Lord.

Again, herein you may see, what confusion God leaves you to, who are opposers
of this truth: for Mr. Kiffin, he affirms in his dispute with Doctor
Chamberlain, that though it were a principle and Doctrine of Christ, (to wit,
laying on of hands upon believers,) yet ought not to be practiced; but you deny
it to be either principle or Doctrine. Surely by this we may see, that Satan
will leave no stone unturned, if possible he can overturn the truth.

Your third Reason is, because if this laying on of hands (to wit, upon
believers Baptized as such) were the foundation-principle, then this very
Church of the Hebrews, the first constituted Church in the New Testament after
Christ's Ascension, (this Church being the same with that, Acts 1. and 2 Chapt.)
had wanted a principle in Religion; which were very absurd to imagine; for they
had not laying on of hands to this end, Acts the 8. being the first place, that
ever this was practiced: and surely in all matters about worship, the written
word must be our Rule, and to the Scriptures silence we must give consent,
according to the Proverb: where God has not a Mouth to speak, we must not have
an ear to hear.

To which long discourse or Reason of yours, whereby the truth is evaded, and
something Eclipsed,

I answer, that this Church of Christ did wait upon God in this way, contrary
to what you have spoken: and this I do affirm: for if they continued in the
Apostles Doctrine, then in this practice; it being that the Apostles did teach,
(as before is plainly discovered in the second Reason; laid down in my book,
for the proof of this truth, likewise in the answer there to an Objection,) but
they did continue in the Apostles Doctrine, Acts 2. 42. therefore in their
obedience to this truth: read the 41. and 42 verses.

And therefore, Acts 8. was not the first place that ever it was practiced;
Neither were they in Acts 2. without this principle in Religion; for as I have
said, how should they continue in the Apostles Doctrine, and yet short in the
principles thereof? and therefore the mind of God being thus declared, it
plainly discovers his mouth speaking to you, and that your ears should be
obedient.

But you proceed further, and say, they had not laying on of hands to this end,
because they received the Extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit without it.

I answer, first taking notice you say, that those in Acts the 1. and 2. were
not under it but: this, as before, is false: but if your saying were true, that
they were not under it, then I pray you, to what end did they receive it? why,
surely by your Reason they did not receive it. Yet you say, they had not laying
on of hands to this end, because they received the Extraordinary gifts of the
Holy Spirit without it; and so instance Acts 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. verse.

To which I answer, they that are there said to receive the Holy Spirit, were
under the promise thereof, without any more Baptizing with water: this was the
promise, and the Command of Christ unto them, Luke 24. 49, 50. Behold, I will
send the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye at Jerusalem, until you be
endued with power from on high: and He led them out, as far as to Bethany, and
lift up his hands and blessed them: and Acts 1. 5. (says Christ to his
Disciples,) John truly Baptized with water, but you shall be Baptized with the
Holy Spirit, not many days hence: see verse. the 4.

Now though it were thus with the Apostles, and those who were immediately
under this promise; yet I do affirm, that those three thousand, who are in Acts
2. 41. and 42. verse. there said gladly to receive the Word, and to be Baptized,
and were added to this Church, were under this practice; and that, 1. Because
they (two wit, those spoken of in the 41. and 42. verse.) were not immediately
under the promise, (as those spoken of in the 2, 3, 4. and 5 verse.) but I may
say conditionally, as the Apostle says verse. 38. and 39. Repent and be
Baptized for the Remission of sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy
Spirit: for (says he) the promise is to you, and to your children, and to all
that are afar off, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call; where you
may see, he does annex the end of this Ordinance, (to wit) the promised Spirit,
unto faith and Baptism. 2. If the Apostles did not teach laying on of hands
unto these Jews, Acts 2. 41. they had been defective in a principle of Christ's
Doctrine, of what Christ taught unto them, as Heb. 6. 1.


But the Apostles did teach laying on of hands to these Jews, as Heb. 5. and
12. compared with the 6. 1, 2. verse. does manifest; and therefore were not
defective in Christ's Doctrine: which Hebrews by your own confession, were the
Jews spoken of, in Acts 2.

Now I would query of you, whether you will still affirm, (upon due
consideration of this also)

That the Apostle Peter, having told the Jews, in Acts 2. 38. that God would
make good this promise of giving his Spirit unto them, upon their obedience
unto him, whether you will still affirm, that he did not Act in the same
manner, for their being made partakers thereof, as he did with those at
Samaria, Acts 8. or as Paul did with those at Ephesus, Acts 19. or upon Timothy
at Derbe or Lystra, as in my book I have minded.

Surely, I think, upon due consideration, you dare not so affirm; Neither deny
what I have written, and herein queryed, to be truth.

So that it does appear in the conclusion of the Examination of your second
Chapt. that you are mistaken in the laying on of hands, which, say you, is not
and cannot be meant, Heb. 6. 2.

Your 3. Chapter contains, according to your mistaken Judgment, what laying on
of hands is and must be meant, Heb. 6. 2.

And therefore you begin: For the better resolving of this Question, we must
take notice, that it is laying on of hands here in the singular Number;
therefore can be but one laying on of hands, that is called here a principle;
and not more, as some would have it; for then it should be layings on of hands
in the plural Number.

These are all your own Words, which I do the rather cite, because I do own
them to be words of truth: but I pray you, who would have it in the plural
Number? why surely your selves; and therefore take notice, that herein you are
also divided, and agree not in crucifying of the truth; see the 7 Page of Mr
Harrisons Touchstone.

But now, say you, this being considered, we must remember what went before,
that it is not laying on of hands for healing, nor for giving the Extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Spirit.

I Answer, that it was not for healing, I have before proved; and your labor
in the proof of this, might have been spared, unless it had been by any of us
affirmed: But that it was for the giving of the gift of the Spirit, do affirm:
for the gift of the Spirit is the promise of God unto believers Baptized, as
such, Acts 2. 38.

Now whereas you would have the Extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit, to be
the end of this Ordinance you are still mistaken, as I have already made to
appear, that it is the end no more of this ordinance, then of the preaching of
the word and prayer: it may be an effect of them, or a fruit of the Spirit of
God, being given therein; but the proper end of neither of them.

But say you, laying on of hands, in Heb. 6. 2. must be meant for the ordaining
of officers: and this you labor to make appear by several Arguments.

1. Say you, it must be laying on of hands for healing the sick, or for giving
the Extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit, or for ordaining of officers; but
neither for healing the sick, nor for giving the Extraordinary gifts of the
Holy Spirit; therefore for ordaining of officers.

Answ. Your first proposition I do grant, (considering what I have spoken;
wherein you have missed the right end of laying on of hands, which is the
foundation-principle,) for not the Extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, but the
Spirit it self is the end of this Ordinance. This considered, I do grant, that
one of those 3. laying on of hands, is the foundation-principle; yet if there
be but 3 ends of laying on of hands in the Scripture, then why did any of you
query about that wicked laying on of hands in Luke 21. 12. verse. as you may see
Mr. Griffith takes notice thereof in the 38 Page of his book of the 6
principles.

Now to your second proposition: say you, it is neither for healing the sick,
nor for giving the Holy Spirit; has been already proved in your second Chapter.

To which I answer, that it was not for healing the sick, I have already
granted. But that it was for the giving of the Holy Spirit, I have as you may
plainly see, in my Exposition of your second Chapt. plainly discovered; and
therefore your conclusion proves false, that it must be for appointing of
officers.

2. Your second Argument, that laying on of hands upon officers, must be here
meant; because laying on of hands, Heb. 6. 1. is called a Doctrine, and
therefore must be a laying on of hands, which is somewhere else taught; but the
other laying on of hands was never once taught.

Answ. I have fully answered this Argument, as may be plainly seen in my Answer
to your second Reason, in your second Chapter; to which I shall for the
confutation of this Argument refer you.

But only thus much, I would further mind you, that this laying on of hands
upon believers, as such, was the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6. 1. The Word or
Oracle of God, Heb. 1. 12. verse. and that for this Reason; because God did bear
witness to it by his Spirit, Acts 8. 17. and 19. 6. which if compared with Heb.
2. 4. is plainly discovered, that what God did bear witness to by the gift of
his Spirit, was confirmed to be the Word of Christ, which must not be
neglected, as in the 2. 3. verse.

Further, to answer a query (of your own making) you seek to resolve, at the
heels of your Argument: I shall propound this Query.

Query. Whether persons ignorance of laying on of hands, be a sufficient ground
to deny any one the administration of Baptism.

To which I answer, No; and that for this Reason:

Because we do suppose young Professors to be Ignorant; and therefore if any
one does propose himself for obedience unto Christ, and that in Baptism, he is
to be Baptized and instructed; according to the Commission our Savior gives,
Mat. 28. 19. and 20. Teaching them, (to wit, those that are Baptized) to
observe all things, etc. But if any after they be Baptized and Instructed,
shall refuse submission to other of the Commands of Christ, either through
ignorance or obstinacy, they are not to be Communicated with, but to be sharply
reproved.

And therefore whereas you say, it is sore against our wills, if we may not
suddenly lay hands on those we do Baptize; if by the Word suddenly, you do
mind a time for persons to be instructed, that you do allow of Instruction to
come between their being Baptized, and having hands laid upon them, then we do
grant it; for there is no soul, that desires to follow Christ, But is our
desire, they should receive and walk in obedience to the whole Doctrine of
Christ.

Further, I cannot but take notice, how confident you are that laying on of
hands to office, in Acts 13. 23. was enjoined and Commanded by the Holy Spirit,
and that the laying on of hands upon believers, was never in the least
commanded by the Holy Spirit.

Answ. Surely, It is not there said so, and therefore you do but suppose it to
be so; for is there any Command expressed in those verses, for that practice? I
grant there is Example, which is of weight, and ought to be followed:

But whereas you say, we have no Command for the laying on of hands upon
believers; Surely, if such a Command as here you bring, would have served you,
your mouths had been long before this stopped; for is there not as much command
from the Apostles practice in these Scriptures, Acts 8. 17. and 19. 6. as there
is for what you affirm, from Acts 13. 3. But this know, for what I now plead,
we have Command as well as Example, as is fully discovered in answer to this
Objection made by you, (to wit,) that we have no command for laying on of hands
upon believers Baptized as such.

3. Your third Argument, because this laying on of hands, (to wit) on officers,
this Church of the Hebrews had practiced amongst them, Act. 6. 6. they laid
their hands upon the Deacons to assign them to office; but none of the other
laying on of hands was practiced amongst them, that you find.

I Answer first, to the first part of your Argument: that this laying on of
hands (to wit, upon officers) was practiced in this Church of the Hebrews, I do
grant, and so ought to be the practice of all Churches in this matter of
appointing officers; it being the way and order of God in his house, according
as they shall find occasion thereof.

But that this laying on of hands was ever laid down the foundation-principle
in Heb. 6. 2. I do deny:

1. Because laying on of hands in Acts 6. 6. was (as I have minded in my book)
upon particular men, who were set a part for particular offices, and that for
the good of the Church of Christ; this was not to Babes, but strong men: but
the Apostle reckons up the Hebrews Babes, Heb. 5. 12, 13. but these were strong
men, who were fit to be employed in the work of the Ministry, such as the
Apostle speaks of in Heb. 5. 14. Who by Reason of use, had their senses
exercised to discern both good and evil. Such who were gone beyond those spoken
of in the 12. and 13 verse. being in a Capacity of Teaching others, and
therefore this laying on of hands cannot be that meant, Heb. 6. 2.

But we may safely conclude, that laying on of hands upon believers, for the
receiving of the Holy Spirit, may be here meant, and that for these Reasons. 1.
Because every Babe is capable thereof; which they are not of the former. 2.
Because every Babe has need thereof; which he has not of the former. 3.
Because we find Babes in the practice thereof, Acts 8. 17. Acts 19. 6. yea,
the Hebrews, when Babes, were in this practice; they learnt it in that
condition, Heb. 5. 12, 13.


2. Because officers are not for the being, but the well-being of a Church of
Christ. When things are not in such a Capacity, as in their beginning, to watch
over one another; then they are to consider of some amongst themselves,
according to their wisdom, (who are faithful) into whose hands, in the Name of
Christ, they give authority, committing the Charge of the house of God unto
them.

Also we find the foundation of the service of God laid, and a house unto God
built, before there were officers chosen amongst them, as these Scriptures do
witness, Acts 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. Chapt. 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5.

And therefore, laying on of hands upon persons to office, is not the
foundation-principle minded in Heb. 6. 2.

To the second part of your proposition, whereas you say, that none of the
other laying on of hands was practiced amongst them: this is false; for the
contrary has been already proved, that the Jews in Acts the 2. were under it;
yea, they were in the practice thereof, as it was milk for Babes, Heb. 5. 12.
so that, (as your former Arguments did not,) neither does this prove the laying
on of hands upon persons to office, to be the foundation-principle, Heb. 6. 2.
verse.

4. Your fourth Argument is this. Because this laying on of hands (to wit) upon
officers, only remains in force; the other two not capable to be practiced,
nor have been for many hundred of years.

1. Whereas you say, this laying on of hands, (to wit, upon officers) only
remains to be practiced:

To which I answer, you are herein mistaken; For, as has been already
manifest, laying on of hands upon believers as such, being an Ordinance of
Christ, is still in force for their obedience, and therefore capable to be
practiced.

2. Whereas you say, that this laying on of hands upon believers as such, has
not been capable of practice for many hundred of years;

I Answer, it is very true; but let us consider what is the Reason that this
Ordinance of Christ was not capable to be practiced, is not the same why other
Ordinances of Christ were incapable of practice; was it not because of that
confusion, or Mystery of Iniquity, that has long reigned, and does to this day?

3. I answer, if the promise of God, which is the end of this Ordinance (to
wit, laying on of hands upon believers as such,) be now made good upon his
people, then they are capable of this Ordinance.

But the promise of God is still made good unto his people, Acts 2. 38. it
being made unto them: for Christ is the same Yesterday, to day, and for ever;
and his Word, yea and Amen. Likewise this Ordinance was the way or means
through which God made good his promise, as is plainly seen, Acts 8. 17. and
19. 6.

Therefore I conclude, they are capable of this Ordinance: and therefore
neither does this Argument of yours, serve the purpose you bring it to.

5. Your fifth Argument; because this laying on of hands (to wit, upon
officers) concerns the whole Church, which is necessary a principle should do;
but the other do not concern the whole, as I have showed.

To which I answer,

1. That there are many things that do concern the whole Church of Christ,
which are no principles of the foundation; as for Instance, breaking of Bread,
with many other duties, (which may be minded) does concern the whole, and yet
no principle of the foundation; and therefore this considered, your Argument is
void.

2. Whereas you say, it does concern the whole body as a principle:

But I pray, how does your Argument make it to appear, that it is one of the
principles, Heb. 6. 2. verse. which if your Argument were good, it should do.

I do grant, that laying on of hands upon officers, does concern the whole
body, (and that thus) God having appointed this way and order in his house, for
setting persons apart for office. Now this way and order the Church of Christ
ought to maintain; and this does concern them as well as a principle of the
foundation does concern them, which yet is not the principle, Heb. 6. 2. and
therefore you are mistaken; for I have already showed you, how laying on of
hands upon believers as such, does concern the whole body, yea every particular
member thereof, as the principle, Heb. 6. 2. and that as they are Babes in
Christ: which the other in this sense does not; but to some particulars, who
are strong men, as is before minded, though of concernment to the whole.

3. Whereas you say, you have showed how the other does not concern the whole,
you may by what I have said, plainly see your mistake, (which I wish the Lord
may show unto you,) for laying on of hands upon believers, as such, does
concern the whole body, not only as a principle, but as the principle, as is
before discovered.

But you have a seeming Reason to prove your Argument, which is, because every
member is bound to live under the Government of the Church, and to be obedient
to their officers, to whom the rule and care of the whole Church is committed;
and therefore this must be the principle, Heb. 6. 2.

Answ. To which I answer, granting your proposition, yet denying your
conclusion: because it is every ones duty to maintain communion with the Church
in breaking of Bread, does it therefore follow that breaking of Bread is a
foundation-principle?

Thus you may see the weakness of your Reasons, which you bring to prove laying
on of hands upon persons to office, to be the foundation-principle, Heb. 6. 2.

As for your Phrase, of laying on of hands upon persons to office, that it
holds forth the Government of the Church: I shall not at this time enter the
debate thereof; though I do Judge there is some exception in it, as it is laid
down by you.

But you further say, to enforce what you have spoken, that this is the very
order of the principles, as they are laid down, Heb. 6. 2.

I Answer, that here again you are mistaken: for laying on of hands upon
persons to office, is no foundation-principle, as I have already proved.

And therefore what the principle is we contend for, which is indeed that in
order there laid down; I shall further clear unto you by this Argument.

That which was administered next in order after Baptism, is the
foundation-principle. But laying on of hands upon believers Baptized, as such,
was administered next in order after Baptism; and therefore the
foundation-principle, as it is laid down, Heb. 6. 2.

1. That it was administered next in order after Baptism, is very plain from
Acts 8. 17. and 19. 6. Where when they were Baptized, they had hands laid upon
them: and in this very order it is laid down, in Heb. 6. 1, 2.

2. That this laying on of hands was upon believers Baptized as such, is
likewise plain from those places of Scripture; and therefore this laying on of
hands must be there meant, the foundation-principle, in Heb. 6. 2.

And so in the next place, I say with you, that Baptism and laying on of hands
is necessary to a right and orderly Church-constitution: but whereas you say,
Baptism was to admit believers into the Church, (if you mean so as to join
them members of the body, then) I do deny it: for their addition to the Church,
followed after their Baptism, as I have fully proved in my book, ( in Answer
to an Objection, following my second Reason given for the proof of this truth,)
from Acts 2. 42.

Lastly, Whereas you say, that this is the Judgment of most Modern and later
VVriters upon this Text, Heb. 6. 2. for which you instance Doctor Gouge,
Wilson, Trap, and Cartwright;

Answ. I fear you being so much learned in these men's Judgments, makes you the
less knowing, in the Scriptures.

2. Had you had sufficient Testimony for what you said from the Scripture, as
in your Reasons you pretend to have, then what need you instance these men's
Judgments; unless you did think, (as I think you do not,) that what they spoke
were Oracles? and therefore,

3. Does not this discover; in some measure, the weakness of your Reasons or
arguments before minded, for what in this Chapter you have affirmed? Surely, by
this your arguments were not good, that you must run to these men's Judgments;
and I wonder, (you having recorded this Testimony for your Judgment in your
third Chapter,) you were not ashamed (in your fourth Chapter,) to declare, that
our best argument for this practice, is the Common Prayer book, if the
Judgments of men should end this controversy: unless you do Judge these men
you bring, did not love the Common Prayer book, or there were not amongst those
that did love it, men partakers of as much wisdom, as these you instance.

Now what would you say, if I should now instance, that laying on of hands
according to the sense I have minded, was the Judgments of as good men,
according to the test, (although it was by them wrongly applied,) as those you
do bring: will you say, that this is therefore true? I do think you would not,
otherwise you would not have instanced the Common Prayer book: well, though
this may be done, yet I must tell you, that we have a more sure word of
Prophecy, and this is that I do desire to stand unto, and to be tried by, and
not by men's Judgments; and therefore now do refer what I have spoken, to be
tried by the Scriptures; and the Lord hasten a clear discovery of his truth, in
what I have now written, and make you sensible wherein you have wrested the
good Word of the Lord, from the proper and true meaning thereof: and so I shall
proceed to your fourth and last Chapter.

Your 4. Chapter, which does contain, according to your mistaken Judgment,
that the laying on of hands, practiced by some in these our days, on all
Baptized believers, was never instituted, commanded, or practiced, by Christ or
his Apostles, in all the New Testament.

And herein, say you, does lie the stress of this controversy; which does
occasion this your writing, to undeceive and reduce those who are under the
vanity of this practice, and to prevent others from owning of, and submitting
to such a Scriptureless thing as this is, etc.

Answ. First, I hope the Reader will well consider of what I have written in
Answer to your book, and in the discovery I have made (according to the measure
of faith I have received) in this book, of this truth of Christ, before he do,
(as you too confidently have already done) pass Judgment upon this truth: the
Lord give you to see it, and to repent, lest God suffer you to go on in
laboring to turn poor Souls aside from this truth, or right way of the Lord,
and so to deceive and seduce those that are unstable, to the belief of your
lies.

2. I wish you may see the evil of your Language (which this Chapter contains
little else in it,) which you have vented forth against this truth, and the
maintainers thereof. Oh! how little therein you have savoured of grace, and how
much the vanity of your mind is discovered, in seeking to possess the hearts
of poor Souls, with that which is not: and therefore I may truly say (in stead
of what you speak of us,) that you speak evil of the things you know not, and
call that a foundation-principle, which by your arguments you prove not;
Neither have you the least word or warrant for it, in all the New Testament.

But now to make good your assertion, which is the ground of your 4. Chapter,
you have framed this Syllogism.

That which has not one word of institution, or command for it, in all the New
Testament, is no Ordinance of Christ; but will worship and Superstition.

But this laying on of hands on all Baptized believers, has not one word of
institution, or command for it, in all the New Testament; therefore, no
Ordinance of Christ, but will worship and superstition.

To which I answer, that practice which has not one word of institution or
command for it, in all the New Testament, (I do grant) is will worship and
Superstition.

But that laying on of hands upon believers Baptized as such, is without
institution or command from Christ; this I do deny, the contrary being already
made to appear, both in my answer to your book, and also before, in what I have
written in my Book: and therefore it is not your saying of what we do aleage,
(wherein you mind Scriptures we mind not in this particular case,) that will
prove there is not; Neither your sense and interpretations you put upon those
Scriptures we do aleage.

I wish you would consider, how you have wrested those Scriptures, which have
been minded for the proof of this truth, (to wit, laying on of hands upon
believers Baptized as such) and so by your wiles, if possible, the truth of God
out of our hands.

I wonder you Answer not the Arguments laid down by some for the proof of this
(to wit, that we have a command for laying on of hands) as for instance:

Doctor Chamberlain in his dispute with Mr. Kiffin, in the 16. page of his
book, says he, For a command, we have it in Mat. 28. 20. For whatsoever is a
Doctrine of the Apostles, is the Command of Christ. But imposition of hands is
a Doctrine of the Apostles.

The minor is granted by you, in your first Assertion, where you say, you grant
it is a Doctrine or principle; but not to be practiced: and the Text does also
number it up amongst the Doctrines and principles.

The Major is the very words of the Text: Teachings them, to observe all
things, whatsoever I have Commanded you; unless (says he) you will deny that
Doctrine is Teaching, or that the Apostles taught what they were not commanded,
as some have presumptuously affirmed.

This argument was endeavored, (yet not in the least answered) by Mr. Perry,
as you may see in the 23 page of his Book of animadversions.

2. You may also see Mr. Griffiths Arguments, one of which I shall name, why
this is so.

Because, says he, the Apostles did administer such a thing on dipped
believers as such, Acts 8. 17. and 19. 6. Now says he, either they did
administer it, upon the account of Christ's Requirement, command or injunction,
or upon an account of their own.

But it was not upon an account of their own; therefore it was upon the account
of Christ's Requirement, command or injunction. This he proves, as you may see
in the sixth page of his book in answer to Mr. Harrison: this was never that I
know of answered by any of you; with many more he lays down in his book of the
six principles.

Surely, you could not be ignorant of those Arguments; and therefore how you
could retain this Objection, when it has been by such Arguments refuted, and
yet not take notice of those Arguments, so as to answer them, I know not.

3. You may likewise see what Mr Tillam writes, in the 10, 11, 12, 13. and 14
page of his book, (it being an answer to Mr. Paul Hobson, and to this very
Objection.)

4. Amongst the rest, for further witness herein, I shall refer you to what I
have written in answer to this very Objection, laid down and answered in my
book, which I desire the Lord may help you to weigh and consider of, that the
truth of God may have place in your hearts. For I must tell you, it will be
little comfort to you, if Christ (as he suddenly will come,) shall find you
opposing the reformation of his house. And further, I desire the Lord may keep
you from this temptation, (which too many are subject to run into) to wit, Now
truth is displayed, presently to make war therewith, endeavoring the
suppressing thereof.

There being little in this fourth Chapter, then this bare Syllogism more then
frivolous discourse, with reflections, and unsavory and hard speeches, which
do discover the bitterness of the mind from whence they proceeded; I shall
take as little notice as I can, (with wisdom) of them, and draw to a
conclusion of my answer to your book; only shall observe some few things.

1. You labor to darken the truth, and that with your slighting of those
things that have been written in the vindication thereof, and those Scriptures
which have been affirmed by those that have written; thereby seeking to possess
the minds of people with an understanding from several Scriptures, as if they
were ours; but is indeed your own imagination, that thereby you might hinder
the proceeding of this truth amongst the people of God.

And therefore I do affirm, that what has been affirmed (by any of us,) from
those Scriptures, does still stand good to what they were intended; and are
true witnesses in this case for the proof of this truth.

And when by those persons that shall duly weight and consider the matter you
have written, with the answer thereunto, (without prejudice of Spirit, but with
love toward God, to find out his truth,) they will easily see your error
herein, and that in this matter we have not (as your selves have done,) handled
the Word of God deceitfully, 2 Cor. 2. 17. and 4. 2.

2. You say, that we say you are Babes; taking that as matter of great disdain;
but how like Children you do and have acted, I do believe will be easily seen,
by those who have their eyes open.

3. And whereas you say, we are much at loss about the end of this Ordinance,
and so by this would cast dust into the eyes of persons, to blind them the more:

I Answer, that if there be any that does affirm this or that, or a third
thing, to be the end of this Ordinance; yet I hope you will grant us the same
liberty to come to the knowledge of this truth, you your selves take to attain
the highth of opposition against it: is there not divisions among your selves,
in your opposing of us? what is the Reason, that you affirm one thing, Mr.
Kiffin another, and Mr. Harrison a third? Mr. Harrison he says, it is laying
on of hands for healing is the principle, Heb. 6. 2. Mr. Kiffin, he says,
(missing the end of that we practice) that it was only dispensed for the
confirmation of the Gospel. I could tell you, that others who do oppose it, do
say, Not the practice of laying on of hands, is the foundation-principle; but
the effects of laying on of hands; which is as false, and the words unsound:
and you after all, affirm laying on of hands upon persons to office, to be the
foundation-principle, Heb. 6. 2. (which is not so) therefore consider, w^o is
more at loss then your selves. Remember what is written, and take good
cognizance of your books you have written against us, and the truth: surely
your opposition is much heighthened, by the bitterness of your Spirit against
us; because we cannot deny this Word of the Lord we are conscious of; Not,
because the Bishops did practice it, (as you say we do;) but because we find
it written, as that which Christ and his Apostles taught, and that unto which
believers as such were obedient.

What though some among us, (though I know not of any) should understand the
Extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit to be the end of this Ordinance, wherein
they should be deceived with your selves; does this make void the truth of God?
God forbid.

We know, that the Extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit, did follow the
Preaching of the Word, and so was a fruit of that Ordinance, as well as laying
on of hands; but the proper end, of neither of them. Is there no gifts of the
Spirit of God, which believers then did, and do now receive according to the
promise of God, but such as are given in an Extraordinary manner? Surely you
dare not say there is not.

But I shall leave this, and take as little notice as possible, of the frames
of your Spirits, which are as if you were bent and resolved to fight against
truth, and to tread under, and render odious, the maintainers thereof.

The ground whereof, I conceive is; because we cannot communicate with you, who
reject and deny this teaching of Christ, and bring your own with the
new-conceited opinion of Doctor Gouge and others in the room thereof: and
though you are pleased to say, that our best Argument is the Common prayer
book, yet we would give you to know, that we have a more sure Word of
Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1. 19. our witness is in the word of truth; and your Reasons,
with all the wisdom of those men you minded, in this case, will be found too
light, being weighed in the Balance of the truth, that laying on of hands, in
Heb. 6. 2. is meant upon persons to office.

But wherefore are we branded with the names of censoriousness, Rigid, Hatred,
and such Judgments; as if we had (as you say) received the Spirit of Satan, in
stead of the Spirit of God?

1. Is it because some of us, as you say, forbid you their houses? but I pray
you in your writing of this, did you carefully observe and remember the frames
of your Spirit? whatsoever your carriage was toward your Brethren, of whom you
thus speak, I know not; yet sure I am, in this your writing, you go beyond your
bounds: but what is this Spirit which is discovered to be in you, but that old
Malign Spirit, that seeks the destruction of the truth and way of God, who
always reaps up the failings, (if there be any) in any poor soul, thereby to
dishonor, and cast dirt upon the face of truth? or

2. Is it, because as you say, we deny you Communion? why consider, is it not
upon the same ground that you your selves have denied others? and have not you
dealt with some poor souls, who have been convinced of this truth, and for
truths sake, in duty toward God, have been obedient thereunto?

Surely to withdraw from those, who deny truth, and turn their backs upon
truth, is from a better understanding, and is more agreeable to the mind of
God, then to withdraw from poor souls, who are followers of truth: The first is
ours, the second your practice; the Lord he is Judge, and will certainly Judge
between us, and make his truth manifest: for it is time for thee Lord to work,
when men make void thy Law, Psalm 119. 126. verse.

The End.
Postscript.
Reader,
I would have thee take notice, that whereas I have made mention of the names
of some particular persons in my book; It is not from any Spirit of prejudice
that I have toward them; for the Lord he knows they are men I do love and
esteem: but my mentioning of them was for this end, that believers might see
the weakness of their Objections, and the difference that is in their
understandings about this truth of laying on of hands upon believers Baptized
as such: that so indeed the great Mountains that are raised up in the ways of
poor souls in their obedience unto Christ in this Ordinance, may be removed;
and therefore I hope, there i^ none that will harbor such a conceit from what I
have written, as that I should have ever the l^ss esteem of them, for the
mentioning of their names in the cases I have minded; neither that others
should have ever the less esteem of them; but that indeed so far as they follow
truth, they should be esteemed for the sake thereof: and therefore I do desire
that Satan may have no advantage, by any thing I have written; for I have
endeavored both in my book and in my Answering of these four Chapters, to
write without reflecting Language, which as I know it would not profit my self
nor the truth; So likewise would but raise up the Spirits of those, who are
opposers thereof: and therefore now, that God may give thee a Spirit of
Wisdom, that thou may know and understand what is written, is the Prayer of
him, who is willing to serve thee, wherein he may be instrumental for thy good:
and the blessing of God go along with this his weak endeavors, Amen.

W. R.

FINIS.

