A Rowland for an Oliver: Or, a Sharp REBUKE TO A Saucy Levite.

IN ANSWER To a Sermon Preached By EDWARD OLIVER, M. A.

Before Sir Humphry Edwin late Lord Mayor of London, at St. Paul's Cathedral,
on Sunday October 22. School.

By a Lover of Unity.

Printed in the year 1699. and sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster.

AN ANSWER TO Mr. Oliver's Sermon.
IT was a Circumstance peculiar to the Deliverance of the Children of Israel
out of Egypt, that not so much as a Dog moved his Tongue against them, and such
a Circumstance perhaps as the Church is in no Age to expect the like. The King
and Parliament have thought fit to set the Dissenters at Liberty, and to give
them a Manumission from their more than Egyptian Taskmasters; in which every
true Protestant rejoiced, as hoping that it might be an effectual Preparative
to unite Protestants among themselves at home, and that it would tend to
confirm and strengthen the Protestant Interest abroad. But a certain Party of
the Church of England, have, notwithstanding the concurrence of the greatest
and best of her Bishops in settling the said Liberty by a Law, been always
uneasy and peevish since, and constantly bawling against Dissenters: and not
content with a Badg of servitude still fixed upon them, by which they are
excluded not only from all Ecclesiastical Preferments or Benefices, but from
all places of power and trust in the Civil Government, nothing will satisfy
them except they have liberty to bite and devour their dissenting Brethren, as
in former Reigns. And it is very well known, not only what heavy Censures his
Majesty has lain under by that Party, because of his Fatherly Protection
granted to Christians of all Denominations, but what Obstruction they laid in
the way of his Affairs, in Council, Parliament, Army and Navy; nay, how uneasy
the^ have made him in his very Household; so that it would seem highly necessary
that a due Enquiry should be made by what secret Springs those Persons are
acted, that continue thus to foment Divisions amongst us. It is worthy our
observation that this spirit of Discord at home, seems to be invigorated and
gather strength at the same time when the spirit of Persecution rages afresh
against the Protestants abroad. It is not at all to be doubted, but as C^in was
stirred up against his Brother Abel by that wicked one, that all his Successors
in Persecution are still influenced by that same malignant Spirit, who has
been a Murderer from the beginning; but at the same time it cannot be denied
that Satan makes use of Men as his Instruments to sow division and discord. Nor
is it unworthy our Observation, that as the Papists abroad, and our implacable
Ceremony-mongers at home, have their Spirits fermented at one and the same
time, it is also in a great measure for one and the same Cause, viz. because
they cannot bring all Men to submit to their Ceremonies and Modes of Worship of
human Institution: and in truth of the two, our English Formalists seem to be
the least excusable, because they own themselves not to be infallible; disown
human Tradition as a Rule of Faith, and in all their Controversies with the
Papists, make use of the same Arguments against the Church of Rome, that we
make use of against the Ceremonies and Discipline of the Church of England.

They are still the more blameworthy, because formerly they laid the charge
upon the Government that these things which are the subject of discord, were
still continued amongst us; but now that we have a Prince, who has solicited
that his Subjects might be united, and those things that are the Cause of
Contention removed, they are so far from complying with him in it, that they
are ready to fly in his face upon that account. This, if we may believe Dr.
Burnet, the present Bishop of Salisbury, who cannot be suspected of partiality
in the case, was far from being the temper of the Church of England-Bishops, at
least the best of 'em, in Queen Elizabeth's days, that Learned and Moderate
Bishop in his Letters, containing an Account of what seemed most remarkable in
Switzerland, Italy, etc. p. 42. says, He saw the Originals of Letters writ by
several of the English Bishops to Bullinger at Zurich, in Queen Elizabeth's
time, whereby it appears, that the ancient habits were preserved rather in
compliance with the Queen, than out of any liking they had to them. That Bishop
Jewel that great Ornament of the English Church, in a Letter Feb. 8. 1566,
wishes that the Vestments, together with all the other Remnants of Popery,
might be thrown out of their Churches, and out of the Minds of the People, and
laments the Queen's fixedness to them. In January that same year Bishop Sands
wrote to the same purpose, Contenditur de Vestibus papisticis, utendis vel non
utendis; dabit Deus his quoque finem. Horn Bishop of Winchester July 16. 1565.
regrets the Act concerning Habits, and expresses some hopes that it might be
repealed next Session of Parliament, if the Popish Party did not hinder it. In
many Letters on that subject it is asserted, that both Cranmer and Ridly
intended to procure an Act for abolishing the Habits. Bishop Grindal in a
Letter of Aug. 27. 1566, writes that all the Bishops who had been beyond Sea,
at their return dealt with the Queen to let the matter of the Habits fall; but
she continued inflexible -- and Cox Bishop of Ely, one of the most violent Men
of the time, in one of his Letters bewails the aversion they found in the
Parliament to reform those abuses.

Then by the Testimony of these Great Men, who may well be called the Fathers
of the Church of England, it appears the things in controversy betwixt us, are
Popish Remnants; and that the Popish Party did then hinder the Acts concerning
them to be repealed. And it is very well known that these things have been
continued ever since, and some Additions made to them by the Influence of the
Popish Party, who were rampant in the beginning of Charles the First's Reign,
and had no little Interest at Court, and in obtaining the Act of Uniformity,
after the Restoration of K. Charles II. This being uncontrovertibly true, we
have reason to believe that the same Party in concert with the Jacobites, are
still the Incendiaries, and make it their business to add Fuel to our Flames;
but we have this Happiness, that they cannot now, as formerly, make Tools of
the Court, and by his Majesty's prudent Conduct, the highest places in the
Church are many of them filled with Persons of a more generous and Christian
Temper, than to comply with such angry ill-natured Men, that would again
sacrifice the peace of the Nation to their own peevish humors. It remains then
that the Tools they now work upon are some of the inferior Clergy, and such of
the dignified ones as are perhaps discontented that they are not elevated to an
higher Dignity; from them, or the professed Jacobites proceed those virulent
Invectives, that have of late by a superfoetation of Malice been brought forth
into the world against Dissenters: by the timing of the thing it would seem
they have a design to render them odious and obnoxious to the ensuing
Parliament; and if they can but prevail to have their Liberty taken off or
restrained, then they know that the Nation must be unavoidably thrown into new
Convulsions, that a great part of the Subjects who have been so useful and well
affected to the present Government, will be thereby delivered up into the hands
of their and its implacable Enemies; that the Episcopal Party in Scotland who
are avowed Enemies to his Majesty's Person and Government, will be thereby
encouraged to embroil that Kingdom afresh; that the People of the North of
Ireland, to whom all Britain ows so much, will also come under the lash: and so
by an universal Confusion at home, whilst the Protestants are ungratefully
persecuted by their Allies abroad, the way will be paved for the return of the
late King James. This appears plainly to be the natural Tendency of those
ill-timed Divisions that are so industriously fomented amongst us. To this end
are all those Alarms to the true Sons of the Church directed, and their
imminent danger from the Presbyterians, their Imperium in Imperio, and the
erecting of their Classes inculcated. What a dreadful noise for this end have
some Persons made about a harmless Letter, directed from a Presbyterian
Minister in Newbury to another, importing a design among the Protestant
dissenting Ministers throout this Kingdom to advance the Interest of Religion,
and Reformation of Manners? What malicious Reflections have there been made
upon that Letter by men of different Kidneys? What frightful Ideas do some men
endeavor to possess the minds of the Nation with against the Presbyterians, in
a late virulent Pamphlet, called An Apology for the English Presbyterians? What
strange Insinuations and imbittered Reflections does that Libel contain against
the Church of Scotland, and the Classical Presbyterians? and who can doubt of
the mischievous design of all this malicious Clamor, when they know that the
Papists and Jacobites raise the Hue and Cry on the one hand, and L. and F. with
Sir R. L. raise it on the other? what pleasant game would it afford to the
French King and the late King James to see the Church of England set on by this
means to hunt down the Presbyterians? they are indeed the noblest Quarry, but
if the wild Boar get once into the Forest, can the other Parties hope to
escape? Yes, why not, L. would once more be of the Cabinet Council at Whitchal,
and the Cardinal Protector of those of his Order.

But I shall leave that honest Triumvirate to go on with their Consult in
High-Holborn, and heartily wish that none of 'em may ever have occasion to go
any higher. I return again to our Church of England Friends, it being high time
to give one of 'em a Rowland for his Oliver.

It seems, if Youngsters be once advanced to Fellowships in Colleges, and
honored to wear Scarfs as Noblemen's domestic Chaplains, and to this have
added the Title of Master of Arts, that they may then take the liberty to
preach what they please, and to reflect upon those who have the Liberty of
their Worship allowed them by Law as well as themselves; whether that be
answerable to that deference to Magistrates, which Mr. Oliver preaches up so
much in his Sermon, to throw such squint Reflections upon our Legislators, and
to upbraid one of the greatest Magistrates of the Nation to his face for doing
that which is allowed both by the Laws of God and the Land, let him look to it.
If his Heat had not been greater than his Judgment, he ought to have considered
that one of the chief Arguments for Ceremonies was, that being indifferent in
themselves, yet when commanded by the Magistrate, they ought to be complied
with; this he will find to have been the opinion of those great Bishops
formerly mentioned in Q. Elizabeth's time, as will appear by the Letters before
quoted, Mr. Powel de adiaphoris, Tilen's Parenaesis, Paybody's Apology, etc.
and therefore seeing the Magistrate has taken off those Laws that enjoined the
practice of those indifferent Ceremonies, according to that Argument no man is
now obliged to comply with them.

Therefore as Mr. Oliver's Reflections savor nothing of that Universal Charity
he tells us our Blessed Redeemer came into the World to Teach; ^he cannot
expect tha^ his Doctrine will be able to remove the stiff Prejudice of those he
pretends to Convince, as our Savior's Doctrine convinced the S^mir^t ^n Woman.

Page 3, of his Sermon, he says, Though I believe there is neither Jew nor
Samaritan to convince in this Audi^ory, yet we have th^se I fear s^metimes to
deal with who ^^de such a M^d^y of Religion, that they are near as danger (...)
to the Truth of it. For so do^^ine Romanists confound their Will Worship and
Ido^a^ry with the Essentials of Christianity, that they take b^th from its
Truth and Spiritual^ty. So do other Dissenters from us, mistake the true Notion
of its Spirituality, that they d^^rgute from the very Essentials of our most
Holy Rel^gi^n, and would go a^out to persuade us its Truth consist^d in mere
Aivy Notions, and Wild Enthusiamsms.

By Mr. Oliver's leave, it seems there was something of a Jew in the Pulpit,
lif there was none in the Auditory: for he seems himself to be for some of the
Jewish Ceremonies, and perhaps it may be no diskindness to him, if he did a
little partake of their Circumoision too, for his Heat certainly wants a
Cooler, and that would do it for so^e day^ ^t least. Whethe^ he has any thing
of the loose Temper of the Samaritan Woman in his Text or not, I know not; but
something of her Ignorance I am sure he has, and if to that he will add her
Confession of Sins, he may plead a Right to that Advantage which he tells us,
pag^^. Ig^orance and a Confession of Sins, have above an affected prete^^^ to
Knowledge and ^ Counterfeited Z^al.

Well, it seems he thought he had some Papists and Dissenters in his Auditory,
the Truth of which I know not, for indeed I was not there to see; but I am of
Opinnion there was something of a Papist in the Pulpit too ^n for I find him a
mighty Zealot for those Ceremonies which we have so lately heard some of Queen
Elizabeth's ^^^^ops accounted Popish (...). And others of his ^^rty have
acknowledged, That the Ceremoies are i^convenient, but yet to be obser^^d for
^o^^e and that Offense and hindrance to Edification do arise from those
Ceremonies, according to Dr. Burgess, in his Answer to the Reply, Pref. p. 43.
And Mr. Sprint, Reply to the Answer, p. 270. And Cassand Anglican. page 46.

Came^^, a Man of great Note, and Friend to our Author's way, says expressly in
his Popish Prejudices, c. 10. That so admirable was the simplicity of the
Primitive Church in the Times of the Apostles, that there were no other
Ceremonies then to be found in her but the Celebration of Baptism by washing of
Water, and of the Holy Supper a^cording to the Lord's Institution, in taking
the Bread and Wine, and distributing them after thanksgiving, and the
Imposition of Hands upon those who extraordinarily received the Holy Ghost, and
for a (...) the Sick* I would pray then this Youngster to consider whether the
Judgment of those Great Men of his own side, or that or such an Upstart as he,
is most to be valued, and whether we have not reason to reject those
Ceremonies, when Camero* a Friend of their own, says in the same place, The
Superstition, the Mother of Cere^onies, (...) and prodigal; Spiritual Whoredam
(...) it is* (...) with the Bodily, both of 'em most have their Pa^^^ings,
their Trinket^, and Inv^aglements. I could give him more Quotations of this
sort, but these are enough to (...) the World that it were fitter for him to go
home to Corpus Christi^ College, and read a little more, than thus to endeavor
to perpetuate a Schism in the body of Christ, by Preaching up those Ceremonies
which the Greatest Men of the Church have complained they were forced to comply
with* out or Necessity, and not out of choice.

If he did but ^dve^t to his own Concession, that the Romanists take both from
the Truth and Spirituality of the Christian Religion, by confounding their
Will Worship and Idolatry with the Essentials of Christianity; it were enough
to cure him of his Fondness for Ceremonies; and I would fain know of him,
whether enjoining the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, and kneeling at the
Communion, which he cannot pretend have any other Foundation but the Will of
Man, don't fall under the same Charge he brings against Popish Will Worship; so
that our Author has been as unhappy i^ stumbling upon this Parallel, as the E.
of Roscommon, a noted Papist, was to translate that part of Horace into English
Verse; Olim truncus era^ ficulnus inutile lignum, etc. where the Poet brings in
the Clown, debating with himself what use he should put a Log of Wood to, and
at last he resolved to make a God on it.

Then his malicious Charge against Dissenters in general, as derogating from
the Essentials of Religion, by Enthusiastical Notions, serves only to discover
the Confusedness of his own Brain, or the Rancour of his Breast. He many know,
if he pleases, that the main Body of Dissenters allow no other Rule of Faith
and Practice, but the Sacred Text; though some who perhaps go under that Name may
be tainted with Enthusiasm: and how those that bring every thing to the
Touchstone of the Law, and the Testimony, and make no Account of pretended
Revelations, or Impulses, can be called Enthusiasts, let him determine. In
looks Ten times more Enthusiastical in him to trump up the Authority of what he
calls the Church, above that of the Scripture, which enjoins a mutual
Forbearance in Things indifferent, and expressly forbids and ^^ning one another
for Meats, Drinks, and Days, 1 Cor. 8. Romans 14.5. etc. than any thing he can
charge upon the Presbyterians. He must, or at least ought to know, that the man
Pl^a which these of (...) Party make use of to defend that wherein they differ
from us, ^s Succession, (...), and Tradition, which he himself own, Page (...)
strangely mistaken, and that Tradition deserves ^ut little Credit (...)
borrowed from the Pre^byterian Heap, to (...) Papists, and to be qu^^ with us,
(...) from the Popish Heap, that is, the Authority of the Church, and Primitive
Practice, to throw at the Presbyterians, as we shall see afterward.

Mr. Oliver (...) Page (...) That ^he (...) and Samaritans differed chiefly in
the Place of (...) Sacrificed: ^ut why did not he take Notice that this is als^
one Point of the Difference (...) his Party and the Dissenters, which is
clearly determined (...) by the Gods of Truth himself, for the (...)? He knows
that those of his ^action ascribe a Sanctity to the very Places of Worship,
even whilst there is no Worship performed in them; and therefore at all times
uncover themselves in Cathedrals, and many of them in (...) Ch^rches,
especially in the Cha^^els* for which they cannot show one (...) of Scripture:
but on the contrary, our Savior here informs us, that the Day shall come when
Men shall Worship him in Spirit and Truth, without regard to any particular
Places* and we ^^nd that ^he himse^^* and his Apostles, practiced accordingly,
and worshipped either in private Houses, Mountain, Ships, Seacoasts, or any
where, as Providence offered an Opportunity, without a formal Consecration of
any particular Place, which he knows is contrary to the Pract^^e^ of the Church
of England.

I come here to consider his Explanation of what is meant by Worshipping God in
Spirit; which he tells us is when we are ^osses'd with a true and lively Sense
of his divine Majesty, Power, and Rule over as, humbly ^^knowledge hi^,
unspeakeable Goodness, ^o (...) his infinite Wisdom which searches our Hearts,
that we in all things submit to his allwise Will, when we love him with all our
Hearts, and all our Souls, and yet Fear and Reverence him as a Father, (...)
with the greatest Cheerfulness obey whatsoever he has (...) pleased to command
us; when we not only give up our Souls pure and spotless, but keep our Bodies
fit Temples too, for the Holy Ghost, and thus joined, offer up our selves one
reasonable Service.

There Is scarcely any thing in this Definition, but what is comprehended in
this one Distich of Cato, Si Deus est animus nobis ut carmina dicunt,
Hic tibi praecipue sit pu^a mente colendus.
or what a mere Dei^t, who owns no Revelation, will grant; but methinks one who
pretends to be a Minister of Jesus Christ, should not have been guilty of such
a gross Omission, as never once to have mentioned his Name in the Explanation
of Spiritual Worship, when nothing is more expressly enjoined in the Scripture,
than that all Gospel Worship should be performed in his Name, without which
none of our Devotion is acceptable* I would therefore advise this upstart
Divine, first to read and understand the Gospel better, before he pretend to
preach it, and to know his own Duty before he offer to teach other Men theirs,
and out of pity to his Ignorance, or to chastise him for his faulty Definition,
would refer him to John 14.13. where we are taught to offer up our Prayers in
the Name of Jesus, to Matthew 18.20. and other Places, where we are taught to
assemble in his Name, to Matthew 28.19. etc. where Ministers are commanded to
preach and baptize in his Name, to 1 John 3.23. where we are commanded to
believe in his Name, and to Heb. 13.15. where we are enjoined to offer Praises
to God by him. Now these being all Acts of Spiritual Worship, is it not strange
that this Novice in Divinity should not so much as once have mentioned the Name
of Jesus in his Definition of worshipping God by the Spirit. I suppose he would
be very angry at those who should forbear bowing at hearing of his Name, which
is no where ^^^manded, and yet he pretends to explain Spiritual ^^rship,
without taking so much as once notice of that ^lessed Nane, though there be
none other under Heaven by which we can be saved.

Another thing he has omitted in his Definition, is, that to Worship God in
Spirit, must necessarily infer the worshipping of him according to the
Direction of his own Spirit in the Sacred Scriptures, without which, all those
Impressions of his Majesty, Power, Rule, and Wisdom that he talks of, signify
nothing. The Heathens have expressed themselves to Admiration on all these
Attributes, and yet we cannot say, that they worshipped him in Spirit, because
it was not according to his Revealed Will, they worshipped they knew not what,
as our Savior here tells the Samaritan Woman.

He goes on thus, Page 10, That h^ving once this true Notion of the Almighty,
we ex^rt our selves in Acts of Piety and public Devotion, express our Sense of
his Power and Rule, by our daily Supplications, ou^ Ackno^l^dgments of his
Goodness, by our continual Praises, our Love, by our Charity to our Neighbors,
and Zeal for his Wo^ship and Service, and our Fear, by abstaining from the
lea^t Appearance of Evil; and all this with Humility and Reverence, Decency and
Order, with Obedience to Authority, and Respect to those whom he has set over
us; these being most certain and spiritual Duties, nay, the only things wherein
we are capable of t^stifying that we really do worship him in Spirit. A little
further he says, That God is a Spirit, and therefore his Wo^ship ought to
deduce its Source from the Reason and Soul of Man. And in the 1^th. Page, That
if Worship takes its rise from the Heart, then is it a Spiritual Worship. And
this he takes to be the true meaning of worshipping in Spirit. It Is well he
does but take it, but I think it is plain from what has been already said, he
mistakes it; for all this while it is evident that Cato in his Distich
before-named, had as true a Notion of Spiritual Worship as Mr. Oliver: And
therefore I will make bold to tell him, that if he don't make haste to increase
more in Spiritual Knowledge than hitherto he has done, it will be a great while
before he deserve to be made a Spiritual Lord; but I am afraid he has already
spoiled his Lawn Sleeves during this Reign, whatever hopes he may have in
another.

I would fain know whether by part of his own definition of Spiritual Worship,
he has not excluded himself from the number of Spiritual Worshippers, by
failing in his Obedience to Authority, and in his Respect to those whom God has
set over us, in railing thus against those whose Worship is established by Law
as well as his own: Does he think, that when the King and Parliament passed the
Act for Liberty, they designed that every little Pragmatical Priest should
revile Magistrates to their faces, and reflect upon the whole Dissenting Party
in such a manner as he has done, for non compliance to Humane Ceremonies in
Divine Worship? If it were so, then the Nonconformists are only tied down to a
Stake, to be baited by every dumb Dog, that cannot bark, except it be for gain
from his Quarter: Such kind of Dogs as these the Apostle enjoins us to beware
of, as well as of the Concision by which they made a Schism in the Church, and
would have forced Circumcision and other Jewish Ceremonies into the Christian
Worship, Phil. 3.2. Just so our Author seems to be one of those that would
tear the Flock, and return again to the old Vomit of Persecution; he and his
Brother the Author of the Mystery of Phanaticism, would make a delicate couple
to be under the Conduct of some of Antichrist's Huntsmen, for they seem both of
'em to be deep-mouthed, and so well versed in the Art already, that they
understand all the Hunters Notes, from Tone, to Tontontontontavon.

We come next to hear him open upon full scent, for Page 11 and 12. with a
Medley of a Charge he falls foul upon some of the Dissenters; saying, They are
above Ordinances and all manner of Rule, guided by Fancy and a Frantic Zeal. I
am afraid he has in those very words described himself and the rest of his
Kidney, who will force their own Impositions into the most Solemn Ordinances of
the Gospel, and exclude those from the Church that will not comply with them; for
if this be not to set themselves above all manner of Ordinances and Rule, when
the Scripture expressly forbids any adding or diminishing to its self, as the
Rule of our Faith and Manners, I cannot tell what is. However, I know that by
this he means the Quakers and some others; but then in common Ingenuity he
ought to have made a distinction, and not have added all Dissenters together,
to inflame the Reckoning; and in the mean time let me tell him, that such as he
set them a very bad Example, in going so far astray from the Rule, and making
things they own to be indifferent, necessary terms of Communion.

He falls next upon those that make use of his Text against all manner of
Ceremonies: But who these are, I know not, nor never heard of, nor I believe no
body else; had he said, significant Ceremonies, or a kind of Party-per-pale
Sacraments, that must be outward and visible Signs of inward and Spiritual
Graces, such as the Sign of the, is made to be our fighting under Christ's
Banner, etc. he had said somewhat; and then I should have made bold to tell
him, though I incur the danger of an ipso facto Excommunication for it by the
Canons of his Church, that such Ceremonies are ipso facto condemned by this
Text, that teaches us we must worship God according to Truth, which is his
Revealed will, and if he can find any thing there enjoining those Ceremonies, I
will yield him the Cause, and for his further Comfort, I will also tell him,
that what the Scripture does not Command in matters of Worship, it forbids, and
without the Law, and against the Law, as in Policy, so in Divinity, are both
one according to Tertullian, in his Corona Militis; and I am of the mind he
made a greater Figure in the Church than ever our Author will do so long as his
Name is Oliver.

So little does this Zealous Ceremony-monger understand the Controversy in
which he is so fierce a Disputant, that he tells us, we our selves make use of
Ceremonies; and what are they? Why, truly they are set Looks, a formal Voice,
and forced Gestures; a wonderful Discovery! worthy of the Genius of that Noble
Author, called, The Mystery of Phanaticism: But does not this little Sprig, or
Sucker of Divinity, know that these Things, if they must be Ceremonies, are not
imposed upon those of our Party as Terms of Communion? For our parts we are so
little concerned about such things, that we should not value it one rush if all
the Youngsters of the Church wore their Shoes upon their Head, and their
square Caps upon their Feet, as well as their Shirts on the outside of all
their other Clothes, if they would not thrust them down our Throats as Terms of
Communion, and tell us we shall neither have the Privileges of Men nor
Christians, if we don't let them do so.

But now he comes with the killing Stroke, that it is almost time for the
Huntsman to sound the Death of the Heart, with a Tone Tontontaven, etc. He tells
us, page 14. and 15. That the Objections against set Forms, and the Pretensions
to the Spirit, from this Text, are vain and frivolous: Where is such Assistance
promised, or upon what account indeed necessary? Let these Pretenders to
Inspiration work Miracles too, and then we shall believe these extraordinary
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which we rightly now judge to be ceased -- The very
Opinion contradicts it self; and what they pretend an extemporary Effusion, is
no more than a Form to all the Auditory -- and are often worked up, by Heat and
Passion, to say Amen to no better than Nonsense, sometimes, I fear, even
Blasphemy it self -- Strange is it, that Men otherwise sober, and that will not
venture a Sermon, which they will not address to the People, without Care and
Accuracy of Wording, should yet dare to entertain Commerce with God at all
Adventures, buoyed up with a little popular Applause and Self-Conceit! Most
evident it is, that what they would make the World believe is immediately from
Heaven, is attainable by Memory, and a Volubility of Speech, and perfected by a
great share of Confidence.

Here, as elsewhere, this Novice has entertained the Auditory with Ignorance,
Railing, and Falsehoods. I could wish that his Tutor, when he returns to
Cambridge again, would whip him a little for Ignoratio Elenchi. Is it not a
horrid shame, that a Confident Prig should step up to the Pulpit of the
Greatest Cathedral in England, pretending to preach upon Controversies, and not
so much as understand the State of the Question he pretends to handle? Then let
him know, that the Nonconformists don't deny the Lawfulness of set Forms,
provided they be sound, and only made use of by those that cannot do without
them; for they are always so good natured, as to allow the Lame a Crutch: But
the thing they deny, is this, that it is unlawful for any Church or Society of
Men upon Earth, to impose stated Forms of other Men's composing to be used by
Ministers in the whole Exercise of their Ministerial Function, and no others:
This being a Yoke that many of the Conformists themselves don't submit their
Necks to, but use Forms of their own composing, or extemporary Prayers, many
times before Sermon, at visiting the Sick, and otherwise. If our Author will
read Didoclavius his Altar Damascenum, an ancient and learned Author, or Dr.
Collins of Norwich, a Modern Author upon the Subject, he will find this to be,
and to have been the Principle of the Nonconformists upon that Head; and the
reason of it is this, that the Gift of Prayer, as well as of Preaching, is
given by our Savior to his Ambassadors, else how should they be the Mouth of
the People to him, as well as the Deliverers of his Message to them? The
stinting of Ministers to the Forms of others, is perfectly to make them guilty
of the neglect of part of that Gift, which they receive at their Ordination by
the hands of the Presbytery, against which the Apostle cautions Timothy, 1 Timothy
4.14* It is likewise plain by Acts 6.4. that it is the Duty of Ministers to
give themselves to Prayer, as well as to Preaching; and seeing many of the
Preachers, by giving themselves to it, (nay, most of those in other Countries)
attain to a Faculty of delivering the Message of God in good Method and
Language without Notes; for what Reason can our Author think it impracticable
for them, if they likewise give themselves to Prayer, to deliver their own, and
their Peoples Desires, in the same manner to God without the help of a Form? I
confess for such as he, who seems to be grossly ignorant of the Office and Duty
of a Minister, and is more like Jeroboam's Priests of old, that by consecrating
themselves with a Bullock and ten Rams, were fit to be Priests to them that
were no Gods, a Form of Prayer may be necessary; for by his ignorant Twattle,
he seems to be such a Parson as the Story goes of, who could not tell what
Prayer to read for a poor Man, that came to him when his House was on Fire; but
at last bethought himself of that for Rain, which he wisely conceived would
extinguish the Flames: But when he came to mumble it over, it was only for
moderate Showers; which the poor Man knowing not to be enough for his
Necessity, made bold to mend the Form, and cried out for whole Buckets full.

For his ignorant and irreligious Questions, Where the Assistance of the Spirit
is promised, or upon what account indeed necessary, they smell so rank of the
Libertine, that we may justly enter our Exceptions against his Evidence in
matters of Religion, as an utter Enemy to it: But to reform him if possible,
let him read his own Text once more, which is a Promise as well as a Prophecy,
that the Spirit should assist the Saints under the Gospel in their Worship, of
which Prayer is a very great part. Let him read Romans 8.26, 27. and there he
will find the assistance of the Spirit to be necessary to help our Infirmities;
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self
makes Intercession for us with Groanings which cannot be uttered; and he that
searches the Hearts, knows what is the Mind of the Spirit, because he makes
Intercession for the Saints, according to the Will of God. He may likewise read
the Fifteenth Verse of that same Chapter, and there he will find that true
Christians receive the Spirit of Adoption, by which they cry Abba Father, and
are as naturally enabled thereby to pour out their Souls before God in Prayer
for Spiritual Mercies, as we are by Nature prompted to request such things of
our Earthly Parents as we stand in need of, without a Set Form. Let him read
John 14.26. and there he will find a Promise, That the Comforter, the holy
Spirit, shall teach us all things; and if Prayer be a Christian Duty, it must
certainly be included in the Bosom of this Promise. If he thinks to evade this
by pretending that we alledg the very words of our Prayers are inspired, Let
him quote any Dissenting Author, Quakers, or some such excepted, that have said
so if he can.

I conceive his profane Raillery, that we entertain Commerce with God at all
Adventures, is sufficiently censured already, when I have made it appear that
we have the Promise of the Spirit to help our Infirmities: But I shall tell him
further, that if ever he come to have any Experience of the Work of God upon
his own Soul, to see the Sinfulness of his Nature, and that he is eternally
undone without a Savior, it will be no longer such a Mystery to him; and I
would fain know his reason why a Minister that is acquainted with the Condition
of his People, as all of 'em ought to be, and is able to instruct them in their
Duty, and to reprove them for their Sins without a Set Form, may not as well,
and as easily represent their Desires to God in the same manner, pray for his
Assistance against their particular Temptations and Sins, beg for those Graces
they want, offer up Praises for such Mercies as they have received, and turn
his Instructions to them, into Petitions for them, without hazard of Blasphemy
or Nonsense.

Let him give us his reason why all Ministers and Christians, must be tied up
to the Forms of others, who have no more right to those Promises abovementioned
than themselves, and as appears by the Event, have had a lesser share of them,
than many others have had.

Our Author before he had made so many ill grounded Objections and Charges
against Extemporary Prayer, ought first to have taken the Beam out of the Eye
of his own Party, before he had offered to pull the Mote out of those of
others. He cannot but know, or have heard, that the Book of Common Prayer is
objected against, as being the Mass Book, Romish Breviary, and Rituals,
translated with some Amendments, as K. Edw. 6 th. owned in his Proclamation to
the Devonshire Rebels, that it is chargeable with vain Repetitions, that it
stints God to such a daily Measure of Prayers, hinders many necessary
Petitions, and the enlarging on those that it has, according to the necessity
of the Persons that join in it, and many other things that I shall not now
touch upon.

It ill became our Author to charge Dissenters with Blasphemy in their Prayers
at random, merely upon report or slander, when his Party oblige all their
Clergy to assent and consent to all the Mis-translations of the Psalms, and
other places of Scripture in their Common Prayer Book, when its evident that
sometimes a whole Verse or more is left out; as in the 72 d, Psalm. where the
Words, Pr^ise ye the Lord* are 17 times omitted; as is the Conclusion of the
Lord's Prayer, according to the Example of the Popish Missal, and part of the
First Commandment, sometimes the Translation is blasphemous, as in Psalm. 18.26.
where it is said of God, that he shall learn frowardness with the froward;
sometimes it is absurd and senseless, as Psalm. 58.8. and sometimes adds Words
and Sentences, which change and obscure its meaning, as Psalm. 2.12. and Psalm.
14.

Page 15, and 16. He goes on with his usual Assurance, and says, Our Savior
proved by a Form, that the World has been so sensible of the Necessity of one,
that there is no Age or Church that has left themselves at liberty. Not one
word of which he can prove. Our Savior indeed has given us that usually
called the Lord's Prayer as a Rule, and which we own we may lawfully use as a
Form, but not to exclude others of our own composure. The idle Pretense that
our Savior composed this out of the Jewish Form^ then in Use, has been long
since exploded; or if it were so, is a strong presumption that 'twas only to be
used as a Form during the Jewish Economy: But it is so evident in the
Scripture, that our Blessed Redeemer and his Apostles tied themselves to no
certain Form of Prayers, that none who have ever read the Bible can be ignorant
of it. Is it not strange, if they judged a set Form necessary, that they should
not have composed one themselves, or have told us who they empowered to do it?
And is it not a reflection upon the Scriptures, that they which are able to
make the Man of God wise unto Salvation, should not be thought sufficient to
direct us how to pray without set Forms, as well as it is to make Men able
Ministers of the New Testament without set Homilies? Would not Mankind look
upon it as an Imposition on humane Nature, if Forms should be imposed upon
them, in which, and no other, they should be obliged to sue for Relief to their
Superiors in all the Calamities that may befall them, when it is impossible to
compose such as will answer all Circumstances? And is it not equally, nay, more
absurd to restrain Men to Forms composed by others, for addressing the Almighty
in their various Exigencies, that none can know so well as themselves; and
which though not expressed in such Terms as may please such envious Critics as
our Author, yet He that searches the Hearts, knows the Mind of the Spirit, as
we have heard before.

As to his Assertion, that no Age has been without a Form, it is Gratis dictum,
he has it only by Tradition, and that he says himself is but little to be
credited; I think the known Passages of Justin Martyr, and Tertullian, in their
Apologys, are more than enough to answer such a pert Youngster. The Passages
are to the following Import: Tertullian speaking of the Worship of the
Christians, Illuc, (that is toward Heaven,) suspicientes Christiani manibus
expansis quia Innocuis capite Nudo, quia non erubescimus denique ^ine Monitore
quia de pectore Oramus. And Justin Martyr on the same Subject says, (...). If
this pert Sophister knows any thing, he knows that those pretended Liturgies of
Peter, James, Matthew, Andrew, etc. are spurious, and therefore shall say no
more on the Subject, but this, that Eusebius in his Epistles of the Churches of
Smyrna, Vienna, and Lions, is silent as to any Liturgy. The like silence there
is in the Epistles of Clemens, Ignatius, and the Writings of Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, and Origin. Nay, Baronius ad An. 58. Numb. 102. treating expressly
of the Public Prayers of the Church, keeps the same silence as to the use of
Forms. Mr. Oliver's other silly Reflections of want of due Reverence in Places
of Worship, are so like himself, that they deserve no other Answer but
Contempt: If others keep on their Hats there, let him make amends for it, if he
pleases, by pulling off his Shoes; and while others sit, may he be condemned
always to stand; and while others take no notice of the Altar, may he bow to it
till his Breeches burst behind: For my own part, I know no reason for being
covered, or uncovered at any Sermon, but as Convenience directs; for though the
Text be divine, the Commentary is humane; and I thin^ his own Sermon is a
convincing Instance, that every thing delivered to us from the Pulpit is not
the Message of God: We must bring them to the Touchstone, as the Bereans did,
to try whether they be so, or not, and I am certain his will never abide that
Test.

I shall conclude this extemporary Answer to a premeditated Sermon against
extemporary Prayer, with this one Reflection, that the late Lord Mayor may well
be abused in the street by Ballad-singers, Hawkers, and raskally Fellows, when
he was first abused to his face in the Pulpit by a pedantick Parson. A Noble
Example, and as bravely followed! but if the City of London suffer their Chief
Magistrate, and the ^reatest of the Kind in the whole Nation, to be thus abused
for going to Meetings, which was neither contrary to the Laws of God nor Man,
they don't acquit themselves according to their Character: It is utterly
intolerable, that a Gentleman, who his very Enemies must own, has acted the
part of a good Magistrate, should be so scandalously abused. If this be Mr.
Oliver's deference to Dignities, it is pity he should ever preach in any other
Place but Bedlam, where his namesake Oliver's Porter used to rave. And thus I
leave the Huntsmen, who sounded the seven strokes to the Field, to sound the
stroke of nine to draw home the Company; for I believe their..... will scarcely
recover his Game, so that he may even sit down contented with the Honor of
being the Ringleader of those who sing such goodly Ballads, as they were
gathering Grigs about the streets one day, and cry Lampoons against Magistrates
another.

FINIS

