THE Scots Episcopal Innocence: OR, The Juggling of that Party with the late
King, his present Majesty, the Church of England, and the Church of Scotland,
demonstrated.

Together with a Catalogue of the Scots Episcopal Clergy turned out for their
Disloyalty, and other Enormities, since the Revolution.

And a Postscript, with Reflections on a late malicious Pamphlet, entitled,
The Spirit of Malice and Slander. Particularly addressed to Dr. Monroe, and his
Journeymen, Mr. Simon Wild, Mr. Andrew Iohnston, etc. near Thieving-lane,
Westminster.

Rampantur and Ilia Codri.

By WILL. LAICK.

Impavidum feriunt Ruinae.

London, Printed in the Year, 1694.

To the Right Honorable and Right Reverend, the General Assembly of the Church
of Scotland.
Right Honorable, Reverend, and Worthy;
IT is not from any Opinion that the Author has of himself, or what he can do,
that he presumes upon such a Dedication; but only as a true Son of the Church
of Scotland, he finds himself obliged to espouse her Cause, and obviate the
false Calumnies which those of our own Nation do so industriously spread
Abroad; not only to the Disparagement of your Government and Discipline, but
even of your Doctrine and Morals: And therefore he begs, that what is well
designed, may not be ill taken, but that you would be pleased to accept of
these weak Endeavors, as a Testimony of his Zeal and Affection for his
Mother Church, with that same Benignity that that Great Prince accepted of the
poor Man's handful of Water which was offered him, amongst a Crowd of more
valuable Presents. He is sensible, that neither the Matter nor the Manner
deserve the Patronage of such a grave Assembly, but he hopes that you may
thence be convinced, of the Necessity there is, that you should take such
Measures as your Wisdom shall suggest, to provide Antidotes for those poisonous
Libels which fly abroad here against you, in such Numbers, by the United
Endeavors of your Enemies. You cannot readily imagine how much you lose by a
Neglect herein, and it is not easy to express the Grief of your Well-wishers, to
hear the Church of Scotland made the Song of the Drunkard; and the Ridiculous
blasphemous Stories printed here against Her, to be the common Entertainment of
Debauchees, who triumph in all public Places over your silence. May the great
Shepherd of his Church, whose Servants you are, inspire you with such Counsels,
that as the Church of Scotland had formerly Nomen inter caeteras Celebre, upon
the Account of her singular Unity; She may also be famous in Time to come,
clear as the Sun, fair as the Moon, and terrible like an Army with Banners, to
the Conviction of all those who oppose her, upon the Account of the Purity of
her Doctrine, and Strictness of her Discipline. And blessed be God, who has not
left her without this Testimony, that her greatest and most avowed Enemies are
generally the most Vicious and debauched, and visibly embarked with an Interest
altogether destructive to the Protestant Religion, and the common Liberties of
Europe.

The Scots Episcopal Innocence, etc. PART I.
IT being undoubtedly his Majesty's Design, as well as Interest, to manifest a
fatherly Concern for the Welfare of all his Subjects in General, it is
unaccountable that there should not be found a suitable Disposition in them to
concur with his Royal Intentions, and be ambitious to outdo one another in
their returns of Love and Zeal for his generous and impartial Administration;
by which, like the Sun, he dispenses the Rays of his benign Influence toward
all Men, whereof his admirable Temperament toward his Church of England, and
Dissenting Subjects; are undeniable Demonstrations; and do so clearly evince
that Justice and Equability have the Ascendent in his Soul, that it can be hid
from none but those whose Interest and Passion blind their Eyes: But my
Thoughts being at present confined to his Government in Scotland, I shall
endeavor to keep within my Limits, though I must confess it puts a Violence
upon my Inclination when I have so large a Field wherein I could expatiate with
delight.

From the sense of the Calamities under which that Kingdom has for a long time
groaned, upon account of their Differences in Church Matters, it might have
been reasonably expected that both Parties should have greedily embraced the
opportunity of a Comprehension; which his present Majesty has done more to
accomplish, than he who coveted the Motto of Beati Pacifici, or any other of
his Successors, had either Interest or Inclination to do: but to the Amazement
of all Good Men, those who petitioned for it, now when it is obtained, stand
aloof from it; and as I hope to make it appear, chiefly, if not merely, because
they are obliged to abjure all Interests which are opposite to his Majesty's,
who procured it; which (as I am confident there is no need of Rhetoric to
persuade you) is a piece of the blackest Ingratitude. But to set this Matter in
its true Light, be pleased to read the following Address of the Scots Episcopal
Party, and then the Act of Parliament which his Majesty with no small
Application has obtained in Answer to their Request, and I doubt not but you
will discover that there is a Snake in the Grass.

To his Grace their Majesty's Commissioner, and the General Assembly met at
Edinburgh. We Vnder-subscribers, for our Selves and our Constituents, Ministers
of the Gospel in Scotland.
Humbly show,
THAT since Episcopacy is abolished, and Presbyterian Government established by
Act of Parliament, as it was established in 1592; and we being desirous to
exercise the Holy function wherewith we are invested in our several Stations,
for the Glory of God, Advancement of Religion, their Majesty's Service, and the
Peace of the Nation.

Do therefore humbly desire, that all Stops and Impediments may be taken off,
so that we may be permitted to Act as Presbyters in Presbyteries, Synods, and
General Assemblies, in concurrence with the Presbyterian Ministers in the
Government of the Church as now by Law established.

The TEST, or Declaration to be Signed by all those who shall be assumed.
I, A. B. do sincerely declare and promise, that I will submit to Presbyterian
Government of the Church, as it is now established in this Kingdom by their
Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, by Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and
General Assemblies; and that I will, as becomes a Minister of the Gospel,
heartily concur with the said Government for suppressing of Sin and Wickedness,
promoting Piety, and purging of the Church of all Erroneous and Scandalous Men.
And I do further promise* That I will subscribe the Confession of Faith, and
larger and shorter Catechism now Confirmed by Act of Parliament, as containing
the Doctrine of the Protestant Religion professed in this Kingdom.

ACT for settling the Quiet and Peace of the Church. Edinburgh, June the 12th,
1693.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queens Majesty's, with Advice and
Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Ratify, Approve, and perpetually Confirm
the Fifth Act of the Second Session of this current Parliament, Entitled, Act
Ratifying the Confession of Faith, and settling Presbyterian Church Government,
in the whole Heads, Articles, and Clauses thereof: And do further Statute and
Ordain, That no Person be admitted, or continued for hereafter, to be a
Minister or Preacher within this Church, unless that he having first Taken and
Subscribed the Oath of Allegiance, and Subscribed the Assurance in manner
appointed by another Act of this present Session of Parliament, made
thereanent, do also Subscribe the Confession of Faith, Ratified in the foresaid
Fifth Act of the Second Session of this Parliament, declaring the same to be
the Confession of his Faith; and that he owns the Doctrine therein contained,
to be the true Doctrine which he will constantly adhere to: As likewise, that
he owns and acknowledges Presbyterian Church Government, as settled by the
foresaid Fifth Act of the Second Session of this Parliament, to be the only
Government of this Church; and that he will submit thereto, and concur
therewith, and never endeavor, directly or indirectly, the Prejudice or
Subversion thereof. And their Majesty's, with Advice and Consent foresaid,
Statute and Ordain, That Uniformity of Worship, and of the Administration of
all Public Ordinances within this Church; be observed by all the said
Ministers and Preachers, as the famine are at present performed, and allowed
therein, or shall be hereafter declared by the Authority of the same; and that
no Minister or Preacher be admitted or continued for hereafter, unless that he
subscribe to observe, and do actually observe the foresaid Uniformity. And for
the more effectual settling the Quiet and Peace of this Church, the Estates of
Parliament do hereby make an humble Address to Their Majesty's, That they would
be pleased to call a General Assembly, for the ordering the Affairs of the
Church: and to the end that all the present Ministers possessing Churches, not
yet admitted to the exercise of the foresaid Church Government, conform to the
said Act, and who shall qualify themselves in manner foresaid, and shall apply
to the said Assembly, or the other Church-Judicatures competent in an orderly
Way, each Man for himself, be received to partake with them in the Government
thereof: Certifying such as shall not qualify themselves, and apply to the said
Assembly, or other Judicatures, within the space of thirty days after meeting
of the said first Assembly in manner foresaid, that they may be deposed by the
Sentence of the said Assembly and other Judicatures, tam ab Officio, quam a
Beneficio; and withal declaring, That if any of the said Ministers who have
not been hitherto received into the Government of the Church, shall offer to
qualify themselves, and to apply in manner foresaid, they shall have Their
Majesty's full Protection, ay and while they shall be admitted and received in
manner foresaid. Providing always that this Act, and the benefit thereof, shall
no ways be extended to such of the said Ministers as are Scandalous, Erroneous,
Negligent, or Insufficient, and against whom the same shall be verified within
the space of thirty Days after the said Application: but these and all others
in like manner guilty, are hereby declared to be liable and subject to the
Power and Censure of the Church as accords. And to the effect that the
Representation of this Church in its General Assemblies, may be the more equal
in all time coming, Recommends it to the first Assembly that shall be called,
to appoint Ministers to be sent as Commissioners from every Presbytery, not in
equal numbers, which is manifestly unequal where Presbyteries are so; but in a
due proportion to the Churches and Parochines within every Presbytery, as they
shall judge convenient. And it is hereby declared, That all Schoolmasters, and
Teachers of Youth in Schools, are, and shall be liable to the Trial, Judgment,
and Censure of the Presbyteries of the Bounds for their Sufficiency,
Qualifications and Deportments in the said Office. And lastly, Their Majesty's
with advice and consent foresaid, do hereby Statute and Ordain, That the Lords
of Their Majesty's Privy Council, and all other Magistrates. Judges and
Officers of Justice, give all due assistance for making the Sentences and
Censures of the Church, and Judicatures thereof, to be obeyed, or otherways
effectual as accords.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by Tarbat, Cls. Regist.

God save King William and Queen Mary.

By their Petition it is easy to perceive, that Presbyterian Government, as now
established in Scotland, is none of the Stops and Impediments which they desire
to be taken off, seeing they promise a Submission to it, and a Concurrence with
it: And therefore the Ratification of this Government, in the Comprehension
Act, cannot be that which they scruple, especially seeing it does not enjoin
them to own it, submit to it, and concur with it, as the Government of the
Church by Divine Institution, but as the only Government of the Church of
Scotland.

And if any should object, That this may bear hard upon their Principles, who
may reasonably be supposed to think that Episcopacy still remains in Force. I
answer, 1. The Petitioners can have no such Objection, for they own in
Terminis, that Episcopacy is abolished: So that this can be no Subterfuge,
except they have some such Jesuitical Equivocation, or Mental Reservation,
couched under that Term, as that late Distinction, of a King de Iure and de
Facto. 2. If they do not believe the Abolition of Episcopacy de Iure, they must
be de Facto very bad Men to offer Submission and Concurrence with it, seeing
whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin; and he that doubts, is damned if he eat.
3. If they question the Legality of its Abolition, then it is plain they must
disown the Authority of their Majesty's and the Parliament, which makes them
justly unworthy of their Protection, and liable to the Lash of the Law. But, 4.
and lastly, I am very well assured, that the far greater part of the Scots
Episcopal Clergy, did always pretend to believe, That no particular Species of
Church Government, was of Divine Institution, but that it was alterable,
according to the Pleasure and Convenience of the State. And this I have heard
asserted by some of the most Learned of their Communion.


Then it remains that the subscribing the Confession of Faith as their own,
together with the Oaths of Allegiance and Assurance, and their being enjoined
to an Uniformity in Worship according to the present Administration, and making
Application to the General Assembly, thirty Days after their meeting, to be
admitted upon the Conditions aforesaid, must be what they scruple, seeing these
are all the other Terms required of them by the Act of Comprehension.

Then as to the subscribing of the Confession of Faith, they offer it in their
Petition: But how? Why truly, as containing the Doctrine of the Protestant
Religion professed in Scotland. -- They have indeed labored to persuade the
World, that the Scots Presbyterians were Fools: And truly they would have had
very good Reason for their Assertion, if they should have admitted them into
the Church upon such a barefaced Equivocation; for so the modest Gentlemen may
subscribe to the Alceran, as containing the Mohammedan Doctrine in Turkey; or the
Council of Trent, as containing the Popish Doctrine in the Church of Rome. Then
certainly their Majesty's and Parliament cannot be blamed, if they have changed
the words so far, as to make the Subscriber own it as the Confession of his own
Faith; otherwise a Door had been opened to all Errors and Heresies whatsoever.
And seeing the Petitioners own that the Doctrine of the Protestant Religion, as
professed in Scotland, is contained in the said Confession, if they refuse to
subscribe it as theirs, it is plain that they entertain some other than that
Protestant Doctrine: and if so, it cannot justly be called hard Measure, to
exclude them from officiating as Ministers in that, or any other Protestant
Church; seeing the Doctrine of that Confession is owned by all except
Lutherans, and is every way agreeable to the Doctrine contained in the Articles
of the Church of England.

Then as to the Oath of Allegiance and Assurance, I confess there is reason
enough to doubt their Sincerity, if they should comply: for never was there any
thing conceived in Terms more express, to abjure the lawfulness of resisting
Kings, or those commissionated by them, upon any Pretense whatsoever, than the
Scots Declaration and Acknowledgment of the Prerogative.

And seeing that Doctrine was so much extolled and applauded, and that the
Party valued themselves so highly upon it, I cannot conceive how they can,
without downright Perjury, own his present Majesty's Title, except they have
changed their Principles. And seeing they have never, by any public Authentic
Act, renounced that Doctrine, nor given us their Reasons why, there is no great
Cause to think that they will be any steadier in their Allegiance to King
William, than they were to King James; and therefore Swear, or not Swear,
there is no Encouragement to trust them with the Conduct of Peoples Consciences.
But however, if they refuse to swear Allegiance, no Body can think the
Government obliged to grant them Protection, for that were but to nourish
Vipers in their Bosom: And if they should swear Allegiance, and decline the
Assurance, it discovers that they act mala Fide with the Government, and only
watch for an Opportunity to declare against it: For if they think that their
present Majesty's have not a Title de Iure, they will never own their Right de
Facto any longer than while they are not in a Capacity to rebel. And at the
same time, such a Distinction denotes a Man of a very ill informed, if not of a
debauched Conscience: For if their Majesty's Title be not lawful, it cannot be
lawful for me to own it; and if their Title be lawful, it must needs be lawful
for me to oblige my self to defend them in it, against all Pretenders
whatsoever; So that a declining of the Latter, is an infallible Demonstration
of my doubting the Former. And if those who call their Majesty's Right in
question, be fit to be entrusted as Leaders of the Subjects, let common Sense
and Reason determine.

Now that the greater part of the Scots Episcopal Clergy disown their Majesty's
Title, is evident from the Practice of all their Bishops, to whom they have
sworn Canonical Obedience; from the practice of the most part of themselves,
seeing some hundreds of them were turned out by the Convention on that Head;
and by their Behavior now, seeing they universally refuse the Assurance,
though many of them formerly had sworn Allegiance, which is in plain English,
no other than a granting of the Premises, and a denying the Conclusion: Or
according to the Example of a certain Gentleman in England, granting the
Abdication, and denying the Vacancy. And in truth their offering to swear
Allegiance, and declining the Assurance, is much such another Trick upon the
State, as by their Formula they have put upon the Church; they would subscribe
the Confession of Faith, as that of the Nation, but not their own: And so they
would also swear that King William and Queen Mary are King and Queen of
Scotland, but not theirs.

Their Prevarication in this Affair, puts it out of all doubt, that their
Design to be admitted into a Share of the Government of the Church, was not
according to the specious Pretenses in their Petition, but merely to imbroil
both Church and State, and by our Confusion to make way for the late Kings in
whom that they still design to keep an Interest, is manifest by their sh^^^^ing
with the Government; as to the swearing Allegiance, which they put off from
time to time, with frivolous Pretenses, till they see the Success of the late
King's Endeavors to reinthrone himself.

So last Year they pretended that they would take the Oaths, if they were
imposed upon the Presbyterians as well as them: And knowing that that could not
be done without an Act of Parliament, they and their Party stav'd off this
Session as long as they could: Which in the mean time shows, that it was Humor
and not Conscience which kept them from complying. And now that there is an Act
enjoining the Presbyterians to take the Oath and Assurance, and that they
conform almost universally, to the Confusion of those who reproached them as
Enemies to Kingly Government; yet the Episcopal Clergy keep off still, and not
above two of them have subscribed them, because the E. of L -- w, and Viscount
T -- t, etc. advised the contrary; on this Pretense forsooth, that their
Petition was not answered at first, and the Comprehension taken in hand
immediately on its being tendered: Which a certain Minister of State did wisely
defer till the last, as reasonably imagining that that Affair would create
Heats, and disappoint his Majesty's other Affairs which were to be treated of
in Parliament. So that before ever the Church Affairs were meddled with, they
sent their Agents to dissuade the Northern Clergy from taking the Oaths,
because there was no Comprehension; and tho that Objection be now vacated, yet
they persist still in their Obstinacy: So that it is evident they have Interest
at Bottom; and it is but rational to conclude that the said Managers intend to
make their Court with the late King, by keeping the Clergy from abjuring him,
or swearing Allegiance to their present Majesty's.

But to return to our Petitioners; They were so disingenuous, and so little
sincere in their Application, that when required to attend the Committee of
Security, to whom they were referred by the Parliament, they not only declined
all Communing with them, but did, in contempt of their Majesty's and the
Parliament, load the Members of the Committee with Obloquy and Reproach: And,
as I am informed from a very good Hand, resolve to continue in their Churches,
without qualifying themselves according to the late Act.

I shall forbear insisting upon their Ingratitude to their Majesty's and the
Parliament till afterward, and go on to consider the other Terms required in
the Comprehension, which are their observing an Uniformity of Worship,
according to the present Administration, and applying to the General Assembly,
or other Church-Judicatures, for admission to a Share of the Government, after
having qualified themselves according to the Act.

Now as to the Uniformity of Worship, there is nothing in difference betwixt
them, but the use of the Doxology, or Gloria Patri, which the Episcopal Party
did declare, that they could omit in compliance with a Law, though not to
satisfy the Humors of the Presbyterians: So that according to their Concession
and Promise that ought to be no Scruple, now seeing there is a Law against it.
And as for their making Application to the General Assembly for Admission,
after having qualified themselves by Law, they cannot decline that from any
Scruple of Conscience, seeing in their Petition they promise to submit to, and
concur with the Presbyterian Government. It Is true, that the Act does also
require that they shall promise, neither to endeavor, directly nor indirectly,
the Prejudice or Subversion of that Government, which by their Promise just now
mentioned, it is evident they can have no well-grounded Objection against; for
certainly if it be lawful to submit unto, and concur with that Government, it
cannot be unlawful to promise, That they will not endeavor its Subversion,
especially if their abovementioned Principle of the Indifference of this or
that Species of Church Government, and that there is now a Law enjoining the
latter, be considered.

Upon the whole it is plain, that if the Terms of their own Petition, and those
of the Act of Parliament, be duly weighed, their refusal to comply is an
unaccountable piece of Obstinacy and Ingratitude, especially toward his
Majesty: Which I think will appear very evident, if we consider, 1. What a
great deal of Clemency, beyond any Parallel, he has been graciously pleased to
exert in favor of a Party who by their Bishops addressed against him, and
wished King James might have his Neck to trample upon when he undertook our
Glorious Deliverance; a Party that have hitherto generally disowned his Title,
and continued in Rebellion against him till their Strength fall'd; a Party who,
by their Calumnies in Word and Writing, have endeavored to render the Church
of England jealous of him; and had actually plotted in conjunction with the
Irish and French Papists to overturn his Throne, while at the same time they
made Application to him for his Favor. 2. If we consider how much he
disobliged the Presbyterians, (the only Party on whom he could rely in
Scotland) to gratify the Prelatists in forbearing to punish those of their
Party who had forfeited their Lives, by overturning the Constitution of
Government in the late Reigns, and committed barbarous Murders upon their
Fellow Subjects, and being actually in Rebellion against himself; nay, and that
which was more, advanced some of them to the highest Places of Power and Trust,
while he turned out Presbyterians, who had ventured all for him, and were
steadfast to him. 3. If we consider that he disobliged the Presbyterians, at a
nick of time when he was threatened with a Foreign Invasion and Intestine
Rebellion, by ordering the General Assembly to admit the Episcopal Clergy on
such Terms as the Parliament have thought fit to refuse, and then by dissolving
them for their declining it. And, 4. If we consider the Risk which he ran now,
when engaged Abroad with a formidable Enemy, to hazard the Session of a
Parliament, so much Presbyterian as is that of Scotland, chiefly to make way
for the admission of the Episcopal Clergy into the Church, when he could not be
ignorant how tenacious of their Privileges, both Civil and Religious, the
Presbyterians are, and what good Reasons they have for an Aversion to any
Comprehension of that Party, who when their Turn was uppermost, would never
hear of comprehending them any otherwise than in Prison or a Rope. But more
especially when this Session might have given an Opportunity to the Parliament
of Scotland, of demanding Justice against such English Men, as contrary to our
Constitution, meddle in our Affairs, and support the Episcopal Clergy in their
disturbing of the Church of Scotland as established by Law; especially having
received such an Affront, as a Commission sent down by their Influence to
require such Things of the General Assembly, as the Parliament in their Wisdom
thought fit to provide against.


I say, all these things being considered, it cannot but seem very strange,
that when his Majesty has obtained them a Comprehension, whereunto, as appears
by their own Petition, etc. as aforesaid, they can have no valuable Objection,
that they should reject it: So that to all unprejudiced Persons, this can
appear no uncharitable Censure, if we think that they have hitherto been
bargaining with his Majesty only to gain Time till they see the Success of
their late King, and the French King's Efforts, that they might take their
Measures accordingly; seeing it must needs be obvious to any who read their
Petition, and consider it duly, together with the whole Tenor of their
Practice, that the Bond of Assurance, to stand by his Majesty against all
Pretenders whatsoever, is that which choaks them most in the Terms of
Comprehension.

Their Obstinacy will still appear more, if it be considered, that the
Presbyterians, whom they treated so cruelly in the late Reigns, as to make it
Death for any of their Ministers to preach (for not Conforming to that, which,
as appears by their Petition, they themselves reckon indifferent) should have
been brought to condescend so far toward an Accommodation with them, as to
consent to their being admitted without a formal Renunciation of their Doctrine
of Passive Obedience and Episcopacy; considering that the Abjuration of the
Covenant was imposed upon the Presbyterians in the late Reigns, and that their
Conformity was expressly required as a Testimony of their owning Episcopacy, and
the King's Supremacy, which was diametrically opposite to their Principles:
whereas there is nothing in this Comprehension, but what the Episcopal Party
have conceded in their Petition.

So that there being in effect no more required of the Scots Episcopal Clergy
(that of Submission to Presbytery excepted, which they did voluntarily offer)
than what is required of all the Clergy of the Church of England: We may easily
discern whether or not the Countenance given to the Disobedience of te Scots
Clergy by some here in England, ought not rather to be ascribed to their Enmity
to the Repose of the present Government, than to their Zeal for the Church of
England; and I am certain that if the unanimous Sentiments of all true
Williamites may have any Weight, those of them who are the most Zealous Patrons
for our Scots Episcopal Clergy, are reckoned Heart-Enemies to King William and
Queen Mary: And I wish that there had been no late public Misfortunes which
may have confirmed them in their Jealousy; and I am very well assured that the
Parliament of Scotland had gone near to have branded some of those who are
Tools to the said Englishmen with perpetual Infamy, had it not been out of
respect to his Majesty, who has honored them with an eminent Character; and
might have proceeded further to have declared such Proceedings as they advised
to, in relation to the General Assembly, Arbitrary and Illegal: and a demand of
Justice against such as advised to those Measures, would have thereupon
followed of Course.

But notwithstanding of all this favorable Procedure toward our Scots
Prelatists, yet their Clamor does not cease, and particularly against those
Ministers of State to whom his Majesty entrusted the Management of Affairs;
though it be Evident, that if any Party be abridged by the Act, it is the
Presbyterians, who are now obliged by Law to receive the Prelatical Clergy on
such and such Terms; with certification, if they refuse, that the Episcopal
Clergy shall have their Majesty's Protection. So that if our murmuring
Gentlemen will but evidence so much Loyalty to his Majesty, as to abjure all
those who pretend a right to his Crown, and promise neither to molest the
Government, Civil nor Ecclesiastical, they have it in their own Power to be
secured in the execution of their Office, and enjoyment of their Benefices,
whether the Presbyterians will or not, if they cannot in thirty Days time prove
them either Heterodox or Scandalous. And seeing, as I said before, the Test to
prove their Soundness in the Faith, is no other for the Matter than what the
Church of England imposes upon her Clergy; we hope that that Venerable Society
will find no cause to complain, that the Terms of our Communion are too Narrow,
if they do but consider what our Episcopal Party have conceded: whereby indeed
they have abandoned the Church-of- England-Government and Discipline, which I
suppose will gall their Patrons more than if they had disowned her Doctrine;
which it is plain they must also do, if they refuse to subscribe the Confession
of Faith as enjoined by the Act.

This brings me naturally to observe the Unstedfastness and hateful
Prevarication of that Party, both with God and Man; which will appear
uncontrovertably true, if we consider their subscribing the Solemn League and
Covenant, when that was uppermost, and their abjuring it again after Charles
the 2 d's Restoration; their swearing of the Self-contradictory Test in his
Reign, as also to Passive Obedience; and yet their offer to swear Allegiance to
their present Majesty's, which now again they retract. Nor is their Shuffling
less notorious with their own Church: They were sworn to maintain Episcopacy in
the late Reigns, and by their pretended Zeal for it, make their Interest with
the Church of England in this, and yet offered to submit to, and concur with
Presbytery in their Petition, which now again they retract: So that the Church
of England have no more reason then we, to put Confidence in these Men, seeing
as has been said, its plain, that they have offered to relinquish her
Government and Discipline, and by their refusal to sign the Confession of
Faith. It Is evident that they have also relinquished her Doctrine; and whether
King William have any reason to trust to their Loyalty, who, contrary to their
Oaths and pretended Principles, have offered to swear Allegiance to him, when
they have, without any Recantation of their former Doctrine, offered to abandon
King James, let the World Judge. But that they are not to be trusted in relation
to King William, appears yet more fully by their Shuffling, and refusing to
comply with the present Act. And I must ingenuously confess, that of the two, I
think the barefaced and steadfast Iacobite, the honester Man; though I am apt
to be of Mr. B -- y the blind Parson's Mind, when one told him that Mr. S --
the Iacobite Parson, would bring an Odium upon their Party, by his avowed
Dissatisfaction to this Government: He answered, that Mr. S -- was a Fool, and
did act too much above-board; but that Dr. C -- es would, notwithstanding his
Compliance with the Government, be much a greater Man with King James, than S
--, or such as he. Which was a plain Declaration, that let them pretend what
they will, as the Motive of their Compliance with the present Government, it is
by virtue of a Dispensation from the late King that they may undermine it.

The Scots Episcopal Innocence, etc. PART II.
TO let the World see how little Reason our Scots Prelatical Clergy, who are
outed of their Benefices, have to complain of the Administration of their
Majesty's Government in Scotland, in relation to themselves, I have been at the
Pains and Expense to procure this following Abstract, from the Records of the
Committee of States and Council, which does exhibit a List of all those turned
out during the E. of Crawford's being President: And not only vindicates that
noble Lord from the malicious Aspersions wherewith his Enemies traduced him,
and which they continually buzzed in his Majesty's Ears, till he was pleased to
give the said Earl his desired Quietus; but justifies the Moderation of the
Presbyterians in general toward their most implacable Enemies: For here the
Reader will clearly see, that their Principles as Episcopalians, was never made
the Test; and that not one was turned out, but such as were proven guilty of
refusing to comply with the Order of the State, to pray for King William and
Queen Mary. And herein also the Council, etc. proceeded, with so strict a
regard to Justice, that they acquitted, or, to use their own Term, assoilzed
such as could not be proven guilty of Disloyalty by sufficient Evidence:
Although at the same time it was proven against them, that they had been
Persecutors of the Presbyterians, as........... number....,... And to evince
this further, we find diverse acquitted, though accused of very heinous Crimes,
as at No. 8, 58, 59, 84, 93, 94, 102, 103, 124, 125, 126, 133, 138, 164, 165,
170, 177, because the Proof was not clear.

But so great a Number being turned out, as appears by the following Catalogue,
upon the Account of their Disloyalty, it was no wonder that the Scots Episcopal
Party should be concerned to find, not only the Head, but also the Hands and
Fingers of their Prelalatical Dagon cut off, for their espousing the Interest
of a Popish Prince, whom the Convention of States had laid aside for his
Maladministration, according to former Precedents. And therefore for the
Credit of their Cause, and to wipe off that horrible Scandal, they open their
Throats, and raise the Cry, that they were turned out, because of their
adherence to the Church-of- England-Discipline; by which means they procured
abundance of Friends in this Nation, and so great Interest at Court, that they,
though disowning their Majesty's Authority, are given out to be the best of the
Subjects, and his Majesty's real Friends brought under Obloquy and Reproach;
whence came those Changes amongst Counselors and Ministers of State, and those
Proceedings against the General Assembly of the Church, which our Prelatical
Adversaries endeavored to destroy in his Majesty's good Opinion. But I hope,
that upon perusal of this following List, our Brethren, the moderate Church-of-
England-Men, will find how injuriously we have been traduced. And this
Catalogue may also serve for a Touchstone to try those Swarms of begging Scots
Iacobites, who impose upon the Clergy and Country, and obtain their Charity, as
sufferers for the Church-of- England-Government and Discipline: Whereas there
is nothing more false, they being truly seditious Iacobites, and Sufferers for
the late King's Interest, which they industriously promote as they have
Opportunity: and therefore the Charity of those well-disposed Clergymen, and
others, is actually misplaced, and given to a company of Men who are
Heart-Enemies to this present Government, and wait for its Destruction. Whereas
it would be more acceptable both to God and Man, to give what is lavished out
upon these idle Bellies, to such who are made Widows or Fatherless, or reduced
to other Straits, by their own or their Relations Adherence to this present
Government; which it is impossible during their present Circumstances for their
Majesty's to provide for. Not that I would be understood to dissuade from
Charity, to such who may really be brought to Straits for a Conscientious
adhering to King James, of which the Number will be found very small; but from
being cheated by the false Pretenses of our Scots Prelatical Clergy, such as L
-- son, F -- r, G -- y, and others, who make a Trade of Begging, and reviling
their Majesty's Government in Scotland, and spend what they get profusely in
Taverns, Alehouses, etc. in London; where it is known that they associate only
with Iacobites, though they impose upon well-meaning People in the Country, as
if they were true Williamites, and Confessors for the Church of England.

A LIST of the Episcopal Ministers deprived by the Committee of Estates, in May
1689, as follows.
May 2. 1689. MR. James Wauch, Minister of Leith; Deprived for not reading the
Proclamation enjoined by the States, April 11. 1689. and not obeying the same.
Mr. John Somervail, Minister of Cramond, the like. May 3. 89. Mr. Arthur
Miller, Minister at Innerask, the like. May 6. 89. Mr. George Barckly, Minister
at Mordington, the like. May 8. 89. Mr. Alex. Irwin, Minister at Innerkeithing,
the like. Mr. And. Auchenfleck, Minister at Newbottle, the like. Mr. David
Lammie, Minister at Carrington, the like. May 10. 89. Mr. George Hendry,
Minister at Corstorphin, the like. Mr. Rob. Ramsey, Minister of Prestounpans,
the like. May 11. 89. Dr. Rich. Waddel, Arch-dean of S. Andrews, the like. Mr.
John Wood, Minister at S. Andrews, the like. Mr. Robert Wright, Minister at
Culross, the like. Mr. Allen Young, Minister there, the like. May 14. 89. Mr.
Alexander Hamilton, Minister at Stenton; deprived for not reading the
Proclamation, nor praying for the King and Queen; and for Expressions
reflecting upon the Honor of K. William and the States. Mr. Alexander Cumming,
Minister at Liberton, deprived for not reading the Proclamation, and not
praying for K. William and Q. Mary. May 16. 89. Mr. John Malters, Minister at
Seres, the like. May 17. 89. Mr. James Scrimger, Minister at Currio, the like.
Mr. John Tailor, Minister at Drone, the like.
Turned out afterward by the Council, etc.
August 9. 1689.
1. MR. John Lumbsden, Minister at Lauder; For not reading the Proclamation of
the States, and not praying for their Majesty's, and for praying for the late
King; and that God would give him the Necks of his Enemies, and Hearts of his
Subjects. To prove which, Depositions of the Witnesses were aduced; and he
acknowledged at the Bar, that he had not read the Proclamation, and had only
prayed for King and Queen in general Terms. Deprived of his Benefice, his
Church declared Vacant; and he was ordained to remove from his Benefice at
Martinmass.

August 15. 1689.
2. Mr. Patrick Trant, Minister at Linlithgow; For not reading and not praying;
and for praying for the late King, and that God would restore the Banished;
being moreover not only scandalous to all well-affected Persons, but a very
great Encourager to the disaffected. Absent, and holden as Confessed. Whereby
Certification was granted against him, and he deprived in manner aforesaid.

3. Mr. Robert Stewart, Minister at Balwhither; cited to answer several things
that may be laid to his Charge, conform to the Information given in to the
Council Board: Absent. Whereupon Certification was granted against him, and he
was ordained to be denounced; and in the mean time deprived of his Benefice,
and discharged from Preaching, or exercising any other Part of the Ministerial
Function within that Parish.

4. Mr. John Barclay, Minister at Faulkland; For not reading, and for praying
for the late King. Present, and acknowledged that he had not read, nor prayed
for their Majesty's. Deprived, and discharged from Preaching in that Parish.

5. Mr. David Murray, Minister at Blackford; For not reading and not praying,
and not obeying the Thanksgiving, and for hindering the reading the
Proclamation for a Collection for the French and Irish Protestants. Present;
and acknowledged that he did not read nor pray, nor keep the Thanksgiving, nor
read the Proclamation. Deprived.

August 16. 1689.
6. Mr. David Guilo, Minister of the West-Kirk; As being imposed on the Paroch
by the Bishop; and for his acting as a Spy, and otherwise as an Intelligencer
to the Castle of Edinburgh, then besieged; exposing himself to the most
dangerous Places, without fear; giving Signs, and occasioning great Shooting;
calling Persons well-affected, Whores and Rogues; wearing Pistols under his
Coat: And was one of the principal Informers against Sir Patrick Nisbet of
Dean, who for his frivolous Words against him, was fined in 500 l. Sterling in
the late Government. It was sufficiently proven that he called one of his
Parishoners a damned Whore: And he acknowledged that he married Persons, and
baptized Children in the West-Kirk, several times since the Order of Council,
discharging him to preach at that Place. Finds that the Marrying and Baptizing
of Persons, being a part of the Ministerial Function, that he has contravened
the Order of Council, and therefore was deprived, ut supra.

August 22. 1689.
7. Mr. Patrick Midletoun, Minister at Leslie; For not reading, and not praying
for their Majesty's, and praying for the late King. Present; and acknowledged
his not reading, and not praying for their Majesty's. Deprived.

8. Mr. Samuel Nimmo, Minister at Collingtoun; For not reading, and not
praying; and for praying for the late King. Witnesses aduced for proving his
being constantly hindered by Force; and proving accordingly, Acquitted.

August 23. 1689.
9. Mr. Robert Gordoun, Minister at Abercorn; For not reading, and not praying;
and praying for the late King. Present; and acknowledged his not reading and
not praying. Whereupon he was deprived: And upon his desiring that the Libel
might be proven, he was, because of his disingenuity, committed to Prison
during Pleasure.

10. Mr. Alexander Burnet, Minister of the Cannongate; For not reading and not
praying, and praying for the late King; and not observing the Thanksgiving, and
the Collection for the French and Irish Protestants. To prove which,
Depositions of the Witnesses were aduced, and he acknowledged he did not read
the said Proclamation, by reason he preached that Day for the Dean by Order,
and did not read. So that it was found proven, that he has not read the
Proclamation, nor never prayed for their Majesty's, except one Sabbath; and was
deprived.

August 29. 1689.
11. Mr. John Auchinfleck, Minister at Largo; For not reading and not praying,
and praying for the late King. Present; acknowledges the not reading and not
praying. Deprived.

12. Mr. David Barcly, Minister at Stramiglo; For not reading and not praying,
and praying for the late King. Present; acknowledges the not reading and not
praying. Deprived.

13. Mr. William Galbreith, Minister at Iedburgh; For not reading and not
praying, and praying for the late King. Present; and acknowledged. Deprived.

14. Mr. John Barcklay, Minister at Ketle; For not reading and not praying; and
not only praying for the late King but also that God would confound all his
Enemies; and that he hoped to see the late King in his Throne; and for his
running always out of Church when his Reader read the public Papers mentioned
in the Libel. Present; and acknowledged his not reading, and not praying.
Deprived.

15. Mr. John Melvill, Minister at Enes; For not reading, and not praying.
Present, and acknowledged. Deprived.

16. Mr. Andrew Darling, Minister at Stitchell; For not reading and not
praying, and for not observing the Thanksgiving, and not reading the
Proclamation for the Collection. Present, and acknowledged the not reading and
not praying. Deprived.

17. Mr. Thomas Somervail, Minister at Cavers; For not reading and not praying,
and for praying for the late King. Present, and acknowledged the not praying
and reading. Deprived.

18. Mr. Francis Scott, Minister at Hassenden; For not reading, and praying for
the late King. Present; acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

19. Mr. John Hepburn, Minister at Ersletown; For not reading and praying, and
for other Scandalous Misdemeanors libelled. Present, acknowledged his not
reading and not praying. Deprived.

20. Mr. James Strachan, Minister at Fagan; For not reading and not praying.
Present, acknowledges that he prayed not, expressis Terminis, for their
Majesty's; and that the Proclamation was offered him when he was saying the
Blessing, and that he did not, nor has not yet read the same. Deprived.

21. Mr. James Adamson, Minister at Bederule; For not reading, and not praying,
and for praying for the late King. Present, acknowledges the not reading and
praying. Deprived.

22. Mr. Andrew Guild, Minister at Northberwick; For not reading and not
praying, and for praying for the late King. Present, and alleges that the
Proclamation came not to his Hands in due time; but that upon hearing hereof he
did immediately pray for their Majesty's, and observed the Thanksgiving; and
being removed and called in, declared, that he had then Scruples, and was not
yet free to read the Proclamation. Deprived.

23. Mr. William Hay, Minister at Lintoun; For not reading and not praying; and
for praying for the late King, and drinking his Health. Absent, holden as
Confessed. Certification granted against him, and he was deprived.

24, 25. Mr. Henry Pittcairne, Minister at Logie; and Mr. David Balfour his
helper; For not reading and not praying, and praying for the late King: Mr.
Henry Pittcairne absent, and holden as Confessed; and Mr. David present, who
acknowledged the not reading and not praying. Certification granted against Mr.
Henry, and he deprived; and Mr. David, discharged from Preaching, or exercising
any part of the Ministerial Function within that Parish.

August 29. 1689.
26. Mr. John Cockburne, Minister at Ormistown; For not reading and not
praying, and for praying for the late King's Restoration, and Confusion of his
Enemies. Present, acknowledged the not reading and praying. Deprived.

27. Mr. Alexander Kerr, Minister at Easter-weems; For not reading and not
praying, and for praying for the late King. Present, and acknowledged it.
Deprived.

28, 29. Mr. Alexander Lundie and Mr. William Wilson, Ministers in Couper of
Fife; For not reading and for not praying, and for praying for the late King;
and not observing the Day of Thanksgiving, and for not reading the Proclamation
for the Collection. Present; acknowledged, ut supra. Both deprived.

30. Mr. Robert Norie, Minister at Dundee; For not reading and praying.
Present, and acknowledged. Deprived.

31. Mr. Andrew Nauchly, Minister at Stou; For not reading and not praying, and
for praying for the late King. Present, and acknowledged that he knew the
Proclamation was in the Reader's Hands the Sabbath-Morning, and that he did not
then nor yet read the same, nor prayed in the Terms thereof. Deprived.

32. Mr. James Dempster, Minister at Auchter-muchty; For not reading and not
praying; and for praying for the late King's Restoration, and Confusion to his
Enemies; and for not observing the Thanksgiving, and not reading the
Proclamation for the Collection. Present, and acknowledged his not reading and
not praying. Deprived.

33. Mr. Thomas Macbean, Minister at Gordoun; For not reading and not praying,
and for praying for the late King. Present, and acknowledged, ut supra.
Deprived.

34. Mr. Henry Christie, Minister at Kinross; For not reading and not praying,
and praying for the late King's Restoration, and Confusion of his Enemies; for
not observing the Thanksgiving, nor reading the Proclamation for the
Collection. Present, and acknowledged not reading nor praying. Deprived.

35. Mr. Charles Macinarn, alias Mac-Fingus, Minister at Erwall; For not
reading, and for the other things immediately above. Present; acknowledged, ut
supra. Deprived.

36. Mr. John Cameron, Minister at Kincardin; For not reading and not praying,
and employing one who prayed for the late King James; and for not observing the
Thanksgiving, and for not reading the Proclamation for the Collections; and for
bringing down the Rebels to rob his Parishioners: And, he said, If God would
not give him amends ( i. e. Revenge) of them, he would make the Devil do it.
Present; and acknowledged the not reading and praying. Deprived.

37. Mr. William Layng, Minister at Ligertwood; For his not reading and not
praying, and for praying for the late King. Present; and acknowledged, ut
supra. Deprived.

38. Mr. Androu Dou, Minister at Crighton; For not reading and not praying, and
for praying for the late King; not observing the Thanksgiving nor Collection
for the French and Irish Protestants. Present; acknowledged the not reading and
praying. Deprived.

39. Mr. Lewis Gourdon, Minister at Kirkaldie; For not reading and not praying.
Present, and acknowledged. Deprived.

40. Mr. George Scheils, Minister at Prestonhaugh; For not reading and not
praying, and for praying for the late King, and not observing the Thanksgiving.
Absent; holden as Confessed. Certification against him granted, and he deprived.

September 3. 1689.
41. Mr. James Ross, Minister at Mintzie; For not reading and not praying.
Present; and acknowledged. Deprived.

42. Mr. Patrick Walker, Minister at Langton; For not reading nor praying, and
praying for the late King. Present; and acknowledged his not reading or
praying. Deprived.

43, 44. Mr. Adam Berckly and Mr. David Anderson, Ministers at Perth; For not
reading and not praying, and praying for the late King, and for not observing
the Day of Thanksgiving. Both present; and acknowledged their not reading and
praying. Deprived.

45. Mr. George Berckly, Minister at Sproustoun; For not reading and not
praying, and for praying for the late King. Present; and acknowledged, ut
supra. Deprived.

46. Mr. John Cook, Minister at Eccles; For not reading and not praying, and
absenting himself the Day appointed. Present, and acknowledged. Deprived.

47. Mr. James Wright, Minister at Alloway; For not reading and not praying, as
the Proclamation was tendered him to be read in the Church the same Day.
Present; and acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

48. Mr. William Speed, Minister at Ednem; For not reading and not praying, and
for praying for the late King. Present; and acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

49. Mr. Robert Calder, Minister at Nenthorn; For not reading and not praying,
and for praying for the late King. Present; and acknowledged, ut supra.
Deprived.

50. Mr. William Bullo, Minister at Stobo; For not reading and not praying, and
for praying for the late King; and as a Person imposed upon the Paroch by the
Bishop, who would give him no entry at the Church, until he went in at the
Window; and he had no Hearers these two Years; and as being a Scandalous
Person. Present; and acknowledged his not reading and not praying. Deprived.

51. Mr. John Chisholme, Minister at Lisly; For not reading and not praying,
and praying for the late King; and not observing the Thanksgiving and
Collection. Present; and acknowledged his not reading and not praying. Deprived.

52. Mr. James Adamson, Minister at Simprin; For not reading and not praying,
and for praying for the late King. Present; and acknowledged, ut supra.
Deprived.

53. Mr. William Gray, Minister at Dunce; For not reading and praying, and not
observing the Thanksgiving-day. Absent; holden as Confessed. Certifications, and
deprived.

54. Mr. James Gray, Minister at Kelso; For not reading and not praying, and
praying for the late King. Absent; holden as Confessed. Certifications, and
deprived.

55. Mr. John Blair, Minister at Scoon; For not reading and not praying, and
praying for the late King; and for saying, That the Defeat of his Majesty's
Forces at Gillechrankie, was the best News in the World: And upon the Death of
the Viscount of Dundee, That the greatest Bulwark for the Protestant Religion,
and against Popery, was gone. Present; and denying the last two, and declaring
that he had prayed for their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary; and that he
made search for the Proclamation, but got it not in due Time; and albeit he
were deprived, he would still pray for their Majesty's. Acquitted, and ordained
to read the Proclamation the next Sabbath.

56. Mr. John Ogilvie, Minister at Collace; For not reading and not praying.
Present; and acknowledged. Deprived.

September 4. 1689.
57. Mr. Paul Gelly, Minister at Avith; For his not reading and not praying,
and for his Treasonable inveying against the Government, and praying for the
Restoration of the late King, exhorting his Hearers to pray so in private; and
for saying, That then he expected a blessed Reformation, and that they had only
gotten wicked Tyranny and ungodly Rulers to govern them; and that the People
had no Security of Life or Fortune. The Defender present, Probation aduced.
Finds the Libel proven, and therefore deprives the Defender.

58. Mr. John Monro, Minister at Sterling; For not reading and not praying, and
praying for the late King. Present; and declared that he had still prayed for
their Majesty's, since the Proclamation of Estates, which came not to his Hands
in due Time, and that he had made search for the same, and had no Scruple to
read. Acquitted.

59, 60. Mr. James Grifin, Minister at Dumfermling, and Mr. Simon Couper,
Minister there; For not reading and not praying, and for saying, that when the
News came of the defeat of Gillechrankie, that no less could come of them for
rebelling against their lawful King. The Defenders present; Probation aduced by
Witnesses. Finds not the Libel against Mr. Simon proven; and in regard that Mr.
Grifin declared, that the Proclamation came not to his Hand, and that he had no
Scruple to read it, both were Acquitted.

61. Mr. Thomas Marishall, Minister at Carnock; For not reading and praying,
and praying for the late King, and hoped to see him in his Throne before
Lammass. Present; and acknowleded the not reading and praying for their
Majesty's. Deprived.

62. Mr. David Eairbairne, Minister at Duinning; For not reading and not
praying, and not observing the Day of Thanksgiving, nor suffering any
Collection to be made for the French and Irish Protestants. Present; and
acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

63. Mr. John Langlanes, Minister at Hawick; For not reading and praying, and
for praying for the late King. Present; and acknowledged his not reading and
praying. Deprived.

64. Mr. William Milles, Minister at Flisk; For not reading and praying, nor
observing the Day of Thanksgiving, and suffering his Servants to labor
thereon. Present; and acknowledged his not reading and praying. Deprived.

65. Mr. Will. Arnot, Minister at Abdie; For not reading, and praying for the
late King, that God would restore him to his Throne; and for not observing the
Days appointed the Thanksgiving, and the Collection. Present; and acknowledged,
ut supra. Deprived.

66. Mr. William Grant, Minister at Nenburgh; For his not reading and praying,
and praying for the late King, and not observing the Day of Thanksgiving.
Present; and acknowledged his not reading and praying. Deprived.

67. Mr. James Seaton, Minister at Crench; For not reading and praying, and
praying for the late King; and for not observing the Day of Thanksgiving,
suffering his Servants to work that Day, and impeding the Contribution for the
French and Irish Protestants. Present; acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

68. Mr. Thomas Paterson, Minister at Borthwick; For his not reading, and
praying for the late King. Present; acknowledged his not praying and reading.
Deprived.

69. Mr. Robert Bannerman, Minister at Newton; For not reading and praying.
Present; and acknowledged. Deprived.

70. Mr. Matthew. Erwing, Minister at Houdran; For not praying and reading, and
praying for the late King. Present; and acknowledged his not reading and
praying. Deprived.

71. Mr. Alexander Grant, Minister at Farce; For not reading and praying.
Present; and acknowledged. Deprived.

72. Mr. Walter Stirling, Minister at Badenoch; For his not reading and
praying. Present; and acknowledged. Deprived.

73. Mr. John Wenziel, Minister at Dennio; For his not reading and praying, and
praying for the late King and Queen, and for their Restoration, and Shame and
Confusion to their Dethroners. Present; acknowledging his not reading and
praying. Deprived.

74. Mr. Robert Arthburnet, Minister at Cranston; For his not reading and not
praying. Present, and acknowledging. Deprived: And in respect he was ordered to
be denounced, for resetting in his House John Hay, after he was in the Rebels
Army, was ordained to be carried to Prison.

75. Mr. Andrew Florber, Minister at Cameron; For his not reading and not
praying, and praying for the late King James. Present; and acknowledged his not
reading and praying. Deprived.

76. Mr. William Nesmith, Minister at Eickfoord; For his not reading and not
praying, and praying for the late King's Restoration, and Destruction to his
Enemies, and that God would take the Usurper out of the Way. Present; and
acknowledging, ut supra. Deprived.

77. Mr. Alexand. Williamson, Minister at Tilliallan; For not reading and not
praying, nor observing the Day of Thanksgiving. Present; and ackowledging, ut
supra. Deprived.

78. Mr. Thomas Rutherfoord, Minister at Sudar; For his not reading and not
praying. Present; and acknowledging the same. Deprived.

79. Mr. James Arthburnet, Minister at Dysert; For his not reading and not
praying, and for praying for the late King. Present; acknowledging his not
reading nor praying. Deprived.

80. Mr. George Patersone, Minister at Dersie; For his not reading and not
praying, and for discharging the Presenter to say, God save King William and
Queen Mary, when he was ending the reading the Proclamation concerning the
Baggage-Horses, and forbidding him to read it till he was out of the Kirk.
Present; acknowledging his not reading nor praying. Deprived.

81. Mr. James Weems, Minister at St. Leonards; For his not reading and not
praying, and praying for the late King. Present; and acknowledges his not
reading and praying. Deprived.

82. Mr. Alex. Auchenleck, Minister at Dunlogo; For his not reading and not
praying, and praying for the late King's happy Restoration, and Confusion of
his Enemies; and for not observing the Thanksgiving, nor Contribution. Absent;
holden as Confessed. Certification granted against him, and he deprived.

83. Mr. Alex. Sutherland, Minister at Larbor and Dunipace; For his not reading
and not praying, and joining the Rebels. Absent; holden as Confessed.
Certifications deprived.

84. Mr. Robert Glasford, Minister at Auchterderron; For his not reading and
not praying, and praying, in a disdainful manner, for King William and Queen
Mary, as those whom the States had set over us for King and Queen. Present;
declared the Proclamation came not to his Hands; and if he had got the same by
a private Hand, he would have read it without Scruple; and that he had prayed
for King William and Queen Mary; albeit not in the same Terms at first, yet
thereafter he prayed for them in the Terms of the Proclamation. Acquitted.

September. 8. 1689.
85. Mr. George Chalmers, Minister at Kenoway; For not reading and praying, and
saying to some of the Presbyterian-Perswasion, That there were three Papers
lying in the Parliament House, which was like to cause the Members of
Parliament sheath their Swords in one another Sides. Present; acknowledging
his not reading the Proclamation; and being allowed till to morrow to advise if
he would read the same, and being again called, declared, He had not the
freedom to read the same. Deprived.

86. Mr. John Falconer, Minister at Carnbee; For his not reading and praying.
Absent; holden as Confessed. Certification granted against him, and he deprived.

87. Mr. Alex. Douglass, Minister at Coldingham; For his not reading and
praying. Present; and acknowledging the same. Deprived.

88. Mr. Thomas Auchenleck, Minister at Anstruther-Wester; For his not reading,
and praying for the late King. Present; acknowledging his not reading nor
praying. Deprived.

89. Mr. John Berkley Minister at Cockburnspath; For not reading and praying.
Present; and acknowledging the same. Deprived.

90. Mr. John Lydell, Minister at Opkirk; For his not reading the Proclamation
and praying for their Majesty's; and saying, That he would never pray for them
as long as his Blood was warm. Present; and acknowledging his not reading and
praying. Deprived.

91. Mr. John Berkley, Minister at Edean; For his not reading, and praying for
the late King. Present; and acknowledging his not reading and praying. Deprived.

92. Mr. Alex. Wilson, Minister at Elie; For his not reading and praying.
Present; acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

93. Mr. David Baine, Minister at Kinglasse; For his not reading and praying,
and not reading the Proclamation, albeit the same was tendered to him in the
Church. Present; declared that the Proclamation came not to his Hands; but that
he did still, and would continue to pray in the Terms thereof, albeit deprived.
Acquitted.

94. Mr. Andrew Bruce, Minister at Pittenwyme; For his not reading and praying.
Present; and declared that he had still prayed for their Majesty's from the
beginning; and that he had intimate from his Pulpit the Tenor of the said
Proclamation, after he had seen the same. Acquitted.

September. 10. 1689.
95. Mr. John Lamie, Minister at Eccloisgrage; For his not reading and praying,
and praying for the late King, and keeping correspondence with the V. of
Dundee, and sending private Persons to acquaint the Rebels of Sir John Laniers
being on his march to attaque them. Present; acknowledging his not reading and
praying. Deprived.

96. Mr. Archibald Buchan, Minister at Spell; For not reading and praying, and
for employing disaffected Persons who were deprived, to preach for him, who
prayed for the late King. Present; and acknowledged the not reading and
praying. Deprived.

97. Mr. Richard Scolt, Minister at Askirk; For his not reading and praying.
Present; and acknowledged the same. Deprived.

98. Mr. Henry Knox, Minister at Bouden; For not reading and praying, and for
saying, That he had rather the Papists should gain the day, than the
Presbyterians. Present; and acknowledged the same. Deprived.

99. Mr. James Luntie, Minister at Chirnsyde; For not reading and praying.
Present; and acknowledged the same. Deprived.

100. Mr. James Gordoun, Minister at Rosneath; For not reading and praying.
Absent; holden as confessed. Certification, and deprived.

101. Mr. Alex. Ramsey, Minister at the old Church of Edinburgh; For not
reading and praying; and for praying expressly for the late King and Bishops,
after they were abolished by Act of Parliament. The Libel found proven by the
Depositions of the Witnesses. And he was deprived.

102. Mr. John Midletoun, Minister at Marknich; For not reading and praying,
and for praying for the late King. Found the Libel not proven by the
Depositions of the Witnesses aduced. And he was acquitted.

103. Mr. John Park, Minister at Cainden; For not reading and praying; for
baptizing the Children of scandalous Persons, without demanding Satisfaction
therefore; and praying, That the VValls of the Castle might be as Brass about
D. Gordon. Finds the Libel not proven by the Depositions of Witnesses aduced.
And he was acquitted.

September. 12. 1689.
Mr. John Gordoun, Minister at Aberladie; For his not reading and praying.
Absent; holden as Confessed. Certification, and deprived.

104. Mr. John Beatoun, Minister at Aytone; For not reading and praying; and
for praying for the late King, and not observing the Thanksgiving. Present;
acknowledged his not reading and praying. Deprived.

105. Mr. David Stirling, Minister at Heymouth; For his not reading and
praying, and not observing the Thanksgiving. Present; and acknowledged, ut
supra. Deprived.

106. Mr. James Gladstains, Minister at Yettam; For not reading and praying;
and praying for the late King, and not observing the Thanksgiving. The Libels
found proven by the Witnesses aduced. Deprived.

107. Mr. Alex. Hay, Minister at Kineucher; For not reading and praying; and
praying for the late King, and reflecting upon the Estates. Proven by
Witnesses. He was deprived.

108. Mr. William Thompson, Minister at Borroustonnesse; For not reading and
praying, and not observing the Thanksgiving. Absent; holden as Confessed.
Certification, and deprived.

September. 17. 1689.
109. Mr. Alex. Leslie, Minister at Craill; For not reading and praying.
Present; and acknowledged his not reading and praying. Deprived.

110. Mr. Andrew Hardy, Minister at Forgondenie; For not reading and praying.
Present; and acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

111. Mr. David Spence, Minister at Kircurd; For not reading and praying, and
not observing the Thanksgiving, and for not intimating the Proclamation for the
French and Irish Protestants; and declared publicly, It was as lawful to go
and hear Mass, as to hear a Sermon in a Meeting House. Present; and
acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

112. Mr. William Methven, Minister at Fogo; For not reading and praying.
Present; and acknowledging. Deprived.

113. Mr. John Home, Minister at Greenlau; For not reading and praying, nor
observing the Thanksgiving. Present, acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

114. Mr. John Balnaves, Minister at Dumbarny; For not reading and praying.
Present; and acknowledging. Deprived.

115. Mr. John Stewaurt, Minister at Waltoun; For not reading and praying.
Present; acknowledging. Deprived.

116. Mr. William Gairns, Minister in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh; For not
reading and praying, and absenting himself the Day of the reading the
Proclamation; and prayed only, God have Mercy upon King William and Queen Mary,
and the Royal Family; and for not reading the Proclamation concerning the Fast,
which he contemptuously threw down when offered to him. Present; and
acknowledging his not reading the Proclamation of the Estates, nor the
Proclamation for the Fast. Deprived.

117. Mr. George Maitland, Minister at Moffit; For not reading and praying.
Absent; holden as Confessed. Certification, and deprived.

118. Mr. James Chalmers, Minister at Kilpatrick-Fleeming; For not reading and
praying. Absent; holden as Confessed. Sentence. ut supra.

119. Mr. Robert Iunkin, Minister at Abernethie; Libel, ut supra. Absent, ut
supra. Sentence, ut supra.

120. Mr. John Macquhorn, Minister at Dallmelingeloun; For not reading and
praying, and absenting himself from his Church for two Years, without any
violence. Absent; holden, ut supra. Sentence, ut supra.

121. Mr. John VVilkie, Minister at Lintoun in Tivedale; For not reading and
praying. Absent; holden as confessed. Sentence ut supra.

122. Mr. George Macgrather, Minister at Collace; For not reading and praying,
and for praying for the late King's happy Restoration to the Throne, and
Confusion of his Enemies. Present; and acknowledging his not reading nor
praying. Deprived.

123. Mr. Thomas Strachan, Minister at St. Martins; For not reading nor
praying* nor observing the Thanksgiving, and a Proclamation for a voluntary
Contribution to the French and Irish Protestants; and for praying for the late
King and his happy Restoration, and Confusion of his Enemies. Present;
declared he only read the Proclamation, and prayed for their Majesty's King
William and Queen Mary, Sunday last after the Citation. Deprived.

124. Dr. James Kinnaries, Minister at Selkirk; For not reading and praying,
and praying for the late King, that God would restore him to his wonted
Privileges; and for keeping Correspondence with Papists, and not observing the
Fast. Witnesses aduced; the Libel not found proven, and he was acquitted.

125. Mr. William Alisone, Minister at Lilbucho; For not reading and praying,
and praying for the late King's Restoration. Witnesses aduced, and the Libel
not found proven. Acquitted.

126. Mr. James Murray, Minister at Yarrou; For not reading and praying, and
for delating such of his Parochiners to the Circuit, as withdrew from his
Preachings in 1684. Witnesses aduced, found that he had obeyed the
Proclamation. Acquitted.

September 19. 1689.
127. Mr. John Smith, Minister at Comrie; For not reading and praying, and for
praying for the late King's Restoration; and for saying, That our Rulers are
as Sodom, and Judges as Gomorrah. Present; and acknowledging his not reading
and praying. Deprived.

128. Mr. William Murray, Minister at Craft; For his not reading and not
praying, and for praying for the late King's Restoration; and for causing to be
read on the Sunday after the Defeat of his Majesty's Forces at Gillechrankie,
these Notes in the 118 th Psalm, This is the Day God made, in it we will joy
Triumphantly. Present; and acknowledging his not reading and praying. Deprived.

129. Mr. David Young, Minister at Monivaird; For his not reading nor praying,
and praying for the late King; and not observing the Thanksgiving nor
Proclamation for the Collection. Present; acknowledges that he did not read nor
pray in the Terms of the Proclamation till the Sabbath after the Citation was
given him. Deprived.

130. Mr. David Hedderweick, Minister at Camebre; For not reading nor praying,
and for entertaining of Skulking Persons, and for saying, in a deriding manner,
That the Surrender of the Castle of Edinburgh made a great noise. Absent;
holden as Confessed. Certification deprived.

131. Mr. Alexander Arthburnet, Minister at Arthburnet; For not reading the
Proclamation of the Estates, nor praying in the Terms thereof, nor observing
the Fast, nor Proclamation for the Contribution. Absent; holden as Confessed.
Sentenced, ut supra.

132. Mr. Alexander Foulis, Minister at Enderwick; For not reading, nor
praying, nor observing the Fast. Present; and acknowledging his not reading the
Proclamation, but prayed for their Majesty's, though not in due time. Deprived.

133. Mr. James Adamson, Minister at Etrick; For is not reading and praying,
and praying for the late King's Restoration; and for not observing the Fast,
but suffering his Servants to work that Day; and harboring disaffected
Persons. Depositions of the Witnesses aduced, the Libel not found proven.
Acquitted.

September 26. 1689.
134. Mr. Thomas Blair, Minister at Lendell; For not praying nor reading, nor
observing the Thanksgiving, nor the Proclamation for the voluntary
Contribution. Present; and acknowledging his not reading nor praying. Deprived.

135. Mr. David Drummond, Minister at Killmadock; For his not reading and
praying, nor observing the Fast; and for keeping Company with disaffected
Persons. Present; acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

136. Mr. Alexander Burnet, Minister at St. Ninians; For his not reading nor
praying, and for praying for the late King and pretended Prince of Wales.
Absent; holden as Confessed. Certification, and deprived.

137. Mr. Gideon Brown, Minister at Smelholme; For not reading and praying, and
absenting himself from his Church the Time appointed for the reading the
Proclamation of Estates. Present; and acknowledged his not reading and praying.
Deprived.

138. Mr. John Keir, Minister at Roxburgh; For not reading the Proclamation at
the end, but only a part thereof, and mincing the same; and for not praying for
their Majesty's, and for praying for the late King, that God would confound his
Enemies. The Libel not proven by the Witnesses aduced. Acquitted.

139. Mr. Robert Rule, Minister at Dundee; For not reading nor praying, nor
observing the Day of Thanksgiving, nor observing the Proclamation for a
voluntary Contribution to the French and Irish Protestants. Present; and
acknowledged his not reading and praying. Deprived.

October 10. 1689.
140. Mr. William Mac-Lethny, Minister at Bouill; For not reading and praying,
and for saying, that seeing he had taken an Oath to King James, he would not
obey King William's Authority; and encouraging People to disown the Authority
of their present Majesty's. Absent; holden as Confessed. Certifications granted
against him, and he deprived.

141. Mr. John Lawson, Minister at Elith; For his not reading the Proclamation
of the Estates, nor praying in the Terms thereof. Present; and acknowledged the
same. Deprived.

142. Mr. Alexander Balnaves, Minister at Kinloch; For not reading and praying,
ut supra, nor obeying the Thanksgiving or Fast. Present, and acknowledged his
not reading nor praying. Deprived.

143. Mr. Charles Ross, Minister at Cralen; For not reading nor praying, nor
observing the Fast. Present; acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

144. Mr. Gilbert Blair, Minister at Blair; For his not reading, nor praying in
the Terms of the Proclamation of the Estates, nor observing the Fast. Present;
and acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

145. Mr. John Blair, Minister at Fuitrey; For not reading nor praying, and
refusing to do the same, and saying, Let the Whigs pray for King William and
Queen Mary, for he would not, for he never got good by them: And for saying,
That he would not pray for them, till She got her Father's Blessing; and God
keep him from having such a Daughter. Absent, holden as Confessed. Deprived.

146. Mr. John Kier, Minister at Culls; For not reading, nor praying, nor
observing the Thanksgiving nor Collection. Present; and acknowledged his not
reading nor praying. Deprived.

147. Mr. David Rankin, Minister at Ratry; For not reading the Proclamation of
the Estates, and praying in the Terms thereof; and for not observing the Day of
Thanksgiving. Present; and acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

October 3. 1689.
148. Mr. Robert Young, Minister at Kippen; For not reading and not praying,
and for many Evidences of his dissatisfaction to the Government, and for his
being otherwise Scandalous, and for certain Expressions uttered by him.
Present; denies the Proclamation came to his Hands the 21 th of April, and that
he was constantly since Molested; and that he never preached since, except once
in his own House, and then he knew of the Proclamation, and did not read nor
pray in the Terms thereof. Deprived.

149. Mr. Patrick Bell, Minister at Port; For not reading nor praying, nor
observing the Thanksgiving. Absent; holden as Confessed. Certification, and
deprived.

150. Mr. James Menzies, Minister at Calender; For not reading, and not
praying. Deprived.

151. Mr. John Edmnigestown, Minister at Gorgounoch; For not reading and
praying, and throwing from him the Proclamation of the Estates when delivered
to him to read; and being a Person violently thrust in on the Paroch without
consent; and for his Immoderate Drinking, and other scandalous Practices.
Depositions of the Witnesses aduced, found the Libel sufficiently proven.
Deprived.

152. Mr. Alexander Mac-Knizir, Minister at Neutyll; For his not reading nor
praying, nor observing the Fast. Depositions of the Witnesses aduced; finds the
Libel not proven. Acquitted.

October 8. 1689.
153. Mr. Patrick Strachan, Minister at Maxtown; For not reading and not
praying. Present, and acknowledged. Deprived.

154. Mr. William Eason, Minister at Auchtergaven; For not reading, and praying
that the Lord would exalt King James 's Horns above his Enemies, and that they
and their Designs might be Confounded. Present; and acknowledged his not
reading and not praying. Deprived.

155. Mr. Thomas Fouler, Minister at Kinail; For not reading nor praying, and
for praying for the late King's Restoration, and for thanking God for the
Viscount of Dundee's Victory against Maj. Genesis Mackay at Gillechrankie, and
thereupon drinking the late King and Viscount of Dundees Health. Present;
acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

156. Mr. John Murray, Minister at Scoon; For not reading and praying, and for
praying for the late King's Restoration; and sitting down on his Knees, and
blessing the Viscount of Dundee in his Undertaking for the late King, and for
sending his Brother with the late Viscount; and for saying to him, God's Curse
and my Curse befall you, if you leave the Viscount until he return Victorious.
Present; and acknowledged his not reading, nor praying. Deprived.

October 10. 1689.
157. Mr. William Law, Minister at Forres; For not reading nor praying, nor
observing the Proclamation for the Contribution. Present; and acknowledged, ut
supra. Deprived.

158. Mr. John Drummond, Minister at Mintzie; For his not reading nor praying,
and for praying for the late King, and being otherwise scandalous in his Life.
Present; and acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

159. Mr. William Falconer, Minister at Dyck; For not reading nor praying.
Present; and answered, that Dundee was at the Place on the Day appointed for
reading, with a great number of Men and Arms at Forres, and staid there two
Days before, and a Day after, and threatening all the Ministers of the
Presbytery conveened at that time, if they should read the same; and that there
was no other Day appointed for reading thereof; and that he was content to make
Faith, that he had expressly prayed for their Majesty's; and that he was of
Opinion that such a Government of the Church, which conduces very much to Piety
and suppression of Vice, has the approbation of God Almighty, and so is Iure
Divino; and that Presbyterian Government with Moderation and Unity may conduce
to the aforesaid Ends as much as any other Government in the Church of this
Nation. In regard that M. G. Mackay was in the Neighborhood, and as near the
time appointed for reading the Proclamation of the Estates, and during his
continuance there, the Defendent persisted in his disobeying, he was deprived.

160. Mr. William Hay, late Bishop of Murray, as Parson of Elgin; For not
reading nor praying, nor observing the Proclamation concerning the
Thanksgiving, Contribution and Fast. Absent; holden as Confessed. Certifications,
and deprived.

161. Mr. Archbald Good, Libel, ut supra, Deprived.
Minister at Elgin. Present; acknowledged not reading nor praying.

162. Mr. James Cook, Libel, ut supra.
Minister at Langbude; Present; and acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

163. Mr. John Drummond, Minister at Fowls; For not reading and praying, and
praying for the late King, and keeping converse with Rebels. Present;
acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived, and ordered to be committed to Prison, and
the Bond granted to Keiller to produce him, ordered to be given to him the said
Lord of Keiller.

October 16. 1689.
164. Mr. James Craig, Minister at Kilren; For not reading and praying, and
saying, That this Prince, King William, had procured great Trouble in his Time;
and wishing he were drowned in the mickle Pot of Great-Nesse, which is the
deepest place in Murry-Water; and for calling King William a Cypher'd King; and
for several other opprobrious Speeches. Witnesses aduced. The Libel not found
proven, and he acquitted.

October 18. 1689.
165. Mr. James Forsythe, Minister at St. Ninians; For not reading and praying,
nor observing the Thanksgiving, and reflecting against the Proceedings of the
Estates. Depositions of Witnesses aduced. Libel not proven, and he acquitted.

166. Mr. James Aird, Minister at Toryburne; For not reading and praying, and
praying for the late King, our natural Prince, that God would comfort him in
the Day of his Distress; and praying that God would send back that Tyrant
(meaning King William, who had come to invade these Lands) with a Hook in his
Jaws. Depositions of Witnesses aduced. The Libel found proven, and he deprived.

October 22. 1689.
167. Mr. John Hamiltoun, late Bishop of Dunkeld, as Minister at Miglo, and Mr.
John Gresin his Helper; Both for not reading the Proclamation, nor praying in
the Terms thereof; and the said Mr. John, for praying for the late King's
Restoration, and that God would give him the Necks of his Enemies; and for
harboring the Visc. of Dundee. Mr. John Hamiltoun absent, holden as Confessed;
and Mr. Gresm present, and acknowledging he read not the said Proclamation, nor
prayed in the Terms thereof. Certification granted against Mr. John Hamiltoun;
and both deprived.

October 29. 1689.
168. Mr. Alex. Lindsay, Minister at Cortachie; For not reading and not
praying, and praying for the late King, and not observing the Thanksgiving; and
several other things libelled against him, as evidencing his dissatisfaction to
the present Government, and keeping Correspondence with the Rebels. Present;
and acknowledged his not reading nor praying. Deprived.

169. Mr. John Nicolson, Minister at Erroll; For not reading and praying, and
for employing deprived Ministers to preach for him the Day of the Fast, and for
praying in general for the King and Queen, and that God would enlighten the
King's Eyes, and that no Arms prosper against him, meaning the late King.
Present; and acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

November. 7. 1689.
170. Mr. John Ross, Minister at Dornoch; For not reading the Proclamation of
the Estates, nor praying in the Terms thereof. Present; and the Complainant
being cited, and having produced no Witnesses; and the Defender producing a
Certificat, that the Proclamation was not sent to the Sheriff-Deputy of the
Shire of Southerland, or the Clerk of the foresaid Shire under their Hands; and
declaring that he had no Scruple to read the same; and that lie had prayed for
their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary. Acquitted.

171. Mr. James Fran, Minister at Keith; For not reading and praying, and
praying for the late King's Restoration to the Throne. Absent; holden as
Confessed. Certification, and deprived.

172. Mr. Arthur Strachan, Minister at Morthick; For not reading, and praying
for the late King's Restoration to the Throne; and for his conversing with
Rebels, and for pressing some of his Parishioners to go into open Rebellion
under the Lord Dumfermling. Present; and acknowledging his not reading nor
praying. Deprived.

173. Mr. John Henderson, Minister at Defford; For his not reading nor praying,
and praying for the late King's Restoration to the Throne. Present; and
acknowledged his not reading nor praying. Deprived.

174. Mr. John Hay, Minister at Ruthven. Libelled, ut supra. Present, and
acknowledged, ut supra. Deprived.

175. Mr. Patrick Chalmer, Minister at Boyndee; For not reading and praying,
and praying for the late King's Restoration; and for his praying against, and
speaking Evil of the present Government, and praying for K. William and Q. Mary
scoffingly, saying, as they call them: And for expressing, That seeing the
Convention had voted out K. James, he hoped they would vote out the belief of
the Trinity also. And for calling the Members of Parliament a pack of Devils
and Rebels: And that the Convention had only issued out the Proclamation for
the Contribution, on purpose to disgrace King James; and that they were
Runnagadoes and Rascals who came from Ireland, and pretended Persecution,
Oppression and Force, when they had never lain under any, and therefore would
not intimate the Proclamation: And for saying, That all that are for King
William, should renounce the Name of Protestants, and take that of Rebels. And
for his ordinary conversing with Papists, drinking Drunk; and being otherwise
scandalous in his Life and Conversation. Present; and acknowledged his not
reading and praying. Deprived.

176. Mr. John Innes, Minister at Ganirie; For not reading the Proclamation,
and praying in the Terms thereof; and for praying for the late King's
Restoration to the Throne. Present; and declaring, as soon he had notice of
the Proclamation of the Estates, he prayed for their Majesty's, King William
and Queen Mary: And that the Proclamation not coming to his Hands in due time,
sometime thereafter he read the same, having got it from a neighboring
Minister. Acquitted.

177. Mr. Alex. Ker, Minister at Grange; For not reading and praying, and
praying for the late King's Restoration to the Throne. There being a
Certificate produced, under the Hands of two Physicians, upon Soul and
Conscience, That he was not able to travel: And another Declaration under the
Hands of his Parishioners, that he had given Obedience, he was acquitted.

178. Mr. John Dempster, Minister at Larg; For not reading and praying, and
praying for the late King. Absent. Deprived.

179. Mr. Simon Grant, Minister at Duther; For not reading and praying.
Acknowledges. Deprived.

180. Mr. Colme Nicolson, Minister at Kirkmichel; For not reading and praying.
Absent. Deprived.

181. Mr. John Stewart, Minister at Cromdale; For not reading and praying.
Present; and acknowledges. Deprived.

182. Mr. James Grant, Minister at Abernethie; For not reading and praying.
Present; and acknowledges. Deprived.

183. Mr. Walter Rose, Minister at Rogart; For not reading and praying, and
praying for the late King. Never called in question. Continued till the first
Thursday of January, and never called.

184. Mr. Hugh Rose, Minister at Creigh; For not reading and praying, and
praying for the late King. Never called in question. Continued, ut supra, and
never called.

The Scots Episcopal Innocence, etc. PART III.
Being some Reflections on Dr. Monro's malicious Pamphlet, entitled, The
Spirit of Calumny, etc.
PLVTARCH in his Book de Cohibenda Ira, has a Story of one Magas King of
Cyrene, that sent some Bones and a little Bowl to a Poet, who had writ
Invectives against him, as thinking that he had done it for want of better
Employment. Certainly we have reason to make the same Judgment of our Scots
Prelatists, who being spued out of their own Country by the Convention, as an
Insupportable Grievance, have nothing else to do, but invent and publish
Calumnies against the Presbyterians, whom the King and Parliament have
preferred before them; and in Truth their Choler has got the Ascendant so
much, that if any good natured Physician will present them with a Purge, I Will
cheerfully contribute for some Bells and VVhistles, which for any thing I know,
may be a Service to the State, and prevent a Voyage to the Baltic for Hemp.

But to come to our Authors. Their Pamphlet, entitled, The Spirit of Calumny
and Slander, is truly the same with which they themselves are possessed, as
undeniably appears from the 3 d Page of their Epistle to the Reader, where they
assert, That they know no Sect, Ancient or Modern, that ever broke the Peace of
the Christian Church, but may be more plausibly defended than the latest
Edition of Presbytery in Scotland. By the latest Edition, they must mean as it
is now established, since the late Revolution in Doctrine and Discipline. Now
for the Doctrine of the Presbyterians, it is established by Act of Parliament,
as contained in the Westminster Confession, which is granted by every one to be
the same, as to the Matter, with the Doctrinal Articles of the Church of
England. Then as for their Discipline, which is established by the same
Authority, it is that of their Government by Parochial Consistories, made up of
the Minister and Elders; Presbyteries, which consist of a greater number of
Ministers and Elders associated; Provincial Synods, which are composed of
Delegates from the several Presbyteries; and General Assemblies, which are
formed of Commissioners from all the Presbyteries of the Kingdom. Now any that
have perused the Learned Archbishop Usher's Treatise, to reconcile Episcopacy
and Presbytery; or that have ever considered the Concessions made as to the
Government of the Church by Charles I. in his Treaties, may easily be
convinced, whether our Learned Authors were not possessed with the Spirit of
Calumny and Slander even in the sense of the Moderate Episcopalians, when they
published the Proposition abovementioned. But this will appear more evident
still, if we do but enumerate some of the Ancient and Modern Sects who have
broke the Peace of the Church.

To begin with the Gnostics, who were so Ancient, that Dr. Hammond. Diss.
Proem de Antichr. thinks that the Apostles saw the first Authors of their
Opinions; and that St. Paul alludes to them, in 1 Timothy 6.20. They are charged
with denying the Godhead of Jesus Christ, maintaining all manner of Impure
Lusts, polluting the places where they met accordingly, and foasting
barbarously on the Children begotten in such Impurity, after they had pounded
them into Mortar, which they esteemed a most religious Act, as is related by
Tertullian, Epiphan, Theodoret, etc.

In the next place, we shall name the Arians, who begun about 290, and infected
most of the Christian World: They held Christ to be a Creature, and the Holy
Ghost the like, rebaptiz'd the Orthodox, and baptized all their Disciples only
from the Navel upwards, as thinking the inferior Parts unworthy of it.

The Donatists flourished in the 4 th Age, and held, that the Son was less than
the Father, and the Holy Ghost less than the Son. That it was lawful to kill
themselves, rather than fall into the Hands of the Magistrates, and to kill
others who were not of the Faith.

The Armenians in the 6 th Age, who held, that Christ took not a Humane Body
from the Virgin; that his Body was immortal from the Minute of his Conception;
that there was a quaternity of Persons, and that the Divinity suffered.

In the 11 th and 12 th, the Bong^milit rejected the Books of Moses, and
aledged that God had a Humane Shape.

But to make haste, we shall come to the German Anabaptists of the 16 th
Century, whose Opinions and Enthusiasms are known to every one: And the
Socinians, who deny the Divinity of Jesus Christ, etc.

For the Arminians, I know it is in vain to name them, most of the Party being
infected with their Leaven: But if any Man will be at the pains to compare the
Doctrine of the Church of England in her Articles, and the Westminster
Confession, which agree in the Matter, with the Sects here mentioned, he may
quickly be satisfied whether those Gentlemen may not justly be charged with a
Spirit of Malice and Slander, in saying, That they know no Sect, Ancient or
Modern, etc. but what are more plausible than Presbytery in the latest Edition?
They have no other Hole to creep out at, but either that they knew not of those
Sects, or else that those Heretics did not break the Peace of the Church; and
then we shall know what Judgment to make of their Learning and Ingenuity. But
if they insist upon the Comprehension Act, let them answer what I have already
said on that Head.

However, we may quickly be satisfied, that those Gentlemen's Veracity and
Learning, are much of a-piece, if we consider the amiable Character which they
bestow upon the Presbyterians in the Scots Presbyterian Eloquence; viz. That
they are void of common Sense, never scruple any Perjury before a Judge, that
may seem to advance their Cause. That they think Murder a Virtue, when the Work
of the Covenant requires it. That they generally discountenance Morality; glory
in Lying, Cheating, Murder and Rebellion, to fulfill the Ends of the Solemn
League. That they look not upon a Man as endued with the Spirit of God, without
a loud Voice, whining Tone, broken and smothered Words, and such canting
deformity of Holiness. Their Ministers, they say, are a proud, sour,
unconversible Tribe; looking perfectly like Pharisees, having Faces like their
horrid Decrees of Reprobation; are without Humanity, void of common Civility:
Never preach Christ nor Eternity; are Firebrands, the Scandal of Christianity,
and Disgrace of the Nation.

Now I would fain, in the first place, ask our Gentlemen, Whether this be not
an Arraignment of the King and Parliament* who have lodged the Government of
the Church in such Men's Hands, and established Presbytery to please such a sort
of People? And if this Character be true, Whether King William be not the
greatest of Tyrants, to have established such a Church by the touch of his
Scepter, in contrariety to such a Learned, Holy, and Innocent Party as the
Scots Episcopalians? And if this Character be not true, Whether the Libellers
and Bookseller be not obnoxious to the Government, and guilty of seditious
Designs, in accusing his Majesty of having concurred to the settling of such a
Church? Or, whether the Ministers of State in Scotland have not cause to demand
Justice for this Indignity put upon their King and Parliament?

In the next place, Who deserve most to be charged with Falsehood, Malice,
Slander and Forgery, the Authors of the Scots Presbyterian Eloquence, who
charge the whole Presbyterian Party of Scotland with those odious Crimes in
general? or the Answerer, who proves the Prelatical Persecution by Acts of
their own Parliaments, and their Murders by uncontrollable Instances? And his
Charge in general against their Clergy, by the Vote of this present Parliament,
when a Convention, That they were the great and insupportable Grievance of the
Nation. To which the Prelatists can oppose nothing, but Sir George Mackenzie's
Vindication of Charles II's Government in Scotland, which the Answerer has
made appear to be a malicious Libel, or else the Cause of King William's
Undertaking was unjust, and He and his Parliament of Scotland abominable Liars,
in declaring those Acts which Sir George defends to be impious.

And last of all, I would ask those Gentlemen, Whether they think that any
thing which they invent or suggest against the Answerer, can justly deserve any
Credit, when they attaque the Reputation of the King, Parliament, and all the
Presbyterians of Scotland?

But lest I should weary my Reader, in being too serious with Libellers, that
know not how to be serious in any thing but Wickedness, I Will give him Apollos's
Portraiture of Calumny; the Goddess to which our Scots Prelatists do now offer
Incense, though at the same time they have still a hankering mind after Bachus
and Venus. This Goddess called by the Greeks (...), was accompanied by
Credulity with great Leathern Ears like Midas, or the silly Tory-fellows about
Town, who damn and sink themselves, if all that the Doctor and his Fraternity
have writ against the Presbyterians be not true. Credulity stretched out her
Hands to Calumny, as those dull Fellows do to the Authors of the Scots Presbyt.
Eloquence. On each Hand of Credulity, were Ignorance and Iealousy, i. e.
Guthry, Foster, etc. who trot about the Country, to impose upon the Credulous,
with their abominable Forgeries against the Presbyterians. The first of them
was represented by a blind Woman, that saw as little before her Nose, as does
Simon Wild the pretended Author of the Spirit of Malice and Slander: And the
second by a Fellow of an ill-natured Look, just like Dr. Monroe, expressing his
uneasiness, as the Doctor did at my Answers, but yet seeming to be pleased with
some secret thing which he had discovered, as he and his scoundrel Journey-men
hug and bless themselves at the huge Discoveries which they pretend to have
made against Mr. R. in Sir W. Paterson's Letter, accusing him of the terrible
Sin of Popeburning. In the middle of the Picture, facing Credulity, appeared
Calumny like a very handsome Woman, well dressed, but having a fierce Look, and
her Eyes sparkling with Anger, the lively Representation of the false
Accusations forged by the Doctor and his Fraternity, against the Church and
State of Scotland, and varnished over with a counterfeit Zeal for the Church of
England. In her left Hand Calumny carried a burning Torch, the flagrant
Scandals with which they charge the Presbyterians in general and particular.
And in her right Hand she dragged a little Infant, who by its cries implored
the Assistance of Heaven, and so do we to vindicate our Innocence against the
Scourge of their false Tongues. She had Envy for her Gentleman Usher, who
looked like a Meagre and withered Fellow, eat up by his own Choler. Another
lively Representation of Dr. Monroe, who changes Posts, and is sometimes
Prefacer, sometimes Author, to the scandalous Libels against the Presbyterians;
and being outed of his Place because unworthy, corrodes his own Bowels with his
viperous Resentments, (...), the Unfortunate being always enraged with their
Misfortunes. Calumny was followed by Imposture and Flattery, such as Iohnston's
forged Certificates; and those from the Coopers, Curats, Carters, and old
obsolete Iacobite Magistrates, etc. at Edinburgh, of whom afterward. However
these took care of Calumny's Dress, or what else belonged to her Service; and
so those humble Sneaks are ready to wait on the Doctor, Iurare in Verba
Magistri, and condemn a Book which I am sure some of them never saw. At a
considerable distance from Calumny, followed Truth. My Answers justified by the
Acts of Parliament, and other Records of the Nation. Truth seemed to march
toward the Place where Calumny stood, to beat up the Doctor's Quarters. And
Truth was followed by Repentance in Mourning; and I wish both of them to the
Doctor, for the notorious Lies which he has uttered against the Presbyterians.
This Representation of Calumny did Apelles present to one of Ptolomy's
Captains, against another Painter, who had falsely accused Apelles of a
Conspiracy. And in like manner I present my Reader with this Portraiture
against Dr. Monro, and the rest of the Scots Prelatical Lies-mongers, who have
falsely accused the Presbyterians in general, and many of them in particular.

Page 2. Our Authors undertake to make it appear, before any number of grave
Witnesses, That there is not one good Consequence in the Answer to the Scots
Presbyterian Eloquence. Whereas the Answerer challenged them then, and does
again challenge them now, to prove this an ill Consequence; That if it can be
made appear that they enacted severer Laws against us, than we have against
them; or that the Prosecution of those Laws by the then Government, was much
more rigid than the Prosecution of our Laws by the present Government: Then it
must necessarily be granted, that the Scots Episcopalians are Liars, in saying,
That they are more severely persecuted than ever we were. Now if I have not
made good the Antecedent in the first part of the Answer to the Presbyterian
Eloquence, I appeal to all Men of Sense: And therefore the Consequence must
hold good in spite of the Doctor and his Journey-men: And until they answer
what is aduced against their Position in that Book, they must be contented to
be posted for Liars, in saying what they have asserted; or Cowards, that dare
not defend it.

Page 2. You bestow the Epithet of the truly Just, upon Sir Geo. Mackenzie, and
endeavor to stave off the Charge of Subordination, and change it into that
which our Law calls Precognition, or a previous examination of the Witnesses.
But, Doctor, there is a great difference betwixt Precognition and Prescription:
Sir George set them their Lesson, and took an Account whether they had conn'd
it, that they might swear it briskly in Court: And if it had been otherwise,
there was no need of Sir George's begging forgiveness of God upon that Account;
which Sir George Campbel of Cesnock will own to be true, though you have the
Impudence to say, that I have no ground for what I asserted in this Matter, but
my own Petulance.

Then as for your Insinuation, that Sir Geo. Mackenzie needed not that
Gentleman's Recommendation to the present Court, if he had been ambitious to
have been a Favorite. It shows your incurable Ignorance of what is the Subject
in Controversy betwixt us; for I said, that he had a Mind to ingratiate himself
with that Gentleman, without any mention of his Application to the Court; tho
in the mean time it is well-enough known, that how ambitious soever you or he
either might have been of Favor at Court, that the Court cared for neither of
you; and so you may stand aloof with the Fox, and cry out, sour Plumbs, when
you cannot come at them.

And as for your slovenly Reflections, Page 3. upon Sir Geo. Campbel, for
divulging Sir Geo. Mackenzie's Acknowledgment, it is a Commendation from such an
one as you, who can speak well of no honest Man: Nor has he any reason to
resent it, seeing you are as unmannerly to the King and Queen, whose Favor you
think not to have been worthy of Sir Geo. Mackenzie's Ambition.

As for what you call my Advice and Threatenings to English Ministers of State,
I said nothing but what concerns the Honor of our Nation, and what all true
Scots-men do and will maintain, that they ought not to meddle in our Affairs.
Stafford was as high once, as some others are now: And his Holiness, Archbishop
Laud, who took the Title of Whitlock's Memorials, p. 83.
Pontifex Maximus, Aeternum Reverendissime Cancellarie, and Sanctitas Vestra,
did as much despise the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, as you and your Patrons
do at this Day; yet both of them were broken in pieces by falling on that
Stone. And as I said then, I say still, that the Kingdom of Scotland is not so
very contemptible, but that its Influence may reach those who put an Affront
and Injury upon them now, as well as formerly.

As for your false, malicious and impudent Reflection, Page 3. That I treat
King William no better than other Kings. It Is like the rest of your Sense and
Veracity: I only make a Supposition, that if it should be so and so, what we
may justly plead and defend by the practice of the Church of England toward
King James. Whereas I charge your Kings with direct Breach of their Trust, and
Subversion of the Original Contract; but your Eyes were blinded with
Indecencies of Passion, or sitting up too late at the Tavern, that you could
not, or would not see what I wrote; yet, like a devout Worshipper of Calumny,
you are resolved to reproach, tho without either Sense or Reason, as appears by
your delicate Argument to maintain your Position: because, I say, he is
prevailed upon to write Letters to the General Assembly, which they are not
obliged in Law to comply with; therefore you argue, that according to my
Hypothesis, If he venture upon such Essays of Arbitrary Power, he may in a
little time forfeit his Title, since he has none but such as is twisted with
the Divine Right of Presbytery Pray, Doctor, look upon this Argument your self
once more, and see whether your Conclusion can naturally follow from the
Premises, and compare the Hypothesis which you have laid down as mine, with P.
4. of my Book which you refer to, and see if you have not knavishly perverted
it My Assertion is, That their Majesty's accepted the Crown upon this
Condition, among others, in the Claim of Right, That they should consent to the
Abolition of Prelacy, as contrary to the Inclination of the generality of the
People: And that they have since abolished it accordingly, (which is a
fulfilling of the Contract) and established Presbytery in Scotland, as most
agreeable to the World of God, as well as the Peoples Inclinations, which are
the very Words of the Act of Parliament. Then I suppose, that if their
Majesty's should be prevailed upon (which, blessed be God, there is no cause to
fear) to act contrary to their solemn Oath, and the Claim of Right, they must
needs see that the People of Scotland would have ground enough to plead a
Breach of the Original Contract. Nor could the Church of England for shame
condemn them, seeing they have made use of the same Plea, in their Convention
and Parliament against King James.

Now, Doctor, where can you find in these Words, that I say or insinuate, that
he has no Title but what is twisted with the Divine Right of Presbytery? His
Title is indeed twisted with an Obligation to abolish Prelacy, as contrary to
the Peoples Inclinations, and to establish such a Government of the Church, as
should be found most agreeable to the same. And accordingly after a
Twelve-months suspense, which was time enough to examine it, Presbytery was
settled, as most agreeable to the People, and, ex super abundanti, as also most
agreeable to the Word of God: Which Clause it was in his Majesty's own Power to
have consented to, or not; for there was no such thing twisted with his Title,
nor did I ever assert it as you do knavishly alledg, though at the same time I
made it appear, that according to the Church of England's Hypothesis, a King
may forfeit his Title by breaking the Original Contract, and dispensing with
the Laws; for that was the Clamor of your Party against the late King, though
your Universities, Judges and Clergy, had formerly preached up his Dispensing
Power.

Then for your Argument, to fix your Malicious Reflection upon me, that if he
venture upon such Essays of Arbitrary Power, as writing Letters to the General
Assembly, which they are not obliged in Law to comply with, he may in a little
time Forfeit, etc. It Is so weak, that I am ashamed for Country's-sake, that
ever that Man should have been made Vice Chancellor of an University who argues
no better. Will any Man of Sense infer, that because his Majesty, out of his
exuberant Clemency to his sworn Enemies, writes to the General Assembly to
admit some of them into the Church, which they are empowered to do by the Law
if they please, but are not obliged by the Law to do it; I say, will any Man of
Sense, think that this is such an Essay of Arbitrary Power, as may hazard the
forfeiture of the Crown? Indeed, Doctor, according to the late Actings and
Arguments of your Party, such a Principle may be fixed upon a certain sort of
Men in the World, who as soon as the King touched the Hem of their Garment, and
gave Liberty to Dissenters, did forthwith bandy against him, and expel him. But
you may see that all those Kings which the Presbyterians did oppose, were
guilty of overturning the very Foundations; and yet the World must needs own
that they were very tender of King Charles I's Title and Person,
notwithstanding of all his Male-Administrations. And if your Doctorship please,
either to read Rushworth's Collections, Whitlock's Memorials, or the Bishop of
Salisbury's Memoirs of the House of Hamilton, you will find how Honorably the
Presbyterians of Scotland acted in relation to King Charles I, both in the
Treaty, at delivering him up; complaining of the Breach of that Treaty by the
Usurping Faction, and protesting against his Imprisonment and Trial; though you
be pleased, to the dishonor of your Native Country, to assert, with as much
Impudence, as Ignorance and Malice, That we tied him Hand and Foot, till others
out off his Head. Whereas all the World knows that the same Party who cut off
his Head, would be satisfied with nothing less than our Hearts Blood for
espousing his Cause, and that of his Son and Successor Charles II. when those
who were afterward the greatest Sticklers for your Party, did at the same time
abjure him; as did also General Monk when he was actually bringing him in;
which you may see in the same Author's abovementioned; and the Life of both
those Kings printed lately by Nathaniel Crouch in the Poultry.

In the next place, Doctor, I must find some Weapon-Salve for that dreadful
Wound which you have given me, in saying, That her present Majesty is much
obliged to me -- for alleging that the Scots Prelatists have put the Stuarts
from the Throne. Really, Doctor, I do think that the Family of Nassaw is now
upon the Throne, and that with so many Advantages as have hardly been seen
before; for all the different Titles of Birth, Marriage, and the Peoples
Choice, are centred in his present Majesty; whom God has endowed with such
Qualifications, that if Alexander the Great had had such a Successor, he would
never have said, detur digniori. But, Doctor, I am so much a Scots-Man, that I
am no otherwise for the House of Nassaw, than as the Champions whom God has
chosen for the Protestant Interest, and one of the most Illustrious Cyons that
ever was engrafted in old Fergus's Stock. Nor is it any Diminution to the
Honor of our Country, to have a King from that Family which gave Emperors to
Germany. But, Doctor, Hinc illae Lachrymae, proh dolor! Here Is the thing that
grieves your Party. That that very Family which cut the Turkish Bowstring of
Passive Obedience, when sent from Spain to choke the Netherlands, should, by
the Wheel of Fortune, be tumbled from beyond Sea to do the like for Britain and
Ireland, which have been in horrible Convulsions ever since the Apostles of
Slavery, Whitlock's Memorials, p. 8.
Sibthorp and Manwaring preached in 1626, That the King might make Laws, and do
whatever pleases him; and that the Subjects under pain of Damnation, ought to
pay the Loan-Money, demanded by Charles I. and obey the King's Will in all
things. Which by the way, Doctor, gives quite another state of the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience, then what your Doctorship is pleased to exhibit P..... And
if it be not Nefas dictu, I humbly conceive that the Authors of that Doctrine
understood it as well as your Doctorship, or any other of their Scholars: But
in truth, Doctor, Ignorance and Malice are so very discernable in your Spirit
of Calumny, that it is hard to know which of them has the Ascendant; for I
perceive your Elect Lordship so much upon the Fret, and in such a terrible Rage
against the Presbyterians, that you charge them with as little Sense, and as
much Malice, as did that Fellow who came home drunk, and not being able to find
the Keyhole of his Door, swore, That the Fanatics had stole it away.

Then, Doctor, I would fain know whether it be not against the Logical Axiom ex
particulari, because Herriot appointed an Anniversary to be kept by those of
his Hospital, for whom he has provided a constant Maintenance, on condition
that they observe his Rules; of which this is one, To argue thence that the
Observation of Anniversaries may be imposed upon a whole Nation, by Churches or
Civil Magistrates. Really, Doctor, I think this to be just such a way of
arguing, as that of a foolish Girl, who being a gathering of Berries with her
Mother, said, O Mother, here is abundance of Berries, for I have found one.

Or tell me, Doctor, whether it be not a Nonsequitur, that because a particular
Man may impose an Anniversary upon those of an Hospital whom he maintains, and
who by the Observation of his Rules, whereof this is one, are entitled to all
the Benefits of his Munificence; to argue thence, That the Church, or Civil
Magistrate, may impose Anniversaries upon all the Christians in a Nation,
seeing they are neither the Founders of their Religion, nor Donors of the
Benefits which they reap thereby.

Next, I would pray your Doctorship to resolve me, Whether if I affirm such a
Man to be a whining Fellow, who drivles at Eyes and Mouth, which in all English
Construction must signify Weeping, and another calls that same Man a Ludicrous
Fellow in relation to that very Action; I say, I would pray you to resolve me,
Whether we do not contradict one another? But if the Doctor have such a
Faculty, that he can drivle at Eyes and Mouth in Jest, I confess that he not
only deserves the Name of Scaramouchi, but to be a Merry-Andrew in the
principal Booth in Bartholomew-Fair.

But, Doctor, to argue this Point a little further, tell me, Whether there be
not a direct Contradiction betwixt your Parties saying, as I cited it, Page 37.
That there was nothing like Justice amongst the Presbyterians; and your owning
that the Presbyterian Privy Council, and a Presbyterian Synod treated Dr.
Canaries with special Honor, acquitted him, and reproved his Accusers? Really,
Doctor, if this be not a Contradiction, I do not understand one; but I wish you
understood a little more Honesty, to quote your Adversary fairly, and not leave
out my Words, on which the stress of the Argument lay, as you did here. You
make a great Noise with me, for leaving out the Word Sense; when you oppose the
Quality, Sense and Interest of your Party against ours; and yet charge me
falsely with saying, that Nero and Julian the Apostate had the advantage of the
Primitive Christians, in Quality, Sense and Interest; whereas I only said in
Quality and Interest, which you cannot deny. But, Doctor, I Will allow you Sense
too, and yet the Argument will hold pretty well; for Nero and Julian the
Apostate, were Men of much better Education and Sense too, if we mean
Philosophy, or Natural Wisdom, than any of the Apostles, Paul excepted: And yet
the Christian Religion is no loser by it, for St. Paul himself declares, that
not many Wise, not many Mighty, nor not many Rich are called; and here is
Quality, Sense and Interest allowed to be on the side of our Enemies by the
Apostle; so that the Presbyterians might yield all three to the Prelatists, and
be no losers in their Cause: but, blessed be God, we need not, for we have the
King and Parliament on our Side, and I hope there is Quality, Sense and Interest
enough to over balance you. Then you alledg, that I own your Honor and
Integrity; whereas I only tell you, that it is none of my Business to question
it; but the Instances they are charged with, come under none of those Heads:
which to any Man but the Doctor, would be understood a denial of it; and
therefore your Doctorship must either confute those Instances, or yield your
Cause; for I still say it is none of my Business to question their Honor and
Integrity in Terminis.

But, Doctor, to make an end of our Logical Controversy; look to the last Page
of your Postscript, and tell me, Whether those words, he begins his Book with a
Lie in the Title Page; or this Proposition, that such a Book was printed for
Thomas Anderson at Charing Cross, is a Lie, be Affirmative or Negative? Doctor,
I maintain the former, and for this reason, because there is somewhat affirmed
of the Subject: And to make it plain to every Capacity that they are
Affirmative, let us try whether they be the same with these Propositions; He
does not begin his Book with a Lie, or that such a Book was printed for Thomas
Anderson at Charing Cross, is not a Lie; which are undoubtedly Negative.

Doctor, I presume that you have not forgot the Logical Canon, Vt propositio
sit Negativa, necesse est particulam Negandi, vel toti propositioni praemitti,
vel Copulae and verbo adjectivo habenti vim Copulandi immediate addi. Pray,
Sir, either show the Particle of Negation in your Proposition, He begins his
Book with a Lie in the Title Page, or yield the Cause.

But seeing you are pleased to say further, That if you called me a Liar;
though such a Proposition sounded like an Affirmative, yet it was no
Affirmative Proposition, but finally resolved into a Negative, and can no
otherwise be proved than as a Negative may. I demonstrate the contrary thus.
You know that Mentiri, is derived from Contra mentem ire, and therefore you
will excuse the Latin; Omnis qui it contra mentem, mentitur;
At Doctor Monro it contra mentem:
Ergo.


Now, Doctor, I prove the Minor thus, You said, That Halside denies that ever
he was persecuted by Sir George Mackenzie, which you must know to be an
Untruth; for Halside never denied any such thing. And thus, Doctor, I have
called you a Liar, and proved it as an Affirmative; and submit it to the
Judgment of all Mankind, whether it be you, or Mr. R. that has discovered their
Ignorance of the Difference betwixt a Negative and an Affirmative Proposition?

Doctor, as for the mighty Advantage you imagine to your self, because of the
Act of the Assembly enjoining the Covenant to be taken by Students at their
first entrance to the College; you will find it not so great as you believe,
for you did equivocate at best, in saying, It was required of Children at
Schools: By which one might have thought, that it was imposed upon Children
before they could read. And according to your wonted Honesty, you charge words
upon me, that I never wrote, viz. That I believed the Covenant was required of
little Children that offered to take Degrees of Master of Arts, about the Age
of thirty Years; whereas I mentioned no such thing as thirty Years in that
Case: and hereupon, Doctor, I make bold to call you a Liar; which according to
your Logic, is no Affirmative, and therefore I hope you will not be angry.

But further, Doctor, although it be the Custom now for Children to go to the
Universities at Twelve or Fourteen, which yet is rare, except you mean the
Humanity Class; it was not so usual in 1638, or the Time of the Covenant, which
I believe your Doctorship may have heard, if you don't remember it. But after
all, Doctor, I own that I did not remember the Act, nor have not the Acts of
the Assembly by me, but yet I was as near the Truth in my Supposition, as you
were in your Assertion, if Schools be taken in the lowest sense.

But, Doctor, because I do not love to be in your Debt, I Will answer your
Question in Page 54. and show, that you are as ignorant of your own Acts, as I
am of our Acts. Your Act of Uniformity obliged all Ecclesiastics to renounce
all Obligation from the Covenant on them, or any other, to endeavor any
Alteration of Church Government. And by the Corporation Act, all Nonconformists
were obliged to swear, That they would never endeavor any Alteration of the
Church Government, or else they were not suffered to live within five Miles of
a Corporation. And not only so, but all Vestries, Corporations, and Militia,
were sworn never to endeavor any Alteration of Government of the Church. So
that now I hope your Doctorship has received more than a sufficient Answer to
your Demand, to let you know, if ever Clergymen were turned out of their
Livings upon their denying to promise, neither directly nor indirectly to alter
an Ecclesiastical Government. For here you see it is imposed upon Laics, and
therefore we hope that the Church of England will find no reason to complain,
that this is imposed upon our Ecclesiastics. And whereas you caution me not to
run up and down, and make a Noise as if you opposed an Act of Parliament, for
you only dispute against the Opinion of blind Zealots, who have no more regard
to the Peace of the Nation, than to the Order of Episcopacy: In truth, Doctor,
I think it is reckoned Treason in Scotland to impugn an Act of Parliament; and
King and Parliament both, are those blind Zealots against whom you dispute, for
they have in the Act, establishing Presbytery, declared it most agreeable to
the Word of God. But your Doctorship is wiser than they all, and says, It
cannot be reconciled to it, no more than to the former Settlement of
Presbytery; and yet the last Act establishing Presbytery, does only ratify the
Act of 1592: But such Contradictions are venial in the Doctor.

As to St. Austin's Epistle to St. Jerome, your Doctorship is so much
Cock-a-hoop, that it is but reasonable to chastise your triumphant Ignorance, by
citing it: And therefore if you please to read his 19 th to St. Jerome, you
will find these words, Quamvis secundum honorum vocabula, quae Ecclesiae usus
obtinuit, Episcopatus Presbyterio major est, in multis tamen, etc. Now, Doctor,
I think here is the Antiquity of Presbytery acknowledged, and nothing more but a
Ius humanum of Episcopacy asserted, which was all that I said; though,
according to your ordinary way, you falsify my words. And whereas you are
pleased to argue for Episcopacy, from the Jewish Church Government, as having a
High Priest above the other Priests; I wonder you do not also argue for
Circumcision to be joined to the rest of your Jewish Ceremonies; and perhaps
you might, if it were only to be imposed upon Laics. But I am afraid that your
High Priest Paterson would never consent to it, because, for a time at least,
it would mar his and some other of your Clergy-mens Gallantries. But, Doctor,
is not there a visible disparity in the Case? Can you say that the Office of a
Bishop, is as distinctly set down as different from a Presbyter in the New
Testament, as that of a Priest and High Priest in the Old? For though you find
the Name of Presbyter given to all above a Deacon in the New Testament, yet you
find the Offices of Apostle, Evangelist, and Presbyter, to have their
specifical Differences; but so you can never do as to Bishop and Presbyter, who
are the same in Name and Office; but that you let slip through your Fingers.

F. Simon, though a very great Friend to the English Prelatists, concerning
whom he says, Que des tous les Sectaires ils approchent le plus de l'Eglise
Roman dans ce qui regard la Discipline Ecclesiastique. He does not run so
high as the Doctor, but says only, That comme dans chaque Synagogue il y avoit
un President on Chef de Synagogue, de meme dans les premieres Assemblee des
Chrotiens il y avoit un Chef que quelques Peers ont nomme President, and il est
appelle dans le Nouveau Testament Eveque and pretro ou ancien. He says further,
That la Jurisdiction qu'on nomme aujurdhui Episcopale ne dependoit Point de
l'Eveque seul mais de toute l'Assemblee des Pretres conjointement avec
l'Eveque, and cola a dure tant qu'il n'y a en dans chaque Ville qu'une Eglise
and qu'une Assemblee des pretres jointe a son Eveque Mais Aussitot qu'il fut
necessaire d'augmenter le Nombre des Eglises il y ent a craindre que ceux qui
les governoient ne S'attribuassent aussi la qualite d'Eveques ce qui fut cause
que les Eveques commencerent a s'attribuer quelque autorite sur eux. P. Sim.
Supplement, Chapter 4. and Hist. des Revenus Ecclesiastiques.

Now, Doctor, I hope you will allow Father Simon to be as well versed in
Rabbinical Learning as your self: You see that he only insinuates their
Imitation of the Jews, but nothing of a Divine Warrant; and plainly owns, that
the Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters, is merely of humane Original. But I
must tell you further, Doctor, that your Argument from the High Priest of the
Jews, will be more conclusive for a Pope: And if this be not argued like a
Gentleman of his Guard, it is however argued like one that wishes him well. For
your brag as to St. Jerome, reconcile it to his Commentary on Titus, or your
own Opinion with Dr. Holland's K. James the 6 th's Professor at Oxford,
Archbishop Whitgift's, Dr. Fulk's, and others of the Church of England. The
first in an Act at Oxford, July 9. 1608. concluded, That it was contrary to the
Scriptures, Fathers, Doctrine of the Church of England, and Schoolmen, to say
that Episcopatus est ordo distinctus a Presbyteratu, coque superior Iure Divino.

And in the next place, Doctor, as a further Answer, consider, That there was
no standing Officer appointed in the New-Testament-Church above a Deacon, but a
Presbyter. And Clemens, who lived in the first Century, in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, telling them, That God in the Jewish Church, appointed a High
Priest, Priests and Levites, names no other Orders of Ministry in the Christian
Church, but Bishops and Deacons; His words are (...). And, Page 57. (...) (...)
Note, this (...) imports here (...), because, Page 57 and 58, he shows, that
the Controversy was not about the Name, but Dignity of Episcopacy, because they
were about deposing their godly Presbyters or Bishops.

But, Doctor, my next Attaque shall be upon your Evidence, Sir William
Paterson, who is pleased to treat Mr. Ridpath with the genteel Terms of
Villain, Rascal, Varlet, etc. though at the same time Mr. Ridpath is content to
refer it to any Herald in Scotland, Whether the Family whence he is descended,
or Sir William's be the best. It can be very well instructed, that the Family
of Ridpath is of the same Original with the Gordons, both by the Heralds Books,
their armorial Bearings, and constant Tradition. And I think there is none will
deny, that the Family of Gordon is one of the eldest and greatest Families in
Scotland. The History of Douglas does also own, that their Princely Family did
not think it below them to espouse the Quarrel of that of Ridpath, the best
Families of the Mers, as those of Swinton, Cockburn, etc. will not disown their
having been allied to them: And there is yet a Monument in Cranshaw's Church, at
the Head of that which was formerly the Baron of Ridpath's Seat, demonstrating,
that one of our Kings did not think it below him to be the Guest of that
Family, and to honor them with his Company to Church. This I have much ado to
prevail with Mr. Ridpath to let pass, as being of the Opinion, that all such
things are but Vanity; and that sola Virtus nobilitat; nor would he have indeed
suffered it, but that his malicious Enemies think it their Interest to revile
and vilify him, because, forsooth, he was a Servant; though at the same time he
was never Servant to any Man, but in a Station becoming a Scholar, and thinks
it no disgrace to be so still: And as for being Servant to the two Sons of one
Mr. Gray, it is false; he had no concern but with one of the Greys, and that was
as an Assistant in his Studies; and that Gentleman did then, and does still
treat him as his Companion, nor is he ashamed to own that he serves Mr. Gray
now.

As for Dr. Cant's having found the Bond of Combination, as he calls it, upon
Mr. R. it is also false; nor was ever the Original Bond found by any of your
Party; though Mr. Massey, who was his Regent, had a foul Copy of the Bond from
Mr. Gray, which must be that, if there be any, that is in the Council Office:
And if it be there, he dares refer to it to prove Sir William's Falsehood, as to
that Clause inviting Prentices, and all others, to join in the Association, for
there was never any such in it. But lest Sir William, or any of his Gang, have
corrupted it, I shall by and by exhibit an attested Copy to prove what I say:
And it is as false that any Ringleader of the Presbyterians, or any other,
were concerned in framing the Design besides the Students themselves. Nor was
it ever designed as a Prologue to any Rebellion, as Sir William does aver.
Neither has Mr. R. any reason to believe that he would have been spared, could
the Law have reached him, or could they have found a Jury to have condemned
him; for the Proceedings against him on that Head, were universally abhorred by
all Protestants in general, those of Sir William and the Doctor's Kidney
excepted. As to the Benefit which Mr. R. had by the D. of York's Clemency, we
shall hear anon: And as to the falseness of his Answer to the D. of Rothes, and
other great Lords, he defies Sir William to instance in one.

But to set this whole Matter in its true Light, take this short but true
Narrative of it. Mr. R. having, upon reading the account of the Pope burning at
London, moved it first himself to some of his fellow Students; the Design was
so laid afterward, that it could not well, nor did not miscarry; though the
two Mr. Greys, Mr. Guthry, Mr. R. and others were taken up the Night before the
burning of the Pope, on design to prevent it; and after the Business was done,
examined by Sir George Mackenzie, the King's Advocate: but Mr. R. being
sufficiently possessed with the Apprehensions of the then raging Tyranny, he
refused to answer, though threatened with Torture, till he was persuaded
thereunto by his Regent, Mr. Massey, who told him in a very Friendly manner by
himself, that my Lord Advocate only desired to know whether any other than the
Students were concerned in the Contrivance; for if it happened to be so, that
it was only a Project of their own, the Council would pass it over as a puerile
Business; whereupon Mr. R. confessed, that he drew the Bond, and after several
Questions upon that Head, was discharged, which was a very unpardonable Blunder
in that great Lawyer, if the Matter had imported High Treason, as Sir William
alleges. But that this was so in Matter of Fact; Mr. R. appeals to Mr. Massey,
who is still a Regent at Edinburgh; and though no Knight, yet a Person of
better Reputation than ever Sir William was. But though Mr. R. was set thus at
Liberty, a Storm immediately succeeded the Calm; some malicious Persons having
spread it about, that the Students had threatened to burn the Provosts House,
which stood about a Mile from the Town, if he would not release their Comrades
from Prison; the House was in a few Days after burnt by some Papists, as was
supposed, to bring an Odium upon the College; but the Students were all of them
at Liberty before, so that they had no further Ground of quarrel, and a barrel
of Powder with the King's Ammunition-Mark, which the Students could never have
come by, was also found near the place. However the Council issued a
Proclamation, charging it upon the Students, and summoning the Regents to
appear with such and such of their Scholars to answer it: and Mr. R. being one
of those named, his Friends advised him to withdraw, because they knew his
Danger, both as a Presbyterian and framer of the Bond, but especially because
there was no due legal Course observed in those Days. Yet he was so concerned
for his Reputation, and that of the University which he had engaged in the
Affair of the Pope burning, that he would not abscond, but appeared on the Day
of Summons; and being examined on the Head of the Bond, for burning the Pope,
refused to answer at first, because he was summoned for his alleged Accession
to the burning of Priest-field. But the Council declining that, and insisting
upon the other, and Mr. R. knowing that he had confessed to Sir George
Mackenzie, as above, that he had writ the Bond, did again own it before the
Council. And after many other Questions wherein the Bishops were severest upon
him, the D. of Rothes was very favorable to him, upon notice of his Relation
to Mr. Thomas Ridpath of Fulfordlees. But Mr. R. being ordered to withdraw to a
Corner of the Room, while the Council advised what to do, Sir W. Paterson, then
Clerk to the Council, came to Mr. R. and pretending a deal of Friendship, asked
him, If he went to Church? which Mr. R. refusing to answer, this generous
Knight went immediately to the Council Board, and moved them to ask the
Question, which heightened their Resentments, but especially that of the Bishops
against him. Mr. R. was hereupon ordered to Prison; and as the Macer was
carring him out at the Council Chamber Door, Mr. R. perceiving that there was
abundance of Spectators, and remembering that the whole College was falsely
charged with the burning of Sir James Dick's House, then Lord Provost, for
suffering them to be so much abused, he thought it requisite, seeing he was the
only Student committed, to tell the Spectators, in his own Vindication, that it
was only for burning the Pope. Sir W. Paterson, who represents these words
falsely, being behind Mr. R. when he said so, pulled him back by the Hair, and
reviled him before the Council, in much the same Language that he uses now in
his Letter. And the D. of Rothes, the President, signed an Order for Mr. R's
close Consinement without Pen, Ink, or Paper, or any Friends having Liberty to
come and see him, without his Order. And thus, Doctor, you have an Account how
your Evidence, Sir W. Paterson, acted both the part of an Informer and Hangman
against Mr. R. and therefore it is no wonder that he should vilify one whom he
had so much abused.

Mr R. being consigned, as above, was kept close Prisoner for five Weeks, and
removed from Room to Room to prevent his escape or rescue, without any Friends
having liberty to speak with him, but in presence of the Keeper, who, from time
to time, brought him Word that he was to be tortured, as indeed the Council had
threatened him, or some such dismal Message. And at the same time the University
was broke up, the Students banished the City, and an extraordinary Guard set
upon the Prison; but that ever Mr. R. was laid in Irons, as Sir W. says, is
false, though he did very much wonder at the Providence of his escaping the
Boot, or a second Examination. However two other snares were laid for him at
the same time: the first was, by putting in one John Murray into the same Room
with him, who was condemned for an Opinion which some of those poor oppressed
People called Cameronians, began then to broach, that Charles II. ought not to
be owned as King, because he had broken the Covenant on which he took the
Crown, and that a small number of about 20 or 30 Men had declared his
Forfeiture at Sanqhair. This Man being much superior to Mr. R. in Years, and
very Zealous for his Opinion, they thought he would infect Mr. R. with it, and
so they might hang him by clear Law: but a worthy Minister, supposed to be the
Reverend and Learned Mr. Iamison, having found means to convey Notice of the
Design to Mr. R. it was not only frustrated, but Mr. R. proved an Instrument to
save his Fellow-Prisoner, by convincing him of the unreasonableness of his
Principles; and persuading him to petition the Council, which with the
Intercession of his Friends procured his Pardon, though he was just ready to
have been led to Execution.

Mr. R. having been 5 Weeks in close Prison, was upon his Petition allowed the
Liberty of the House; and a little after the Council passed a Sentence of
Banishment upon him, without calling for him to show a reason why: And at that
same time they laid a 2 d Snare for him by ordering him to sign a Bond,
obliging himself to depart the Kingdom in ten Days, and never to return without
their License, on pain of being holden pro Confesso, as guilty of the Burning
of Priestfield abovementioned, and punished accordingly. But Mr. R. did utterly
reject it, because he perceived the Design, though they thought, that being a
young Man, and uneasy under Confinement, it would have gone down glibb, and
then they would have had occasion of Calumny at least not only against him, but
the whole College, though they never examined him upon that Head when he was
before them. Mr. R. petitioning the Duke upon this unreasonable Bond, and
desiring only that the Penalty might be altered, it was granted, and Mr. R. was
ordered to give Bond, and a Bondsman, for 2000 Mark Forfeiture, if he did not
depart the Kingdom in 10 Days, and never return without their License; which
was accordingly done March 10, 1681.

This is a true Narrative of that Affair; and now, Doctor, Mr. R. is not afraid
to leave it to any true Protestant to judge, whether his Part in it, or that of
your Prelatical Council, and particularly the gallant Knight Sir W. Paterson,
was most honorable; especially if Mr. R's Years, and other Circumstances, be
duly considered. For however your Scurrilous Evidence Sir William represents
him, he had never then been under the Razor; though the valourous Knight may be
very well satisfied, that it was not from any defect of his Constitution, if he
remembers the full handful, which Hangman like, he took of his Hair to pull him
in again before the Council.

And to let your Doctorship see further what honest Evidence you have to
support your Cause, here is an attested Copy of the Bond, which Sir William
gives a false Account of.

WE whose Names are here underwritten, in order to the prosecuting of our
Design to burn the Pope in Effigy; (1.) Do faithfully promise mutual
Assistance and Concurrence; but to prevent Scruples which may arise hereanent,
We declare that it is not out of contempt of Lawful Authority, or to bring any
Person or Persons into a Praemunire, but out of a pure hatred against that Man
of Sin, and eldest Child of the Devil. (2.) For the Encouragement of each
concerned in this Affair, we faithfully promise Secrecy, lest any should incur
Hazard, either by contriving or carrying it on. (3.) We promise to defend one
another, against the Opposers, but yet we look for none. (4.) That we shall not
suffer one another to be extruded the College, or imprisoned upon that Account.
(5.) That in a special manner we shall keep secret the Names of the principal
Actors.

To the observing of which Articles, we, every one of us for our selves,
oblige, upon the Word of a Gentleman and Promise of a Christian; and in case of
Failzie, the Divulgers or Breakers, besides the incurring the Hatred of the
Observers, shall forfeit 30 s. Scots.

The Attestation. THAT this above-written is the true Copy of the Bond
contracted amongst the Students of Philosophy in the College of Edinburgh,
called by the Council the Bond of Combination; Whereupon they found their
Warrant for what they have done against the whole Students in general, and for
sentencing to Banishment our Fellow-Student, after nine Weeks Imprisonment in
particular: We do by our subscriptions Testify. William Gordon, eldest Son to
my Lord Viscount of Kenmure. John Drummond, Son to Alderman or Balzie Drummond,
of Edinburgh. William Gordon, 2 d Son to the Lord of Earlston, and now a
Captain in the Earl of Leven's Regiment. John Drummond, a Perthshire Gentleman.
Da. Arnot, Son to a Worthy Minister. Thomas Wake, a Northumberland-Man. Io.
Guthrie, lately Major in my Lord Cardrosses Regiment.


Now, Doctor, here is your Evidence, Sir William Paterson, proven to be a false
one, by the Attestation of several Gentlemen of better Quality, and the meanest
of them of much better Extract than himself. Whence his Worship may also have a
clear Vidimus, that better than he chose Mr. R. whom he does so much vilify for
their Companion. And at the same time you may also perceive the Wisdom of your
Prelatical Council, in making so much to do, and bringing in their whole Army
to oppose about 200 young Lads, who had a mind to divert themselves by burning
the Pope, and to secure themselves from the Insults of any rascally Fellows,
Papists, and others, with which the Town did then abound; or from any Collegial
Punishment which the Principal and Regents durst never have refused, if the
Council had desired it, entered into the abovementioned Bond; which was so far
from being maturely considered, that the Tautologies are sufficient to discover
its having been drawn in a Hurry; and the foolishness of the Penalty shows,
that it was altogether Juvenile. But however, the Council of Scotland, and
especially Archbishop Paterson, and his Brother Sir William, were then so
eager to promote a Popish Interest, that they affronted Mr. George Shields; who
is well enough known here in London for his owning the late King, because he
did about that time, as I think, preach against Transubstantiation; and
threatened to kick him down Stairs.

Well, Doctor, we must now come to the Politics which you advance, p. 51. by
way of Apology for your Bishops, seven of whom concurred with the Convention of
States in their Vote, when King James's Letter was delivered to them, viz. That
they were a free and lawful Meeting notwithstanding of any Order that might be
contained in that Letter to dissolve them. Whence I concluded, that the said
Bishops were inconsistent with their former Principles, and after Practices.
The first thing which you advance, is a Concession that it was so, if they
intended by that Vote nothing less than what the Presbyterians advanced. Now,
Doctor, that the Presbyterians advanced any thing higher against King James
than his Forfeiture of the Crown for his Maladministration, you cannot
pretend: but I humbly conceive there is something more advanced in the
concurrence of your Bishops, viz. that King James had forfeited without
Maladministration; for we never heard that they complained of his Government,
nor was it possible according to their Principles, that he could forfeit on any
Account whatsoever. Now, Doctor, all that remains in Controversy betwixt us in
this Point, is, Whether by this Vote they intended that King James had
forfeited, or not? And I dare be bold to aver, that whether it were Intentio
operantis, or no, it was certainly Intentio operis: and if your Bishops could
not see so far before their Nose as this comes to, who can help it; for that it
was the undoubted Right of King James, while he was King, to call and dissolve
Parliaments or Conventions, I know no Body that denies: And therefore by clear
Consequence, the depriving him of this Power, does certainly divest him of the
Sovereignty; and if your Bishops did this, though they did not intend it, it
may perhaps excuse them from being Knaves, but it declares them Fools with a
Vengeance. But, Doctor, I am afraid, that if the Business be duly canvass'd, it
will prove them both. That this Power of Calling and Dissolving Parliaments,
etc. was one of the fairest Jewels of the Crown, and the most discernable Badg
of Sovereignty in a limited Monarchy, they could not be ignorant of: And
therefore to deprive their King of that Prerogative, when by their former
Principles they professed him to be accountable to God only, argues, that they
played the Knave with God and him too; and if they thought that their future
Practices would either have atoned for them at the Hands of K. James for
unkinging him, ipso facto, or recommended them to his present Majesty after
such a proof of their Treachery to his Predecessor, it demonstrates them to
have been Fools.

Well, but the Doctor, who it would seem was of the Cabal, tells us, That they
took the Word, A free and lawful Meeting, not to signify any Meeting of the
People contrary to the King's Prerogative, Authority and standing Laws, but
rather a Meeting to support all the Three. Good Doctor, this may perhaps please
Fools, but do you think that K. James will take this as a sufficient Excuse for
that rascally knavish Act of unkinging him, contrary to your own Principles, or
at least Pretenses? Was not the declaring that to be a free and lawful Meeting,
though K. James in his Letter had ordered you to dissolve, contrary to his
Prerogative, who as I have already said, had the Power of calling and
dissolving Parliaments, etc. lodged in him, as an Inherent Right of the Crown,
according to your Principles? Or could that be a free Meeting, according to
your Tenets, which was called against his Mind by a Power directly opposite to
him, and which had an Army to support it? And if that Meeting was not against
the standing Laws, what becomes of your Act of Combination, so much insisted
on, to prove Mr. R. a Traitor, in combining with others to burn the Pope? or of
these other Acts, which declare it to be Treason to convocate the Lieges
without the King's Authority? as I am sure this Convention was called without
K. James's. But further, Doctor, how could this be a lawful Meeting, in your
Sense, to which those who were Outlawed by your own Laws, and declared Rebels
and Traitors, had not only access as Members, but were some of its principal
Constituents, and had joined with the Prince of Orange to procure this Meeting
by the Sword? So that, good Doctor, if these things be duly considered, you
will find it hard to persuade the World, that your Bishops believed that the
Design of this Meeting was to support K. James's Prerogative, Authority and
standing Laws.

In the next place the Doctor tells us, That they were to sit, notwithstanding
of a Prohibition, until such time as they could duly inform the King of their
Straits and Difficulties; that is, in plain English, they will sit whether the
King will or not, till he hear their Case. Really, Doctor, this is strange
Doctrine from a Passive-Obedience-Man* sed magna est Veritas, and praevalebit:
the Devils themselves were forced to confess Christ, though much against their
Wills. But, Doctor, how will you reconcile this Doctrine with your Reflection
on the Presbyterians, for meeting without the King's Leave, in 1639, when there
was an indispensable Necessity for it, to prevent our being swallowed up with
Tumults, occasioned by illegal Impositions on Church and State? But I beg your
Pardon, Doctor, the Episcopalians have perhaps a Privilege to rebel, which
others have not; and in truth, to give them their due, of all the Rebels which
this Age has produced, they are the chief.

The Doctor tells us further, That they hoped that a Vote might be forgiven,
which their Practices would have vindicated from any suspicion of lessening the
Royal Authority. A fair confession then, that they had some after-Game to play,
to atone for their treasonable Vote. Indeed, if the Viscount of Dundee, with
their Concurrence, could have succeeded in the Design which was charged upon
him to destroy the Convention, it had been a sufficient Vindication of their
Loyalty to K. James; but in the mean time we are obliged to the Doctor for his
Ingenuity, this being a plain confession, that his Party can go along with the
present Government in things, which all Men of the World would think the most
destructive of K. James's Interest, because their After-practices will
sufficiently vindicate them from any suspicion of lessning his Royal Authority.
So that the present Government may hence have a fair prospect of the Fidelity
of our Scots Prelatists, who, by the Doctor's Confession, have such a
Dispensation from the late King; For they were to sit, says he, notwithstanding
of a Prohibition: So that it seems K. James's Prohibition is only to color the
Matter. So that take him which way you will, the Doctor's an honest Man, he can
go along with the Convention, and unking his Prince at one Blow, and that
pleases this Government; and he can, by after-practices, vindicate his Loyalty
to K. James, and that is a sufficient satisfaction to the late Government. Is
not this an Ambidexter?

But, Ibid. the Doctor would insinuate, That they were just in the same
Condition with a Merchant in a Storm, who will throw all overboard to save his
Life. Good Doctor, the P. of Orange's Army murdered no Man; nor was there any
other Life in hazard, than that of your Scots Prelacy: And truly K. James is
mightily obliged to you, that to preserve it, you would throw him overboard,
and sink the Crown, to save the Mitre. And when that would not do, then you
pretend Loyalty to K. James again, because you could do other; for K. William,
and the Nation of Scotland would not entertain you. And lest your Doctorship
should think this to be more than I can prove, I refer you to your Friend Mr.
Caddel's Declaration, and the Petition of your Party to this present
Government, which demonstrates, beyond all Contradiction, that you would sell
K. James and Prelacy both, if you can but get Money by the Bargain: Though I
must needs say, that you have much more Zeal for the Latter than the Former;
for you take a great deal of pains to vindicate the dissembling hypocritical
Practice of your Bishops, in unkinging him, and then declaring for him again;
though at the same time you stab his Prerogative to the Heart; for which,
Doctor, he may perhaps remember your Christmass-Box, or New-Years-Gift; for I
perceive you expect his Return, else it were in vain to excuse your Brethren
for their Disloyalty toward him. Your Doctorship is pleased to ask your
Antagonist, if ever he heard of Merchants throwing their Goods overboard in a
Storm? Yes, Doctor, that he has, and moreover remembers, that he has also heard
of Buyers and Sellers being whipped out of the Temple; and so it is but just
that K. James should do by his Scots Bishops when he returns, for selling his
Scepter to redeem their Shepherds Club. But now when I think on it, there is no
hazard of that, for the Doctor tells you, Page 52. That he knows that they
intended no more by the words Free and Lawful Meeting, than what they are
capable of in the lowest Sense that they can be taken in. Very well, Doctor,
then I perceive you are a Man of Intrigue, for you know it, you say; and pray,
Sir, be pleased in your next, to let others know too what is that lowest Sense,
for I never understood those words to have any other sense, than what all
English Men put upon them; that is, Free imports a thing to be free from any
Constraint; and Lawful signifies, that there is no standing Law against it.
But, Doctor, I have already made it evident, that in neither of these senses
could that be called a Free and Lawful Meeting, according to your Principles of
Passive Obedience.

Then as for your next Reserve, That some of the Bishops, as Privy-Counsellors,
might suspend the Execution of the King's Orders in his Letters, until he
should be better informed of the State of Affairs, and until he should
reiterate his Commands; and in that Case, you think, that all who own his
Authority, would leave the Convention. Really, Doctor, you are a
Lyncean-sighted Gentleman, and a wonderful Politician. Will it follow, that
because Privy-Counsellors may suspend the Execution of the King's Orders in his
Letters for some time, till he be further informed, in a peaceable State of
Affairs, when his Title is not questioned, that therefore they may suspend the
Execution of his Orders, when their so doing strikes at the Sovereignty it
self, and constructively declares their Concurrence with his Rival in
Authority? Doctor, I am afraid that such a Consequence will not be much neither
for the Commendation of your Logic nor Loyalty: But you were resolved to say
something, though, in truth, you had much better have said nothing, than have
defended your Bishops so sillily, at the Expense of your Master's Prerogative.

As for what you say, Page 4 and 5, concerning Archbishop Paterson, that he
offers 200 l. to any Man that will prove, by Witnesses of known Probity, any
one of the Particulars vented against him by my self, or any of my Informers:
If I were in Scotland, it might easily be done; but I don't think it worth my
while to go thither on purpose, even though I had an honester Man's Bond than
the Bishop's for his 200 l. and that is more than his Word. But I understand
that he is now vomited out of his Country, which was sick of him, and so can
neither attend a Trial, nor be responsible for his 200 l. But if this be
according to the Plan of his Lordship's Directions, let him consign his Money
in the Hands of some Goldsmith at Edinburgh, and give public intimation of it,
and perhaps some or other may embrace his Challenge. But as for his Promise, I
know no Man who will regard it, for it is a long time since Bishops Promises
were current in Scotland. But, Doctor, I will be yet more generous, if the
Archbishop, or any of his Friends, will but procure a Certificate, under the
Hand of three or four of the present Ministers of Edinburgh, and as many of the
Elders, that none of these things wherewith I charge the Archbishop, were
talked of, and believed in that City, I Will fairly insert it. But for the
Doctor's Offer, if such things can be proven, it is a mere empty sound; for as
to the present Case, it is enough if I can prove, that he lay under the Scandal,
and was commonly talked of as such a Person, though I be not obliged to produce
his Pimps for Evidence, or to make such particular Proofs as are judicially
required to warrant the Sentence of a Court in such Cases.

But, Doctor, having given you such a Latitude as to Certificates, I find my
self obliged to caution you, not to set your Journy-men at work to forge any,
as your Amanuensis Mr. Andrew Iohnston did that in your last Book, to vindicate
-- Brown, Curate of Drysdale.

And that your Doctorship may be fully satisfied of the Truth of what I assert,
take this following Letter, under one of the Gentlemen's Hands, whose Name is
forged to your Certificate.

UNderstanding that Mr. Andrew Iohnston has affixed my Name to a Certificate,
in a Pamphlet entitled, The Spirit of Malice and Slander, etc. to vindicate
Mr. George Brown, Curate of Drysdale, from the imputation of scandalous
Converse with Iohnston of Lockerby, and Sarah Brown, though living in Adultery,
and being his own Parishioners; These are, as I shall answer it at the Great
Day, to declare, That I never signed any such Certificate, nor gave my Consent
to the putting of my Name to it, directly nor indirectly. But the said Mr.
Andrew Iohnston being one Day in my Company at Mr. Hopkins Shop in Cornhil, I
told him, in jest, That he was of a good Kind, reflecting upon him as the
Grandson of the said Iohnston of Lockerby, the Adulterer, who was
excommunicated for the same. Whereupon he answered, That none could prove any
such thing of his Grandfather. To which I answered, That I could swear it, if
need were. And upon his desire, that I would give it him under my Hand, that he
might send to enquire of his Friends about it; I gave it him in these words; I
testify and declare, that Andrew Iohnston of Lockerby was excommunicated for
Adultery with Sarah Brown; and that Mr. George Brown, Curate of Drysdale, after
the Excommunication, had frequent Converse with both Parties, intending it as a
Taunt to Mr. Andrew, but never as a Certificate to vindicate Mr. Brown; and
therefore he has knavishly suppressed the latter part, which fully proves what
Brown was charged with, in the Answer to the Scots Presbyterian Eloquence. And
as a further Testimony to the Truth of what is there charged upon Brown, I
declare, That I my self have found Brown drinking Brandy, by five or six in a
Morning, with Iohnston of Lockerby, lying naked in Sarah Brown's Bed, after the
Excommunication; which Brown was only influenced to put in Execution against
Iohnston, because the Country cried shame upon him for his Converse with such
shameless Persons.

Tho. Mitchell.


Now, Doctor, pray answer, Is not this a shameful and rascally piece of
Forgery? Is not this much for your Credit, to publish such a manifest
Counterfeit to the World? And have we not just reason to reject your other
Certificates, in behalf of your Self, Paterson and Cant? He that is guilty of
Forgery in one, may justly be suspected in all. And as for your other Evidence,
Guthry and Iohnston, they are known to be beggarly scandalous Fellows, and
indeed only sit to be Irish and Scots Prelatical Evidence.

But, Doctor, I must come to an Engagement with your self in the next place,
and leave your Journey-man, who in due time may perhaps be prosecuted according
to his Merit. You offer, that if your Antagonist can prove that ever you spoke
with Mr. Shields in St. James's Park, you will acknowledge all the Libels against
you to be true. Doctor, if you can, without indecency of Passion, read the
following Certificate, I am apt to think you will find it proved home.

WE whose Names are here-under written, do testify and declare, That Mr. George
Shields, late Parson of Prestonhaugh in Scotland, did in our hearing declare,
that he has often conversed with Dr. Monro in St. James's Park.

Ia. English.
Tho. Shields.

Now, Doctor, here is proof of Mr. Shields having owned it: And as for your
mutual salute, Mr. William Robinson, a substantial Housekeeper, and Man of
unspotted Reputation, who lives in York-buildings, will take his Oath upon it
before any Justice of Peace in England.

And further, Doctor, I have been told, by a Person whose Station and Quality
forbids me to name him without his Consent, that he has seen you and Mr.
Shields together in the Park several times. Now let any Man judge, Doctor,
whether your denying it in such an impudent manner, be not a Lie in all its
forms? And I dare venture Mr. Shields, your Brother, will own it to be so; and
though your Doctorship, as I understand, slights him as a Fool, and not worthy
of your Converse, yet by the Account I have had of him, he seems, though not so
cunning a Man, yet to be much the honester Man than your self, and truer to his
Principles; which though I do not approve, yet I must needs own to be more
commendable than your Doctorship's Practice of dissembling a Respect to this
Government, and at the same time entertaining a Correspondence with Archbishop
Paterson, who was imprisoned for plotting against it; declaring, That you were
pursuing the Plan of his Lordship's Directions. And though it may be that Mr.
Shields's Circumstances for some time past have lessened him, yet it seems very
haughty in Dr. Monro, though a quondam Bishop Elect, so much to despise Mr.
Shields, who was thought worthy to be a Tutor to the E. of Lauderdale, as to
think him unworthy of his Converse.

And, Doctor, because I would make an end with what concerns your self all
together, that Story of your being found with a Woman among the Corn, I had
from Mr. Sheals, formerly Servant to the Countess of Dundonald, and now here in
Town; which he is ready to own, and will take his Oath that he heard it of you
in Scotland* though at the same time he is willing to signify so much to you,
that he had a more honorable Employment than to be your Pimp.

Doctor, as for your saying, Page 19. that I accuse Sir George Mackenzie of
having persecuted Halside, and that he falsely denies all the Malicious Fictions
that I have heaped together on that Subject: Really, Doctor, I perceive you are
in a sinking Condition, when you lay hold on every Twig; but if you had acted
like an honest Disputant, you ought to have been sure to have repeated my own
Words, which p. 27. you will find to be, that he suborned Witnesses against
Halside: And truly, Doctor, if I may venture to speak so much Logic before
such a terrible Critic, I think, Subornation and Persecution, are not
convertible Terms; for every Subornation is not a Persecution. And as for that
matter concerning Halside, my Information runs thus; That Thomas Watt, Servant
to Hamilton of Blanterferm, when examined against Halside in Court, did
actually declare, that he had 20 Dollars offered him by Lord Sim in Sarahs
Ieans Forstairs in Hamilton, to depone against Halside whom he had never seen;
and this Lord Sim was Colleague with Sir John Whitford of Milton, both of them
being employed at that time as Informers, by the Government, against the
Presbyterians in the West of Scotland. Now, Doctor, to make it plain how I
understand Sir George Mackenzie to be chargeable with this Subornation, take it
thus: Sir George Mackenzie having given order to those Informers to bring him
in viis and modis, such Evidence as would swear, those Informers did actually
offer a Bribe to the Evidence against Halside, as the Evidence himself did
declare in Court: And this being true, I hope, Doctor, you will allow the
Consequence, that Sir George was chargeable with the Subornation, and so much
the more, seeing he employed the Suborners not only at that time, but
afterward.

But further, Doctor, lest you should think to escape by a quibbling
Explanation of Sir George's Viis and Modis, I refer to you to the Measures
which he took against Sir George Campbell, P. 41. of my Last, every bit of
which Sir George himself will own; and I dare venture to lay his Reputation in
the Balance, against your bully Evidence, Sir William Paterson, or the
mistaken Narrative of any Stranger, by what Title soever dignified or
distinguished: and thus, Doctor, you may see that I had better Foundation for
what I wrote on that Head, than my own Petulancy, as you are pleased to word
it. I leave it to you and your Journy-man Iohnston to forge Stories, I Will
assure you it is none of my Practice.

But, Doctor, seeing you are so great a Patron of Sir George Mackenzie's
Memory, pray send to enquire of your Friends, Whether he did not restore fifty
Guinies to John Hamilton of Boggs, Halside's Brother, which that Gentleman had
given him to be saved from the Penalty for refusing the Test, for fear that
Boggs, who was brought as an Evidence against Mr. Ezechiel Mongomery, one of
Sir George's Informers, should have found himself obliged in Conscience to
discover it, if the Question should have been asked at him, Whether or not Sir
George had any of his Money to save him from taking the Test? And at the same
time, Doctor, enquire, Whether Monkland, another Brother of Halside's, was
condemned upon the Evidence of Thomas Stevens, Cottar to Hamilton of Woodhall,
though it was proven that the said Stevens swore, that he would swear against
all the Gentlemen of the Country for 13 d. Penny a piece, and all the Yeomen
for a Penny a Piece. I am confident, Doctor, that Halside will deny none of
this, though I doubt not but he is so much a Gentleman, as to acknowledge the
Kindness which he received from Sir George, when he was arraigned for his Life
the fifth time, both in saving him from taking the Test, and from Prison, for
refusing of it: Though at the same time I have heard so much of Halside's
Temper, that I Will presume so far upon him, as to conjecture, that he bought it
dear enough. And so much, Doctor, for your just Lord Advocate.

Doctor, I have other Employment, than to answer such rascally and villainous
Libels as yours; and therefore have not confined my self to your Method, but
took your chief Matters to task, at such spare Minutes as my Hurry would allow,
and as they offered themselves to my Thoughts, referring the rest to another
Opportunity; only, Doctor, let me advise you, not to be continually Ignarius
Elenchi, nor to trifle as you have done hitherto, in attaquing the Out-skirts,
and passing over the chief of what I wrote, that does not become the Courage of
a Cadee of Dunbarton's Regiment, nor the Learning of an Elect Bishop, etc. And
I must beg your Pardon, to acquaint you further, that it is every whit as
unbecoming a Gentleman to treat any Man as you have done Mr. Ridpath, for the
meanness of his Circumstances, seeing the greatest of his Enemies cannot say
that ever he was extravagant: And tho he finds not himself obliged to satisfy
you, whether he be your Antagonist or not, yet he allows me to give you a
public Defiance, and declares, That he understands not what you would covertly
suggest, and gives you free liberty to write his Life, which you say you have
by you; only name your Evidence, and don't forge it as you or your Man Iohnston
did Mr. Mitchel's Certificate; and he doubts not but to find those of very good
Reputation in London, who have known him from his Youth, that will and can
obviate your malicious Character; and tho others perhaps would have taken up
your Bookseller, yet he despises all that you have writ or can say against him;
so much, that he thinks it his Honor to be reproached by those who belie the
Presbyterians of Scotland in general, as beforementioned, the chief of our
Ministry as Profane, Ignorant and Blasphemous; the best of our Nobility and
Gentry, as void of Sense and good Morality; the King and Parliament as the
greatest of Bigots, and having established ungovernable Humor and Rebellion;
and God himself as the Author of horrid Decrees.

Nor is Mr. Ridpath ashamed to own, that it is part of his Business to write
News, and give as true an Account of Occurences as he can; for which he knows
your Party bears him a Grudg, because he has often obviated the malicious
Reflections, and seditious News of your Newsmonger General against the present
Government: And seeing the State don't think it below them to countenance the
printing of News twice a Week by their Authority; and that Mr. Ridpath's
Intelligence is often confirmed, verbatim, by the Gazette; he does not see
where the huge strength of this Reflection, of his being a News-monger, lies,
any further than that it denotes the meanness of his Circumstances; but I think
that a generous Man would remember the Axiom, Nemini Miseria sua objiciatur.
Mr. Ridpath, it is probable, would not have done that, if he had had a better
Employment; but thinks it much more creditable to write News, by which he may
not only be kept from begging, as some of your Doctorship's Brother-Curats do,
because of their Idleness, but is able to employ and maintain three or four,
who think themselves nothing inferior to your Doctorship's Journeymen, and
would scorn to beg about, or defame their Native Country, and their Majesty's
Government, with Lies, as you and they do with blasphemous Pamphlets,
defamatory Libels, etc. no not for a Share in the Purchase with your new Order
of Friars-Mendicants, Lawson, Foster, Guthry, etc. of which your Doctorship may
have the Honor to be General if you please; and then you may be Mentientes,
Mendicantes, Manducantes and Murmurantes, altogether; while, blessed be God for
it, Mr. Ridpath eats none of the Bread of Idleness; nor does he so much rely
on writing News, but that he has been, and is, engaged in other Business,
which would be no disgrace to a Doctoral Scarf.

If your Doctorship think you are too sharply treated, consider how you dealt
with Mr. Ridpath in your Spirit of Calumny and Slander, and you will find that
I have been far from revenging his Quarrel in such opprobrious Terms, as you,
and Paterson, and Cant did use toward him in the Libel abovesaid, but leave
you in full possession of the Claim, to be Princes of the
Billinsgate-Rhetorick, or to use our own Scots Phrase, Captains of the
Edinburgh Coal-stealers.

FINIS.

