LOVE WITHOUT DISSIMULATION: Or. The Letter and Directions of Robert Rich to M.
John Raynes, For The Distributing his BENEVOLENCE TO THE SEVEN CHURCHES in
LONDON.
Mr. John Raynes,
MY last to you was the 17th of February, with a Copy of the 19th of October
1665. both which were in answer to yours of the 13th of June, and 17th of
October 1665. These may inform you, That in the month of December 1666, by the
way of Ireland we received the sad and deplorable Intelligence of London's
destruction by Fire, wherewith the Beauty and Glory of that City is (like
Sodom) turned into ashe^, which when I had understood and thoroughly pendered, I
did impart my thoughts to your Brother Mr. Francis Raynes to this effect, viz.
That this Calamity would be so universal and extensive, that multitudes must of
necessity be cast upon great Extremities of Want and Misery, and that now was a
fit opportunity for all to hold out a hand of Charity toward their distressed
Brethren: To which purpose I had you upon my Heart, to write unto you when our
Fleet went, (which have been detained until now) to dispose of that 210 l. in
your hands. Now Sir, as touching your proceedings in this business of my
Request, that these Seven Churches, with all others, might more fully discern
the mind of my Lord in this figure of Love and Amity to them. I think it meet
for to let you know that I have something already written to each of those
seven Congregations: (which in the fullness of time, may be presented to their
view) Hold^ng forth the Everlasting Gospel of our Lord and Savior Christ in
us; the Saving health, and Universal free Grace of God (ready to revealed) to
all Nation, S^^ts and People: Together with a Declaration, or Testimonial of
that dear Love and Unity, which my Soul has, to all that fear God and work
Righteousness; and not only to such, but likewise to the Rebellious,
Disobedient and worst of Sinners. Also something I have to offer concerning the
New Creation (Gods Workmanship in Christ Jesus) that which mine eyes have seen,
and hands have handled of the Word of Life, of things that now are, and must
shortly come to pass, when the Son in man, the New Birth shall more abundantly
be revealed, which as yet is a great, Mystery to many, and has been long hid
from Ages and Generations of formal Professors of Godliness, that have wanted
the Power of Love, or Christ Jesus that Spirit, working all their works in them
and for them; but is now making himself manifest in all that are Borne again of
his Spirit, and Baptized with that Water of Life which regenerateth and keeps
clean the heart; That chaste Virgin that only brings forth the Man-child; and
second Adam, who is Heir of all things, and the Savior of All that believe and
follow him: Who enlightens every one (with the knowledge of good) that comes
into the World. This is he that was, and now is, and is yet to come to all
succeeding Generations, of whom all the Prophets from Moses until John bare
Record: Hallelujah: Whose day Abraham saw and rejoiced, as do all that have
Christ the Unction in them, who only and alone open^th Mysteries, and does
^each to sing the Song of Moses and the Lamb, Hallelujah; whose Star of old
led, as his Spirit does now lead all the wise in heart both to find and also to
worship him acceptably, according to his Law, Mind and Will, written therein;
Even him that is the Rock of Ages, whose Body and Blood our Fathers did (in the
Wilderness as at Jerusalem) taste of; and which we their Children that are
Heirs of the same promised Spirit, do now eat and drink the Bread from Heaven,
which is not carnal, but nourishes the Soul into a Life and Kingdom that
fades not away, but endures forever. Hallelujah.

And now, dear Sir, Having (in part) acquainted you with the reason of my
intended proceedings, my next care is (what I can) to lessen your trouble, to
which end I think it the best way to propound three of each sort of People,
chief amongst them, as Overseers of the rest, men of good report, into whose
hands the 30 l. may be delivered (as a sign of my Love) and by them be
distributed amongst those of their way, who are in need, sickness, or any other
kind of Adversity, which is according to the way first propounded, as also
agreeable to a List herein enclosed to you.

And because you formerly seemed to scruple the giving of 30 l. to the Roman
Catholics, I have therefore written to three of my old Acquaintance, viz. to
Mr. Bacon, Mr. William Blackborow, and Mr. Rawlinson, desiring their ear and
pains in the disposing of that money, as also of the 30 l. given to the Church
of the first born, according to the List aforesaid, who will (I doubt no)
readily assist you in any service of Love, that concerns the Affairs of this
business, whenever you shall please to require it of them.

Finally, When the whole sum shall be (according to my Request) disposed of, my
earnest desire is, That you will be pleased to transmit unto me the names of
those Persons who shall undertake to distribute the sum, that so I may have the
fairer opportunity to bequeath to them those future Pledges and further
Testimonies of my Love, which I have received from the Spirit of Truth, for to
distribute unto the several Tribes and Families of the earth, that all may know
his name to be one, viz. (Love in Truth) as proceeding out of Joseph's
Storehouse, or rather from Jesus, that true and faithful Witness, who brought
into Peace and Rest the whole Tabernacle of Witnesses, in all Ages, not only
into the possession of the Gentilss; but also into Heaven it self, the full
number of Sealed Ones, even one hundred and forty four thousand, the whole
Land of Hallelujahs, (where he now appears in us, our Song and Crown, our Joy
and Glory; Hallelujah) O. Emanuel, fill thou the breadth of thy Land, (even the
whole Earth) with thy blessed Seed of Love to Enemies; which bruiseth the head
of Enmity, Hallelujah; that they may stand as Saviors on the Top of Mount
Gerizim (which by Interpretation is as Mount Ziou, the Mountain of God, Love)
there to Judge and Bless the Mount of Esau, viz. Gods whole Creation, according
to the same Pattern or Spirit of loving Kindness, wherewith God has Judged and
Saved us: So will the Kingdoms of this world be made the Lords and his Christ's,
who must reign for ever: Hallelujah to God on high, on Earth peace and good
will ^o all things that ever he made, who made the wicked for a day, Hallelujah
to him who is and none else, where old things are passed away; and can behold
all things made a new: Hallelujah to our King, who rules, who rules in every
thing; Amen, Hallelujah.

Now Sir, if you should complain that I have been tedious and troublesome in
This work, I shall easily acknowledge both, and also humbly beg your pardon;
yet withal must say, that he which Truly believes, makes not haste, but
rather chooses either to stay, or walk, even as the Principle of Faith, (the
Grace of God) leads (which is something else besides the Letters teaching)
and neither wills nor runs before that guide, who leedeth into all Truth;
neither does he desire to awaken his Beloved till himself pleases; to whom the
lowest depth of silence (in the will of God) is as welcome as the most
quickening motions, which mount the Soul in the Chariot of Aminadab: For to him
who has learned always, continually, and evermore to pray; (God's will be
done) as well when he forsakes, crucifieth, or tries, as when he makes alive,
I say who can separate such an one from the Love of God, freely given and
planted in the Soul? can a Life that is Carnal and Sensual? or can Death or
Fear of Hell? I tell you nay; Love to good, is much more stronger than all
these; does conquer and cast them forth: So under the Vine, or Divine Teaching
and Experience, rests in Peace, as in Abraham's bosom, the Soul of

Robert Rich.

A Note or List of Direction, to Mr. John Raynes, after what manner to dispose
of the 210 l. in his hands.
I. Thirty pounds to the Professors of the Roman Catholic Religion, Enquire I
pray (on the Exchange) for one Mr. Daniel Archur, or one Mr. Thomas Wise,
Merchants; they can inform you who are the chief Confessors and Teachers in
Queen Katharines ^rin the Queen Mothers Chapel; and give the Money to three of
the chief of them, (as a sign of my dear love) entreating them to bestow the
said Money on those that are in need, sickness, or any other kind of Adversity
amongst them.

II. Thirty pounds to the Episcopal Protestants. Give to Dr. Thomas Pierce, Dr.
Pearson, Dr. Peter Guanel, Dr. Robert P^ry, Dr. Britten, Dr. Duckenson of St.
Cloment Danes, to any t^ree of them, or any other three you judge more
convenient (as a sign of dear love) entreating them to bestow the said money on
such as are in need, sickness, or any other kind of adversity amongst them.

III. Thirty pounds to the Prebyterian Professors. Give to Dr. Spurstow, Dr.
Manton, Mr. Richard Baxter, Mr. Thomas Case, Mr. Samuel Clark; to any three of
them, or to any three of that way you judge more convenient, (as a sign of my
dear love) entreating them to bestow the said money on those that are in need,
sickness, or any other kind of adversity amongst them.

IV. Thirty pounds to the Professors of Independancy. Civet Dr. Owen, Dr. Dell,
Mr. John Goodwin, Mr. Thomas Goodwin, Mr. Thomas Brooks, Mr. Feak; to any three
of them, or to any other three of that way you judge more convenient, (as a
sign of my dear love) desiring them to bestow the said money on such a^ are in
need sickness, etc.

V. Thirty pounds to the People called Anabaptists. Give to Mr. Thomas Lamb,
Mr. John Rodgers, Mr. John Cooper, Mr. ^iff^n, Mr. Vavasor Powel, to any three
of them, or to any three of (...) way you judge more convenient, (as a sign of
my dear love) entreating them to bestow the said money on such as are in need,
etc.

VI. Thirty pounds to the People called Quakers. Give to Amos Stoddard, Simon
Dring; John Bolton, Sam^el Newton, G^^rard Roberts, Henry Clark; to any three
of them, or to any other three of that way you judge more convenient (as a sign
of my dear love) desiring them to bestow the said money on such as are in need.

VII. Thirty pounds to the Church of the Firstborn, who worship God in Spirit,
and have their Conversations in Heaven. Give to Mr. Robert Bacon, Mr. William
Rawlinson, and to Mr. Blackborow, he is a Leatherseller, and once lived in the
Old Change, but now (as I am informed) dwells in Aldersgate Street, he I
suppose knows the rest, and may help you to the speech of them, to whom I have
written a few Lines, and sent them here enclosed (open that you may see what I
have desired.) My further request to them is, That they would also receive this
30 l. of you, and therewith provide a Dinner or Supper, which I chiefly do for
the raising of my dear Friend Lazarus, viz. The Love of God, which has been
long pining away through a tedious famine of Contention and Strife, even unto
death; and invite to this Entertamment of Joseph, Love, and as his Passover
from the Death of Enmity, to the Life of Love unfeigned, such as they shall
apprehend to be born again into the new Life of Love, so as to have peace with
God therein, and good Will toward each other, which is a Life and a World as
yet to come to many an one) who with one heart and soul can meet and break
bread in the singleness of their hearts, and behold my Spirit is with you from
the beginning to the end, even with all or as many as shall meet together in
the Name or Power of Love the Father, and of Love the Son, and in the pure
Innocent, Powerful, Loving Spirit thereof, even with all that feel the Joy of
the Lord their strength, or that have Christ Jesus, the Love of God, shed
abroad in their Hear^s; all such are but one Bread, which the Father gives for
the Light and Life of the World. O eat and drink abundantly thereof, my Beloved
Friend. Hallelujah.

More particularly, I desire you to bid welcome the persons, or rather remember
the Spirits, of certain Friends to the Bridegroom, who longed to see this day
of the Son in Man; but could not, he vanishing out of their sight; and not
appearing as he now does in many, face to face, as bone of their bone, and
flesh of their flesh; Hallelujah, viz. dear Saltmarsh, honest Erbury, Doomesday
Sedgwick. Noble Sir Henry Vane, Dr. Everard, Dr. Gell, Samuel How, Gilles
Randal, Thomas Venner, Mr. Jesse, Praise God Barebone, etc. Innocent and
Patient James Nailor, John Parrot, George Fox the younger, Humphry Smith,
honest William Tomblingson, Divine Webster, John Cordwell, John War, Cobb,
Copp, and Coppin, Joseph Salmon, Joshua Sprigge, the Lady Fines, Mrs. Brice,
Mrs. Wally and her Husband, Mrs. Calvert, Elizabeth Rook, the woman Robinson,
etc. John Tauney, Roger Crabb, Francis Jennings, Elizabeth Porter and her
Husband, Paul Bunting, etc. The whole Family of Love, Henry Nicolson, Jacob
Behmes, Dr. Pordage, Humphry Blundal; Russel, Whitlock and him that writ the
Sabbath of Rest, etc. Ruishin^l Casamus, The Lord Mountague, Brave Mr. Hobb^,
Dr. Chalton, Mr. Owen Feltham, Dr. Broom, Dr. Comenius, Mr. George Withers,
etc. Likewise certain others of my dear Friends or Acquaintances, viz. Mr. John
Raynes, Mr. Francis Raynes, and Isabella his (...), Mr William Deake, M. G.
John Lambert, Col. Nathaniel Rich, Col. Richard Moss, Methusalah Turner, Mr.
William Smith, Mr. John Jackson, Mr. William Potts, etc. Sincere Simon Dring,
Robert Dring and their Wives, Joan Woodcock, and her Husband; Mary Erbery,
Mary Leekes, John VVatham, and Jane his Wife, Hannah and John Stringer, Henry
and Darky Cook his Wife, William Wilson and his Wife, Ann and John Stanton,
Luke Herbard, Sir Hugh Quiffin, etc.

Many of which I know are fallen asleep: yet dying in the Faith of Good things
to come, I have seen in the New Jerusalem, at the Forming and Transfiguration
of Christ in me, as the Spirits of Moses and Elias) appear in the Holy City,
amongst other Spirits of just men, perfect in their Generations, which Spirit,
is the One Body of Christ, (which was dead, but behold now lives) whereof we
are a part, and they without us not perfect: Wherefore let us in the Unity of
Love; (that one spirit) meet and join together with all Saints, under any
Dispensation or Form whatsoever, that so our Joy may be the fuller, when in our
Feasts of Charity, we Feast with them, in remembering the good and virtue that
was in them, for ever and ever. In which Innocent Spirit of Love there is no
Spot nor yet Wrinkle, for it thinks none ill to its Neighbor, and can do
none: This is the Seed and Plant which our Heavenly Father alone planteth, will
bless, and whom none can curse, the which must grow and increase into a great
Tree, so that the Fowls of the Air, may lodge in the Branches thereof, (even
All those Cares, Fears, and vain Imaginations which attend the Life of Man)
whose Leaves are for the healing of the Nations: Hallelujah to God in the
highest, on Earth Peace and Rest, to men of Good will; the which I most humbly
offer to the God of the whole Earth; and Lord of the Spirits in all flesh, as a
perpetual, eternal, everlasting Incense-Sacrifice, and Prayers of all Saints,
to him who is our King, and has made us Kings and Priests for evermore. Amen,
Hallelujah.

If any of this 30 l. be left unspent, my desire is, That it should be given to
the Relic or Family of Giles Calvert, viz. That Harlot who (in his time and
day) so kindly and readily did receive the New Light, viz. the Spiers out of
that good Land which flows with Peace and Rest. Hallelujah. Let the whole
Earth rejoice in Gods Salvation, as does

ROBERT RICH.


