A BRIEF and SERIOUS WARNING TO SUCH As are concerned in Commerce and Trading,
who go under the Profession of TRUTH, to keep within the Bounds thereof, in
Righteousness, Justice and Honesty toward all Men.
ANY Days and Months, yea, some Years, has my Life been oppressed, and my
Spirit grieved, to see and hear of the uneven Walking of many, who have a Name
to live, and profess the Knowledge of GOD in Words; yea, and also of some who
have tasted of the good Word of GOD, and have been made Partakers of the Power
of the World to come, and have received the heavenly Gift and Grace of GOD,
which teaches all (who walk in it) to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts,
and to live soberly, bonestly and righteously in this present World; whose
Faithfulness (with great Reason) has been expected to GOD in Things of the
highest Concern, and to have walked as Lights in the World, and in all
Faithfulness both to GOD and Man, to have stood as living Monuments of the
Mercies of the LORD, letting their Lights so shine before Men, that they might
see their good Works, both in spiritual and temporal Concerns; and so might
have honored and glorified GOD in their Day and Generation, and have convinced
(or confounded) Gainsayers, putting to Silence the Ignorance of foolish Men,
whereby the worthy Name of the LORD, (by which they have been called) might
have been renowned through the Earth, and his precious Truth and Glory spread
to the Ends of it, that many, through the beholding their good and exemplary
Conversation in Christ, (coupled with the holy Fear of GOD) might have desired
to lay hold of the Skirt of a Christian indeed, whose Praise is not of Men, but
of GOD.

These are the Fruits which we have labored and traveled for through many and
great Tribulations, that many might be turned to Righteousness, and that the
Knowledge of the Power and Glory of the LORD might cover the Earth, even as the
Waters do the Sea. This was (and is) our only End and Design, which, blessed be
the LORD, many are Witnesses of, and established in, to our abundant Joy and
Comfort: But there are some amongst us who have not walked humbly with the
LORD, as he has required, nor kept in that low Estate neither inwardly nor
outwardly, which becomes such who are traveling up to Zion, with their Faces
thitherward, but have launched from that Rock, which is firm and sure, into the
great Sea of Troubles and Uncertainty, where some have been drowned, others
hardly escaping, and many yet laboring for the Shore, with little Hopes of
coming at it; who have not only brought themselves in Danger of suffering
Shipwreck, but have drawn in others, and have endangered them also, which has
opened the Mouths of the Enemies of Sion's Welfare, to blaspheme his great and
glorious Name, and has eclipsed the Luster of the glorious Sun of
Righteousness both in City and in Country: This is a crying Evil, and ought not
to go proved, and that with a severe Countenance, for GOD is angry with it, and
will assuredly punish it.

Many have got Credit upon the Account of TRUTH, because at the Beginning it
did, and does still lead all who were and are faithful to it, to Faithfulness
and Truth even in the unrighteous Mammon, and to let their Yea be Yea, and
their Nay be Nay, even between Man and Man in outward Things; so that many
would have credited one that was called a Quaker with much, and many I believe,
did merely upon that Account, some whereof, I doubt, have just Cause to repent
of it already: But if Truth and Righteousness had been lived in by all who
prosess it, there had been no such Occasion given; for they who still retain
their Integrity to the Truth and Life of Righteousness manifested, can live
with a Cup of Water, and a Morsel of Bread in a Cottage, before they can hazard
other Men's Estates to advance their own; such are not forward to borrow, nor to
complain for Want, for their Eye and Trust is to the LORD their Preserver and
Upholder, and he has continued the little Meal in the Barrel, and the Oil in
the Cruse has not failed to such, 'till GOD has sent further Help; this is
certainly known to a Remnant at this Day, who have coveted no Man's Silver,
Gold or Apparel, but have and do labor with their Hands Night and Day, that
the Gospel may be without Charge.

It is so far below the Nobility of Christianity, that it is short of common
Civility and honest Society amongst Men, to twist into Men's Estates, and borrow
upon the TRUTH'S Credit, (gained by the just and upright Dealing of the
Faithful) more than they certainly know their own Estates are like to answer;
and with what they borrow reach after great Things in the World, appearing to
Men to be what in the Sight of God and Truth they are not, seeking to compass
great Gain to themselves, whereby to make themselves or Children rich or great
in the World: This I testify for the LORD GOD is Deceit and Hypocrisy, and will
be blasted with the Breath of his Mouth, and we have seen it blasted already.

And that Estate that is got either with the rending, or with the Hazard of
rending another Man's, is neither honestly got, nor can be blessed in the
Possession; for he that borrows Money of another, if the Money lent be either
the Lender's proper Estate, or Part of it (...) ^hans Money that he is
entrusted withal (...) ^ws, or some such, who would not let (...) ^on certain
good Security, and to have (...) ^ble Consideration of its Improvement; and the
borrower, though he has little or no real or personal Estate of his own, but
has got some Credit, either as he is a Professor of the TRUTH or otherwise,
and has (it may be) a little House, and a small Trade, it may be enough to a
low and contented Mind; but then the Enemy gets in, and works in his Mind, and
he begins to think of an higher Trade, and a siner House, and to live more at
Ease and Pleasure in the World, and then contrives how he may borrow of this
and the other, and when accomplished according to his Desire, then he begins to
undertake great Things, and gets into a fine House, and gathers rich Furniture
and Goods together, launching presently into the strong Torrent of a great
Trade, and then makes a great Show beyond what really he is, which is
Dishonesty; and if he accomplishes his intended Purpose, to raise himself in
the World, it is with the Hazard (at least) of other Men's Ruin, which is
unjust: But if he falls short of his Expectation, (as commonly such do) then he
does not only ruin others, but himself also, and brings a great Reproach upon
the blessed TRUTH he professes, which is worse than all; and this has already
been manifested in a great Measure, and by sad Experience witnessed. But the
honest upright Heart and Mind knows how to want, as well as how to abound,
having learned Content in all States and Conditions; a small Cottage and a
little Trade is sufficient to that Mind, and it never wants what is sufficient:
For he that clothes the Lillies, and feeds the Ravens, cares for all who trust
in him, as it is at this Day witnessed, Praises to God on high; and that Man
has no Glory in (nor Mind out after) superfluous or needless rich Hangings,
costly Furniture, fine Tables, great Treats, curious Beds, Vessels of Silver,
or Vessels of Gold, the very Possession of which creates Envy, as faith the
ancient Christian, Clement Alexandrinus, Paedag. lib. 2. Cap. 3. Page 160, 161.

The Way to be rich and happy in this World, is first to learn Righteousness;
for such were never forsaken in any Age, nor their Seed beging Bread. And
charge all Parents of Children, that they keep their Children low and plain in
Meat, Drink, Apparel, and every Thing else, and in due Subjection to all and
reasonable Commands, and let them not appear above the real Estates of their
Parents, nor get up in Pride and high Things, though their Parents have
plentiful Estates, for that is of dangerous Consequence to their future
Happiness: And let all who profess the TRUTH, both Young and Old, Rich and
Poor, see that they walk according to the Rule and Discipline of the Gospel, in
all Godly Conversation and Honesty, that none may suffer Wrong by them in any
Matter or Thing whatever; that, as the Apostle exhorted, they may owe nothing
to any Man, but love one another; for Love out of a pure Heart is the
fulfilling of the Law, which Law commands to do justly to all Men. And he that
has but little, let him live according to that little, and appear to be what
in Truth he is; for above all GOD abhors the Hypocrite; and he that makes Haste
to be rich falls into 1 Timothy vi. 9, 10
. Snares, Temptations, and many noisome and burtful Lusts, which drown many in
Perdition; And the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil, which, white some
have lusted after, they have erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves through
with many Sorrows.

For preventing this growing Evil for the Time to come, let such by faithful
Friends be exhorted, who either live without due Care, spending above what they
are able to pay for, or run into great Trades, oeyond what they can in Honesty
and Truth manage; and let them be tenderly admonished of such their
Undertakings: This will not offend the lowly upright Mind; neither will the
Honest-minded, who through a Temptation may be drawn into such a Snare and
Danger, take any Occasion to stumble, because his Deeds are brought to Light.
And if after mature Deliberation, any are manifested to be run into any Danger
of falling, or pulling others down with them, let them be faithfully dealt
withal in Time, before Hope of Recovery be lost, by honest faithful Friends,
who are clear of such Things themselves, and be admonished to pay what they
have borrowed faithfully, and in due Time, and be content with their own, and
to labor with their own Hands in the Thing that is honest, that they may have
wherewith to give to him that needs, knowing that Acts xx. 35. it is more
blessed to give than to receive. And if they hear, and are thereby recovered,
you will not count your Labor lost; but if they be high, and refuse
Admonition, it is a manifest Sign all is not well: Let such be admonished again
by more Friends and warned of the Danger before them; and if they still refuse
and reject Counsel and Admonition, then lay it before the Meeting (concerned
about TRUTH'S Affairs) to which they do belong, and if they refuse to hear
them, then let a Testimony go forth against such their Proceedings and
Undertakings, as not being agreeable to the TRUTH, nor the Testimony of a good
Conscience, neither in the Sight of GOD nor Man: This will be a Terror to evil
Doers of this Kind, and a Praise, Encouragement and Refreshment to them who do
well, and nothing will be lost that is worth saving by this Care; for he that
does Truth, whether in spiritual or temporal Matters, will willingly bring his
Deeds to Light, that they may be manifested to all, that they are wrought in
GOD.

These Things lay weightily upon me, and I may truly say, in the Sight of GOD,
I writ them in a great Cross to my own Will, for I delight not, nay, my Soul is
bowed down at the Occasion of writing such Things; but there is no Remedy, the
Name of the LORD has been, and is likely to be greatly dishonored, if Things
of this Nature be not stopped, or prevented for Time to come: Therefore I
beseech you all, who have the Weight and Sense of these Things upon you, let
some speedy and effectual Course be taken to prevent what possibly we may, both
in this and all other Things, that may any Way cloud the Glory of that Sun
which is risen amongst us. And make this public, and send it abroad to be read
in true Fear and Reverence, and let all concerned be faithfully and plainly
warned, (without Respect of Persons) by faithful Friends, who have the Care of
GOD'S Glory, and his Churches Peace and Prosperity upon them: So will the
Majesty and Glory of GOD shine upon your Heads, and you shall be a good Savor
of Life, both in them that are saved, and in them that are lost.

Written by one who longs to see Righteousness exalted, and all Deceit
confounded, AMBROSE RIGGE.
Catton-place in Surry, the 16th of the Eleventh Month, 1678.

