The Substance of a LETTER, occasioned by a Discourse of the Time CALLED
CHRISTMAS, From an ABUSE on it.
L. N.
I Have in mind thy Friendly Visit after our Dirty Abuse and thy Admonition,
seasonable, as thou it may be thought for the future. But as for the
Apostolical Tradition of Christmas, which thou said thou had read in
several Authors, I am so unsatisfied in it, that I have a Desire to obtain the
sight of one of them: for I love to read a Piece that does say the utmost. It Is
a Maxim, None would be Deceived. I am sure I would not, and would not have
others. I have read some of the most learned Antiquaries and Chronologers
concerning it. Our Countryman J. Seldom, speaks as much for it, I think, as
can be, in a Treatise of it under his Name, and more than may be, showing more
Reading than Ingenuousness, or Ingeniousness through Inconsistency (and so no
Genuinness in the Treatise) obvious to a mean Understanding. For though such
Authors (Antiquaries) like Travailers, think they may Lie by Authority, because
few can contradict them; yet many may when they contradict themselves, yea,
almost any. For, owning J. Selden's Assertion in his Review, viz. That in the
Eastern Church the Celebration of that Day was not received on the 25th of
December, till the ancient Tradition of it was learned from the Western about
four hundred years after Christ. This Treatise to vindicate him from inclining
to the Puritan, reels quite over the Protestant; and for fear of the Brand of
their hot Brain, as he say, he leaps into the Purgatory of the Popish Tenet of
the inherent Holiness of the Exact time, and that upon the Ground of unwritten
Tradition; which he gives no Reason for not being first known in the Eastern
Church, as well as the written; which Absurdity implies a Contradiction. And he
shows no Author in the first four hundred years before the institution of it
that mentions it: But Clemens of Alexandria (where was a Patriarchal Church,
being in the East, where the Church Cycles were kept, wherein there is no Rule
for this Epicycle, nor gives this Treatise any, why it should be retrograde
from Rome thither) he taxes them of Curiosity that pretend to know either the
Day, the Month or the Year of Christ's Birth, and speaks of two Opinions about
it, falling both in Summer Time. And this Clemens lived about Eighty Years
after the Apostle time. If all the Eastern Churches had slept all that time,
they would (as they Story of the Seven Sleepers) at their awaking have
remembered surely, whether they had kept it in Summer or Winter; seeing the
Tradition of it, which the later Fathers write of, was on the Winter
Solstice-Day, that is Two Weeks before the time wherein it is now observed;
which is another Contradiction, to say, That the Exact time of the Birth only
is sacred, which was at the Solstice; and yet say, That the Tradition of that
Day, as it is now kept through all Christendom, is both Apostolical and as
Ancient as the Birth it self: whereas the Julian and Gregorian Account of it
differ Ten Days one from another, and both differ from the True Account
according to Astronomy. Can all these three be the Exact Time, especially ours
of the Dionysian Account, which makes (as Scaliger shows) the Birth of Christ
to have been Two Years after Herod's Death, who sought his Life? Or can the
very Name of the 25th of December, though not the Exact Time, make it sacred by
inherent Holiness in the Time? He calls Cardan Impious for tying the Mystery of
the Sacred Time to the Rules of Astrology, and yet tying it himself to the
Rules of Astronomy (which he confesses Uncertain; another Contradiction) and to
the Course of the Sun only, and not also of the Moon, as well as the Passion
Day, about the Time of which all Christendom was in Broiles, and
Excommunicating one another. Concerning which he says, Peter, and James, and
John teaching at Alexandria, taught Mark, Bishop there, the true Time of that
Feast. Did the Apostles then conspire to carry away the Tradition of the Birth
Day so closely from Mark to Rome? Why! was it that Peter's Successor there
should teach Mark's Successor the Exact Time, four hundred years after, to show
the Pre-eminence of that Sea? Must that Feast alone be retrograde in their
Divinity grounded on Astronomy? And was it Apostolical, and from the Birth it
self, before Apostles were, and before some of them were in being (a Miracle
beyond the Papists) to confirm his Popish Tenet) Did his Brethren that despised
him, the Carpenter, keep it from his Birth? or his Father reputed and Mother,
to whom he was obedient, keep it, contrary to their Fathers Examples, and their
Account, after the Example of Herod the Idumean, and the Romans, and their
Account (as it is now, and as he says it was) who, as Polydore Virgil says,
received that Custom from the Persians of Observing Birth-dayes. As this man
does from the Example of those that kept the Birth-dayes of Philosophers,
Princes and Heathen Gods, saying, Therefore he that scruples it to Christ,
deserves not the Name of a Christian: But then he should have shown, that the
Apostles got that Name upon that account, and that they sacrificed Men to him
also, as the Heathen did here in Britain, and elsewhere, to their Gods, and
what not; for one will follow as well as the other, from that Reason of his;
and so did many things else, as Hospinian shows, who disputes this Point
largely against Bellarmine, which this man takes for granted, namely, the
Sacredness of Times, not by Institution, but of themselves by Inherence, taking
no notice of him (nor of the Answers of Protestants to his Testimonies for
unwritten Tradition) only he mentioning him amongst those Learned Men that
oppose the Day, as Beroald, Paulus de Midleburgo, Susliga, Jos. Scaliger,
Kepler, Wolphius, Lidiat, Calvisius, Casaubon, etc. But he says he did it
according to Instructions: It seems he had not a mind to it, but as aforesaid;
for the Times turning, it lay by him Twenty Years, it may seem, when it should
in its way have informed Opposers (if ingenuous or genuine) and for any thing
that appears by the Edition 1661. without his direction came out to countenance
the Times, when it was like to be pecuniary seven years after his Death, which
Characters were usually urged against Supposititious Pieces, as against the
Constitutions of Clement, etc. There was something in it also (increasing the
Suspicion) that he being a Lawyer, inclining to the Magistrates Power about
Religion (with the Erastians) as appeared in his History of Tithes, and the
Assembly of Divines, should yet here take the Plea of some Divines for the
Sacredness of this, and glad of such a Divinity that is but grounded on
Astronomy. For he says, That Peter and Mark an Hundred Years after Christ's
Birth, grew better Astronomers, and settled Easter. It is a Wonder then, they
settled not this other too, but left it at random to the Error of the Fathers
(as he confesses, because, as he says, they were no good Astronomers) and of
all Christian-Churches ever since, to Profane the Exact Sacred Time, as he
call, it, and all the immovable Feasts depending on it, after the Course of
the Sun and Example of the Heathen. These things and the Authorities he brings
from Nicephorus Calistus, a Fabulous Author, Ann. 1300. and the Martyrology of
Rome, and the Menology, which might suit the Time to the received Custom then
(as in the Chronicle of Alexandria the Translator made the 21th of December the
25th, he says) with other Suspicious Test imonies of later Times, that he
brings, are not sufficient (to use his own Expressions) to inform a Judgment
against the Silence or contrary Testimony of the first four hundred years (if
the Question depended there) Chrysostom knowing nothing of that his only
Instance of Nicomedia, so near him in place and time (which also contradicts
his Assertion of the East not knowing it for four hundred years) nor the
Armenians at this day, who keep it not yet, then knowing nothing of it, nor of
Chrysostom's Sermon about it. If the Exactness of Chrysostom's Instructions
from Rome be credible (on which the main strength lies) that the very Day of
Quirimus his Taxation in Jury was found in Rome to be on the Winter Solstice
Day, and the Year not found, as he proves, contradicting his Authorities out of
Barbarous Translations out of Eusebius and Africanus; its an Argument against
it; seeing it is probable thereby, that the Tradition of the Solstice Day sprung
from that (not being known before) the Taxation being then found, if truly
delivered, to be about the Solstice: As Caesar designed his two Passages into
Britain by the Equinox.

I have been the longer on him, as being the only Man I have read of the
inherent Holiness of the Time, and Apostolical Tradition of it, that thou
alledgedst; and it may be the Author thou meanest, styled, The Eminently
Learned Antiquary.

And as for thy other Allegation in thy Admonition, viz. That all ENGLAND keeps
it.

He that reads the Church-Histories, and minds the Effects of pressing the
National Worships, and the Sufferings that the sincere Worshippers, according
to what was manifest to them, have undergone in all Ages, will think that also
an insufficient Argument, to inform the Judgment, or to quiet the Conscience,
by the subjecting it thereto. For besides what the holy Scriptures record, of
Nebuchadnezzar his pressing his Religion he had devised, and casting the three
Children, for refusing to submit to it, into the Fiery Furnace: of the Persians
casting Daniel into the Lions Den, for serting his Window open, and praying to
God, contrary to their Law, etc. Other Histories also relate how the Graciant
forced their Worships on the Jews; as in the Maccabees the eruelty of Anticchus
to them is notorious. After them the Romans pressed theirs on the Christians;
who not being subject to them therein, were put to Death by them. And so was
Paul himself, who had transgressed his own Precept in his Epistle to the
Romans, chap. 13.1. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers, etc. (urged
so often against us) if he had understood it in Religious Matters, that the
Romans should be subject to their Emperor therein; who on the contrary
suffered most Cruel Torments, rather than to condescend to Swear at their
Command, during three hundred years. Afterward the Christians (especially the
Arrians) persecuted one another, for National Worships, as the Emperors came to
be on their side. After them the Papists for many Ages. Then the Protestants;
though about Anno 1548. Magdeb. Abridgment by Osiander. Hist. of Counc. of
Trent, p. 295, 48, 387, 393.
in Germany a Council or Assembly of them there declared, That Ceremonies
imposed were bad, and they that submitted to them were Censured: And before
that had the Name of Protestants, for protesting against the Decree for
Forcible Imposing Matters concerning Religion: Yet afterward the prevailing
Party among them have Persecuted the other about Conformity to their National
Worships; and caused that none should Buy nor Sell, but such as had their Mark
and their Name in the Forehead of their Profession, and veiled Bonnet to their
Mass Times. Is not that an evident Mark of bowing to an Image of their own
making? for Christ commanded no such Image of him. Hospinian says, De Orig.
Fest. Ar. cap. 2.
This is attributed to Antichrist, Dan. 7. as the Papists, to make Holy Days,
one more than an another, in regard of the Mystery. In this Particular, in his
Treatise of the Birth Day of the Lord, he says, He believes they instituted it
in the Month of December, not because they believed Christ was then born, but
that they turned the Feasts of their God Saturn into it, which were kept at
Rome at that time; and he shows wherein Customs agreed that were observed in
them both, in very many Respects. Here in England Polydore Virgil instances one
of the Lords of Misrule, used in those Feasts. Some say Julius Caesar's Feasts
were turned into it at York, therefore called Iule there. After which manner
Hospinian shows very many Feast, in the Church came to be instituted. Nazianzen
and Clarius Luithprandus show the agreement of Riots in both Feasts. Tertullian
calls New Years Gifts Saturn's (Saturnalitia) so does Jerome. Green things were
also used by the Heathen, and Misselto reverenced by the Priests here in
Britain, called Druides. The time of the bringing them in by Pope Leo and
others, in condescending to the Heathen, is showed in Pisgah Evangelica,
namely, to suit the Goths, and those other Barbarous Nations in Religions, how
he brought many things into the Church agreeable thereto, as had been done in
several things at several times before. And must they not go out again, when
they are discovered? Must Christians be forced to keep up the Monuments of
Idolatry and Superstition in Gospel Times? seeing the Jews in the time of the
Law were commanded to destroy them, as in Deuteronomy. 12. and many other places. And
the Galatians were suspected for observing Days, and Times, and Months, and
Years, which had been once indulged to the Jews, and ordained by God. And
should we be compelled to keep those he never commanded? Socrates Eccles. L. 5.
c. 22.
who lived soon after the Stirs about keeping Easter, says, Our Savior and
his Apostles never commanded his by any Law, as the Law of Moses did, etc. (
Nicephorus also says the same.) L. 12 c. 32.
But that Christians drawn by a certain Custom, by Tradition, because they
loved holy days to rest from labors, as every one thought good celebrated the
Passion. Jerome (on Gal.) to the Question of Festivals, says, All days are
equal; and the holy day of the Resurrection is always: and says, He eats the
Lord's Flesh always, etc. Durandus says (l. 6. c. 1.) More than Five Thousand
Festivals fall on every day through the whole year; so it should be a continual
Feast (as a good Conscience is) if the Kingdom of God consisted in meat and
drink, which the Apostle says it does not, but in Righteousness, Peace and Joy
in the Holy Ghost. I have read in several of the Fathers, as Chrysostom, Jerome,
Theodoret, Euthymius, That God indulged several things to the Jews as to
Children, to bring them off from Idols, and from performing them to Idols, as
in this of Feasts, because they loved Belly-Chear; God suffered them to be done
to himself, in their own respect, not his, who took no Pleasure in them, Ps.
50, and 51. And on that of the Prophet, Spoke I a word of Sacrifices, etc. only
obey my Voice. Rabanus and Lyra note (on Jer. 7. and Isa. 66.) That Ordinances
concerning such things were not given till after they had worshipped the Golden
Calf [ as they had learned of the Egyptians] and sat down to eat and drink,
and rose up to play. But Christ put an end to such things when the time was
come that God sought such to worship him, as did it in Spirit and Truth, and
not their own Bellies. He appointed no Worship then with Feasting nor with
Fasting. And as for the Types of the Paschal Lamb, etc. he fulfilled and put an
end to them, and all that Priesthood with its Rites. He commanded, to give to
Caesar the things that are Caesar 's, and to God the things that are God's. And
he gave Tribute to Caesar, though free, and his Apostle. Therein we have his
Example too, as well as God's Command to the Jews to live quietly under
Nebuchadnezzar: But neither commanded to give to them the Honor due to
himself, to appoint his Worship for him. Must God be at Man's Courtesy,
(CHRIST placed in their PANTHEON) as those called the Fathers reasoned with
them of old, who consecrated them for Gods whom themselves pleased, and
appointed Feasts and Temples for them? God appointed his own Worship in the
Law, and left it not to Man to appoint it; much less in the Gospel, when it is
promised, Ye shall be all taught of God. And he appoints his own Ministers,
whom he pleases, not Man. He says, In vain do ye worship me, teaching for
Doctrines the Traditions or Commands of Men. It has been accounted a good
Protestant Plea, to argue from the Scripture negatively. There is no Command in
the Scripture (nor Example, that I remember, besides Herod's) to keep a
Birthday; neither therein does the Time thereof appear. Though some of the
Ancients would seem to prove it from Luke 1. Luke 1 5. compared with 1 Chr. 24
13.
upon mistake of Zacharias's being High Priest (wherein the Uncertainty of the
Testimony of the Fathers alone does appear) who as Scaliger says, concluded
thereupon, against the Scriptures, that to be the time, from the High Priests
time of burning Incense: whereas it appears plainly there, that Zacharias was
of the 8th course, to burn Incense in his course, in the Temple only. And on
that Error, Scaliger says (whom the Learned call The great Critic of Times)
depended the Institution of the 25th of December, not before the year 400. But
there is more ground or argument from Luke 1.26. that it was not at that time,
but in Summer (or about the time of his Suffering) according to what Clem.
Alex. says of the Eastern People, Egyptians, Arabians, etc. If the sixth
Month there spoken of, was the sixth Month of the Year (as well as of
Elizabeth) as the Language of the Scripture is, and of the Fathers, according
to the Jews reckoning. And the Rule in Interpretations is, according to Bp.
Andrews (on Comm.) In ambiguis utrumque, Both Senses to be taken when analogy
of Faith will all on it, as it will here. And if those that Clemens Alex. speak
of did conclude from hence, though uncertain, yet 'twas more safe, than for the
other to conclude upon a certain falsehood: But that, as the Author excuses it,
The Fathers using the Scripture Language and Jews Manner in the numerical Title
of the Months (as we do; wherein he has given us Authority from the Fathers as
well as Scriptures, for naming the Months not after the Heathenish manner, and
Names of their Gods) that they should thereby mistake the 9th month of the
Egyptians for the 9th month of the Jews, is as credible as the other Miracles,
and that they should mistake Summer for Winter, as aforesaid: and both are
Arguments against the constant Tradition of it. Some will say, What a business
it is to keep a Day in Remembrance of Christ, without Scripture Proof! And we
say, What a business they make of it, without Scripture (and therefore in Point
of Worship, against it, according to the Protestants, as before) so as to abuse
People about it, in honor of it. The Protestants at the Council of Basil,
maintained, That if Monkery was not of God, 'twas of the Devil (Comenius
Schlavon. Hist.) so said Luther of the Pope. And what a business, might some
say, to bow the Knee to Christ's Image, to take his Body, as they thought, in a
Wafer Cake, in their Mouth! Were those stubborn and wilful people, that would
rather be burnt, than do it, in Q. Mary's days? What a matter 'twas, thought
the Greeks, for the Jews to take a piece of Flesh in their Mouth, to escape
Death, in the Maccabees: and for the Children in Daniel to seed of the King's
Meat and Drink. The Commands of Men seem light to them that know not or regard
not the Commands of God. But we say as the Apostles did, It Is better to obey
God than Man. Some will say, It gives Offense: so did the Preaching of the
Cross to Jew and Gentile. Not to offend God is no Offense given to Man, but
taken by Man. To have a Conscience void of Offense toward God and Man was
Paul's Exercise, and so it is ours; yet he did not forbear to obey God, nor did
the other Apostles; because Men took Offense at it, and thought they did God
Service in Killing them: and the Jews were mad against Paul for teaching the
Gentiles not to observe their Law, though it was commanded by God, as the
Temple was, as these Traditions never were, but by the Pope, their Lord God, as
the Canonists call him, which makes them so mad against us, as threatening to
burn us. Never did Protestants use to threaten, to burn Papists, for not
keeping the Pope's holy days. Never were Sheep known to worry Wolves, who are
distinguished by their bloody Chaps, as Chrysostom notes, though they may get
on Sheeps Clothing: Christ gives a plainly discerning difference, By their
Fruits ye shall know them, whether they be Thorns and Thistles, for they bear
Prickles. Christ notes his Sheep by hearing his Voice: others hear only men's
voices. And he says, They are a Little Flock: but the Nations and National
Worshippers are Multitudes. All the World wonders after the Beast, and say, Who
is able to contend with him, to disobey him, or say, What do thou? the
spirit that rules in the Children of Disobedience. But why may not we in this,
as well as several famous learned of later times, who not only with the
ancientest questioned it, but showed their Opinions against it. Wolphius says,
The Taxing was not likely to be in Winter, but Autumn, Dan. 9. In the midst of
the Week he made the Sacrifice to cease, which ends in the month Nisan, the
first month when he suffered: Wolphius proves the same by two Reasons, He
ended the Shadows at the time they began, namely, the Pasch, Pentecost, and
that in the seventh month. 2dly, The Jews, says he, reckon he was born in such
a year, and in the beginning of it to be thirty years old at his Baptism.
Midleburgensis says, The World was created in the Spring Equinox, therefore it
was meet the Restoration to be at that time resumed. But, says Hospinian, if
those men that were near that Age knew it not, why should we believe
Midleburgensis, Epiphanius, or those that strive for December 25? And why
should we this Author? I have heard of some of late that have written of the
Holiness of Places also (but I have not seen any) and that an eminent Man in
the Church showed signs of Reverence to a Place where a Consecrated Fabric had
anciently stood: As I remember I have read that Paul's in London was the Temple
of Diana, and Peter's in Westminster of Apollo, and so of several other Places.
And the Author of the History of the Church of Great Britain, G. G. writes,
That King Lucius here turned the Places of Arch Flamins of Heathenish
Institution into so many Arch-Bishopricks, (as Pantheon at Rome into All Saints
Church) and the Places of Twenty Eight Flamius, or Jupiter 's Priests, into so
many Bishoprics; and turned the Temples builded for the worship of Pagan Gods,
into Churches, for the Service of Jesus Christ; and that all the Possessions of
the Heathen Flamins at Winchester, were conferred on Donatus the Bishop and his
Clergy there. And as I remember, Pope Gregory advised Austin to do the like
among the Saxons. So here is a very ancient Tradition for their Holy Places.
Seeing then they have made men trucle to be their Drudges, Lackyes and
Executioners for them and their Informers for their sacred Revenue (as J.
Seldom calls Tithes, in his History of them, yet there blaming them that made
the divine right of them their Plea) to their Will-Worships (of whose Original
much might be spoke too large for a Letter) and to their holy days and holy
places, as has been here said. What remains, but that they proceed to their
holy Garments (as Cardinal Woolsey made the English Nobility bow to his Red
Hat, so they) to their White Surplice, the Ornament, as Dr. Knewstubbs said, of
the Priests of Isis, the ancient Egyptian Goddess, ancienter than the Children
of Israel being in Egypt, as some say, a very ancient Tradition, and as old as
that of their holy day; unless by Saturn be understood Moloch or Bell, the Son
of Nimrod, the Nephew of Cham: an ancient Pedigree indeed of that Tradition;
and as ancient as any we read of, unless that Cain's Offering, as some are of
opinion, were Tithes or First Fruits, as J. Seldom writes in the beginning of
his History of them; and shows, that some have gone about to prove it from the
Art Cabalistical in the like number of the Letters of First Fruits and Tithes:
and that is the highest we can go, or rather the lowest in ferriting them in
the Burrows and Intrigues and Labyrinths of their dark Traditions: and there we
leave them, lest we lose ourselves. What must they do that know nothing of
History, save the Scriptures (and scarce them) the good Protestant Plea? Must
they by an implicit Faith believe as the Church believes, which they believe
not to be the Church of God, not keeping the Commands of God written in the
heart, to love God with all the heart, and their Neighbor as themselves; to do
as they would be done to, etc. They that know nothing of History may justly
suspect, who was the Instituter of this Feast, by observing who are the most
zealous for it and whose service is done in it, Christ's or Antichrist's. The
Interest bespeaks the Author. So that some, I remember, have written of it,
That more solemn Service has been done to Satan in the twelve days, than in
the whole year besides. If the Kingdom of God consist in Meat or Drink, or in
respect of a Holy Day, and men's Christianity must be judged by that, we have
Christians by the Belly: And Bell must be a God, for being a Belly-God. But the
Apostle's Admonition to the true Christian-Romans was, Not in Gluttony and
Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strift and Envying; but
put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh to fulfill
the lusts of it: And whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, let all be
done to the Praise and Glory of God.

I am thy Friend, and all men's in the Truth, Richard Richardson.

A few more Quotations for Confirmation of the foregoing.
Laertius in vita Plat. Plato's Birthday the same with Apollo's, as this
Author says, was kept lately in Florence by the Medices.

Calend. vet. Rom a G. Hewart. Certain days for the Births of Mars, Apollo,
Diana, Minerva, the Muses, Hercules, and other Gods observed.

T. Langley's Abridgment of Polyd. Virgil, l. 6. c. 5. The manner of keeping
holy Birth-dayes, much used in Rome, though in Persia first.

Ignatius 2 Epist. ad Magn. mentions only the Commemoration of the Lord's Day,
forbids to sabbatize Jewishly but spiritually. He was the Disciple of John. If
that was not his, 'twas later.

Augustine ad Januar. The Mercy of God would have the Church free. He lamented
that in his time the Conditions of the Jews seemed more tolerable, subjected
only to Legal Burdens, not Human Traditions.

Lib. Concord. cap. 14. At an Assembly of the Nobility and Clergy of the
Protestants, where three Electors were present, agreed, That all Ceremonies
were left free. And denied all that thought them either to be imposed, or
submitted to, when imposed, in condescension to Persecutors.

THE END.

