A SERMON Preached at CHARD, JUNE 21. 1685. Before the Right Honorable JOHN
Lord CHURCHILL, And His MAJESTY'S Forces.

By S. RICH, A. M. Rector of Stalbridge, in the County of Dorset; and Chaplain
to his Grace the Duke of ALBEMARLE.

EIKON ASILIK, Page 177. I am sure the right methods of Reforming the Church
cannot consist with that of perturbing the Civil State, nor can Religion be
justly advanced by depressing Loyalty, which is one of the chiefest Ingredients
and Ornaments of true Religion; for next to Fear God, is, Honor the King.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Charles Brom at the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

To the Right Honorable JOHN LORD CHURCHILL of AYMOUTH, BARON of SAND RIDGE,
One of the most Honorable Lords of His MAJESTY'S Bedchamber, MAJOR GENERAL
of all His Majesty's FORCES both Horse and Foot, and Captain of the Third
Troop of His Majesty's Guards, etc.
MY LORD,
AS His most Sacred MAJESTY (whose Life and happy Reign God long preserve) did
very Providentially make Choice of Your Lordship, as a signal Instrument in
that great and glorious Action; which under God was the Preservation of His
MAJESTY and His Kingdoms: So was Your Lordships readiness as Eminent in the
performance of all His Sacred commands; insomuch that by the Loyal obedience,
the Conduct, Care and Courage of Your Honorable self, together with Your
Illustrious Associates, there was a short end put to the raging torrent of an
unparalleled Rebellion; wherein the influence of Your Lordships examples
wrought Miracles never to be forgotten.

My Lord,

As I had often the Honor to be a witness of Your Lordships brave and generous
behavior toward His MAJESTY'S Forces, so I had the further Honor of being
commanded by Your Lordship into the Pulpit, and afterward to commit that to
the Press, which I had delivered before to the Army, which could I with modesty
have declined, had been.

But since the Discourse was chiefly upon Non-Resistance, I ought not to be the
first that should dare oppose Your Lordships commands in that particular, being
resolved to be obedient in all others.

And though I know the following Discourse may upon the reading of it, be
subject to the Censure of some, who I believe will not be backward to asperse
even Majesty it self; yet I am the more at ease, because I reckon my self to be
under the Protection of a person whose Character gives a reputation to all that
have the Honor to serve him.

Nor can I, My Lord, but be sensible of Your Lordships Candid acceptance of the
little Service I did in my happy Intercepting the two Posts and Letters of the
Rebels, and bringing them to your Lordship; which was the occasion of Your
Commands on me, to Preach the next day; and having therein obeyed Your
Lordships Command, Your Goodness has given me some sort of Title to presume
upon this Dedication, which begs only Your Pardon for the confidence of a Loyal
Subject; and a person otherwise at Your Lordships devotion, by all the ties
that can oblige an honest man, and,

My Lord, YOUR LORDSHIPS most Obedient Servant, S. RICH.

A SERMON Preached before His Majesty's Forces.
ROMANS XIII. 2. And they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.


AS there are some ages and times, that are more infested with unhappy
Influences from the heavens, and noxious Reeks from the earth, which by
poisoning the air, roots, and herbs, propagate that deadly venom into men's
bodies that even wearies death, and gluts the grave with its slaughters. In
like manner there are poisonous Lectures in the Conventicle, and malign humors
in the Populace, which infect the public air, and spread a fatal contagion
into men's Principles and Manners, which flies like infection, and destroys like
the plague: And if ever times were under cross and unlucky Aspects, if ever
there were a spirit of frenzy and mischief in the world in any days since
the first, certainly the Lot is fallen on ours; wherein men's Principles and
Practices contend which shall outdo each other in degrees of evil, and it is
hard to say which are worse, men's actions or opinions: we are fallen into
times, wherein among some it is a piece of gallantry to defy God, and a kind of
wit to be an Atheist: among others it is Religion to be fantastic, and
Conscience to be turbulent and ungovernable, nor have men's practices come short
of the malignity of their belief, but if possible have outdone it. Atheism has
not rested in the Judgment, but proceeded to all enormities and debauches, and
we had not been here at this day, upon this occasion, if Rebellion had slept in
Opinion. But alas, the venom of the Asp has swollen into deadly tumors, and
those Seditious Principles which bred the last Civil war, have again shot their
poisonous arrows into the Vitals of the public body. We yet feel the smart of
those wounds, and the generations to come will wear the Scars and the marks of
that Rebellion. What is past we may lament, but cannot remedy. What we may do,
and what we ought, is to inform our selves better of the duty we owe to God,
and those he has appointed over us, and to endeavor the suppressing of those
principles which breath the plagues that destroyed the Nation, and would again
burn us up in hotter flames than those. And if that fatal fire which then
preyed upon our Peace and our Properties, our Religion and our Government, our
Persons and our Friends, has not yet convinced the world of the evil and
danger of a Resistance; yet there is another, and a greater as certain and more
fatal, threatened by the Apostle, damnation: For they that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation.

Which Words were spoken in the days of Nero, who, besides that he was a
Heathen, was a Persecutor and a Tyrant, and the most infamous instance in
nature; and yet this Miscreant is not excepted as to the tribute of Obedience.
Whereas had this been said in the days of such a Prince as ours, it might have
been supposed that the virtue of the person claim^ the reverence and
subjection, and not the character of the Prince; and that 'twas damnable to
Resist because he was good, not because he was supreme: 'twas a happy
concession therefore to secure the Authority of the Magistrate, which answers
the greatest pretensions of Rebellion; if Religion be pretended, an Heathen
must not be Resisted. If Tyranny, it is damnation to resist a Nero; (...), the
wrath and judgment of God, which implies the guilt, and expresses the danger.

To resist the AUthority Providence has set over us, is so sinful and so
dangerous principally on these Three accounts: That it First Affronts the
Authority of God; Secondly, It Is contrary to the Spirit of Religion; Thirdly,
Destructive to the Interest of Societies. The Two former express the guilt, and
the latter both the sin and the punishment.

First, (...), and (...), says the Heathen; and a greater than both
acknowledges Pilate's power to be from above. The Holy Scripture intitles God
to all the Royal Adjuncts, and both Christian and heathen Antiquity symbolize
in these with the Sacred Oracles, which has been largely proved by an
excellent Prelate, as an instance in some of his particulars: First, the Kings
person is said to be Gods. 2 Samuel 22.51. he is the tower of Salvation for his
King, and 1 Samuel 2.10. and he shall give strength unto his Kings, and exalt the
horn of his anointed. I have said, ye are gods; and Plato calls the King,
(...): Gods name is called not only on's person, but Secondly, on's Throne, 2 Chronicles. 9.8. blessed be the Lord thy God who set thee on his throne to be King
for the Lord thy God. So Homer of Agamemnon: Jove lent thee thy Scepter and
Jurisdiction. Thirdly, the Kings Titles also relate him to God -- Gods
anointed, his servant given to Saul, 1 Samuel 12.3. behold here I am before the
Lord and before his Anointed: To Cyrus, Isa. 45.1. Thus says the Lord unto
Cyrus his anointed. To Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 25.9. Behold I will send and take
all the families of the North, says the Lord, and Nebuchadnezzar the King of
Babylon, my servant: the same Athanasius gives to Constantius the great
favourer of the Arrians. Fourthly, The Kings power is from God, to whom alone
he is accountable: an (...) an unaccountableness, or impunity being a necessary
attendant on his Royal function. A Kingdom, Plato calls, (...), Gods gift. 2 Chronicles. 36.23. Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, all the kingdoms of the earth
has the Lord God of heaven given me. Dan. 2.37. O King, thou art a King of
kings, for the God of heaven has given thee a kingdom, power, and strength,
and glory. Athanasius proves by testimonies sufficient that the King wears Gods
image and Authority: therefore called by Meander, (...). The figure of God
among men; by the Pythagorean. And there is evidence in the nature of the thing
to prove that Kings are no substitutes of the people, God having made the
world, it is his, and his alone, the Right to govern it: but being of such
immense perfection, that our frailties cannot bear his immediate Rules; it is a
mercy that he rules us by men like our selves, and puts the sword into the
hands of creatures of our own make; this he does. Therefore they that Rule are
Gods Substitutes, and no creatures of the people; for the people have no power
to govern themselves, and consequently cannot devolve any upon another;
therefore the same authority and commands that oblige us to obey God, bind us
to reverence his Viceroy.

Secondly, Resistance is opposite to the Spirit of Religion; Religion is of a
calm and pacifick temper, like the Author, whose voice was not heard in the
street; it subdues our Passions and restrains our Appetites, it destroys our
Pride and sordid selfishness, it allayes the Tempests and speaks down the
Storms of our Natures; it sweetens our Humor, and polisheth the roughness of
our Tempers; it makes men gentle and peaceable, meek and compliant: this was
the Spirit of the great Exemplar of our Religion; this was the Sense of his
doctrine and his practice: He commands duties to be paid to Caesar,
acknowledges Pilate's power to be from above, commands the Disciples to pray
for their persecutors, permits them to fly, not to oppose, rebukes Peter's
violence to the High Priest's servant, and the Disciples revenge in calling for
fire; he paid tribute, submitted to the Laws of the Sanbedrim, and to the
unjust sentence of his Life. This was his temper, and the Apostles who lived
among his enemies and theirs, and met with severity enough to sour their
Spirits, and exasperate their pens to contrary resolutions and instructions;
yet as true followers of their dear Lord, they faithfully transmit to us what
they had learned from him, viz. that we should obey those that have the Rule
over us, submit to every ordinance of man, pray for Kings and all in authority,
submit to Principalities and Powers, and obey Magistrates: And those Spirits of
the first ages after, who began to be Martyrs as soon as to be Christians; who
lived in the fire, and went to heaven wrapped in those flames that had less ardor
than their Love; those amidst the greatest and fiercest fires that cruelty and
barbarism had kindled, paid the tribute of a peaceable and quiet subjection to
their murderers, and make enforced acknowledgments of the Right they had to
their obedience: nor do we read they made any attempts to free themselves by
Resistance; though as Tert. says, they were in powerful numbers mingled in
their Villages, Cities, Castles, Armies: An Illustrious instance of passive
obedience in the Thebeian Legion, submitting peaceably to a first and second
decimation, making way to heaven not by their swords but another warfare. And
now if after all this, and infinitely more on this Subject that might be said,
to pretend Religion, and plead Scripture for Rebellion, is impudent and
shameful; an affront to Religion and a lie in the face of Christ: and those
that cannot discern those great lines of their duty, which are set upon the
high places, and illustrated with a full beam, and yet can find sin in little
harmless circumstances, which nothing has forbidden but the coyness and
perverseness of their own humor, are like him that could see the Stars at noon,
but not the Sun, and could spy the shadows made by the mountains in the Moon,
but not the greater spots in its visible surface. And for men to strain at the
decency of a habit, or the usage of a Ceremony, when they can swallow Rebellion
without chewing: is to be like him who durst not eat an Egg on Saturday, but
made nothing to kill a man. Had the Holy Scripture said by 1000 part so much
for the Jus divinum of Presbytery, as it has for obedience to Authority; had
there been one plain word against Conformity, as there are many against
Rebellion, that would have been worn bare upon the tongue, and have filled the
world with endless importunities. But the Injunctions and commands of Obedience
are against our humors and opinions, against the darling of our fancies, and
the interest of our parties, and therefore here we must shuffle and evade, cog
and interpret by Analogies of our own making, by the rules of our Sect and the
Authority we worship, by necessity and providence, and every thing that will
color sin, and cozen Conscience, that will turn Religion into the current of
our Appetites, and make Scripture speak the language of our humors. Thus
Religion and divine Authority shall be reverenced and pleaded when they agree
with men's own measures, and send any light or advantage to the favorites of
their Affections; but when they cross their models, oppose their imaginations,
and call them upon duties that are displeasant, the case is altered, the great
motives of persuasion have lost their power and influence, and Religion can do
nothing with them. So I come to the Third, which makes Resistance both a great
sin and punishment.

Thirdly, Its Ruinous to the interest of Societies. These I must more largely
prosecute, because it will lead me into the sad occasion of our present
meeting. Man is a Creature made for Society, and what is against the interest
of Societies is destructive to humane nature; and if the greatness of a sin,
and the mischiefs are to be measured by its reference to the public, for ought
I know, Rebellion will be the next sin to that which is unpardonable in the
degree of guilt, as well as itis near it in the penalty threatened. Now there
are two great Interests of Societies, viz. Government and Religion, to both
which Resistance both in doctrine and practice is fatal.

1. To Government, for if Subjects may resist the power over them, no
Government in the world can stand longer than till the next opportunity to
overthrow it; every man will resist what he does not like, and endeavor to
pluck down what comports not with his humor: thus every fit of discontent will
stir up the various and inconstant people to seek an alteration. And there was
never any Government so exactly framed in the world, but in the manage and
administration of it many things would displease. Now the generality of men are
led by their present senses, and if they feel themselves pained by any thing,
(and it may be too the grief is but in the imagination) they are for present
deliverance from that evil by any means, never considering whither the cure of
that evil draws; though to greater evils after it than the distemper, and so
upon every discontent the people are inflamed, and upon every occasion Rebel:
and thus is a Kingdom laid open to inevitable devastation and ruin; and by a
dear experience we have learned, that it is better to endure any
inconveniences in a settled Government, than to endeavor violent alterations.
When the Sword is drawn, no man knows when and where it will be sheathed; when
the stone is out of a man's hand, he cannot direct it as he pleases: men with
Swords by their sides will do what likes themselves, and not what is enjoined
by those that employ them; or could we suppose, what our own unhappy experience
in the old Rebellion has confuted, that Armies would be obedient; yet the
Murders and Rapes, the Spoils and Devastations, which are the natural issues of
a Civil war, are worse than any inconvenience in any Government possible. And
though foreign war is like the heat of exercise, good and healthful for the
body, yet civil war is like the heat of fire; Lord Bacon. Besides, They that
resist, either overcome the Supreme power, or the contrary; if the first, then
their instruments in all likelihood conquer them as well as those they secured
them against; and so from the Just Authority of their Lawful Rulers, they fall
under the Insolence of their Licentious Vassals: or suppose they get the
Government to themselves, all the evils will follow which usuallay do upon
Competitions and variety of Claims, which will breed everlasting disturbance
and eternal fears. If the Resisters be overcome by the Power they oppose, they
can expect nothing less than to be Crushed and ruined. Thus either way they
draw inevitable Ruin upon themselves, and probably on the common body. For
Laws and Government are the great Charters of our Lives and Liberties, our
Properties and our all: whereas Murder, Rapes, Violence, and all kind of
mischief invade the world with Anarchy and disorder.

And how far all this has been verified in our borders, a little recollection
will inform us.

For when fair weather and a warm Sun, the indulgence of heaven, and a long
tranquillity had made us fat and frolic, rich and full; our prosperity made us
wanton, and our riches insolent; we began to murmur we knew not why, and to
complain because we had nothing to complain of. Resistance grew upon the stock
of our ill nature, and the perverseness of our humors, and every little
occasion was fuel to the fire that was kindled in the distempered body; Then
it was the Government was invaded with malicious whispers, and Conventicle
preachments, with Libels and invectives, with insolences and tumults; and when
Sedition strengthened it self by noise and numbers, and by popular zeal, and
talk of Reformation, it brake out into the highest irreverencies against the
King of ever blessed memory, and the most violent proceedings toward his
Ministers; to the end, that the nearest trees being removed, they might have a
full stroke at the Cedar. Nor did things stop here, but sparks grew into mighty
flames, and small vapors into Thunders and Tempests: murmurings past into the
noise of a Camp, and the clamours of the street came to be proclaimed by the
found of a Trumpet: the Cloud like a hand quickly overspread the Heavens, and
our new lights set us all on fire. The Pulpit sounded as much war as the Drum,
and the Preacher spit as much fire as the Cannon: Curse ye Meroz was the Text,
and blood and plunder the Comment and the Use; Thus began our happy
Reformation, and proceeded from Law to Licentiousness, from Religion to
Frenzy; from an happy Government to a wretched hurry and confusion, and the
progress and the end were suitable to these beginnings. God was worshipped with
the Devils sacrifices, humane blood and slaughter; and glorified by being
affronted in his authority and laws. The King was honored by the persecution
of his person, and murder of his friends; submisly addressed to in the style of
the Rabble, and petitioned in humble form of Drums and Grenades; welcomed at
his Cities by the shutting of their Gates, and entertained in the Country with
the glittering of Swords and the noise of War; fought against for his defense,
and his life fought for the preservation of the King. Thus happy were our
Reformers in the twisting contradictions; and they would be so indeed, could
they reconcile one more, viz. that they are the good people, and sure heirs of
heaven, because that the Apostle says, that they that Resist, shall receive to
themselves Damnation.

But we are not yet at the end of the line, the most fatal part of the story is
to come. Therefore after 10000 Butcheries and Devastations, miseries and
disorders which cannot be described, but are always the events of a Civil war.
Prosperous wickedness finally prevailed, the friends of Loyalty and Justice
were scattered and destroyed: Majesty is made a prey to the sons of a Dunghill,
and afflicted innocence falls into the hands of the hunters: and after he had
been infamously sold like a slave, and imprisoned like a vile malefactor; after
that he had been ravished from his friends, blasphemed in his name, and robbed
of the Ensigns of his dignity: after he had been tossed up and down from one
place to another, according as the designs and insolences of his cruel Jaylors
should call him: after he had been mocked by conditions of peace and terms of
accommodation that were never meant; after that he had made concessions to all
their demands, and for the sake of peace and settlement of his Kingdoms, had
granted things that Subjects had never the insolence to ask: after these, and
1000 instances of barbarism and indignities more, that his cruel Persecutors
might transcend all examples of wickedness, that generations to come might
honor them, as they did the High Court of Justice whereof Pontius Pilate was
President; and that they might deserve a deeper damnation than that threatened
to bare Resisters, they summon their Sovereign to their Bar, and Try him by a
company of petty fellows that called themselves by a great name: they buffet
him with their insolent taunts, and bait him with the mercenary noise of
Justice; like Crucify him: they upbraid him with their own faults, and charge
him with the guilt of that blood which themselves had spilt: that they might
add the guilt of his to all the rest. Which black Treason not to be thought on
without horror, nor named without a tear, they then accomplished beyond any
Precedent of former times, and perhaps belief of the future: contrary to their
Allegiance and their duty to God, and their profession to the people, to the
obligation of Laws and common Right.

Therefore let the blackest grief be upon the remembrance of these works of
Darkness, because, thus fell a Prince; one of the best, the wisest, and most
generous, and the most gracious that ever swayed these Scepters; he fell, and
fell by violence, and the violent hands of his own, who ought to have
sacrificed their lives to the preservation of his: He fell to the dishonor of
God, to the grief of good men, to the scandal of Religion, to the shame of
Protestantism, to the overthrow of Government, and ruin of the Nation. This is
a Lamentation, and to all generations shall be for a Lamentation: But O
heavens, O Providence, must virtue be dethroned, and villainy be crowned? must
victory and success wait on Treason and Parricide, while infamy dogs innocence
to the grave? must the most righteous of Princes be the most miserable of men?
and Religion and a good cause be the only way to be unfortunate and undone?
will the searcher of hearts abet Hypocrites, and Providence suffer it self to
be made an argument to legitimate Rebellion? shall the Pharisee pray and
prosper, and the righteous cry and be forsaken? shall Treason carry Religion in
Triumph upon its gilded banners; and shall the wicked lift up their hands in an
appeal to heaven, and bring them down to the destruction of the Just? shall
villainy raise its head to the clouds and meet no thunderbolts there; while the
devotions of the innocent return upon him in storms and flames? Thus Sense and
Nature would complain on this occasion. But Providenoe is Just, though we are
blind, prosperous villainy crows and triumphs for a moment, but is covered with
shame and perpetual darkness in the issue, the end of things will disintangle
Providence, and rectify all disorders: then shall we see that afflicted virtue
shoots up on the other side the grave, and sends its branches into a flowing
Paradise, where they shall be green and verdant in an eternal Spring; while
every tree that virtue has not planted, shall be rooted up and wither in a
moment. This I thought fit to suggest as an Apology for Providence, lest the
successes of the wicked and misfortunes of the Just in instances so great and
near might be Atheistically abused. Thus I am arrived at the first period of
the miseries the nation was then brought into by Resistance, which concluded in
the ruin and desolation of Government; and this run into all the mischiefs to
which humane nature is obnoxious. For Government is the great interest of
mankind; that which bounds our Passions, and secures our Rights; prevents
confusion and that deluge of debauches that Anarchy lets in upon the world. And
how far we felt this would be considered.

When the Nation then had lost its Head and its Glory, 'twas turned with its
heels upwards, and governed by a thing as Infamous in its quality as its name;
the dregs of the Populacy, the creatures of a Sectarian Army, the worst part of
a body that was bad enough in its best: these were our Senators and our
Patriots; the Preservers of our peace, and the Keepers of our liberties: and
keep them they did, but not for us but from us; and was not this a liberty
worth the blood and treasure that was spent to purchase it: O the blessed
Reformation that filled the Pulpit and emptied our Purses! that quickened our
endeavors and inspired our zeal! and that was so glorious in our mouths and so
pleasant in our hopes! were not all miscarriages in Government well mended,
when Government was thrown up by the roots? and was not the disease well cured,
when the body was destroyed? were we not well freed from evil Counselors, when
we made Kings of the worst we had? and was not Tyranny well extirpated, when we
were under an Army of Tyrants? But the Glorious things are to come, and we must
be cast into new models; and when the birds of prey have divided the spoil, and
satisfied the cravings of their appetites and ambition, the nation shall be
made happy with new nothings, and golden mountains, with Chimera's of
Commonwealths, and fine names for slavery. In the mean time Loyalty must be
scourged with the Scorpions that are due to Rebellion. And they that feared the
damnation of the Apostle, shall be sure to incur the damnation of the
Reformers. And they that would not hazard their souls, must compound for their
Estates. But when the Juncto had run to the end of their line, 1. as far as
their Master would permit them, when they were as odious as they deserved, and
his designs as ripe as he could wish; then up steps the single Tyrant, kicks
them out of their seats, and Beelzebub dispossesseth the Legion. He engrosseth
the prey to himself, and assumes the sole privilege of completing our
miseries. He made himself after the Image of a King, and invested his Sword
with the Authority of Law; he ruled us with the rod of Iron we deserved, and
made us feel the difference between the silken reins of a Lawful Authority, and
the heavy yoke of an insolent usurpation: and when Providence had freed us from
this plague, and called him to an account for his villainies, we fell back into
our old disorders; we reeled to and fro, and staggered like a drunken man, and
were at our wits end: we knew not this week who would be our Lords the next,
nor did our Lords themselves know to day, by what laws they would rule to
morrow. Confusion was in their Councils, as well as Tyranny in their actions;
and there was but one thing they seemed to be agreed upon, which was to (...)
the nation; and if we would not believe that this was Liberty, we must be
knocked on the head with our Chains; if the Sheep would not take Wolves for
their Guardians, 'twas fault enough, and good reason why they should be
devoured. And were not things come at length to a pretty pass, when men in Buff
durst proclaim themselves the only Legal Authority of the Nation; when our
armed Masters murdered men in the streets, and threatened the ancient Metropolis
of the Nation, with Gunpowder and Grenades: Fire and Sword must be our
portion if we would not be in love with infamous Usurpers; and a worse
Powder Plot than Fauxe's was acting in the face of the Sun: The Strength,
Riches, Beauty, the almost all of the nation was designed for a Sacrifice to
the rage and revenge of our opposers; and Plunders and Massacres were even the
least evils we feared: thus were we tossed up and down from one war to another,
and made the sport of the proud and insulting billows, till Almighty goodness
settled us again on our old basis, and by a miracle of Providence restored us
our Prince and our Government, which our sins had deprived us of; to
re-establish us on the sure foundations of Righteousness and Peace; these are
some sprinklings of that deluge of woe that we brought on our selves by
resistance, which I have briefly described to this purpose, that the
remembrance of these miseries may beget a sense of the greatness of the sin of
Rebellion, and the truth of the particular proposition I have been discoursing
under this head, that Resistance is fatal to Government, and draws temporal and
eternal shame and confusion on the Resisters.

And though Government may be fixed again upon its foundations, and Laws turned
into their Ancient Channel after the violence they have suffered, yet they lose
much of their reverence and strength by such dis-settlements, and the people
that have Rebelled once, and successfully, will be ready to do so often: as
water that has been boiled will boil again the sooner.

Secondly, Resistance is Ruinous and destructive to Religion; for its contrary
to the Spirit of Religion, and therefore destructive of its being, for enemies
destroy one another. Rebellion lays the Reins on men's necks, and takes off the
restraints of their appetites; it opens the floudgates of impiety, and lets
loose the brats of extravagant imagination, it destroys the reverence of all
things sacred, and drives virtue to corners. Religion cannot be heard in the
noise of battle, but is trampled under foot in the hurry and the tumult; Faith
and Love, Humility and Meekness, Purity and Peace, are overcast and silenced by
Atheism and Cruelty, Pride and Barbarism, Lust and Revenge. Thus Rebellion by
breaking up the foundations of the earth lets in a hell upon us, and brings in
a kind of present damnation on the world; and that this is another fatal
mischief of Resistance, we have felt also by an experience that will keep it in
our memories what execution it has done on Religion.

But now this is a tender thing, and I am willing to keep my self within bounds
that are charitable and sober, and therefore must premise what I have to say
about it; that I charge not the whole body of the people of those times with
the guilt of all the follies and corruptions I describe. I profess universal
Charity, and have perhaps more for the worst of them, than they generally will
own for any that are not of their own party or opinion. Therefore at present I
shall say no more than what the sober and intelligent among themselves will
acknowledge to be justly chargeable upon some or other of the Sects bred by
those disorders: And this will be enough for my purpose, which is only to prove
by near and deplorable instances, that Resistance brings mischiefs on Religion,
and not to expose to hatred or contempt the persons of any that are serious in
the way of their profession, though I judge it never so obnoxious and mistaken.
And having said this out of a tender Charity, that none may be wronged by
misinterpretation, nor any offended that are not concerned; I come with freedom
to describe some of the Injuries their unhappy Resistance has done Religion,
notwithstanding that both arms and tongues so highly pretended its defense. And
indeed men fought for Religion till they had destroyed it; and disputed about
it till they had lost it. Multiplicity of Opinions had quite confounded the
Simplicity of Life and Faith; and 'twas most peoples business to chatter like
Pyes, rather than to live like Christians, or like men: as if Religion had been
computed by men's talk and disputes about it, and those latter days of the
declining world had been its best, and this in its growth and ways of highest
improvement, when all things else were verging to their fatal fall and period.
But alas, the Tongue was the most, if not the only Religious member: and many
of the Pretenders, like the Egyptian Temples, were fair without, but Beasts
and Serpents and Crocodiles within; or like the Bird of Paradise, they had
wings to fly in the clouds of Imagination, but no feet to walk on the ground
of a virtuous practice. Yea, some had found the way to swim to heaven in the
current of their appetites, and to reconcile Covetousness, Rapine, Cruelty, and
Spiritual pride; to the glorious virtues of the Elect, the people of God, the
chosen of Christ, and the good party. Religion with Rebellion, and Sacrilege
with Saintship; these had learnt to be godly without goodness, and Christians
without Christianity; these were lovers of God, yet were haters of their
Brother: haters of open profaneness, but not of Spiritual wickedness: very
pious, though cruel and unjust: true penitents, though they returned to their
sins as soon as they had complained and wept: their hearts were good, though
their actions were dishonest: and they had the root of the matter in them,
though that root were a dry stump, and had no branches: they were regenerated,
but not reformed: converted, but not a jot the better: devout hearers, but bad
neighbors: lovers of God, but no haters of Covetousness: had power in heaven,
but none over themselves: they were Gods servants, though they obeyed their
appetites, and his children, though no better than those that they accounted of
their father the Devil.

Thus had men got the knack to be Religious, without Religion; and were in the
way to be sacred without Salvation. This was one of the grossest abuses of
Religion, that those disorders brought upon us: whereby it was taken from its
foundation of virtue and holy living, and placed in emotions, raptures and
swelling words of vanity: and when these had kindled the Imagination, and sent
the Fancy into the clouds to flutter there in mystical nonsense; and when
'twas mounted on the wings of the wind, and got into the Revelations to loose
the Seals; pour out the Vialls, and fantastically to interpret the falls of
Kingdoms: when it flew into the Tongue in an extravagant Rabble, and abused the
name and word of God, mingling it with canting unintelligible babble: when the
diseased and disturbed fancy thus variously displayed itself, many made
themselves believe, that they were acted by the Spirit; and that those wild
agitations of sick imaginations were divine motions: and when this fire was
descended from the Fancy to the Affections, and these being exceedingly moved
by those vain and proud conceits, caused Tremblings and Foamings, Convulsions
and Ecstasies in the body (all which are but natural diseases, if not worse,
and just like those odd ecstatical motions of the Devils Priests when they come
foaming from his Altars) these the wild Phantasticks had learned to ascribe to
the blessed and Adorable Spirit: and when their Fancies being full of rugged
notions, and their bodies in an ecstasie, they dreamed of strange sights,
voices, and wonderful discoveries, which were nothing but the unquiet
agitations of their own disordered brains: these also were taken for divine
Revelations, and the effects of the Spirit of God, showing itself miraculously
in them. Briefly, and in sum; Every humor and fantastic unaccountable
motion was by some represented as the work of that Spirit, to which they are
most opposite. Thus when warm and brisk sanguine thoughts presented a cheerful
Scene, and filled the Imagination with pleasant dreams, these were divine
illapses, the Joys and Incomes of the Holy Ghost; when heated melanlancholy
had kindled the busy and active fancy, the Enthusiast talks of Illuminations,
new lights, Revelations, and many wonderful fine things, all ascribed to the
same Spirit: when phlegm prevailed, and had quenched the fantastic fire,
rendering the madman more dull and in active; then the Spirit was withdrawn,
and the man under spiritual darkness and desertion: when again, choler was
blown up into rage and fury against every thing which was not of the fond cut
and measure: This also was presumed to be a fervor kindled by that Spirit,
whose real fruits are gentleness and Love; yet none here, I hope, will be so
uncharitable and unjust as to think I go about to disparage the Spirit of God
and its Influence, which as I ought, I adore and reverence; therefore I think
it fit to represent and shame the blasphemous abuses of it, which would expose
the most divine things to scorn, and make them ridiculous: and that the blessed
Spirit has been thus traduced and injured, and is still by great numbers among
us, it would be shameful not to acknowledge, and therefore my zeal and
reverence for the Realities makes me thus sharp and severe to the Counterfeits.
Nor do I think that folly and phantastry is to be spared, because they wear the
stolen Livery of things Venerable and Sacred: Therefore to go on, this was a
kind of Religion that the corruption of it bred among us, a Religion conceived
in the Imagination, and begot by Pride and Self-love, which gilded the
profession of it with all the glorious names and privileges of the Gospel; and
when they had encircled their heads with their own fantastic rays, and swollen
their Imaginations into a Tympany of ridiculous greatness, they scornfully
contemned all but their darling selves, under the notion of the formal, the
moral, and the wicked; and proudly pitied the poor and carnal world, viz. all
that were not of their conceited pitch and elevation. And having thus dignified
themselves, and debased others, they herded together, drew the Church into
their little corners, and withdrew from the Communion of others, who had less
conceit though more Christianity; they bid us stand off, lest we should have
polluted them by our unhallowed approaches; and having made us as the Heathen
and the Publican, they cried, Come out from among them. The True Church,
soundness of Judgment, purity of Doctrine and of worship (if men would believe
them) was confined to their Gang, just as they were to the corners of Asrica of
old, when their friends the Donatists were there; thus did they swell and
swagger in their Imaginations, till some other Sect as well conceited as
themselves endeavored to take their plumes from them and to appropriate their
glorious prerogatives to their own party; and then they bustled and contended:
Here Is the Church, says one; nay but it is here cried another, till a third
gave a Lie to them both; and then the scuffle grows warm of pride against
hypocrisy, the self-conceit of one Sect against the pride of another, and all
against sobriety and truth. This among some was the power of godliness, this
the spirituality of Religion, under pretense of which all reverence to things
Sacred was destroyed; for when this Spirit was got into the Pulpit, and set up
the cry of the purity and spirituality of Worship, it never left Canting on the
Subject till men's tongues and minds were fired against every matter of decency
and order, as formal and Antichristian. And so far had it prevailed, as to
drive those of warm affections and weak heads, from all due external reverence
to God and all holy things: and these well-meaning people being frighted with
the terrible noise of Popery, Superstition, and Antichristianism (things they
had learned to hate, but not to understand) boggled and flew off from every
thing their furious guides had marked with these abhorred characters, though it
were never so innocent and becoming. And thus a rude and slovenly Religion made
its way into the world, and such a sordid carelessness in matters of Divine
worship, that should a stranger have come into the Assemblies that were acted
by this Spirit, he would not have imagined what they had been doing; and that
they were about holy offices would perhaps have been one of the last things in
his conjecture. Thus bold and saucy talk crept into men's prayers, under
pretense of holy familiarity with God; nauseous impertinent gibberish, under
the notion of praying by the Spirit; and all kind of irreverences in external
demeanor, under the shelter of a pretended supernatural worship. Thus had men
subtilized Religion till they had destroyed it, made it first invisible, and
then nothing.

And now to gather up all, Religion being thus multiplied, corrupted and
debauched, being made the game of the Tongue, and the frolic of Imagination;
fantastic in its Principles, sordid in its Practices; separated from the form
of a virtuous life, and made to serve the ends of Pride and Avarice; what was
like to follow, according to the nature and order of things, but Atheism and
contempt of all Religion? and when one says, Here Is Religion, and another,
There Is Religion, and a third will certainly ask, Where Is Religion, and what is
Religion. When the heathen deities were so multiplied that every thing was made
a God, Protag. Diag. and others first began to question, and next to affirm
that there was none. Religions have been multiplied in our days, as much as
gods in theirs; and we have seen much of the same fatal event and issue; they
made their gods contemptible and vile by deifying things that were so, and we
had no less detracted from the credit of Religion by bringing it down to things
of the lowest and vilest rank and nature; our Idolized opinions were no better
than their Garlic and Onions; the diseases of the mind, frenzy and
Enthusiasm, which our days have worshipped, were no better than those of the
body which they adored, and they never raised Altar to worse vices than
Rebellion, fraud and violence, which our age has hallowed and made Sacred, and
that notwithstanding all the glorious pretensions of those times, Religion was
among many taken off all its foundations, and the world prepared for Atheism.
The follies and divisions of one Age, make way for Atheism in the next. Thus
also briefly of the condition of our Religion.

And thus I have shown how much Resistance of the Authority that is over us is
against our Duty and our Interest, the former God has plainly told us, and the
latter we have sadly felt: It remains now, that I add a word or two to the
present occasion and so conclude. And have these very men, and this very
Faction, drawn the Sword of Rebellion upon the same pretenses, fears and
jealousies of Popery, and a Reformation in matters of Religion, and to fight
for the Protestant Religion? What! fight for what we already enjoy, and blessed
be God, in all its glorious privileges, in its Doctrine and in its Discipline?
Our Church doors stand wide open, and Aarons bells Ring all in: we enjoy it,
and we shall enjoy it, we have the word of a King for it: and of such a King
whose veracity we may boast of to all nations in that he was never less than
his word: and we have the word of God for it, who is King of Kings, who will
never forsake that Church and People who are truly Loyal to him, and his
Vicegerent. Let your Courage then be answerable to the Justice of your Cause:
with what heart can a Traitorous Rebel appear in the Field, who dying without
repentance sinks immediately into eternal flames? when to those that fight the
Lord's battle (that is, for their King, their Lawful Sovereign who is his
Viceroy, his Anointed, his Servant, as I have showed you) Death to them the
harbinger of their happiness, their souls winged with Loyalty and Obedience
fly into the Arms of an infinite Mercy. God never stands Neuter, in every
fight his Sword is drawn, and that Army is sure to carry the victory wherein
Heaven has its Auxiliaries; if God be for us who can be against us? if
Omnipotence lead the Van, victory must needs bring up the Rere. Let this then
be your comfort and cause of rejoicing, that your cause is Gods cause; be not
then dismayed at their power and malice, but stand up against them with a good
courage. For he that helps you is infinitely stronger than they; you fight
under his Colors, his Banners, and shall enjoy his Protection, and not only
escape the cruel darts of your adversaries, but even tread them under your
feet. The Lord will fight for us, we shall not go with have and disorder
against our enemies, nor fly from them, Isa. 52.12. None shall stand against us
and prosper, their secret Counsels shall be confounded, they shall fear us and
fly from us, we shall chase them, five of you shall chase a hundred, an hundred
of youshall put ten thousand to flight, Lev. 26.7, 8. The wicked fly when no
man pursues. And thus it is, that God enters into a League Offensive and
Defensive with his people. Let us then by our earnest prayers for his
Assistance, and our courage and undaunted resolution in our Sovereigns cause
engage God in our Quarrel; that he may say to us, as Ruth did to Naomi, Whither
thou go I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge; Thy Armies shall be
my Armies, and thy enemies shall be my enemies. When thou entrest the Lists
with thine enemies, I will come down and be thy Second, when thou marchest into
the battle, I will be thy Captain General, I will make bare mine arm to save
thee, and arm Omnipotence to succor thee, I will arm my self with Thunderbolts
of vengeance to discharge upon the heads of thine enemies; let us thus engage
God to become our Confederate, our friend and Ally; and then will all his
Attributes be up in arms against them that fight against us; his
All Sufficiency that fed and clothed them, will strip and starve them; his
Providence that was their Caterer shall turn their destroyer, and his
Omnipotence their Lifeguard become their Executioner; he will turn their
wisdom into folly, and their Courage into Cowardice: and thus will he dismantle
all bloud-guilty Rebels, and lay them open to the just fury and revenge of his
friends, and their enemies; disarming their Courage, and disappointing their
cunning, and making the strong to turn their backs, or sink down at the feet of
his and their enemies; making their own Swords to pass through their own
bowels, that we may all join with the Kingly Prophet, Psalm. 3.6, 7. Arise, O
Lord, save me O my God, for thou have smitten all mine enemies upon the
Cheek-bone, thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly. I will not be afraid of
ten thousands of people that have set themselves against me round about. And
remember this, above all, that he abhors Neuters or indifferent persons, my
people shall come willingly: and our blessed Savior says, he that is not for
us is against us. So that here is no room for a passive Loyalty, but only an
active Obedience. When the flames of a civil war brake out in Rome, Pompey
said, that he would reckon Neuters and indifferent men in the number of his
enemies, and deal with them accordingly. And those that do not actually appear
against the Rebels as well as they can, but wait to fall in with them if they
prevail, are Rebels already: They would think the Preacher rude, if he should
say they are not Christians; when there are no more disloyal Christians in the
world, than there are honest felons, or innocent murderers. And is not this
the very season for every man that fears God and honors his King, to show his
readiness and courage, his Loyalty and his Love to his Prince; (who is the care
of heaven) and whom God long preserve in peace and prosperity to Rule and to
Reign over us, and strengthen him that he may vanquish and overcome all his
enemies: and let us bless God, that he has thought us worthy of so gracious a
Prince: a Prince who is every way great and good; and who is kind to us to the
utmost of our wishes, which past ages have not known, and future will sooner
admire than believe: and whose Wisdom, Justice, and Mercy (to those that
endeavor to deserve it); whose Munificence and Magnanimity; whose Bravery and
Conduct, in a thousand occasions has been shown at Land. Those terrible
actions upon the British Ocean, voluntarily exposing his illustrious life to
the most hazardous and dreadful of all combats and dangers, to preserve, not
only the reputation, but the just dominion of the Sea, for the interest and
glory of the English name and nation. A Prince whose Royal virtues, and Royal
merits entitle him to the Crown above all others; if he had not been born to
it. All which his Excellencies, and infinitely more, illustrate themselves to
the world, and need no recounting. But because the Rebels now in arms, color
their horrid Treason, and animate the giddy multitude, by poisoning their
Affections with cursed Insinuations; and by blackning their Lawful Sovereign
with unjust reflections, and most false and most injurious Aspersions; I think
it my duty to refell and explode the monstrosity of their Treasonable
pretensions and practices: which Clouds of Rebellion can be no way better
dispersed, than by the Sunbeams of Majesty it self.

And thus let us show our love to the King, and our readiness to serve him in
this great action, by subjecting our selves first unto God whose Viceroy he is.
And we may be assured, that they that will not be Loyal to the universal Lord
of all the world, can scarce possibly be so to their particular Sovereign. And
'twill need a great deal of Charity to help us to believe that they who make no
Scruple to stand Neuters in Gods cause, and to break even the plainest and most
earnest, and most express of his Laws, which command to secure and defend the
Rights of our Prince, will be withheld by considerations of Duty or Conscience
from Rebelling against their King, or affronting his, when there is any powerful
interest to oblige them to it.

If therefore we would give any evidence of a through obedience at present, or
any security of a future Loyalty; let us do so by using all holy endeavors in
the sincerity of our souls, to engage heaven on our side; and then there will
be hope that the Authority of God may oblige us to Sacrifice our lives and our
fortunes in the defense of his Minister, wholly aiming to make his Reign, safe,
easy and prosperous; and in doing so we shall be blessed with his Influence, and
deserve his Protection.

And thus behaving your selves with Bravery, Courage and Conduct, answerable to
the goodness and justice of your great Masters cause; your Enemies shall be
subdued under ye, or fly before ye, and peace shall be again established in
our Borders, and God, even our own God shall give us his blessing; his blessing
of peace; And thus fighting for peace, demeaning our selves like Professors of
the Gospel of peace, and Subjects of the Prince of peace; the peace he left
with his Disciples, will be with us here, and everlasting peace will encircle
our heads with rays of Glory in the Kingdom of Peace.

And so the Peace of God which, etc.

FINIS.
BOOKS PRINTED For CHARLES BROM.
THE Method and Order of Reading both Civil and Ecclesiastical History, by
Edmund Bohun, Esquire Author of the Address to the Freemen and Freeholders.

Bishop Lloyds Historical account of Church Government.

Bona's Guide to Eternity.

-- his Precepts and Practical Rules for a truly Christian life.

Camfield's Sermon preached at Leicester on Proclaiming King James the Second.

A Serious Apology for the Laws Established.

All Sir Roger L'Estrange's Tracts in quarto, and his Translations in octavo.

Several Sermons both at Court and other places.

A Narrative of the principal Actions occuring in the wars betwixt Sweden and
Denmark.


