SCOTLAND's Grievances, Relating to DARIEN. etc. Humbly offered to the
Consideration OF THE Parliament.

Vos quibus potior est turpis cum securitate servitus, quam honesta cum
periculo libertas, istam, quam magni estimatis, fortunam, amplectamini, Ego in
Patria, saepe defensa liber and libens moriar: nec me prius ejus caritas quam
vita relinquet. Vallas ad Brussium. Buchan. Hist. lib. 8: Which for the benefit
of those that don't understand Latin, is Englished thus.

You who had rather like Cowards submit your Necks to a Yoke of Ignominious
Slavery, than expose your selves to any Danger in asserting the Public Liberty;
Hugg that Fortune which you value so highly: For my part, I shall cheerfully
Sacrifice my Life to die a Freeman in my Native Country, which I have so often
Defended* Nor will I cease to Love it, till I cease to Live: Wallace to Bruce,
when he joined with the English against his Country.

Printed, 1700.

ERRATA.
OUr Nation being so Unhappy, that those who Write or Act against it are
Rewarded and Carested; whereas those that Write or Act for it, must do it at
their Perril* It is not to be wondered at, that many Faults should escape the
Press in those few Sheets, when all must be done in Hurry and Fear. And
therefore the Readers are not only desired to Pardon, but also to Amend the
following Errata, before they peruse the Book, because they mar the Sense.

Page Line 9 36 read the Claim 12 18 Counselors 16 36 for too late read truly
20 24 for Wrought wrote 21 37 prove pave -- 44 care taken taken care 24 28
unequal equal 25 2 for made by by -- 14 pact packed 26 26 for question mention
27 43 read the Government 28 24 read that Nation 32 9 read the Parliament

PART. I.
SINCE our Nation bethought themselves of advancing their Trade, by the Act for
establishing a Company Trading to Africa and the Indies, a greater Invasion
has been made upon our Sovereignty and Freedom, than has happened at any time
since we were ingloriously betrayed by Baliol.

'Twere needless to offer Instances to prove this, had we not to do with a Set
of Men who having basely betrayed us, would willingly bereave us of our Senses,
that we should neither perceive nor resent it.

The Matters of Fact being notorious, we shall only mention them here with some
short Reflections, and take them in order of time as follows.

The Addresses of both Houses of Parliament in England against our Act
abovementioned, was such an Invasion, as to which it may be a proper Enquiry
for our Parliament, Whether those Addresses were not Contrived and Promoted by
some about the K. as the last Address of the House of Lords was; and whether
any Native of Scotland was concerned in Contriving or Promoting the same?

In the next place it will appear. That the Parliament of Scotland has as much
Right to signify to the King by Address or otherwise, that the said Addresses
were contrary to the Law of Nations, and an Intrenchment upon the Sovereignty
of Scotland, as the English Parliament had to present the said Address to him
against our Act.

They that Advised the King's Answer to the said Address, are guilty of such an
Invasion, as to which it would seem that the Parliament of Scotland have as
much Right to Resolve, That whoever Advised His Majesty to the said Answer, had
done as much as in them lay to create a misunderstanding betwixt him and his
People of Scotland, as the Commons of England had to Resolve so upon His
Majesty's Answer to their Resolves about the Irish Forfeitures.

The Memorial given in to the Senate of Hamburgh, April 7th, 1697. against our
Company's making any Convention or Treaty with that City for Promoting our
Commerce, was such an Invasion. This may certainly be a just Cause of Enquiry
to the Parliament of Scotland, Whether the said Memorial was not a breach of
the Law of Nations, since the King of England has no Right to take Cognizance
of what is done by the Subjects of Scotland out of the Dominions of England. If
the Faction say he did it as King of Scots, let them produce their Authority.

In the next place they have Cause to enquire, whether the Assertion in that
Memorial, that the Commissioners of our Company were no ways Authorized by His
Majesty to make the said Treaties was not false? And whether the said Memorial
was not an actual Dispensing with, and acting contrary to the Law Establishing
our Company, which Empowers them to Treat for, and to procure Exemptions and
other Grants as may be convenient for Supporting, Promoting and Enlarging their
Trade and Navigation from any Foreign Potentate or Prince whatsoever, in Amity
with his Majesty.

It would also seem to be a proper Enquiry for the Parliament of Scotland,
Whether all the Damages the Company has sustained by the said Memorial, and
other Opposition made them by the Court, ought not to be made good out of the
Estates of those who gave His Majesty those Advises, and that in order
thereunto His Majesty be Addressed to know who they were, or else that he would
be pleased to make good the said Damages some other way; for effecting of
which he stands obliged by the said Act, to interpose his Authority upon the
Public Charge.

Since in the Close of the said Memorial, His Majesty's Ministers threaten the
Hamburghers with the Consequences of a breach of Friendship and good
Correspondence with England, if they did not put a stop to the proceedings of
our Commissioners in that City. This together with the beforementioned
Proceedings of the Parliament of England gives the Parliament of Scotland a
more just ground to Address His Majesty to put a stop to those Intrenchments
made by an English Faction (for we don't charge it upon the whole Nation) upon
the Sovereignty and Freedom of Scotland, than the English Parliament had to
Address His Majesty against our Act.

It may also deserve the Enquiry of the Parliament of Scotland, Why the King of
England's Ministers should dare to have called themselves Ministers to the King
of Great Britain in that Memorial, which was in direct opposition to a Scots
Act of Parliament and Letters Patents Granted by the King of Scotland: Since
our Country is included in the Denomination of Great Britain, and that His
Majesty, as King of Scots, neither did nor could give them any Authority to
present that Memorial, This deserves their Enquiry so much the more, that by
this means our own Authority and Name may always be made use of against our
selves, as it was in this Case, if care be not taken to prevent it; and
besides, it may in future Ages be made use of as an Argument by the English
Histor^^ns, to prove that the Scots were Subject to England, as their former
Historians ignorantly made use of it as an Argument to prove the same thing,
that some of their Kings were said to have Commanded over all Britain, by which
no more was meant but that part of it which was Subject to the Romans, and
secured against the Incursions of the Scots by Adrian's or Severus's Walls.

That the Company's Address of June 28th 1697. Complaining of that Memorial,
and asserting like true Scotsmen their own Right, and those of the Nation
against the Invasions of our Neighbors, should have no Answer from the King
till the 2d day of August after, deserves also the Enquiry of our Parliament;
but much more that His Majesty's Promise according to the said Answer was never
fulfilled; nor a Declaration to Indemnifie the Hamburgers against the said
Memorial Granted, by which the Company was so much injured, and the
Independency of our Nation openly violated.

Yet it is still more to be wondered at, and deserves our Parliaments most
serious Enquiry, Why after so many repeated Addresses from the Company, and one
from the Parliament it self July 22d School. our Nation should be so much
contemned and injured, and the Authority of a Parliament which had been so kind
to His Majesty, so much trampled upon and undervalued, that the said Memorial
was so far from being recalled, that Mr Stevenson, the Company's Agent
acquaints them in his Letter of the 4th of October, That the English there did
constantly say, the Company would never be Redressed; and in his of the 18th of
October following, That he understood by Mr. Cresset the English Envoy to the
Court of Lunenburgh, that if the Memorial were yet to be given in, it would
have been done; and that the said Cresset had Private Orders to act quite
contrary to our Company's Expectations. This was such a black piece of
Treachery, and shows so much Contempt of our Nation, and such Rancour and
Malice against it, that we cannot see how the Parliament can in Honor to
themselves, and Honesty to the Kingdom which they represent, omit Addressing
His Majesty to discover the Authors of such pernicious Councils, that they may
be proceeded against according to the Law of Nations; or at least to make a
Resolve, That the Authors and Abettors of such Councils, if Scotsmen, are
Traitors; and if Foreigners, are Enemies to the Kingdom of Scotland; and that
the Company has a Right of Reprisal against them and their Supporters when
discovered. This may perhaps seem too severe, for which we shall make no other
Apology; but if what followed upon the Company's representing this Information
to the Lord Seafield be duly considered, it will appear that our Nation has no
reason to be much softer in the Matter, for by that it is evident that Mr.
Stevenson's Information was but too too true, and that the same wicked
Counselors who had advised that Opposition, still o^tain'd the Ascendant: What
else is the meaning of the Lord S -- s trifling Answer upon the receipt of the
Company's Letter with Mr. Stevenson's enclosed; could any Man think that a
sufficient Answer, that he could not as yet expect an opportunity of
representing the Matter to the King, because he was so very much employed in
the Affairs of his English Parliament: Had his Lordship forgot that he himself,
as President of the Parliament of Scotland, had Signed their Address to his
Majesty to have this very Grievance removed, and did his Lordship think the
Parliament of Scotland so very contemprible; that an Affair of theirs might not
find room amongst the Affairs of the Parliament of England? Did his Lordship
never know his Majesty go a Hunting all that Season, and could not he have
prevailed with him to have allowed a Hunting day or two, to consider of an
Affair wherein the Parliament of the Scotland was so much concerned? What pity
it is his Lordship should not give our Parliament an Account whether this Answer
was made by himself, or put in his Mouth by somebody else to paum a new delay
upon our Company.

The Contempt put upon our Nation in this Affair is further demonstrable, from
that continual Series of trifling with the Company, and their having no other
answer to those important Letters of theirs abovementioned (tho they wrote
another to Seafield to put him in mind of them, da^ed January 13 th) till the 7
th of February following; and then he sends to them, that he was commanded by
His Majesty to let them know that there being Accounts that the Ships belonging
to the Company were arrived upon the Coast of America, and the particular
Design not being communicated to His Majesty, he therefore delays giving
answer, till he receive certain Information of their Settlement.

Whoever advised His Majesty to deal thus by our Company took as little care of
his Honor, as they did of our Welfare: Such evasive and disingenuous Answers
in a private Person would have been called by very hard Names: What Consistency
is there betwixt this Answer and the Promise, made by the two Secretaries, the
2 d Day of August, 1697? That he would order his Ministers at Hamburgh and
Lunenburgh not to make use of his Name and Authority for obstructing our
Company in the prosecution of their Trade with the Inhabitants' of that City.
This Promise was absolute, and the Court stands now charged by Mr. Crescet,
with giving private Instructions contrary to this, and other public Promises;
yet tho His Majesty's Honor, and the Interest of Scotland be so much
concerned, that the Scandal should be wiped off by a speedy and punctual
performance of his Promise, here is a new delay put upon the Company, and a
Promise which was absolute before, now made conditional a Year and an half
after, and before they are to expect an answer whether it shall be fulfilled or
not: His Majesty requires certain Information of the Collonie's Settlement, as
if those pernicious Counselors, who advised to this Conduct could think this
sufficient to absolve His Majesty from a Promise he had made so long before, to
take off the stop he had put to their Subscriptions at Hamburgh.

But that the pernicious Counselors designed this only as an amusement and
delay without any design that our Grievances should be redressed, will appear
by the Sequel: For after the Company had acquainted His Majesty with the
Settlement of their Colony in the Terms of his own Act of Parliament, and that
a very Loyal and Pertinent Address was also presented to His Majesty from the
Colony it self; yet this Interdict laid upon our Subscriptions at Hamburgh was
never taken off to this Day, tho the Company did again press it in their Letter
to His Majesty; with an Account of their Colony's Settlement: nor had they ever
any Redress for Capt. Long, of the Rupert Prizes, traducing their Colony as a
Company of Rogues, Vagabonds, and broken Officers, without any Commission from
the King, and that His Majesty would not own them; all which makes it evident
that there was nothing of Sincerity in the Conduct of those who were His
Majesty's Counselors, as to the Affairs of our Company.

This will still be further evident from the Proclamations published against
our Colony in Iamaica, Barbados, and New England, which were not only
treacherous to the highest degree, but such an Invasion upon the Sovereignty
and Independency of our Nation, as ought not to be passed over by our
Parliament without a Protestation against them, and a strict enquiry after the
Authors and Advisers of them.

That they are full of Treachery and Malice against our Country, is plain from
their being emitted (as appears by their Dates) before ever any Complaint was
made against us by the Spaniards, before we were heard what we could say in our
own defense; and at the same time whilst our Lord President and Advocat were
sent for from Scotland, to hear what they could say in Justification of our
Colony's Settlement. The Treachery is also plainly demonstrable, because the
said Proclamations were published without consulting the Council of Scotland,
and that they were contrary to the solemn Promises, made by the Commissioners
and Presidents in our Parliaments from time to time; wherein His Majesty
promised to encourage and protect our Trade, of which those Proclamations are
utterly subversive.

If it be objected that His Majesty was obliged to publish those Proclamations
out of regard to the English Nation and His Foreign Allies. We answer that his
Majesty by his Coronation Oath as King of Scotland, is obliged to govern us by
our own Laws, and not by any Consideration of Foreign Interests; but admitting
that he ought in this Case to have given the preference to the English Nation,
and his Foreign Allies: It will by no means acquit the pernicious Counselors
of Treachery toward us, since the least they could have advised in this case
was, that we should have had notice of such Proclamations beforehand, that we
might have been upon our Guard, and have done what we could to have prevented
our Colonies being frightened or starved from Darien; the omitting of which
alone, had there been nothing of an actual concurrence to destroy us, makes
those Counselors chargeable with the Blood of our Men, the Loss of our
Treasure, and the Disappointment of the just Expectation we had from that
Expedition.

That the publishing of those Proclamations was an unsufferable Intrenchment
upon the Sovereignty and Independency of our Nation is undeniable, since
thereby the King of England takes upon himself to condemn the Subjects of
Scotland as Invaders of the Dominions of Spain, and thereupon forbids his
English Subjects to have any Correspondence with them, or to supply them with
any Necessaries, which by the Law of Nations must be interpreted an Act of
Hostility, when done by one Nation to another.

That this being done by the King of England is an Invasion upon the
Sovereignty of Scotland, is evident, because he has no right neither as a
Liege-Sovereign, nor Conqueror to judge of our Actions. If he did it as King of
Scots, then it concerns our Parliament to enquire by what Law he could do it
without their Consent, or what Scotsmen advised him so to do, and whether it be
true what Mr. Vernon said, That it was done with the Lord S -- 's Privacy and
Consent.

That the emitting of those Proclamations was a deliberate Action of the
pernicious Counselors, and full of Malice and Treachery against the Kingdom of
Scotland appears further. from the publishing a Second Proclamation, Sept. 5.
1699, at Barbados, against entertaining any Correspondence with the Scots at
Darien, tho the Lord President and Advocate had so long before given in
sufficient* Reasons to justify our Settlement. This will appear yet more
plainly if the Tenor of that Proclamation be considered, which is not so
positive as that at Iamaica in condemning our Settlement at Darien, as contrary
to the Peace with his Majesty's Al^ies, but is expressed doubtfully; Lest the
same should derogate from the Treaties His Majesty has entered into with the
Crown of Spain, or be otherwise prejudicial to any of His Majesty's Colonies in
the West Indies. Whence it is evident that we have a positive Injury done us,
tho the Court could not be positive, but only suppo^'d that our Settlement
might derogate from his Majesty's Treaties with Spain, or be prejudicial to his
Majesty's Colonies in the West Indies. The Authors of this Proclamation knew
well enough the state of our Colony's Provisions, and how fatal those
Proclamations would be to them; and therefore no Art can palliate their Malice
and Treachery.

That the said Proclamations were emitted with a design to ruin our Colony is
demonstrable from this, That tho our Company upon the dismal News of its
Disaster, did in a very dutiful manner petition his Majesty, put him in mind of
the several Acts of Parliament, and his Letters Patent, authorizing the Natives
of this Kingdom to settle Plantations in Asia, Africa and America; upon the
Faith and Encouragement of which they formed themselves into a Company, and had
made a Settlement at Darien, precisely according to the Terms of the said Acts
and Letters Patent; at the same time informing him, That they had too much
reason to believe that the said Proclamations had been of fatal Consequence to
our Company and Colony; desiring that the effect of the Proclamations might be
taken off, and that they might be supplied from the English Plantations in the
ordinary way of Commerce. Yet notwithstanding all this Application they had a
mere trifling Answer returned them, and Couched in such Ambiguous Terms as
might leave room for farther trifling, viz. That we should have the same
freedom of Trade and Commerce with the English Plantations as ever we had
formerly; which was just none at all. So that this was nothing but a mere
Evasion, and no direct Answer to our Companies necessary and reasonable
Petition.

Certainly it concerns our Parliament to enquire who were the Authors of this
scandalous Breach of Public Laws, upon the Faith of which our Country ventured
so much to Sea, and by the violation of which in such a manner the Sovereignty
of our Nation is trampled under foot, and we have lost so much Blood and
Treasure.

The Malice of these pernicious Counselors against our Country and Colony, is
further displayed by their doing all that is possible ^o preclude us from having
our Grievances redressed; we have in vain Petitioned the Court ever since the
last Sessions of Parliament, and therefore had no way left us but to Petition
that the Parliament may meet again at the day appointed in November next, that
His Majesty may have the Advice and Assistance of the Great Council of this
Nation, in such a Weigh^y and General Concern. This those blessed Counselors
are so far from thinking fit to be Granted, that they Advise His Majesty to
Adjourn our Parliament further till the 5th of March following; just when they
heard this Petition was coming up; and at the same time we are told, that His
Majesty will Order the Parliament to meet when he judged the Good of the Nation
did require it; as if any could be better Judges than the Nation it self which
groaned under Oppressions, and knew no other way of being delivered from them;
or as if the Advice of the Council General of our Company, wherein the Flower
of our Nobility and Gentry, and a great number of the Members of our Parliament
are included, were not more proper to give His Majesty Advice in this matter,
than an English and Dutch Faction mixed with some Scotchmen who have so little
Interest in their Country or Affection to it, as to betray it for Bread, or the
Favor of the Court. Thus the Honor and Interest of our Country are still
trampled upon.

Tho those continued Slights and Marks of Contempt were enough to have wearied
our Company out, and might justly have provoked the Nation to have taken other
Measures; yet the Company out of their Zeal to the public Welfare, continue
their Applications to His Majesty, and send up an Address to him by the Lord
Basil Hamilton; wherein they acquaint His Majesty, that Capt. Pincarton,
Commander of their Ship the Dolphin, being forced ashore under the Walls of
Carthagena; to avoid Shipwreck was with all his Company; some of them
Gentlemen, belonging to the best Families of the Nation detained Prisoners, and
inhumanly used, contrary to the Treaties betwixt the Crowns of Spain and Great
Britain, that the Colony had in the Name of His Majesty and the Company sent to
demand them; but instead of having it granted, their Messenger was threatened to
be put in Chains, and not allowed to see any of the said Prisoners; and
therefore they thought themselves bound in Duty and Conscience to lay their
deplorable Case before His Majesty, and for that end commissioned the Lord
Basil Hamilton, one of their Number, to present their Address to His Majesty,
and to give him a further account of their other Affairs, not doubting but His
Majesty would take speedy and effectual measures for redressing their Damage,
and obtaining the Freedom of those distressed Prisoners.

Tho this Address, and the Calamities which our Nation at home, and Colony
abroad labored under, might one would have thought force Compassion, and
speedy Relief from the Breast of generous Enemy; yet such is the continued
prevalency of the per^icious Counselors, that the accepting of this Address
is put off; and by consequence the Redress of our Grievances, and the Relief of
those wretched Gentlemen, and others delayed, on a trifling and frivolous
pretext, that the Lord Basil Hamilton had not waited upon His Majesty, when
formerly at London, had never since given any public Evidence of his Loyalty,
nor acknowledged His Majesty's Government. This was above a month after the
Address was signed, and must needs be taken, as the Company themselves rightly
understood it to be a signification of His Majesty's Displeasure at the
Commission it self, which my Lord Basil brought up: There being no Prince in
Europe, but would with open Arms embrace a Subject of my Lord Basil Hamilton's
Quality and Character, upon his return to his Duty, and presenting an Address
that owned His Majesty's Title and Government (if he had ever acted against it)
but much more a Person of his high Birth and merit who was never charged with
any thing inconsistent with the Duty of a Loyal and Peaceable Subject.

It would seem then to be incumbent upon the Parliament of Scotland, to enquire
who they were that Advised His Majesty to delay his Endeavors, which by Law he
was obliged to exert, for obtaining the Liberty of Capt. Pinearton and his
Company, and the restitution of his Ship and Goods, though the Company had
never Addressed him upon that Head: It would, we say, seem to be incumbent upon
the Parliament to enquire who it was that Advised to the dispensing with a
positive Law, because the Commissioner who presented that Address, had
neglected a Ceremony which he was by no Law obliged to perform. If the Nation
of Scotland is become so contemptible that its Rights must be neglected; and if
the Blood of our Illustrious Nobility and Gallant Gentry be now so vile that
the omission of a mere Ceremony is thought sufficient cause to connive at
Hostilities committed upon our People, and to suffer Gentlemen related to the
best Families of the Kingdom to perish in Infamous Slavery; It Is in vain for us
to pretend to be a Free Nation: If we cannot have such Injuries redressed, we
had as good send our Coronation Oath and Claim of Right to His Majesty of
England in a Present, and tell him, that henceforward we will become his most
obedient Slaves and Vassals, and will hang our selves whenever he shall be
Graciously pleased to send us a Letter and Bow-string for that end.

Some we know will object that His Majesty did not refuse to to receive the
Petition, though he would not allow my Lord Basil to Present it, and promised
to receive Information of what is demanded from his Secretaries; and if my Lord
Basil would give in in Writing to them what he had to represent, His Majesty
would give his Answer to the Company.

To which we can readily answer, That this is the direct Path to the Tyranny of
the late Reigns, which o^dered that no Petition should be presented to the King
but by his Council: If His Majesty must appoint who shall deliver the Petition,
it is all one as if he should dictate the Petition too. We would wish the
Pernicious Counselors to consider how they will reconcile this to that Claim
of Right, and what an Answer they will be able to give out Parliament, if they
think fit to tell them, that His Majesty's beloved Secretary had formerly
neglected delivering the Companies Petitions, on pre^ence that he had not an
opportunity of doing it, because His Majesty was so much taken up with the
Affairs of his English Parliament; and therefore they had no reason to entrust
him with any more Petitions.

Besides, it is visible that this delay proceeded merely from a design to ruin
our Company entirely: It was known to the World how much they suffered in their
Reputation and Interest, by the disaster of their Colony, which nothing in
probability could retrieve, without the Countenance and Concurrence of His
Majesty and Parliament; this the Enemies of our Nation were sensible of, and
therefore take such measures as procure us all possible marks of His Majesty's
Displeasure, and an obstinate refusal of a Parliament. By this Opposition they
had little reason to doubt, that we should be so baulked in the Prosecution of
our American design, as utterly to abandon it: When we saw the Court resolved
to thwart us in every thing relating to it, and so unmerciful as to delay
procuring the Liberty of so many Gentlemen that were detained Prisoners, and
cruelly used contrary to the Laws of Nations.

From all which it necessarily results, that it is incumbent upon the Parliament
of Scotland to enter a Protest against this continued Violation of their Laws
and Authority, and to enquire who they are that gave His Majesty such Council
that they may be punished according to Demerit.

We come next to consider his Majesty's Answer to the Contents of the Address
brought up by my Lord Basil Hamilton, viz. That he was resolved in the Terms of
the Treaty, to demand that Capt. Pincart^n and those of his Crew who are
detained Prisoners at Carthagena be released and set at liberty. That the
Subjects of Scotland shall be allowed the same liberty of Trade that others
enjoy with the English Plantations; that it was his Resolution to Promote and
Advance the Trade of the Kingdom: And the three Frigates they demand, having
been given by Parliament for Guarding the Trade of the Coasts, he was not
resolved to dispose of them till he had the Advice of his Parliament.

By this His Majesty owns that Capt. Pincarton and his Crew were detained
Prisoners by the Spaniards contrary to the Treaty. Then what can his
Counselors in Scots Affairs say for their not having Advised His Majesty to
demand him sooner, especially since he was obliged to it by the Act
Establishing our Company; had the Zeal of those Counselors who pretend to be
concerned for the Welfare and Honor of our Nation; been equal to the malice
of those that Advised His Majesty to issue Proclamations against our Colony in
the West Indies, before he knew whether we had done any thing in contravention
to his Treaties with Spain or not, they would certainly have put him upon
demanding Satisfaction sooner for a manifest breach of those Treaties. This we
conceive deserves also the Consideration of our Parliament.

In the next place, by His Majesty's Promise that we should have the same
Liberty of Trade that others enjoy with the English Plantations. It is owned by
the Advisers of it, that it was in His Majesty's Power so to do; and that he
might lawfully do so, which is a plain Con^ession that we had acted nothing
contrary to his Treaties with Spain, nor to the detriment of his English
Plantations, and that the former Prohibition was the Act and Deed of those
Pernicious Counselors; for had it been contrary to the Laws of England, or
Treaties betwixt the Crown of Great Britain and Spain, that our Colonies should
be supplied with Provisions, andc. from the English Plantations, it had not
been in His Majesty's Power to dispense with it now. The matter then being so,
it concerns the Parliament of Scotland to enquire who they were, and upon what
motives they Advised His Majesty to emit those Proclamations against supplying
our Colony with Provisions, etc. Since it was settled in the precise Terms of
the Act of his Scots Parliament, and his own Letters Patent; and that our
Colony had done nothing contrary to his Treaties with Spain, or to the Interest
of his English Plantations: At the same time it may be proper for them to
enquire why Capt. Pincarton and his Company, as also the Ship and Goods, are
not restored all this while! And whether the promise of demanding them from
Spain has not been as ill performed as was that of recalling the Memorial at
Hamburgh.

As to His Majesty's Promise of our having the same Liberty of Trade to the
English Plantations as others have, it is worth the while to observe the
management of the Pernicious Counselors in this point. It would seem they were
sensible that His Majesty's Promise, if performed, might be of advantage to our
Colony, and would make show to the World, that he really Countenanced our
Undertaking, and by consequence oblige those that oppose us to greater
Precautions; and therefore though this Promise was made us to calm the Spirits
of our People, whom they knew to be in a general Ferment, they were resolved it
should never be performed; but how to bring His Majesty handsomely off, was
their next Enquiry. This they found a method to do, by endeavoring to have the
Parliament of England approve what his Majesty had done against our Company and
Colony, and they thought no doubt, that His Majesty would be sufficiently
absolved, and the mouths of our Nation for ever stopped, as having neither
Courage nor Power to call the Kingdom of England to an Account.

This was in vain attempted upon the House of Commons, but carried at last in
the House of Lords, viis and modis, yet not without a Pro^estation against it,
and several sharp Speeches inveighing against the Courtiers who had promised
that very thing to the Scots, against which they were then soliciting the House
to Address His Majesty.

The Address it self we shall view anon, after some further Considerations on
His Majesty's Promise to our Company, as to the three Friga^s they demanded,
which, he says, Because they were given by the Parliament for Guarding the
Trade of the Coasts, he is resolved not to dispose of till he have the Advice
of our Parliament. It is certainly an essential part of our Constitution, for a
King of Scots to Advise with his Parliament; Why then was not the Parliament
summoned to meet speedily at the Companies desire, since the Honor and
Interest of our Kingdom required it? And we would willingly know of those that
Advise His Majesty in Scots Affairs, whether they think the Parliament meant
those Ships* when the Peace had rendered the Guarding our Coasts unnecessary,
should have been denied for Guarding the Trade of the Nation, and the Coasts of
our new Settlement at Caledonia. And in the next place we would willingly know
of them why the Granting of this necessary demand should be deferred till the
Parliament can be Advised with concerning it, since the Granting of it in all
common Interpretation, must be supposed to be according to their Act, and why
their Advice was not also staid for or desired, before the emitting the
Proclamations against our Colony in the West Indies? This is certainly worth
our Parliaments enquiring into. For it is not to be supposed that they entrust
our Kings to do whatever Pernicious Councils Advise them to, against the
Interest of the Nation, and only to delay doing what is visibly for its
Advantage, till they have the consent of Parliament: Upon the whole it is
demonstrable beyond contradiction, that they who have His Majesty's Ear as to
Scots Affairs, and by whose Advice he has Governed himself as to our Kingdom,
designed no good to our Company, Colony, or Country, otherwise such reasonable
Requests as they have from time to time desired of His Majesty, could not have
been refused as they have constantly been, in manifest violation of our Laws,
and to the irreparable Disgrace of our Nation.

This will appear convincingly to those that consider the Proclamation issued
in Scotland by His Majesty's Order, against carrying on a Na^ional Petition for
a Parliament in order to redress our Grievances as to Darien, etc. The
frivolous pretext of the Pernicious Counselors, that the same was promoted by
Persons who had given no proofs of their Affections to the Government; and that
they endeavored to charge the miscarriage of the Darien Colony, upon
Proclamations published against their having any Supplys from the English West
Indies, whereas it was chargeable upon other Causes; this frivolous pretext we
say is so very thin, that it may easily be seen through, and was contrived on
purpose to draw a Vail over the manifest Injustice of this Proclamation, so
diametrically opposite to the Claim of Right, on which His Majesty accepted the
Crown, wherein it is expressly declared, That it is the Right of the Subject to
Petition the King, and that all Prosecutions and Imprisonments for such
Petitioning, are and were contrary to Law. Here is no exception made of
Subjects that have not given proofs of their Affection to the Government. It is
sufficient if they be Subjects, to certainly Petitioning in it self infers an
owning of the Government; but admit it were so that the said Petition was
promoted by such, must the whole Nation when injured in its Honor and
Interest, be denied the liberty of Petitioning for a Redress of their
Grievances, because Persons that are not well Affected to the Government, when
they suffer in the common loss of their Country, and likewise in their own
personal Property are willing to concur with them, and to promote such a
Petition? This is Doctrine fit for Turkey, or for France; and indeed not
digestable there, much less to be obtruded upon us. But the Truth of the matter
is this, the mischeivous Counselors were not willing the Nation should be
acquainted with the Treatment they had met with by their means, and therefore
did not care to hear of a National Application for a Redress.

But did those Gentlemen think we would take their word for it, that the
miscarriage of our Colony was not chargeable upon their West India
Proclamations, since they know they never yet suffered his Majesty to keep his
word to us, as is but too too evident from the Hamburgh Memorial, the said
Proclamations, and other steps of opposition made to our Company contrary to
express Law? Was it not but reasonable then, that we should desire a Parliament
to enquire into the Matter, and examine whether the Company's Charge be true or
false? Or when the Practices of pernicious Counselors gives the Country just
cause to complain of Grievances, must they not petition for a Redress, because
some ill men may perhaps improve it against the Government? We hope our
Parliament will think it worth their while to enquire, whether they that gave
the occasion for such a Petition, or those that make such a Petition be most
culpable.

Ay, but says the Faction, such petitioning is an invasion of his Majesty's
Prerogative, it being he only who is to call a Parliament. To which we answer,
that the Claim of Right sets bounds to his Prerogative beyond which he is not
to go, since upon those Terms he accepted our Crown; and that Claim having
reserved to the Subject the Right of petitioning, the denial of it is an
Invasion of their Property. And besides, tho his Majesty only is to call a
Parliament, it is not left absolutely or solely at his Disposal when. By the
Claim of Right he is obliged for the redress of Grievances to call them
frequently, and to allow them to sit. So that the denying of the Parliaments
meeting, and adjourning them from time to time, as in the present Case, when
the whole Nation complains of their Grievances in relation to their Colony, is
another manifest infraction upon the Claim of Right, which our Parliament is
concerned to enquire into the Authors of, that they may be punished; otherwise
our Claim of Right will by degrees come to be of no more use to us than an
Almanac out of date.

We come now to the Address of the House of Lords in England, concerning our
Colony at Darien, which we think convenient to insert here at large.

London, February 13th. Yesterday His Majesty received the following Address
from the House of Lords.
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, being according
to our duty solicitous for the preservation and Increase of the Trade of this
Kingdom, on which the Support of your Majesty's Greatness and Honor so much
depends, as well as the Security and Defense of your People, have been very
apprehensive, that the steps lately made toward a Settlement of your Subjects
of the Kingdom of Scotland at Darien, may tend to the great prejudice of this
Nation, and possibly to the disturbance of that Peace and good Correspondence
with the Crown of Spain, which we conceive is very advantageous to us all: We
have therefore taken the same into our serious consideration, as a matter of
the greatest Importance, and proper to be laid before your Majesty, as the
Common Father of both Countries. And as we are truly sensible of great Losses
our Neighbor Kingdom has sustained, both by Men and Treasure, in their
Expeditions to that place, which we very heartily lament, so we should not
endeavor by any Interposition of Ours, to defeat the Hopes they may still
entertain of recovering those Losses by their further engaging in that design,
but that we judge such a Prosecution on their parts must end not only in far
greater Disapointments to themselves, but at the same time prove very
inconvenient to the Trade, and quiet of this Kingdom.

On this occasion we humbly presume to put your Majesty in mind of the Address
of both Houses of Parliament, presented to Your Majesty on the 17th of December
1695. In the close of which Address Your Majesty will see the unanimous Sense
of this Kingdom in relation to any Settlement the SCOTS might make in the
West Indies, by virtue of an Act of Parliament past about that time in the
Kingdom of Scotland, which was the occasion of the said Address.

And we humbly represent to Your Majesty, that having received Information of
some Orders Your Majesty had sent to the Governors of the Plantations on this
Subject, the House did, on the 18th of January last, come to this Resolution,
That Your Majesty's Pleasure signified to the Governors of the Plantations, in
Relation to the Scotch Settlement at DARIEN, was agreeable to the Address of
both Houses of Parliament, presented to Your Majesty on the 17th of December
1695.

And on the 8th of this Instant February, this House came to this further
Resolution, that the Settlement of the Scots Colony at DARIEN is inconsistent
with the Good of the Plantation Trade of this Kingdom.

All which we humbly hope Your Majesty will take into your Royal Consideration,
and we are confident that Your Majesty cannot be thought too partial to the
Address of this House, if Your Majesty shall in the first place consider the
Advantage and Good of this Trade of this Kingdom, by the Preservation and
Improvement of which, both these Kingdoms, and all your other Dominions, must
on all occasions principally be defended.


If this Address be not a manifest Invasion of our Sovereignty and Independency
never any thing was; and therefore it is to be hoped our Parliament, against
whose Act they have so expressly declared themselves, will protest against this
Address, and declare it to be an invasion of our Freedom, and such an
interposition in our Affairs as is inconsistent with the Sovereignty and
Independency of Scotland. We have already taken notice that this Address was
the procurement of the Court, which shows how fraudulently the pernicious
Counselors have all along acted with us, and what our Nation is to expect so
long as we are governed by such Advice: But to come to the Address it self.

It is evident that the natural Tendency of it is to render our Kingdom subject
to that of England, and a plain Declaration against our Settlement at Darien,
or any place in the West-Ind^es.

It is also plain from this Address, that they presented it on purpose to
defeat the hopes that we might still entertain of recovering our Losses, by
further engaging in that Design; and that they have taken upon themselves the
Loss of the Blood and Treasure which we have sustained in the West Indies, by
declaring that his Majesty's Pleasure, signified to the Governors of the
Plantations in relation to our Settlement at Darien, was agreeable to the
Address of both Houses of Parliament, of the 17 th of December, 1695. It Is
observable also, that by this Address the Lords take upon them to say the
Commons are of the same mind with themselves; which since the Commons seem to
comply with by their silence, wants very little of a formal Declaration of both
Houses against our trading either in the East or West Indies.

It is also evident from this Address, that they demand his Majesty should
prefer the Advantage of their Trade to ours; from all which together its
demonstrable, that they have no more to do but to allege any branch of our
Trade they please to be inconsistent with and disadvantagious to theirs, and so
may at last deprive us of our whole Trade; since those who are his Majesty's
Counselors in our Affairs think it sufficient it seems to absolve him from his
Coronation Oath to us, or any other Obligation he is under to govern us
according to our own Laws, if what he does against our Interest and Honor be
but agreeable to the mind of his Parliament of England.

These things make it evident beyond Contradiction, that except some speedy
redress be had, Not only our Company but all other individual Merchants of this
Kingdom, must from henceforward conclude that all their Rights and Freedom of
Trade are and may be further violently wrested out of our Hands by our
Neighbors: As our Company well expressed it in their Address to his Majesty,
June 28 th. 1697.

By those barefaced and avowed methods, the Conjecture of our Company, in their
Address to the Council of Scotland of December 22 d 1697, has been also too
much verified, viz. That if effectual means were not taken for putting an early
stop to such an open and violent Infringement of so solemn a Constitution, its
hard to guess how far it may in after-ages be made use of as a Precedent, for
invading and overthrowing even the very fundamental Rights, natural Liberties,
and indisputable Independency of this Kingdom, which by the now open and
frequent Practices of our unkind Neighbors seem to be too shrewdly pointed at,
and give cause of Apprehensions and Jealousies, not only to our Company in
particular, but even to the whole Body of the Nation in geneneral. It is no
less evident, by those proceedings that the Authority and Credit of our
Parliament is struck at through our Companies Sides: As the Company likewise
truly expressed it, in their Address to the Parliament, July 22 d, School.

And from this Address they may as well foresee that they are to expect all the
opposition from the Faction that can be, as they formerly predicted, but too
late in their Address to the Parliament -- That their Enemies would either
directly or indirectly pursue their Designs of ruining all their Measures. For
we may assure our selves that those Persons about his Majesty, who were so
officious to procure Proclamations against our Colony (when there was no such
Address to countenance their Proceedings) will not be wanting to press his
Majesty to oppose us to the utmost, since they have been at so much pains to
procure this Address, tho at the expense of His Majesty's Reputation, who had
promised us the contrary: This is but too evident from the Advices we have
already received, that the Captain of the Sloope who brought 2 of our Colony
from Darien to Iamaica, since our repossessing our selves of it, was imprisoned
there, and his Vessel seized on that Account.

We come next to the Causes they assign for this Address, viz. That our
Settlement may occasion a breach of the Peace betwixt them and Spain, and be
prejudicial to their Plantation-Trade.

The first they have no Cause to fear, since there is no offensive and
defensive League 'twixt us and England, that we are a distinct and independent
Nation, and that they have sufficiently declared their opposition to our
Settlement, to the loss of our Blood and Treasure; the second is frivolous and
against the Law of Nations, since every free and independent Kingdom has a
right to seek their own advantage without any regard to the Interest of
another, as much as two Freemen of the same Employment have a right to set up a
Shop in the same Street, or next Door to one another, if they find their
account in it. If it were otherwise, the English have as much right to oppose
the old French Settlements in the West Indies, and their new one at Mississipi,
as they have to oppose ours; so that their proceedings against us in this
matter is a piece of the black^st Injustice that one Nation can be guilty of
toward another: And we wonder very much at it, since some of their Council of
Trade, who are amongst the Chief of those that advise to this way of proceeding
against us, seem to place all their hopes of Heaven upon Justice 'twixt Man and
Man, and yet seem to have no sense of Justice betwixt Nation and Nation,

We come next to consider His Majesty's Answer.

His Majesty's most Gracious Answer to the Address, was to this Effect, Viz.
HIS Majesty having received a very dutiful Address from the House of Peers, in
relation to the Endeavors lately used by some of his Majesty's Subjects of the
Kingdom of Scotland toward making a Settlement at DARIEN, in which they humbly
represent to him their Opinion, that such a Settlement is inconsistent with the
good of the Plantation-Trade of this Kingdom: Is pleased to let the House know,
That he will always have a very great regard to their Opinion; And to assure
them, that he will never be wanting by all proper means* to promote the
Advantage and Good of the Trade of England. At the same time His Majesty is
pleased to Declare, that he cannot but have a great Concern and Tenderness for
his Kingdom of Scotland, and a desire to advance their Welfare and
Prosperity, and is very sensibly touched with the loss His Subjects of that
Kingdom have sustained by their late unhappy Expeditions, in order to a
Settlement at DARIEN. His Majesty does apprehend that difficulties may too
often arise with respect to the different Interest of Trade, between his two
Kingdoms, unless some way be found out to unite them more nearly and
completely: And therefore His Majesty takes this opportunity of putting the
House of Peers in mind of what he recommended to his Parliament, soon after his
Accession to the Throne, That they would consider of an Union between the two
Kingdoms. His Majesty is of opinion, That nothing would more contribute to the
security and happiness of both Kingdoms; and is inclined to hope, that after
they have lived near 100 years under the same Head, some happy Expedient may be
found for making them one People, in case a Treaty were set on Foot for that
purpose; And therefore he does very earnestly recommend this Matter to the
Consideration of the House.


This Answer is indeed something more like the Answer of a King of Scots, than
that to the Address of both Houses, of the 17 th of December 1695. Yet the
m^nagement of our Friends, his Majesty's Counselors in Scots Affairs, is still
obvious to our view, in this Answer; the transports of Joy they were filled
with upon the receipt of the Lords Address, discovers it self by visible
Ebullitions in the very first Line. His Majesty having received a VERY DVTIFVL
ADDRESS. What pity 'twas that new Patents of Honor were not sent to every one
of those Lords that were for this Dutiful Address. But when it comes to be
weighed in a Scots Balance it appears to be undutiful to the highest degree.
1. Because they take upon them to advise his Majesty to act contrary to what he
had promised to the Scots. And, 2. Because instead of owning him as an
independent Sovereign of Scotland, they treat him like their Vassal, as he is
King of Scots, by pretending to direct him in the Affairs of our Nation, where
they have nothing to do; and that also in opposition to the Sentiments of the
Parliament of Scotland, who must rationally be supposed to understand the
Interest of our Nation better, and to consult it more, than they either can or
will do.

Certainly they must have a very mean Opinion of the Wisdom of our Nation, if
they think we can be gulled with their pretending to be sorry for our great
loss of Men and Treasure; when at the same time, they charge themselves with
advising to those measures which occasioned the loss of both, and indirectly
threaten us (for we cannot interpret it otherwise) WITH FAR GREATER
DISAPPOINTMENTS IN THE PROSECVTION OF OUR DESIGN: for justification of which
they have already formed their Declaration, viz. That our Settlement at Darien
is greatly prejudicial to their Nation, and disturbs their Peace with Spain;
when all this while the Spaniards have never offered to make the least Reprizal
upon them for it, whereas they have committed actual Hostilities upon us.

His Majesty's declaring that he cannot but have a great Concern and Tenderness
for his Kingdom of Scotland, and a desire to advance our Welfare and
Prosperity, discovers a Paternal Affection to us; but considering how he is
circumstantiate, is like to be of as little use to our Nation, as the Affection
of a Natural Father to his own Children, for whom he dares not do any good
Office, because of a cursed ill-natured Stepmother, that has him at command:
Thus His Majesty was graciously pleased to grant us an Act for Encouraging and
Promoting our Trade, but by the Malice of our Enemies, who have him in their
Hands, was forced to Counteract it: Thus he has been pleased again to promise
our Colony the same Liberty of Trade that others have to the English
Plantations, but must be forced to recall his Word, or at least to be worse than
his Promise, because he is told that the Sense of both his Houses of Parliament
in England is against it. To these straights those pernicious Counselors have
reduced His Majesty; for though the Faction will promise to support him in
a^ting contrary to Law, and his Coronation Oath, against us; yet they will not
suffer him to do any thing against what they are pleased to call the Interest
of England, but he is in danger of being Lop'd off or Abdicated. They will not
allow us to complain of our Kings when misled by Ill Council, or to say that by
our Ancient Constitution, they were accountable to their Parliaments for
Maladministration, but strait they will burn our Books as False, Scandalous,
and Traiterous; yet they themselves fly in the Face of their Prince every day,
suffer his Administration to be tamely Libelled, and his Person reflected on,
in all their Pampblets against a standing Army; they will tell him to his Face,
that they who advised him to the Irish Grants, had not consulted his Honor --
And that they who advised him to such and such Answers, had done as much as in
them lay to create a misunderstanding betwixt him and his People. If we quote
our Historians, or Laws, for asserting that the Supreme Power of our Government
risided formerly in the State^, who could dispose of the Lives and Fortunes of
our Princes, they strait condemn it as Traiterous; but at the same time they
quietly suffer Books to be published, asserting their own Power of doing so by
their Kings, and justify the cutting off of King Charles the I. as Milton's
Works, and others: If their own Kings dispense with their Laws, and Invade the
Rights of their Church, they kick them from their Thrones, and then tell the
World they have Abdicated; yet at the same time they support them in acting
Arbitrarily, and contrary to Law against us; and tell them that in so doing,
they act according to the Sense of both Houses. If we complain of Injuries done
us, and Affronts put upon us by a Faction of theirs, in conjunction with some
ill Men of our own, straitway we are accused of reflecting upon the Honor of
both Nations* and endeavoring to stir up War and Sedition, and Proclamations
are issued, offering 500 l for discovering the Authors of such Complaints; yet
at the same time they suffer us to be Libelled, railed upon, vilified and
belied, and God himself and the Holy Scriptures blasphemed, in Villainous
Pamphlets, without taking the least notice of it. Thus in a Scurrilous Pamphlet
called, A History of Darien, we are bantered and laughed at with Romantic and
Foppish Stories; in the Defense of the Scots Abdicating Darien, the Honor of
our Nation is outrag'd, our Company belied, and Religion blasphemed; yet the
Author Rewarded and Caressed by Mr. V -- n, now a Minister of State, but
formerly a Licenser of Books, for taking off the Penal Laws, and overturning
the Protestant Religion. In a Villainous Lampoon called, The Pedlar turned
Merchant, we are exposed to public Redicule and Contempt, without any
Animadversion upon Authors or Publishers. Nor had any of our own Secretaries of
State the Courage to take any Course with those Libellers, or to complain of
them, though App^ication was made to them for that end. But if any thing be
wrought to vindicate our Nation from such foul Ca^umnies, a greater Reward is
offered for discovering the Authors than was offered for apprehending some of
the Regicides: Proclamations are published with more Zeal and Virulency for
that end, than against Popish Priests and Jesuits, who by their Principles and
Practices destroy Men's Souls and Bodies: What eagerness did our Enemies at
Court evidence, in prosecuting Booksellers for the Enquiry into the Causes of
our Colonies Miscarrying at Darien? What pa^ns and expense to find out the very
Porters that Carried the Books a^out? What illegal and barbarous Treatments
and Threa^s did they make use of to a poor Fellow taken up on Suspicion on that
account, keeping him Close Prisoner for a Week without an^ Oath against him,
when his Wife lay-in in Childbed, and and his Family at the same time in a
Starving Condition, having nothing else but his Labor to depend on? With what
fury and heat did they Prosecute some People in Ireland, for but reading it in
public? And what pains and expense were they a^ to bring over a Scots
Bookseller from thence to witness against another Scots Bookseller in London,
that he had sent him a parcel of those Books? What ca^e to have extravagant
B^^l from that London Bookseller and o^he^s? and what threats to ruin that
Dublin Bookseller, if he would not c^n^rary to Conscience and Knowledge, swear
against the Scots Bookseller in London? and at the same time did not prosecute
English Booksellers that were taken up for actually selling the Books. And what
pains and expense were they at to discover the Author, though they had all the
Reason in the World to think that he was not within the Jurisdiction of
England? and yet at the same time they suffer our Nation to be daily abused and
ridiculed impune. These things are so plain and notorious, that the Faction
cannot but think the World takes notice of them, and curses their Scandalous
Partiality from their very Souls. That pernicious Faction (for still we would
be understood to be far from charging any thing here said, upon the whole
English Nation) may very well remember, that they looked upon it to be a good
Justification of their War against Holland, because the Dutch reflected upon
the Honor of the English Nation with their their Pens and Pencils, drew their
King with his Pocket turned inside out, and his hands in his Breeches running
after his Whores; and represented the English Nation by their three Lions with
their Tails cut; and some such Device as this (if we remember it right) Angli
Castigati latrant non mordent. Is it not strange then, that a Nation so jealous
of their own Honor, should suffer their Neighbors to be so scandalously
reviled in theirs; but such is the Temper of the high Tory Faction, and some
sneaking Court Wigs that are fallen in with them, in opposition to us, that it
seems they would have the Power of calling Kings to an account, or cutting them
off, appropriated to England alone; the latter we believe our Country will
scarcely grudge them, since they have been in the sole possession of it this
100 years, and therefore have a Right to it by Prescription; but as to the
former we must beg their Pardon. By our Claim of Right it is possible still for
our Kings to forfeit their Crowns by Maleadministration, whether they Abdicate
or not. We were under no obligation to mince the matter, nor to manage the
Credit of Passive Obedience, and save our own Reputation for acting contrary to
that pretended Principle, by imposing a falsehood upon the World. We had no need
to say that that Prince had voluntarily resigned his Crown, when he was obliged
to quit it by an Armed Force; therefore we acted fairly above-board, according
to the Genius of our Nation, and declared he had forfeited his Right, by acting
so and so, which being according to former Presidents, may prove the way for,
others to come: Whereas there is no great likelihood of our Neighbors being so
happy, as to have all their ^uture Tyrants run away, and perhaps it is for that
reason they are so Ambitious to ingross the Right of Lopping off Kings to
themselves; this we have the more reason to say, since they were so mild in
their Censure to Mr. Stevens, who on the 30th of January defended that Practice
before them, and yet were so severe upon the Author of the Scots Enquiry, for a
mere Historical Relation of what Power our Ancestors cl^imed over their Kings.

The next thing we are to consider, is the Project of an Union 'twixt the
English and us. We shall not of^er to call in question His Majesty's Sincerity
in the Proposal, because he made it formerly, when there were none of those
Controversies on foot betwixt us; but we have all imaginable reason to question
the Sincerity of those from whom it came now, and to look upon that, and his
Majesty's Promise of holding our Parliament in Person, to have been both of
them contrived to gull and amuse us: The very making of such a Proposal, and
the forwarding it, by those Lords that had almost in the same breath charged
themselves with the loss of on^ Blood and Treasure at Darien, and all the
disappointments that our Company had met with, was enough to make us suspect
that no good to us was intended by it. They that had just declared our Trading
to the East and West Indies to be inconsistent with the Trade of England, were
not like to come to any Union, that would allow us a share in their Trade, when
they will grant us none of our own; yet it must be confessed, that we can never
mention with Honor enough, those Noble Lords who with a Generous and Impartial
Justice protested against that unaccountable Address, about our American
Settlement: But to return to the Union, the unmanly and scurrilous Reflections
thrown upon us in the House of Commons by some noted Torys on that occasion,
are Indications sufficient, that such an Union as they design, would only
complete our Ruin: But at the same time we must own that our Nation is
eternally obliged to those Worthy Members of the lower House, who declared they
rejected the Bill, because they would not concur in putting a Sham upon their
Neighboring Nation, that had been so much injured, and so barbarously treated
by the West India Proclamations, etc.

It were easy to show that an Union upon good and honorable Terms would be the
greatest Happiness this Island could enjoy, that it would certainly enrich and
strengthen it, and secure our Religion and Liberties against all Attempts from
abroad and at home; that it would bless both Nations, with an oppo^tunity to
rectify what is amiss in their respective Constitutions, and make us the
impregnable bulwark of true Christianity, and human Liberty; but some those
about His Majesty discover sufficiently by their Conduct, that those are the
things in the World they are most afraid of; and therefore think it their
Interest, instead of uniting, to divide us, and instead of reforming to debauch
us: What else is the meaning of the prodigious increase of Popery and
Profaneness, and the perpretation of so much unnatural, and formerly unheard of
Villainy in the Nations? What else is the meaning of it, that foreign
Protestants were so little care taken of at the Reswick Treaty; that since the
Conclusion of the Peace, they have lost more than they did during the whole
War, and are every where exposed to be devoured by the Papists in France,
Germany, Hungary, etc. without any interposition in the Name of Great Britain.
Whence comes it to pass else, that now, when the power of these three Nations
and Holland are in the Hands of one Prince, the Hero of his Age, and the
Representative of a Family, that for 100 Years past has been the scourge of
Popery and Tyranny; that the Church of Rome should sport her self with the
Blood and Misery of the Protestants every day, and kindle a War amongst the
Protestant powers of the North, when it were easy for us, humanly speaking,
with the united Naval Force only of Protestant Princes and States to oblige all
the Popish Princes in Europe to come to a better Temper, in relation to their
Protestant Subjects, or to sack Rome the Seat of the Antichristian Empire, make
the Whore desolate, and burn her Flesh with Fire. But instead of such great and
generous designs, we are rendered incapable of protecting our selves; that
Popish In^erest grows within our own Bowels: Proclamations against Priests are
not obtained without Solicitation; new Laws against them are but faintly
carried on, the three Nations are dashed one against another; each of them
subdivided into Factions within themselves: and the endeavors of the
Protestant Kingdom of Scotland to settle a Trade, which has a promising Aspect
for the Protestant Interest, opposed with more Vigor, Industry, and Cunning,
by some about Court, than ever they opposed any thing else; whether it be the
influence of some Spanish and French Gold, or the effects of some secret and
unknown Bargains, God knows: but we think our Nation has very great reason to
enquire into the Cause of it, and together with their Trade, to take more than
ordinary care of the Protestant Interest amongst our selves, and not to suffer
this Kingdom to be a receptacle to any of the Priests banished from England.
This we humbly conceive we are the more obliged to look after, since that part
of the Administration is wholly devolved upon our selves, because His Majesty,
who is of a larger Soul than to do any thing that looks like persecuting people
upon the account of Principles, declined being any ways obliged to use force in
matters of Religion, by taking that Article of our Coronation Oath which
obliges him to root out Heresy, with an explanation; and therefore it is the
more incumbent upon us to see the Laws against Popery put in execution our
selves, lest our Lenity to them prove a Cruelty to our Country; it being very
well known that their Principles and Practices have a natural Tendency to
subvert all Civil Societies, which makes the execution of Laws against them a
Prosecution as necessary as that of other Criminals; and so much the more
necessary amongst us, that it is by the interest of those of that Opinion, and
of them that are addicted to their Superstition, that the advancement of our
Trade is so keenly and maliciously opposed.

Whilst public Affairs a^e under the Influence of such Men as have testified
so much Rancour against our Country, those Gentlemen who spoke of an Union with
us in such unbecoming Terms, as one Civilized Nation ought not to allow toward
another, need not trouble themselves with the Fears of our pressing it: It Is
better to be alone, than with ill Company. How desirous soever we may seem to
have been of a Union, our Neighbors may assure themselves that our Nation
never designed to purchase it at the expense of their Sovereignty and Honor.
We are under no Obligations yet to treat upon such disadvantagious Terms; what
we may be reduced to, when the Faction begin that War which Capt. Baker the
King of England's Solicitor threatens us with, we cannot tell. We doubt not he
speaks the Sentiments of the Courtiers that are so much imbittered against us;
but we despise it as a b^utum fulmen. This they may be satisfied of, that by
proposing an Union we never designed to become a Province to them, and to
resign our Parliament, without a proportionable share of the Legislative and
Executive Power, and of the Presence of the Government and all its Influences;
without which the Union would make us worse instead of making us better. Nor
must they think that we design to give up our Consciences to be new molded,
according to the pattern of Damascus, or their Pleasure. There Is no question to
be made but an Union without any of those Inconveniences might be effected to
the Honor and Advantage of both Nations, were things in a proper disposition
for it; but if our Neighbors grasp at a larger Government than what they are
already possessed of, its not our Interest to become the Subjects of it: Great
Governments like other Great Bodies become unweildy, and where one Member has
too much and another too little, the Frame will quickly come to decay. Mutual
Affection and an unequal distribution of Advantages are the best Cement of
Civil Society; but where some engross too much, and allow others too little,
Friendship can never be firm nor durable. If they design to be our Masters, and
not our Neighbors, they may assure themselves that our design and theirs is
not the same, and that we shall never unite with them upon those Terms.

Thus we have taken a brief view of some of the principal Grievances we labor
under, as to our American Settlement; to which we may add the discourting of
those who have showed themselves zealous for advancing our Trade, and the
advancement and continuing of such in great Posts as ingloriously concur with
those measures, that are taken to ruin their Country.

The great Difficulty lies in ge^ting those Grievances redressed and in falling
upon Methods to have the like prevented in time to come; neither of these are
to be done without our Parliaments assuming to themselves the Ancient Spirit
and Courage of the Nation: if we tamely digest those Invasions upon our
Sovereignty our Enemies will be encouraged to go on, and if we don't take
effectual measures to restrain all stretches of Prerogative, we shall
unavoidably fall into the Tyranny of the late Reigns. The Invasions made upon
our Sovereignty and Freedom made by the English Court, are such as we cannot
once doubt that our Parliament will take care to assert the Honor of the
Nation against them, but perhaps there may be some difficulty in getting proper
Resolves taken against the late measures of some Courtiers, in opposition to
the interest of the Country, such are the trifling and fraudulent dealing with
us as to the Hamburgh Memorial, the like as to the West India Proclamations,
the denying of the Companys reasonable Petitions, the Proclamation against the
National Petition, etc. the unreasonable delaying of the meeting of the
Parliament, when the Honor and Interest of the Nation did so londly call for
it, etc.

It is not to be supposed that a Parliament who have retrieved so much of our
Ancient Constitution (that was Usurped upon, or given away by pact Parliaments,
during the fr^ntick transports and prevalency of the Cavalier Faction in
Charle^ II. time) will be huffed or frightened out of their Rights by the
bugbear words of Treason and Sedition; those are Crimes with which Parliaments
lawfully called, and acting with the Consent of the People, can never justly be
Charged, Freedom of Speech and Debate in Parliament being retriv'd by the Claim
of Right, Members who speak freely for the Honor and Interest of their Country
are not now to be frightened by Red Coats, and other Court Pensioners with the
Castle, the Castle, as in the late Reigns. If any such thing should now be
offered, the said Claim will justify sending the Proposers of it to the same
Quarters.

By the same Instrument of Government or Claim of Right, we are also delivered
from that overgrown Prerogative or Excrescence of Tyranny, that made it Treason
to say the King is accountable to his Parliament, since a freedom from those
encroachments upon the Liberties of the Subject that the late Reigns were
guilty of, are made the foundation of this present Government, and that His
Majesty accepted our Crown upon those terms in the Claim of right, promising to
protect us from the violation of those Rights we therein asserted, and from ALL
OTHER ATTEMPTS upon our Religion Laws and Liberties; all which were to no
purpose and a mere empty piece of formality on both sides, if our
Representatives in Parliament might not freely remonstrate against the breach
of one or all of them, and if upon obstinate refusal of redress when such of
them are violated, as tend to the overthrow of our Constitution, they have not
a right to betake themselves to the last Remedy, from all which it follows as a
natural Conclusion, that all those tyrannical Usurpations upon the people, and
stretches of Prerogative, since King Charles the II's Restoration, contrary to
the said Claim of Right, are as fully abrogated as if there were an Express Act
of Parliament annulling every one of them; and His Majesty's agreeing to that
other Clause to protect us FROM ALL OTHER ATTEMPTS upon our Religion, Laws and
Liberties, extends to the things now under Consideration; but more especially
to those that have been made upon our Sovereignty, Independency and Trade.

His Majesty has no reason to think this a Hardship or Innovation upon him,
since it is evident from our Histories and Acts of Parliament, that our
Ancestors did many times claim a much greater freedom in relation to their
Princes, than any thing here demanded. We know there were a Set of Judges and
Clergymen in the late Reigns, that condemned this as Treason and Sedition from
the Benches and Pulpits, but without a grain of Truth on their side, as has
been sufficiently evidenced, since others had liberty to write and speak as
well as they. Sir George Mackenzy was one of the ablest Penmen on their part,
but his Character and Interest are too well known in Scotland to suffer any man
to lay much stress upon what he wrote on that head in his Ius Regium, or other
pieces. His ipse dixit must not outweigh the Credit of all our Historians and
old Acts of Parliament in this Matter, and so much the less since his wild
Conceptions about the form of our Original Government, as being an absolute
Monarchy, are sufficiently contradicted by Caesar Tacitus, and other
contemporary Historians. They do all of 'em expressly say, that the Spaniards,
Gauls, Irish and Britains, had each of them many Kings, and in Britain
particularly; that Kent alone had 4 Kings, and that almost every City had its
own King. He describes Cassibelan's Boundaries, and gives an account of his
making War with other Cities: The Silures and Bigantes had each their own
Kings; and question is made of Gethus, a King of Orkney; all which proves the
truth of what Buchanan asserts of our Ancestors, who first inhabited this
Island, that they livd' sine Rege ac certo Imperio per Cognationes tributim
sparsi; which fully overthrows what Sir George Mackenzy has asserted as to our
Government, being originally an absolute Monarchy, and overturns all the train
of Consequences he would deduce from thence. This was so much the more
inexcusable in Sir George; that being a Highlander, he could not but know that
that manner of Government by Clans or Kindreds continues still in the
Highlands; and that the experience of all Ages has made it apparent, that
(generally speaking) they paid a greater defference to the respective heads of
their Clans, than to the Kings themselves, and seldom sailed espousing their
Quarrels against their Princes; so little did absolute Monarchy ever obtain in
Scotland. This is so much the more remarkable in our Nation, because the Heads
of those Clans, Tribes, or Families, had not their Original or Estates from the
Gifts or Patents of their Princes, on condition of Military Service, etc. as
happened in those Countries where the Feudal Law took place, and where
Conquerours, such as Charlemagne, divided their Conquests amongst their
Captains, on condition of serving them in their Wars, or other occasions; and
they again subdivided their Lands amongst their Vassals, on condition of the
like Service; but on the contrary, our Kings received their Power originally
from those Heads of Families or Clans, who were in being long before the Feudal
Law was heard of, which is generally agreed to have had its Rise in Lombardy,
came from thence into France, was first practiced there by Charlemagne, and
brought into Britain by William the Conqueror. We don't deny however, that our
People might afterward incorporate some things from the Feudal Law into their
own Customs; but this is plain, if our Histories may be credited that our
ancient great Families don't owe their Original to our Kings, and that from
time to time, those Heads of Families, who were our real Nobility (when the
pompous Titles of Duke, Marquis, Earl and Lord, were all together unknown)
chose and gave Laws to our Kings, who without them could do nothing; and when
they acted contrary to their Advice, and the Constitutions of the Country they
were by them called to an account, and dethroned or continued in the
Government, as they saw cause. This is so plain from our Histories, that they
must have a very large stock of Confidence, or a great share of Ignorance that
will deny it. Nay, tho we have the longest, and most uninterrupted Line of
Succession, that any Nation in Europe can boast of; yet we were so far from
owning an Hereditary Lineal Succession, that we regulated that Matter from time
to time as we thought fit, and never allowed our Princes to claim our
Sovereignty as their paternal Inheritance, but as depending upon our choice;
and therefore sometimes elected them afresh, and at other times confined their
Succession, to make them sensible that they derived their Power from the
People, which the present Parliament, when a Convention, have so far gallantly
retrieved, as to make our succeeding Princes incapable of the Government, until
they take the Coronation Oath, which is a formal stipulation with their People;
and that alone that confirms them in the Throne. From all which it follows as a
necessary Consequence, that if our Kings violate their part of the Stipulation,
our Parliaments have a Right to put them in mind of it, and to demand a Redress
and Security against such Practices in time to come, which is all that our
Nation requires in the present Case. So much was thought necessary to be said
for Information of those that may perhaps be wi^held from doing what they owe
to their Country, in its present Circumstances, by a Clamor of Sedition,
Treason, and Disaffection, raised by those who are the Authors of our
Grievances against such as endeavor to have them redressed. Malice it self
must needs own that our Comp^ny and Nation have behaved themselves with that
Loyalty, Moderation, and steady Affection toward that Government, in the
present juncture under such pressing Grievances, and provoking Treatments from
the hands of the perni^ious Counselors, as bespeaks their due sense of what
they owe to His Majesty King William, our great Deliverer, and sufficiently
vindicates them from the stain o^ all such noisy and ill grounded Reflections.

PART. II.
IT is absolutely necessary that our Parliament take into their Serious
Consideration the State of our Trade, with respect to our Neighbors of England
and France.

It is very well known, and has been hinted at several times already, that
upon the Union of the Crowns it was granted to us by the Agreement of
Commissioners of both Nations, That we should be under no Restrictions in
matter of Trade more than the English, except as to the Exporting of Wool, and
some few things of English Product: Matters continued thus, without any
considerable alteration from that time, to the Administration of the Parliament
in 1641; and during Oliver's Usurpation, our Privilidges that way were rather
increased than diminished; but soon after the Restoration of King Charles II.
we were put under the same hardship with Aliens, By the Act for Encouraging and
Increasing Shipping and Navigation; and the Act for the Encouragement of Trade.
So that we are much worse treated than the Irish. This is sufficient to
convince all Mankind, that the design of the English Court upon our Trade is
not of yesterday, and that the present opposition they make to us, is the
effect of a premeditated Contrivance; against which it is hoped our Parliament
will take effectual Measures to secure us.

It will be also proper for them to Enquire into the Gradual Increase of their
Imposts upon our Commodities Imported into England, to the utter ruin almost of
our Trade with the Nation, particularly as to our Linen Cloth, which was so
much the more unreasonable, that at the same time when this Additional
Imposition was laid upon our Linen, we were so complaisant to the Engglish, as
to concur with them in forbidding the Exportation of Wool from Scotland*
without Prohibiting the Importation of the Woollen Manufacture of England; so
that every one wears English Cloth without any notice taken of it by our
Government, because they pretend it would lessen His Majesty's Customs if they
should; by this means we are ruined in our Linen Manufacture, our own Woollen
Manufacture is perfectly undermined, and we are not at liberty to Export our
own Wool neither.

It would seem necessary that our Parliament should make an Enquiry what passed
betwixt the Lord S -- and Blathwait the English Secretary of War on that
occasion; what Promises his Lordship made to Mr. Blathwait to hinder the
Exporting of Wool from Scotland, and upon what Consideration? Whether there
was any Bribery in the Case? Or whether Mr. Blathwait did not out-wit him in
this matter, by making a fraudulent Promise, which S -- knew he could not
perform; to wit, That the Parliament of England should take off the Imposition
from our Linen. This is so much the more necessary, because Blathwait denied
any such Promise to S -- When some of our Countrymen, Traders in London, went
to him and told him of it, in order to have had it fulfilled; he answered them,
that he only advised the Scots first to discharge the Exportation of Wool, and
that then the English might probably take off the Imposition on our Linen.

It were worth while to enquire if the Bargain had been real, who it was that
Empowered S -- to treat of that matter? And since he had not Wit enough
himself, to transact a thing of that Importance, why he should not have called
for the Assistance of others that were more Capable.

Since we are so treated by the English Court, it results naturally that we
should discharge their Woollen Cloth of all sorts, and apply our selves to the
encouragement of our own Woollen Manufacture at home, which will employ our
Poor, raise the value of our Lands, and the prices of our Cattle. This we have
so much the more reason to do, not only because it will be a just Retribution
to the English Count, who have not only discharged in a manner, our Linen
Manufacture, but have set up Manufactures of that sort of their own, and
encouraged the Irish to do the like, which must certainly prove fatal to ours.

The Argument is also reinforced by this Consideration, That a great part of
the Flax we made use of, was Foreign Product, which Exported our Money, and
yielded us no great Profit; whereas our Wool is our own: And if the Parliament
could fall upon Methods to encourage the making of Bays, Kerseys, and other
things in a regular manner, at home: It would advance a Foreign Trade, furnish
Materials for our Consumption, from our own Product, and save Money, which is
constantly Exported for those things.

We hope, considering the outrage done to our Sovereignty and Freedom, by the
English Court, it will not be an Argument of weight with a Scots Parliament,
that they ought to keep measures with them, since they think it so much below
them to keep any with us.

The only Objection of seeming weight that can be made against this is, That
the English may thereby be provoked to forbid the Importation of our Cattle:
But this is easily answered; That it is not out of any respect to us, that the
English allow that Importation, but they find their own Account in it, because
they buy them cheap, find them better meat, when fed, than their own; and that
they eat up the G^ass which their own Cattle will not touch, and by consequence
would be absolutely lost to them, were it not for our C^^tle; and ^esides, they
would not be able to provide their Fleets and Merchant Ships so well without
ours, which puts them in a Condition to disp^se o^ their own larger Cattle for
that end: But that which is an answer once for all, we do not in the least
bou^t, if those of our own Count^y be consulted, who have most Cattle to
dispose of, but they will satisfy our Parliament, that this O^jection is of no
weight; and we know the common Proverb, That Interest will not lie.

Beside, If the Parliament pleases to take effectual methods to encourage our
Se^tlement in Caledonia, and our Foreign Trade elsewhere, we have reason to
expect (by the Blessing of God upon our Endeavors) that we shall have every
year less occasion than other, to be obliged to our Neighbors for taking off
our Cattle; and so much the less; since we know now by Experience, that our own
Beef will endure S^le so as to make it fit for Sea.

It likewise deserves the Enquiry of ^ur ^arliament, Whether it be not pr^per
to discharge the English from Fishing in our Seas, Creeks and Harbors, which
their Company, called by the Name of The Royal F^shery, pretend a Right to, by
a ^atent from King Chapter II. who had no Power ^o Grant it, without the Consent of
our Parliaments. The English themselves cannot justly find fault if we do this,
they know their Seldom maintained a Mare Clausum, against Grotius's Mare
Liberum; so that out of there own Mouth we judge them; and we have so much the
more Reason to do this, because of their late insolence to come into our own
Harbors and Roads, where they search our Ships, and take out what they think
fit, in defiance of the Laws of Nations, to the great interruption of our Trade
and the dishonor of our Country. These things together with their pressing our
Seamen out of our Merchant Ships in time of War, as if they were their own
Subjects, are Grievances which we ought not to put up, but insist upon an
effectual Redress of them, as being utterly inconsistent with our Liberty and
Freedom.

If the Faction object, that such proceedings may occ^sion a War with England,
we can soon answer them, That it is not the English Nation, but a Court-Faction
supported by some hot headed Ecclesiastics, and their Superstitious Bigoted
Adherents, that is at the bottom of this unneighbourly Treatment of our
Country. England is a wise and clear-sighted Nation, and will never make War
against us upon such a Quarrel; their present Conduct proves beyond
contradiction, that they have no such design, they disarm, instead of putting
themselves in a Posture for War; and are sensible of the danger they are in
themselves, from that very Faction that are now oppressing us, and therefore
will not entrust them with a Standing Army, nor Mon^y sufficient to keep one on
foot.

So that we have so litt^e Reason to fear a Rupture with the English Nation on
that account, that we rather have cause to expect their favor, if we imitate
^^^ir Conduct, and take the same, or the like measures that they do for
securing our Liberty and Property, from the Invasions of Court Parasites and
pernicious Counsel^ors. We hear every day what brave effor^s they make for
advancement of their Trade, and pulling Arbitrary Government up by the Roots;
they are no ways afraid of tel^ing their Kings freely when they are misled, and
act any thing contrary to the Honor and Interest of the Nation They make no
scruple of s^^pr^aching the Chief Ministers of State and Favorites, when they
find them guilty of any thing that may be p^ejudici^l to their Constitution.
They boldly order their Kings Speeches and Promises and their own Resolves upon
them, to be published to the World in justification of their Conduct, and make
Laws to disab^e those that have a dependence upon the Court, from being Mem^ers
of Parliament. These and much greater are and were our B^rth Right as well as
theirs; and it is evident to the World we have much more reason to assert and
demand them, which will demonstrably appear if we consider.

1. That since the Union of the Crowns, our Kings prefer their Interest to
ours, in all matters relating either to Church or State. 2. That ever since
that time we have nor been Governed by our own Councils, but by theirs, and
with a prospect of advancing their Interest, though utterly subversive of our
own. 3. That ever since then, our Interest has been by turns either Sacrificed
by our Kings to them, or by them to our Kings. Thus King James I. and the two
Charles's made a Sacrifice of our Church to theirs, and they in requiral did,
together with a mercen^ry Faction of our own, make a Sacrifice of our Civil
Liberty to them; witness the great Army they furnish^d King Charles I. to carry
on the Bellum Episcopale against us, and the Treachery of our own mercenary
Tools at home, by procuring and agreeing to the 18 th Act of the Duke of York
's Parliament, which Enac^ed that all I^^isdictions did so reside in His
Majesty, that by himself or his Commissioners, he might take the Cognizance of
any Cause, and deci^e it as he pleased. Thus King Charles II did a so make a
Sacrifice o^ our Interest in Trade to theirs, by the Acts above-ment^oned; and
thus our Interest in Trade in this Reign has been also made a^rince to their^,
and their House of Lords in requ^^al with the concurrence no doubt of many of
their Commons have again made a Sacrifice of us to the King, by their Address,
approving his West India Proclamations, etc. against us. Thus we are bandy'd
about with the utmost disregard and contempt, according as their different
Interests and Humors require it.
These things demonstrate that we have more reason to insist upon those
abovementioned Privileges than the Englsh have; nor can we expect to have our
present Grievances Redressed, or future Grievances Prevented till we obtain, if
not all, at least some of the most material of those things, that that
Parliament of England insist upon.

There ordering an Address to the King on the 10th of April last, That none but
Natives of his Dominions, Prince George excepted, be admitted to his Councils
in England or Irelond, is a Pattern fit for our Imitation, and what we have as
good a Right to demand as they. None but Scotsmen ought to be consulted with in
Scots Affairs, for Experince teaches us, that since we have had Secretaries of
State, who Consult English Ministers in every thing, the Honor and Welfare of
our Nation has gone Retrograde. Nor indeed is it enough that none but Scotsmen
be Consulted in our Affairs; it is also requisite that our Parliament should
have the Choosing and Swearing of the Privy Councillors, as our Ancestors had;
and a Power to call them to an Account, and punish them for
Maladministration, The present Calamities our Nation groans under makes the
necessity of this more evident than ever, which if obtained, we might then have
hopes that the Addresses of our Trading Companies should not be thrown over the
Council Bar, nor our American Settlement opposed, as if our Privy Councillors
were rather Chosen by a King of Spain, than by a King of Scotland; then might
we hope that our Arcana Imperii should not be betrayed to our Enemies, and that
the Affairs of our Church and State should not be managed by the Capricio's of
Favorites, English Courtiers, or Prelates, who improving the opportunity they
have to Debauch Covetous, Necessi^ous or Weak Ministers, that attend our
Affairs sometimes at the Court of England, make them the Instruments of ruining
our Country. That this is no groundless suggestion will appear but too plain,
if our Parliament think fit to enquire into the truth of that Report, that a
Spanish Consul at Iamaica should have generously told some of our Caledonians
there, that we were betrayed by one of our Country men that was entrusted with
our Affairs at Court; and perhaps it may yet appear more plain, if they enquire
whether any of our own Secretaries knew of the West India Proclamations against
our Colony before they were issued, as it is confidently said the English
Secretary V -- n has given out, that one of them did.

We have found by woeful Experience, that it is not safe to trust the Management
or Representation of our Affairs to one or two Men, chosen for that end at the
Discretion of the Court of England; therefore it seems highly necessary that we
should be reinvested with our Native Right of choosing our own Public Officers
our selves; or at least that none be advanced to Posts either Civil or Military
without the Advice of the Council of Scotland; otherwise, since our Kings can
now no more be said to be Scotsmen, it is a parting with our Sovereignty, and
lays us open to have all our considerable Posts filled with such Men as will
certainly fall in with the Measures of the English Court and Govern themselves,
wholly by the Dictates of Princes, that must now of necessity be Educated in a
Country who think it their Interest to keep us low, and to thwart us in every
thing that our own Parliament and People think most conducible to our Honor
and Advantage. Nay, they are so jealous of us, that they are unwilling any of
our Countrymen, though unexceptionably well Qualified, should be so much as
concerned in the Education of those Princes in whom we have as great a Right as
they. Thus they removed a Scots Gentleman of the Name of Murray, from having
the Charge of Chapter the First's Education, learing he might have inclined him to
Presbytery, and thereupon made him such a Bigot the other way, that he himself
and the three Nations had occasion afterward to bewail it in Tears of Blood;
It Is well enough known what attempts of the like Nature have lately been made
upon the Duke of Gloucester. Because under the Conduct of a Scotsman, though a
Bishop, whose Order we have thought fit to Abolish in our Nation. If our
Parliament should insist upon the having the Nomination of our Privy Council,
as it is no more than our Birthright, so it is no more than what His Majesty in
effect Granted to our Neighbors in England, when he submitted the List of his
first Councillors to the Judgment of their Convention Parliament.

The next thing we shall propose to Consideration, is that a Restraint, if
possible, might be laid upon the Creation of Lords. As it is only Virtue that
can truly make Noble, so Advancement to the Degree of Nobility ough: only to be
the Reward of Virtue. It Is an unreasonable thing the Power of making Hereditary
Lawgivers to our Nation, should be at the sole disposal of our Princes who are
now Kings of England, and by that means have an opportunity of strenthening an
English Faction among us, by conferring Peerage, or the higher Degrees of it
upon Ambitious Persons who devote themselves to their Interest, and perhaps are
Advanced for no other Merit sometimes, but for having been Ministers to their
impure Pleasures, or Instruments of Tyranny: What pity is it that the
Illustrious Nobility of Scotland, many of whom a^^ Noble without a Patent (as
being the Heads of Ancient and Great Families) should be mixed with such a base
Alloy. It would certainly redound much to the Honor of the Nation, and much
inhance the value of the present Nobility, if none were admitted into their
Rank but with Consent of Parliament, and on the account of true Merit. What
pity is it that the Freedom and Honor of a Country should be endangered by
such an Hereditary Power of Legislation, when Experience shows us but too often
that Wisdom and Virtue is not Entailed upon the Posterity of Nobles more than
others.

We come next to propose the State of our Trade with France. The loss of our
Ancient Alliance with that Famous and Great Kingdom, and of the Honorable and
Advantageous Privileges we enjoyed there; is one of the great Damages we
sustained by the Union of the Crowns; neither our Princes nor our Neighbors
have thought fit to allow us any Compensation for this hitherto, but have
rather pleased themselves to see our Honors and Privileges there gradually
wrested out of our Hands; so that now they are brought to a woeful and final
period; instead of having the Preference there of all other Nations in point of
Honor and Trade as formerly we had, we are now, because of our Union with
England, not only deprived of the same, but are in a worse Condition than other
People: Thus our Salt Fish is discharged there, and the Dutch have engrossed
that part of our Trade, and sell them dearer to the French than we offered
them, but could not be accepted, though at the same time great Sums of Money
are exported yearly from our Kingdom to France for Wine and other Commodities.
This is a thing that certainly deserves our Parliaments Consideration; it ought
to be a Subject of Enquiry whence it came to pass, that the Honor and Interest
of our Nation was so much neglected and despised, as never once to be mentioned
at the Treaty of Rijswick; our Council and Ministers about the King ought to be
examined as to this matter, for we cannot think that His Majesty who took so
much Care of the Honor and Interest of the Little Principality of Orange,
would, had he been put in mind of it, have so much neglected his Ancient
Kingdom of Scotland, since he owes all his present Grandeur to his Descent from
our Royal Line, and his Alliance with it. This deserves the Thoughts of our
Parliament so much the more, that we sustain Affronts and Damages by the
Interposition of His Majesty of Great Britain's Name, as is evident from the
Hamburgh Memorial, the pretended Breach of Treaty with Spain, and the loss of
our Trade with France; but there is no care taken o^ our Interest in any of
those General Treaties.

There Is no way of retrieving this, but by our Parliaments asserting our
Independency and Freedom against all those Invasions and Neglects, and by
making it appear to the World, that we are still a Sovereign Nation, and have
as much Right to consult our own Interest, without any regard to that of
England, as they have to do so by us. It would seem necessary, that until those
Impositions be taken off our Trade with France, and till we be restored to our
Privileges there, that we should forbid the Importation of French Commodities,
Wine and Brandy particularly, either immediately from France, or immediately by
way of England or Holland; and either content our selves with Ale, and other
Liquors of our own making; which might in that Case be made stronger than
usual, would consume our own Product, and raise the value of our Lands. If the
necessity of Wine for Health be objected, the answer is easy; that let us take
all the Precautions we can to exclude it, there will always be enough found for
that use: and besides it is evident from the High Lands, and other remote Places
of the Country, that the People are as strong and long-lived where they never
see Wine nor Brandy; nay, rather more than in those Places where they abound
most.

If this should be thought an Hardship upon Families of Quality, they may have
an Allowance; or if we must have Wine, it were more reasonable to import it
from those places that don't impose upon our Trade, than from those that do.

It were also worthy our Parliament's Consideration, whether it might not be
proper to forbid the sending our Youth abroad into France, which exports so
much Money out of the Kingdom every Year, exposes them to be corrupted in their
Principles, both as to Religion and Politics; and also in their Morals by such
trifling Fellows as Musicians, dancing Masters, and fencing Masters: that sort
of Men live upon the Vices and Folly of Youth, and therefore think it their
Interest to nourish their vicious Inclinations, and many times effect it to the
ruin of their Souls, Bodies and Estates; so that instead of a well accomplished
Gentleman we have but too often nothing in return for our Money but ill
Principles, empty Purses, and bad Morals. There was some necessity for sending
our young Men of Quality thither, during the Alliance betwixt us, for then
France was like a second Native Country to us; there we enjoyed a share of the
greatest Offices in Court and Camp, and were distinguished from all other
Nations by peculiar Priveledges; but now its quite otherwise, our Subjects, or
at le^st their Children and Relations are denied the Freedom of Religion there,
or to return home; but are barbarously used in their Persons and Estates: nor
is there any that have showed themselves greater Enemies to our American
Settlement than the French Court, who from time to time proffer to assist the
Spaniards to drive us from thence; and if some People may be credited, the
Opposition made to our Colony proceeds more from some private League with
France, than from any Damage that may redound to from it to Spain.

We don't mean by this that our Nobility and Gentry should be deprived of the
Accomplishments they aim at by traveling. As for the Exercises they commonly
learn in France, and the Acquisition of their Language, which is now become so
much in vogue: We have as good an opportunity as we can desire, of erecting
Academies of French Protestants to teach them; or of having them taught
privately at home under the Guardianship of their Relations; and then if our
Nobility and Gen^ry have a mind to send their Sons to travel, they will be
under no Tentation of being corrupted by such trifling Popish Fellows, as teach
those things abroad; they need not stay so long in foreign Countries, and yet
improve themselves more by conversing with Men of Note, and observing the
Customs, Constitutions, and Products of Countries, which before they had not
time to do, because of those Exercises; and above all there ought to be care
taken that they be well versed in the Constitution of their own Country before
they go abroad, of which no Nation in Europe has so good and easy an
opportunity as we have by Buchannan's History; an Author ^it to be read by all
Persons of Quality, both for Ornament of Mind and Style. If our Youth were
taken care of in this Manner, and Solidly, instructed in the Principles of
their Religion before they went abroad, they would raise the Reputation of our
Country, and not be so liable to be corrupted as now, being usually sent abroad
in their blooming Years, when they are most apt to be seduced by ill
Conversation As for the study of the Law; it is a shame for our Country, that
from time to time has had such famous Civilians, that we should not have a
College for the study of it at home, which would save both our Money and
Reputation; so that our Youth that had a mind to travel for further
Accomplishment in it, needed do little more but visit foreign Universities.

The next thing to be considered is, the relieving of our poor oppressed and
impoverished Country, which has suffered so much of late (by the Justice of
God, and the Wickedness of Men) from all unnecessary Burdens, amongst which
that of a Standing Army, may well be accounted the most needless and
insupportable; and for keeping up of which, by the Advice of some Cour^iers, we
have been so ungratefully rewarded.

That it is unreasonable for us to have a greater Army in time of Peace, than
we had in time of War, cannot well be controverted; and that to keep up a
Standing Army in time of Peace is against our Claim of Right, can as little be
denied^ Let us learn Wisdom of ou^ Neighbors; we see they who are nearest the
Enemy, that the C^urtiers pretend to be most afraid of, have reduc^d their
Standing Force to Guards and Garsons; their Number is little, if any thing more
at present, than what we have now on foot in Scocland; so that if we should
disband according to that proportion, we should not keep one Man in Pay, for
Guard nor Garrison; for Guards, since we have no King, there seems to be little
need of them, and so much the less that it is but of late our Kings had any.
Formerly they entrusted themselves with their Subjects, and administered Justice
in Person from County to County, without any other Guards but their own
Domestics, and such Persons of Quality as thought fit to attend them with the
Sheriffs of the respective Counties; and for our Garrisons a very few Men may
serve. In King Charles I's Time we had but one Regiment of Foot, and a Troop of
Guards; in King Charles II's Time the Number was increased; in King James VII
th's Time they grew still more, and now they are more numerous than ever.

It Is evident there is no necessity for such numerous Troops, we are now in
Peace at home and abroad; nor are we like to have any occasion of Quarrels,
except it be with the Spaniards in the West Indies; and in that respect, if we
may guess of what is to come, by what is past, our Courtiers are more like to
make use of our Troops against us than for us.

We hope the Parliament will (...) now be imposed upon with a necessity of
keeping them up to o^^raw the disaffected Party; and particularly the Highland
Clanns. It Is known their Chiefs have submitted to the Government, and the
greatest of the Clans are entirely in the Interest of our present Constitution:
It Is very well known, that when it was otherwise, and that most of them were on
King Charles I's side, under their famous Leader Montrosse; and when so many of
them declared for the late King James since the Revolution, they were never
able to cast the Balance, or do any thing considerable, in comparison of the
Low-Lands: The Western-Shires alone were able to overaw all the late King
James's Party at the Revolution, and to set the Crown upon King William's Head.
These things being considered, we hope that all S -- 's Arguments from the
Highland Clans, though seconded by his good Table, of whose wonderful Effects
he boasted so much last Sessions, will not be able to prevail with our
Parliament, to continue a Standing Army this Sessions.

Whatever Arguments the Courtiers may pretend for keeping them up, from such or
any Foreign Considerations, we may assure our selves, that the pernicious
Counselors who put those things in their Heads have other Reasons for it. They
know they have given our Nation just Cause of disgust, and to demand that they
may be punished according to demerit: Therefore they think a Standing Army
necessary to overawe us, to swallow up our Liberties by degrees, and to put us
out of a Condition to revenge the I^jury they have done us. This will appear to
be no uncharitable Conjecture, if it be considered that Instruments of Tyranny
are always afraid of the People they tyrann^ze over, and therefore hate them.

The Oppression the Country groans under, by maintaining these Forces is
undeniable, and the uselessness of them is equally demonstrable. England is the
Seat of the Government, nearer for any Foreign Enemy, and much more capable of
furnishing them Subsistence than our Country; being the Seat of Government, it
is by Consequence the Receptacle of Intelligence, and yet we have not heard of
one Word signified to them of any apprehensions from abroad, this last Sessions
of Parliament. The Case being so, if the English be so secure we have less
reason to be afraid. The World must own that they are zealous for the Defense
of their Country, and that its a Subject well worth their Zeal. Therefore
there is no reason to think that they would neglect their Safety, if they saw it
in hazard. Then since they are the first that will probably be attacked, we
shall have time enough to arm in our own defense.

To this we may add, that Standing Armies not only oppress the People, but
corrupt the Manners, and overturn the Liberties of all Countries where they are
kept up; and that since the pernicious Counselors have already made an
Invasion upon our most valuable and fundamental Liberty, viz. o^^ Sovereignty
and Independency: We shall be looked upon as the most foolish and unthinking
Nation upon Earth, if when it is in our power to disband them, we suffer them
to keep up a Standing Army, to complete that Slavery which has already made
such formidable advances upon us.

At the same time, it is not our Opinion that the Country should be laid naked,
without a Defense; and therefore it is necessary the Parliamen^ should consider
of regulating the Militia, so as to make it most useful. In which, particular
regard ought to be had to the Qualifications of those who are entrusted with
the Command of them, viz. that they be Men of Estates and Interest in the
Country, and well affected to the present Constitution, both in Church and
State, that they be duly trained and armed, and as many of the present Officers
as are Men of Probity employed in the Command as may be, nor would it be amiss
to mix them with such of the Soldiers as are best disciplined, and of the most
commendable Conversation. If our Militia be so regulated, there is no doubt of
their being more servicable in the defense of our Country, and for the support
of the Government, according to our present Constitution, than a Standing Army
can ever be.

We may readily believe that a Militia so modelled will have more Zeal for the
Honor of their Country, than that part of the Standing Army which yielded
their Post of Honor to the Dutch in Flanders; it were but just that our
Parliament should enquire into the Authors of such a Dishonor done our Nation,
and to call them to an account for it. However some Courtiers may palliate
this; we are sure they can never defend it. Their Pretense that the Dutch were
in English Pay, and therefore took the Post as English Guards, is frivolous and
trifling; our Troops were in English Pay as well as the Dutch, who by the
Treatment they have had since by the Parliament of England that sent them away
as Foreigners, appear never to have been looked upon by the People of England
as English Guards.

We come next to consider the Practices of the Faction upon the last General
Assembly of our Church, in order to abate the Peoples Zeal for our
Establishment at Darien. This of it self is sufficient to demonstrate that the
pernicious Counselors have still the ascendant against us. It Is well enough
known how those of the Assembly that were for the Interest of the Colony were
forced to fight for every inch of Ground; that those who were managed by the
Influence of the Faction, appeared more openly against the Interest of the
Country in the Committees, than they dared to do in the Assembly. Nor is it to
be forgot what opposition they made to the Name Caledonia, which however was
all they were able to carry. A Noble Victory! well becoming the Antesignani of
Church and State, and for which no doubt they ought to be well rewarded out of
the Treasury.

We are sensible that many of those Ministers who were deceived by the Agents
of the Faction, have now seen their Error, and that notwithstanding all the
Tricks made use of, things were set in a clearer Light there; and that the
Interest of the Country carried it, as is evident from the Act enjoining a
Fast, which owns our plantation abroad to be a great National Concern, and the
Disappointments it has met with to be National Rebukes. Yet since the
Compliance of that Assembly so far, with those that are Enemies to our Colony,
has in a great measure disgusted the People, it is the more incumbent upon the
Presbyterians in Parliament to retrieve it, and by a steady and firm adherence
to the Interest of the Nation, to oppose a Standing Army, and to concur in
every thing that may tend to the Security and Advancement of our Colony, We are
sure if they don't act contrary to their own Principles they must do so.

The poor Country Ministers, who for the most part have more Honesty than
Policy, may be imposed upon by the sly Insinuations of crafty ill Men, that if
the Presbyterians don't fall in with the Party, another Parliament shall be
called to establish Episcopacy: But we hope Gentlemen, and Members of
Parliament, know better Things.

Admitting it to be true that the Faction has threatened to do so; it is
contrary to the Divine Rule, to do Evil that Good may come of it, or to commit
Sin to avoid Suffering.

Nor will it be in the power of the Faction to abolish Presbytry, so long as it
has the Affections of the People. It is likewise evident, that if the
Presbyterians adhere at this time to our Civil Rights, the Nation will be more
and more endeared to their Constitution, and it will be one of the most
effectual means to convince its Enemies, that our Discipline is not only best
accommodated for the preservation of Religion; but likewise for the Support of
Civil Liberty.

It Is also evident, that if the Presbyterians adhere to the Interest of the
Nation, it will be impossible to overturn their Church Constitution, without
shaking of the Throne; since it is one of the fundamental Articles in the Claim
of Right upon which His Majesty received the Crown.

But if the Presbyterians should at this time take part with the Wicked
Counselors against their Country, and by that means lose the Affections of the
People, they infallibly ruin their Church Constitution, which may be
demonstrated thus.

Presbyterian Government was first settled in Scotland, at the time of the
Reformation, by the Affections of the People; it has been supported by that
same Means against all our Courts to the late Revolution, and was restored to
be the National Establishment then, because most agreeable to the Inclinations
of the People, and it is for that only reason it has been continued since,
because the Court found it the best Method for securing their Interest in
Scotland.

But if once it lose its ground in the Hearts of the People, as it must
unavoidably do, if the Presbyterians at this Juncture act contrary to the
Interest of the Kingdom, then the Court will overturn Presbytery of their own
accord, both from a Principle of Interest and Inclination.

That it will be their Interest so to do is plain, for if Presbytery once lose
the Affections of the People of Scotland, it can be of no more use to the
Court, but will afford them as good an opportunty as heart can wish, to
ingratiate themselves with the Church of England, which is by much the greatest
Interest in that Nation.

That it is the Inclination of the Courtiers so to do* we have no great reason
to doubt* it being well known that they have several times broke in upon our
Laws since the Revolution, in favor of the Episcopal Party. Witness the long
time they took to consider whether they should allow us Presbytery or not,
after Prelacy was Annulled by the Convention of States; and their Adjourning
and Disolving the General Assemblies of our Church, contrary to the express
Statute when the E. of Lothian was Commissioner, besides several Arbitrary
Letters sent to the Assembly, and Commissions of Assemblies to put a stop to
the Exercise of the Jurisdiction the Law had invested them with.

It Is no way improbable, that the pernicious Counselors, who endeavor to
make Tools of the Presbyterians, for carrying on their present purposes, have
also the ruin of Presbytery in view in Conjunction with their other designs
against our Nation, they put them upon those Measures to disoblige the People,
and divert their Inclinations from Presbytery, that so they may have a fair
pretense for getting the Law that Establishes it repealed, since it is founded
upon the Peoples Inclinations.

If they be able to effect this, all the Laws in f^vour of it will be but so
many Cobwebs; our Parliament themselves will be provoked to Annul them, or if
they should not think it their Interest so to do, the Faction will certainly
break through them. It Is in vain to suppose the contrary, for since they have
broke in upon our Sov^reignty and Trade, which all but those who depend upon
the Faction, are unanimous to defend; they will find it a much easier task to
overturn Presbytery, when backed by the Church of England abroad, and a strong
Party at home.

We heartily wish this may never happen to be the Case, for abstracting from
all Theological Arguments in favor of Presbytery* which we are satisfied are
unanswerable; we are fully convinced that it is as much the Political Interest
of our Nation* to maintain that Form of Church Government in opposition to
Episcopacy, as it is the Interest of the Wise Venetians to exclude Churchmen
and their Dependants, from having any share in the Civil Government, and upon
the same account too That Sage Republic excludes their Ecclesiastics because
they depend upon a Foreign Head, and therefore are liable to tentations, to
espouse an Interest opposite to that of their Country. It always has been, and
must be the same with Bishops in Scotland, since we have no King of our own but
in Partnership with another Nation who Claim Ten ^arts in Twelve; or to speak
the plain truth, allow us no share in his Government at all, but in order to
subject us to themselves, or to secure or promote their own Interest; and
therefore since all our Bishops must depend upon the King of England for their
Nomination, and Conge d'Eslire, since they must be acted by the Church of
England, an irreconcilable Enemy to our Nation, since we have found by our own
Experience, that the Bishops went always along with the Court to enslave the
Country, and since they concurred in Parliament to exalt the Prerogative to
that Blasphemous hei^h^ over Church and State, it arrived to in the late
Reigns. It must of necessity be the Interest of Scotland to oppose that Form of
Government, and so much the more, that our Episcopal Party don't think it of
Divine Institution, as appears by the first Act of Lauderdale's Second
Parliament.

By parity of Reason it is our Interest to maintain Presbytery, because that
Form has no dependence on the King of England, our Ministers have no Honors
nor Benefices from him, and ^y consequence are under no such ^entations as the
Bishops are, to a^^ contrary to the Interest of their Country. Besides
Presbytery admits Laymen into all its Courts, which is absolutely necessary to
prevent Ecclesiastical Ambition; it is an effectual restraint upon them from
decreeing such Doctrines as Passive Obedience, and hinders them from Preaching
Mankind out of their Lives and E^ta^es, into a Slavish Subj^ction to Princes;
had it been otherwise, we have good reason to think that the Interest of the
Country would not have carried so much as it did in the last General Assembly.

From all this it will naturally result, that it is incumbent upon our
Parliament to take measures for securing the Church against such Threats as the
Faction made use of to induce the Ministers to a Compliance; this is so much
the more reasonable, because though Pres^yterian Ministers may comply with the
designs of Courts against the Liberties of the Subjects, Bishops must, and they
are so much the more dangerous, because they have a Power in the Legislation,
and are commonly so many Votes on the Courts side; whereas by the present
Constitution, the Clergy have no such Power. I^ the Parliament of Scotland
should demand from His Majesty a further assurance for the Constitution of our
church, it is no more than what our Neighbors in England have from time to time
done as to theirs, and wherein His Majesty did as readily comply with them. To
this end it would seem to be no unreasonable demand if the Revenues of the
Bishoprics that are not already appropriated to Pious Uses, were applied to
the use of our American Colony. This is so much the less to be objected
against, because the Establishment of our Plantation tends to the propagation
of the true Christian Faith, it would be an effectual way to prevent the
Restitu^ion of Episcopacy in this Nation, which can never be done without
throwing all into Confusion again, which would utterly obstruct our Trade;
besides it were but a just reprisal, since it is from those of the Episcopal
Party in England that our American Settlement me^^^ with the greatest
opposition there.

If ^t b^ objected that those Revenues have fa^len to the King as Vltimus
Hoeres, we answer, that as we never see a King amongst us, there is no reason we
should augment his Revenue, that the Parliament of England have appropriated to
Public Use, the Irish For^eitures* which by the ordinary Course of Law sell to
the King, and that His Majesty is obliged by the Act establishing our Company,
to obtain a Reparati^n of their Loss at the Public Charge, All this being
considered, such a dem^nd cannot any ways seem unre^sonable, and so much the
less that this Fund is already settled, and would be no new burden to the
Subject.

These things we have insisted the more upon, because some People took the
opportunity to improve the proceedings of the Assembly to the disadvantage of
the Presbyterians, and openly boasted of it, as a handle to restore Episcopacy.
But we hope that neither this nor any fu^ure Parliament of Scotland will be so
Impolitic as to attempt that. It Is well enough known the Presbyterians look
upon their Form of Church Government to be of Divine Institution, that most of
them have suffered for it, and some hundreds of them have sealed it with their
Blood; therefore it is no wonder they should prefer it to all Temporal
Advantages whatever; and show more than an ordinary Compliance with what they
are told is the Mind of a Prince whose Family and Person they have reason to
esteem, and to whom they have been more obliged than ever they were to any;
there is so much the less reason to wonder at their Compliance, when we consider
what endeavors there have been to persuade them, that the greatest Zealots for
our American Settlement, are their mortal Enemies and seek their overthrow: Nor
indeed have we any reason to wonder at the opposition of the Court, when His
Majesty is informed that the Aff^ir of Darien is a Jacobite design at the
bottom, and that a Presbyterian Lord should be so far possessed with this
Calumny, as to assert it in opposition to our Colony in the English House of
Peers. Therefore it would seem to be incumbent upon our Parliament to enquire
into the Authors of such malicious Suggestions. This is so much the more
necessary, because our Enemies endeavor to maintain their own Cause, by
creating in us a mutual distrust of one another, and dividing us amongst our
selves by false reports. Thus some of the greatest Men of ou^ Kingdom, as well
as the greatest Friends of our Colony are sometimes traduced as carrying on a
Jacobite design, and at other times r^proached as falling in with the Factions
a^ Court, that have declare^ themselves so openly against our Country.

But to return to the Presbyterians, as we would not be thought to disuade
them, or others, from entertaining high and dutiful thoughts of our most
gracious Sovereign King William, yet on the other hand, as they never believe^
Kings to be in^allible, we would have them to beware how they fall in with such
measures as ill Men about His Majesty may put him upon in relation to our
Country and Colony. We would not have them to lick up the Vomit of Passive
Obedience that the Church of England has ^pewed out, and though we would have
them and all good Subject^ to account His Majesty's Person Inviolable and
Sacred, yet there is no reason that all a^out him should have the same
privilege, or be protected from Justice when they invade the Fundamental Laws
of ^ur Nation, nor would we have them to obstruct the Peoples demanding a
Redress of Grievances, or not to concur with the Parliament to maintain their
Authority which is so manifestly violated, for this would be a direct breach of
the Solemn League and Covenant, which ob^^ges the Nation to maintain the
Authority of Parliaments, as well as his Majesty's Just Right and Prerogative.

It had been time long ago to have drawn to a Conclusion, but the Pressures we
labor under are so many, that we hope they will make an Apology for the length
of this Discourse.

It being evident that most of our Grievances proceed from His Majesty's
absence, and our Circumstances being so unhapy, that we are no more to expect
our Kings should reside amongst us. We have no other Remedy but to Address our
selves to our Parliament, that they would take care to make up that want by
good and wholesome Laws, which it is hoped His Majesty will very readily agree to.

Many Particulars might be insisted upon, but those which seem most necessary,
are, a Law for a New Parliament once in three Years, as our Neighbors in
England have, that in future Reigns we may not be liable to be undone by a Band
of Pensioners, under the Notion of Representatives.

2. That we may have the benefit of a Habeas Corpus Act as well as our
Neighboring Nation, and so much the more, that we seem entitled to demand it
by the Article of, the Claim of Right, against Imprisoning Persons without
expressing the Reason, and delaying to bring them to Trial.

3. That some effectual Method be taken to prevent spending so much of our
Money in England by our Nobility and Genty; this is a Disease which feeds upon
the Vitals of our Nation, exhausts our Treasure, and consumes our Substance,
which ought to circulate at home amongst our own poor People, who labor for it
with the Sweat of their Faces. It depraves our Principles and Morals, as is but
too demonstrable from many sad Instances. How many of those who lived
unblamably at home, have been debauched by the licentious Practices, and the
Example of the Court of England, and the bad Conversation they have met with in
London; and how much has their bad Example tended to spread the Contagion, when
they returned to their native Country.

There Is nothing in the World that renders our Nation more contemptible in the
Eyes of the English, than the frequent Recourse of our Nobility and Gentry, to
their Court, for they presently conclude that we are come either to complain of
one another, or to sue for Places and Pensions, and in any of these Cases they
are sure to make their advantage of us. They know well enough that the favor
of Minions, or of that Party that has most Interest at Court, is absolutely
necessary for such Parties or Persons in our Nation as would succeed in their
Suits to the King, and that we must either bribe the Favorites, or make a
Sacrifice of the Interest of our Country to the Court (if not both) before we
can obtain what we seek; they know likewise that for our own Honor, we must
make a Figure there answerable to those of the same Quality in England, which
occasions our consuming a great de^l of (...) in their Country, and many times
obliges persons of Qual^^y (...) Tr^a^esman's Debts at London, and to Mortgage
their (...) Security: all these things together keep us in a Sl^vish Subjection
to the English, which they being willing to perpetuate, use all possible
endeavors to nourish Discord amongst us, and to keep us Low. This was plain
from those barbarous Proceedings against the Presbyterians, which the Court of
England fomented, and from the successive Imposts upon our Commerce, which they
enacted in the late Reigns; and is equally demonstrable now, from their
Practices against us, and raising Divisions amongst us, in relation to our
Tr^de.

This one would think should be sufficient to put our Parliament upon finding
out Methods to prevent this constant Recourse of our Nobility and Gentry to
London, and to take effectual Measures to have our Affairs duly represented to
His Majesty, by such as it shall not be in the Power of the English Court,
either to bribe, or to frighten from their Duty. It Is humbly conceived a
Committee of Parliament, chosen by the Parliament it self at every Sessions,
and accountable to them for their Administration, were most proper for that
end, and that they should depute one or two of their Number to attend His
Majesty constantly, with Power to send and recall them as they saw meet: for
His Majesty's Secretary, being his own Domestic, and by consequence under
command, and liable to be turned out at pleasure, cannot be presumed to be so
fit to be entrusted with the Af^^i^s of a Nation, which is unhappily deprived
of the Presence of their Sovereign, as Persons who are chosen by the Nation it
self. This it is humbly conceived would oblige the Court to have more regard to
the Welfare of our Nation, and to be more cautious how they invade our Freedom
and Rights, than hitherto they have been. It is not reasonable that we should
be governed at home by His Maiesty's Domestics, and such as he pleases to join
with them for Privy Counselors. It Is enough for them to attend His Majesty's
Household Affairs: Nor is it at all proper that we should be governed by the
Servants of a Prince, who in relation to us is not his own Master. The English
Courtiers will be very angry at this Assertion (we doubt not) as they were at
some of the like nature in the Enquiry into the Miscarriages of our Colony at
Darien; and particularly that the K. of Scots was a Prisoner in England; for
which though they burnt the Book as ^al^e, they themselves have now proved it
to be true beyond Contradiction, by telling h^^ in their Ad^ress, that what he
had done against us was agreeable to the se^e of both Houses; and acquainting
him further, that our Settlement at Darien is inconsistent with the Plantation
Trade of England. This is so far from convicting us of F^lshood, for ^ayi^g
they keep our King Prisoner, that on the contrary it is (...) him in Chains, to
prove it to be true; having thus (...), that our Settlement is contrary to the
Interest of Engl^^d (...) they had bid him look to himself, if he (...) to
encourage it; for by their Treatment of him in other respects, we may
rationally infer that they would never have digested such Invasions upon their
Sovereignty and Trade. so calmly as we have done.

We know that His Majesty's Circumstances, as to England and Holland, are made
use of by our Courtiers to excuse those Invasions, that have already been made
upon our Sovereignty and Trade: but we hope this will be so far from prevailing
with a Scots Parliament, to comply with the Measures of the Court, that it will
rather put them upon effectual Methods to secure us against them; since our
King is so unhappily circumstantiate, that he is not in a condition to perform
his Duty to us, it is so much the more incumbent upon our Parliament to perform
theirs, and to supply what His Majesty cannot do. He is as much our King, as if
he were no way concerned with England or Holland, and is as much obliged to
promote our Interest, as if he had no other to promote but ours. If the Union
of the Crowns make it otherwise, it is a fundamental and insupportable Defect
in our Government, that makes it incapable of answering its end, which by the
Laws of God and Man is the good of the People, or governed Society; therefore
the States of the Kingdom are concerned to look to it, and redress it, as they
will answer it to God, to the Nation, and their own Consciences. It Is plain
from the 13th of the Romans, which has been so much wrested to maintain the
wicked Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and Non-resistance, that before
Governments can lay any Claim from that Text, to Submission or Revenue from the
Subjects, they must make it appear that they are such Powers as are there
described, viz Ministers of God for good to the Subjects, which is plain and
demonstrable the King of England can never be to the People of Scotland, if the
Union of the Crowns make him prefer or espouse their Interest to the Damage of
ours, which the Houses of Parliament in England do plainly demand in their
Addresses. From whence it is evident, that if these Grievances cannot be
redressed, such a Government is not what we are obliged to submit to, by the
Law of God.

As to our own Constitution, it is well enough known what our Ancestors did, in
relation to those Kings that subjected us to the English, and how they
vindicated themselves from that Invasion, both by their Pens and Swords, when
we were reduced much lower by the Court of England, in conjunction with our own
Traitors than we are now, as to the Laws of Nations, whatever Gulielmus
Cardinalis may possess some of his Brethren of the Clergy with, to the
contrary; we are sure that Alexander, Cardinalis, Jason, and Imola maintain,
that a Prince who governs a free People cannot render them Slaves, or subject
to the Dominion of another Prince, nor can the Barons of that Kingdom transfer
the Prerogative of that Liberty they have received from their Ancestors, upon
any other than their own Lord: and the famous Bodinus says, if a King who is
subject to none, do either of his own acco^d, or be forced against his Will to
serve and obey another* be loses the Title and Rights of Majesty.

We see then in what a Condition these pernicious Counselors, who have advised
the King of Scots to do such things as make the Kingdom of Scotland subject to
that of England, would bring His Majesty; we never loved any Prince so well as
King William, and are willing still so sacrifice our Lives and Fortunes for him
as our Lawful Sovereign: But there is no reason we should make a Surrender of
our Freedom and Trade to the Humor of those pernicious Counselors about him,
who betray his Honor and Sovereignty in betraying ours: It being certainly
more for his Majesty's Glory to be Sovereign of two ^ndepen^ent Kingdoms, than
to be but Sovereign of one, and V^ssal to himself for another.

From all this it follows, that the Parliament of Scotland have a right to
address his Majest^, that such Persons as advise him to those things ought to
be removed from his Presence and Councils forever, as Enemies to the Dignity of
the Crown, and the Peace of the Nations.

It were also proper for retrieving the Honor of our public Justice, that an
Address should be made for removing those from his Presence and Councils, that
stand charged with being privy to a design to assassinate King Charles II, with
having Pensions in the late Reigns for secret Service, and with Accession to
the Massacre of Glenco, and that the Actors in that barbarous Murder should be
punished according to merit. Nor ought it to pass without enquiry, by what
means those Persons under Condemnation for a b^rbarous Rape, and other inhuman
Treatment of the Lady Lovett, come to be reprieved from time to time, to the
scandal of the Justice of the Nation, and that one of them should be suffered
not only to lurk in Engl^nd, but have access to our Great Men in the
Government, tho a declared Rebel and Traitor, and ought to have suffered in
Scotland for Theft and Murder. Certainly it is not for his Majesty's Honor
that the Court should be made a Sanctuary for the blackest of Criminals, and
much less that we should be governed by the advice of any such, who besides
have no Estate nor Interest in our Kingdom. But this is the effect of our not
having insisted to have the chief Instruments of the Tyranny and Cruelty of the
late Reigns made public Examples. Others are not only encouraged to follow
their Steps, but it seems our Administration must be chiefly entailed upon Men
of that Kidney.

It would also seem absolutely necessary, that an enquiry should be made into
those that advised the turning so many Persons of Quality out of Council, and
other Posts of Honor and Advantage, for opposing a Standing Army, etc. last
Sessions. This is not only contrary to the Claim of Right, which demands
freedom of Debate and Speech in Parliament, but tends to the utter subversion
of all our Liberties; for Parliaments are of no use if Members may not have
liberty to vote there, according to the Dictates of Honor and Conscience: This
is a plain ^emonstration that the Courtiers design to carry on an Interest
opposite to that of the Country; and that we are riding Post to the Tyranny of
the late Reigns. It shows also the height of Contempt for our Nation, since our
Neighbors of England are not so treated; it being well enough known there,
that Lords of the Bedchamber, and Officers of the Army, voted against a
Standing Force in that Kingdom, without being turned out of their Posts, or any
ways disgraced for it. To what a miserable Condition are we reduced then, when
the Parliaments of Scotland, that formerly gave Laws to our Kings, cannot now
espouse the Interest of their Country without being thus trod upon. This
proves the absolute necessity of keeping Officers, and others that h^ve
dependence upon the Court, or Pensions from it, out of our Parliaments. Let us
do all we can in that matter, the Court will have always more than its
proportionable Influence there, by such Lords as have a dependence upon them,
and those Officers of State that are allowed to be in the House.

The Farming of the Customs by the Royal Buroughs, ought also to be taken into
Consideration; for if that be found to have an influence on their Votes in the
House, i'ts ^ much against the Claim of Right, as these Proceedings complained
of there, that were judged to be equal to the King's naming that entire State
of Parliament. It Is therefore hoped that the Royal Buroughs will, by their
behavior in Parliament, vindicate themselves from all Suspicion in this
Matter, and that they will not concur with any Design against the Trade of the
Nation, wherein they have so great a Concern; especially when they consider
that the more Restraints there are upon it, of the less value will their Farm
be, if it be thought fit that it should be continued.

We might enlarge in I^finitum, the Grievances and Wants of our Country are so
many; but must draw to a Conclusion, after having proposed some few things more.

It seems absolutely necessary our Parliament should enquire what good Laws are
needful to secure our Constitution, and to provide for it accordingly. In order
to this it would seem requisite, that a Committee should be appointed to
consider what our States insisted on in 1641, as our Native Right, and what the
English have obtained since the Revolution for securing their Liberty and
Property. His Majesty if he be allowed by our Enemies, to testify his paternal
Affection toward us, cannot, nor will not think it hard if we demand that, and
more, since we are reduced so low by the Oppressions of former Reigns, have
lost so much by the Absence of our Kings, now almost for 100 Years, and are
deprived of all hopes of having them reside amongst us any more.

The Damage we must of necessity sustain by that alone is very great, and not
to be compensated by any Equivalent we can propose; for do what we can, our
Princes must be educated in a Country, that as His Majesty himself has been
pleased to express, it is like to interfore too often with us in point of
Trade; and he plainly sees they have no Disposition to an Union with us, by
which it might be prevented.

Since we are so unhappy, as to have our Princes educated by those who differ
from us, both as to Church and State, and that by consequence they must needs
be bred up in an Aversion for our Constitutions: It Is absolutely necessary we
should have Laws to secure otherwise it will be a perpetual Source of Discord
betwixt Prince and People, and a Seminary of Division betwixt the two Nations;
to prevent which as it is the Duty, so it ought to be the Care of every Prince
that would show himself to be a true Father to his Country.

That this fear of creating in our Princes an Aversion for our Nation and
Constitution, is but too well grounded; time past has proved beyond
Contradiction, and we wish that time to come may not prove it farther.

If we take but a cursory view of the behavior of our Kings to us since that
Union, the marks of their Aversion toward us, stare us in the Face. K. James
our Sixth, and their First, tho a Native of Scotland, and swore at his
Accession to the Crown of England, he would visit us once in three Years, never
came near us afterward but once; and that only to strengthen the Faction
amongst us, that had joined with him, in endeavoring to inslave us. K. Charles
I, tho likewise a Native of Scotland, the first time that ever he came near us
was with an armed Force to subdue us, because of our struggling against that
Slavery, of which his Father had laid the Foundation. Having after this, under
Pretense of a mock Treaty* sown the Seeds of an unnatural War, which soon after
broke out in our Nation, by Montrosse, and the Irish Rebels that joined him, he
never came near us more, till Necessity constrained him to flee to our Army. At
that time, it is known we made honorable Terms for him with the English, and
such indeed, as neither his Circumstances, nor our own could oblige them to
make good; which, considering the Provocations he had given us, and the Slights
put upon us, in all Treaties during that War, as is testified by Whitlock in
his Memoirs, and other English Writers, could proceed from nothing but an
Exuberrant Affection, to a Prince that all along had testified such an
Asiersion for us.

His Son K. Char. II. he came to us in his Distress, or to speak more truly, we
invited him to a Crown when he had not so much as a Cottage, and exposed our
selves to Ruin and Devastation for his sake; yet after the Restoration he
never came near us, but ungratefully overturned our Constitution in Church and
State, cut off the Marquis of Argile's Head that set our Crown upon his own,
and made those injurious Acts which ruined us in our Trade with England.

King James our VII. and their II. when chased from England as a Traitor, and
in danger of being excluded from their Crown, we received him with open Arms,
Settled our Succession upon him, and turned the Balance in England on his side.
Yet he never once came near us afterward, but by his despotical Proclamations
overturned the small remains of our Liberties that his Brother had left, and
wounded our Religion and Laws both at once.

King William for whom we have shed so much of our Blood in Britain, Ireland,
and the Netherlands, and whom we allowed a Standing Army when the Parliament of
England would scarcely allow him his Guards. He has never yet honored us with
his Presence, and we see how we have been treated by wicked Counselors about
him, how our Sovereignty is trampled under foot, our Trade opposed, our Men
starved, and our Colony by that means deserted. Certainly these Instances are
enough to justify our demands of having Laws for the security of our Liberty
as good at least, if not better than those of our Neighbors, since our Kings
have ever since the Union been in the Hands of our Enemies, and that there is
little probability of its ever being otherwise.

To come to a Conclusion our Trade is the thing that is now struck at, and though
we be a Sovereign free People, have Heads, Hearts, Hands, Commodities,
Harbors, some measure of Shipping, and good Laws to encourage our carrying it
on; yet our Neighbors will not allow us to do it, but break through all the
Laws of God and Man to put a stop to it: Our King that should protect us and go
in and out before us, is in the Hands our Enemies, that plainly tell him our
Trade is inconsistent with theirs, and that they expect the preference; and in
a word, he is forced to act against us: What shall we do then? Because our King
is a Prisoner must our Parliament be so too? Because he cannot do what he would
and what he ought, must not they do it neither? Because some of our Countrymen
about him, and who have posts under him concur with our Enemies to betray us,
must not the Representatives of our Country redress us? Must we who never
allowed our Princes when at home and governed by our own Councils, to plead
their Prerogative contrary to Law, suffer our Princes now, when governed by
Foreign Councils, to swallow up our Laws and Constitution by pretended
Prerogative?

We see that no Kings can either by the Laws of God or Man plead any
Prerogative that is inconsistent with the good of the People, and our Kings
least of any. Our Neighbou^s may boast of their Magna Charta, and other
Privileges granted them by their Kings. We have something more Glorious to
boast of, and that is, our Kings have no Prerogative but what was granted them
by us. Our Ancestors who first inhabited this Island, did not receive their
Lands from the Gift of a Conqueror or General, who afterward made himself
Prince, as happened to most other Nations in Europe, but being possessed of a
Country, we sent for Fergus and made him King, and let his Eldest Son Ferlegus
know to his cost, that we chose a King for our own good, to be our General,
fight our Battles, and not to to Luxuriate in Wealth and Pleasures; that
Ambitious Youngster was quickly made sensible that we never intended our Crown
should be Hereditary in such a manner as to be entailed upon the Heads of Fools
and Madmen; in like sort when we were banished the island by the Britains,
Picts and Romans, we sent from the Western Islands where we kept Possession,
for Fergus II. and made him King, and under his Conduct recovered our Country.
In a word, in all the Revolutions of Time and Government, it is plain from our
Histories, that our Kings always received their Crowns at our Hands, upon such
Conditions as we thought fit in the respective Junctures; from whence it
follows that our Kings have no Prerogative but what they must plead from Act of
Parliament, and that whatever they cannot justify that way, is an Usurpation
of that Right which we still keep in our Hands.

Our Case is not like that of other Nations who obtained their Privileges from
the Favor and Clemency of their Conquerors, without whose Consent they could
make no Laws; on the contrary we always reserved the Sovereign Power in our
selves, and hence it was that our Ancient Parliaments or Meetings of the States
did so frequently call our Kings to their Bar, and met without their Consent
when the urgent Affairs of the Nation did require it. Hence it was that their
Resolves had the force of a Law, whether their Kings consented or not; and that
they dethroned them for Maladministration, as happened to Baliol, Q. Mary,
and others; and by that same Authority they forfeited the late King James.

Is it not strange then, that we should now suffer our selves to be bubled out
of our Sovereignty and Trade by the idle Stories of Parasitical Courtiers, who
tell us His Majesty is forced to Grimace to Please the English? Will not all
the World cry shame upon us, and Posterity curse us if we be hectored out of
our Liberties by the Bugbear of a Prerogative cried up by a Mercenary Lawyer or
two, who betray all Causes that ever they take in hand?

Such Gentlemen, we doubt not, will presently cry our Treason, and plead that
this Book ought to be burnt as the Enquiry was in England; but if what is here
said be not our ancient and true Constitution, let us burn our Histories and
Acts of Parliament that mislead us; let us cancel all our Acts establishing the
Reformation; let us condemn our Claim of Right to the flames, and abjure
Parliaments for ever; let us cancel our Coronation Oath and to crown the work;
let us send over to St. Germains and pray the late King to return again, and
Govern us by his Absolute Power, uncontrolable Authority, and Proclamatious
cassing and annulling all our Laws; and to this let us promise him Obedience
without reserve.

If it be not this, it is something as bad the Faction seem to be a^ming at,
when they make Invasions upon our Sovereignty and Commerce, give frivolous
Answers to all our Complaints, falsify Promises of Redress, murder our Subjects
abroad by fraudulent Proclamations, delay the Meeting of our Parliament, though
our bleeding Honor and Interest require it; forbid Petitioning for a Redress
of those things by Proclamation, and seem rather to upbraid than to answer us
when it is presented: If to give Money to keep up a Standing Army to protect
the Advisers of those Grievances, and complete our Slavery be of more
consequence to the Nation than to have those Grievances redressed, let us begin
with that the Faction calls the Kings Business, but if the Cries of an Ancient,
and Gallant, though oppressed Nation, that reach up to the Heavens be of any
weight, let us give the Redress of those Grievances the preference.

Our Company for trading to Africa and the Indies, have by their Memorials and
Addresses, asserted our Rights as became true Patriots of their Country. May it
never be said we are so much degenerated, that our Parliament shall not as much
outdo the Company in this, as they are Superior to them in Interest and Power.
This Company is the Creature of our States, (for the Faction will not suffer
His Majesty to own it) therefore they are obliged in Honor and Duty to support
it; we hope then it will be no unreasonable Request if the Nation desire, that
the Money that was spent on a Mercenary Army to enslave us be given for the
Support of a Trading Company to enrich us, and that our Lawgivers would
likewise be pleas^d to consider the Groans of our poor opp^ess'd People
throughout the Kingdom, m^ke Laws for encouraging our Husbandmen to plant and
enclose, to advance and encourage our Foreign and Fishing Trade, and to prevent
the levying of our Men for English, or any foreign Service: Must we be
perpetually condemned to breed up Men to be destroyed in the defense of other
Nations, after we have been at the Expense of their Maintenance and Education?
Must we still be deprived of the Fruits of their Labor that should rewa^d us,
and of their Off^pring which would strengthen and enrich us? What vast Sums do
we lose every Year by the Multitudes of our People, that are forced to go
abroad for want of Employment at home, and how much our want of good Laws to
encourage their Industry, and secure their Property discourages such of them
from returning again, as acquire Estates and Substance abroad, is obvious from
many Instances; but from none more than that late one of Sir William Brown, the
great Dantsick Merchant, who, upon that account chooses rather to become a
Purchaser in England, than to return to his native Country.

Thus we have spoke our Mind freely, as we think it incumbent upon all true
Scots-men in this present juncture to do. The Grievances here pointed at, are
to be remedied no otherwise but by Parliament, and tho it be scarcely
consistent with our Safety, that one Parliament should continue so long as this
has done, because of Members being liable to Tentations by Pensions or Places;
yet there may perhaps be a Providence in it, that God would reserve the Honor
of completing our Deliverance from Tyranny, by the same Parliament that had so
gloriously commenced it. Our Kingdom never had greater Provocation to resent
the Treatment of wicked Counselors than at present, nor could we expect a
more favorable opportunity for it. The House of Commons in England have set us
a noble Example, poured Ignominy and Contempt upon some of those Evil
Counselors, and have squeezed the Purses of others: we have as good reason as
far as our Case requires it to take the same Method. We have reason to
apprehend that our Grievances proceeds from some of the same Persons. It Is well
enough known that those by whom we are chiefly governed have all their
dependence upon them; and since we find them to be such as are capable of
Bribes, to give His Majesty such Advices as are inconsistent with his Promises
to the Parliament of England, and by them declared capable of creating a
Misunderstanding and Jealousy betwixt him and that People. Why should we not
think they are guilty of the same things, in relation to us. If they be such as
take Money to act contrary to the Interest of that potent Nation, what should
hinder them from taking Bribes to ruin the Honor and Trade of ours; if they
show such favor to Irish Papists against the Interest of Great Britain, and
the Protestant Religion, Why may they not take Bribes from the Spaniards or
French, nay from the Pope himself, to oppose our Settlement in America, since
he dreads it so much. At the same time its known we have Enemies nearer home,
and such as understand the Art of Bribing too: They have declared themselves so
much in opposition to our foreign Trade, as demonstrates they would not grudg
some Money to have it totally obstructed. This makes it necessary to enquire
how our Treasury has been managed at home, which way our Forfeitures here have
been disposed of, and whether we have any within our own Bowels, that have the
Art of taking Money, or are possessed with Souls mean enough to become Deputy
Pensioners to those great ones: It were one good way to try it, to see who
would oppose a Vote in Parliament, that such as shall be found guilty of taking
Bribes, Pensions, or Places to vote for a Standing Army, and against a Tax for
maintaining our American Colony, be for ever declared incapable of sitting in
Parliament, or of bearing any public Office in the Kingdom. This is so much
the more necessary, that it is openly discoursed in England, as if a great Sum
of Money were to be disposed of for that end, and that Precepts are drawn to
pay it accordingly upon the opening of our Parliament. It Is to be hoped that
none of our Nobility and Gentry, who have been formerly so renowned for
gallantly defending their Country, will be bought off from espousing its
Interest in this critical juncture. Pensions and Places cannot be assured to
their Posterity; where as the Shame and Ignominy of such a Practice will render
their Name and Memory as execrable to the Scottish Nation as are those of the
infamous Baliol and Menteith, and be eternal Monuments of Disgrace and Reproach
to their FAMILIES.

Vitam quam Patriae debeo, ei devovi; cui si aliam opem affere non possim,
piis, erga eam conatibus immoriturus sum.

FINIS.

