A SERMON Preached at The Parish Church OF S. MAGNUS the Martyr, In the CITY of
LONDON, ON Sunday, December 24. 1693.

By Edward Roberts, M. A. then Lecturer.

Imprimatur,

Carolus Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
Feb. 13. 1693/4.
LONDON, Printed for S. Smith, and B. Walford, at the Prince's Arms in S.
Paul's Churchyard. 1694.

A SERMON Preached at the Parish Church of S. Magnus, London, etc.
S. JOHN, Ep. III. Verse. 2. Beloved, I wish above all things, that thou may
prosper, and be in health, even as thy soul prospers.
THESE are the Words of the Favourite-Apostle of Blessed Savior, who had the
Courage and Fidelity to own Him in Extremities, to endure the Scandal of the
Cross, and behold His shameful Crucifixion. They are part of this short
Epistle, which was directed by him to Gaius, as is manifest from the
Inscription of it, Verse 1. About whom the Conjectures of Learned Men are
various, when they would point him out with more particular Exactness as to his
Abode or Residence. But the undoubted Account of S. John in the Context, makes
out what is material to our purpose, viz. That Gaius was not only a Proselyte
to Christianity, so made by him, but a generous Assertor of it before an
Infidel World; a worthy Man, who it seems was a Master of Wealth, and of a
Heart also to employ it aright; who made his House the Sanctuary of distressed
Professors, showing a very remarkable Kindness and Hospitality both to the
brethren, and to strangers, who bare witness of his charity before the Church,
Verse 5, 6. In consideration therefore of his extraordinary Usefulness, S. John
sends him this Epistolary Letter, to be a standing Expression of his Concern
for his Welfare, in the largest Extent of that Word; to assure him, that he now
did, and always should, wish above all things, that he might prosper, and be in
health, even as his soul prospered.

The Words are so very plain in themselves, that there is no need of a
Paraphrase to make them plainer; they contain an affectionate and devout
Petition of the Apostle, That God would prosper Gaius in his Body, his Fortune,
and all his outward Concerns, as he had already to a high degree improved his
spiritual and better part. And this is the properest, and indeed the only
proper Return I can make this Day, as to Your worthy Pastor, so to You, and
others the Friends of the Church, and mine, who without any Law, but that of
Kindness, have continued Your Civilities and Encouragements for many Years.
This is the great End of our Holy Calling, your Furtherance in the Ways of
Piety: our Prayers, our Public Discourses, our private Admonitions, all our
Endeavors within these Gates, and without, center here in your Prosperity. The
Spiritual Part of it, is that we most earnestly contend for, without which, the
largest Temporal Portion, we are sure, must vex and oppress the Owners. The
Welfare of the Soul we may humbly ask, with a well grounded Confidence of being
heard; for that is a Petition always agreeable to the Divine Will, but Prayers
for Bodily Satisfactions do often return empty, and should be presented to the
Throne of Grace, with great Indifferency of Mind, and an entire submission to
Providence. The Words of the Text will greatly direct and assist us in our
pursuit of this Comprehensive Happiness, and show us the way, to reap both the
Blessings of God's Right Hand and Left.

In speaking of which, I will insist on the following Heads of Discourse.

First. Show wherein the Prosperity of the Soul properly consists.

Secondly. Add to this an Account of that Bodily and External Welfare: the
Desire of which is strongly rooted in human Nature, and too often made the
great, the darling Consideration of our Lives.

Thirdly. Comply with an essential and inseparable Duty of the Ministerial
Function, by falling in with the Apostle, and fervently Wishing, that You and
all others the Inhabitants of these Two Parishes now united in Law, (I wish
with all my Heart I could say united in Religion, and met together in the same
Congregation) may prosper in both respects.

I begin with that which lies first in the Order of Nature and Religion, tho
placed last in the Order of the Text, namely,

To consider, Wherein the Prosperity of our Souls does consist. And here, as a
necessary Introduction to all that follows, as the Groundwork and Foundation of
the whole Discourse, I hope it may be taken for granted, in a Christian
Congregation, that we all carry about us such immortal Beings, this may fairly
be thought, the settled Persuasion of all, who frequent the Assemblies of
Public Worship, that they repair hither, under the particular influence of it,
with a full entire Design to receive the End of their Common Faith, even the
Salvation of their Souls. If indeed we look abroad into the World, and view the
Temper of the Age, with a careless Eye, there are to be found too many, who
decry the Doctrine of Spirits, that Branch of it in particular, which relates
to the Immortality of the Soul. But this Design, most unworthy of the
Reasonable Nature, is carried on by such as are in their Practices degenerated
into Brutes; who stifle as much as they can, all Intellectual Operations, and
maintain a strict Converse with things purely Corporeal. And when the Subject
of their Morning thoughts, and coolest Recollections, is no other than the
Fulfilling of their Lusts, it becomes their Interest to hope, that the Higher
Principle shall never awake to a future Account, but utterly perish with the
Body. Whereas to the Pious and Unprejudiced, the contrary is most apparent;
When the Mind lies fairly open to its own Notices and Deductions, we are taught
by it, that there is in us a Principle distinct from the Body; this is the
common Dictate and Result of Reason; but the Duration of it, must be fetched
from Divine Revelation; This shows its Immortality, with the greatest Evidence
and Authority; God, who made our Souls, expressly telling us, that they are
Essences which can never be destroyed, by those who have power and malice
sufficient to kill the Body; and that upon the Dissolution of it, they shall
pass into a State, in which Death shall have no more Dominion over them.
Wherefore, acting consistently with our selves, and maintaining a due Regard to
the Principles of common Christianity, we ought to secure to our Souls the
Preeminence; These Nobler Beings, should be always the peculiar Objects of our
Care, whose Prosperity must be carried on, and perfected, by Ways agreeable to
their spiritual Nature. I will mention Three.

1. By our judicious and deliberate Professing of the Truth, by the assured
Light of which, our Souls may have a full view of, and be conducted to, the
Regions of Bliss. This was the leading Method by which the mighty Growth of
Gaius was happily cultivated, even by his Walking in the Truth, and resolute
Adherence to it, styled here by way of Eminency, The Truth, and called before,
The Doctrine of Christ, delivered from his own Mouth, with admirable
Perspicuity to the Apostle; and by him, with agreeable Integrity, to his
Christian Convert; it being a Truth far more excellent, than any which could be
learned from the Writings of either Jew or Gentile, that which is according to
Godliness in hope of eternal Life; Which frees our Minds from the Thraldom of
Sin and Ignorance, it being the inseparable Property of this Truth, to inform
and cleanse, to exalt and purify at once. Now this being not the Prerogative
of any Man's Nature, nor imprinted on the Soul from the Beginning, but an
After-acquirement, and the sole Privilege of the Christian, our Care to be
acquainted with it, should be Early; And let us set out in quest of Truth as
soon as wecan, it will appear, that Error has taken the Advantage of the
Morning, and is set out before us; there being but few in every Age, who can
date their Regeneration from the Font, and glory that their Minds were always
under the happy Power and Conduct of Truth. Some are led into it, by the mere
Prepossession of the Country, and others light upon it, by chance, as they are
wandering in the Vale of Darkness, and perhaps little design to be enlightened.
Saul went out to seek his Father's Asses, and meeting the Prophet, received an
Unction from above, which made him quite another Man; And the Woman of Samaria,
who went for a Pitcher of Water to Jacob's Well, found the Savior of the World
sitting there, who made her a moral Instrument, to bring many of the Samaritans
to the Faith. Some have gone forth of their Doors with a peremptory Resolution
to affront the Priest, and yet have been caught first, and afterward converted
by his Doctrine; The Sermon has been so pat and seasonable, as to pierce the
darkest Corners of their Souls, curing the Distemper of the Heart, causing it
to flow with sincere and obstinate Tears, when just before it was filled with
nothing but profane Laughter and Derision. But then these are Extraordinary
Events, and so not to be depended on; Special Cases that can never with any
Justice be drawn into Consequence. For if we regard the common Methods of
Providence, the Ordinary Proceedures of Salvation, Truth is not to be found but
in a Regular Way, and within the closest Communion of the Church, it being very
obvious to any who peruses the Gospel, with a sincere and unprejudiced Mind,
that the great Design of the Blessed Author, is never answered, but by a
constant regard thereto; who came into the World to erect a Spiritual Kingdom,
to form Mankind into One Body under Himself, and to save them as such; not as
Straggling Believers, but as Persons incorporated into His Church, feeding and
nourishing their Souls, within this Sacred Enclosure. And this most Concerning
Truth seems to be well understood by You, who profess your selves Members of
the Established Communion. For questionless if any Church upon Earth, be
effectual to secure and advance the Prosperity of Men's Souls, this upon a
deliberate Trial, will be found best fitted for that High and Noble End; a
Church which with inviolable Integrity preserves the Holy Scripture, and from
that Fountain draws forth a Religion, which is most Pure, and every way proper
to ennoble our Natures, and perfect the Common Salvation. A Religion which is
not excepted against by its greatest Enemies, for believing too much, or
adopting any thing that is false, but as believing too little: Our Charge is
not the rejecting of any Old Article, but a declared most commendable
Averseness to subscribe any that are New; It being the peculiar Glory of our
First Reformers, those Glorious Instruments in the Hands of God, that they
threw off, and cashiered only Additional Corruptions, restoring the Doctrine of
our Savior to its Primitive Simplicity, as it stood in the World, before the
Birth of those Errors, which are now comprehended under the Name of Popery; Who
most readily received all the Untainted, all the truly Catholic and Orthodox
Truths that were left in the Roman, into the Articles, Confessions, and
Homilies of the National Church: in which it will be a matter of spiritual
Interest to continue always, but a particular Crown, a Glory to do so, in Times
of Liberty and Temptation. For Men to embrace Truth for its own sake, is an
Argument of Sincerity; to continue Regular Good Christians, when there is no
external Restraint to make them so much as Good Hypocrites, is Conformity upon
Choice and Religious Principles, and is to be justified from the Abstracted
Recommending Excellency of the Church it self, which has no By-Ends to serve,
no Design to drive on, but our Redemption from all Captivity, the Increasing of
our Graces, and the Saving of our Souls, and in the end, They shall Prosper
that love it.

II. The Prosperity of the Better Part, consists as in a judicious and settled
Profession of the Truth, so likewise in the Observance of its Known Rules, and
Standing Institutions. The Truth may be, and too often is, manifestly held in
Unrighteousness; Persons may be in the External Communion of the Purest Church,
and receive no more Honor or Benefit by it, than Pontius Pilate does by
standing in our Creed; they may be placed there to their eternal Shame and
Condemnation. Our Happiness cannot arise from our Relation to it, but must flow
from an Habitual Conformity with its Laws and Public Appointments. It will be
but a slender Support to our Consciences before the Tribunal of God, that we
have not given his Glory to another, nor his Praise to Graven Images, if our
Lives are spent without Veneration for his Laws, and Gratitude for his
Benefits. Our Zeal against Idols can never be an Atonement for the Contempt of
his Worship. We may be so far Orthodox, as to own the Sacraments of Christ, and
those only, and yet stand Condemned for their Disuse, or Profanation. The Holy
Scripture it self is left in our Hands to no purpose, if we only vindicate our
Right to read it, and cry out against the sacrilegious Detention of it from the
People in others, and yet slight it our selves, or seldom peruse it, to the
great Ends of Religion, to build us up in our most holy Faith, to fortify our
Minds against Thriving Errors, and Spiritual Enchantments. And in these
Religious Performances, it will be impossible to come on well, and Prosper
without great Application of Mind; The Fervours of Piety, so remarkable in the
first Disciples, had this, next to the Grace of God, for their Spring and
Origin; those Heights were owing to their unwearied Constancy, to their
continuing steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, in Breaking of
Bread, and in Prayers. And mighty are the Effects of it at this Day in the
Eastern Christians; who preserve a Sense of the Religion of their Savior
within the Dominions of its great Enemy, chiefly by this Means, by rising early
before the Sun to perform their Public Devotions, as previously necessary to
their entering with success on the Labors of their Private Callings. Nor is
the Efficacy of it contemptible among our selves; For we may with Comfort
observe in this great City, that many Persons of Slow Capacities, and in Strait
Circumstances, by a careful Watching over their Hearts and Ways, by an entire
Dedication of themselves to God, by the signal Advantage of having the Honest
and Good Heart, together with an habitual Attendance on their Parochial
Ministry, to arrive to a good Proficiency in Practical Religion, and by painful
Degrees to be nursed up into Excellent Christians. Whereas others of far
Quicker Parts, and more Leisure, wanting Probity of Mind, Closeness of
Attention, and a Teachable Humility, ramble eternally from one Church to
another, but without receiving lasting Benefit in any. Men of desultory Tempers
grow Skeptical, they may vouchsafe to try all things, but are habitually
pleased with nothing; Who industriously decry, what Solomon recommends as the
only sure Method of Thriving in the Concerns of Eternity, Eccles. 11. 6. In the
morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand: for thou
know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they both
shall be alike good. But the highest Zeal and Constancy in the Holy Offices,
can be no sufficient Security to venture our Souls upon; these are only Means
of Christianity, and not to be rested in. Considering therefore that the most
flaming Sacrifice may carry in it destructive and consuming Qualities, and that
some in all Ages of the Church have set up Devotion to the ruin of Honest
Morality; Praying long, the better to drown the dismal Cries of Widows and
Orphans, and to build their own Fortunes upon the Graves of their oppressed
Neighbors, I must crave leave to carry the Matter higher yet, and lay before
you,

The Third, The finishing Stroke of this Spiritual Improvement, and that is,
Universal Righteousness, which is never to be Concealed where it is, and but
rarely Counterfeited where it is not: It being not a single Virtue, but all
united in the same Breast, a strong Combination of the more Generous Qualities
of the Mind, which dilate themselves on all proper Occasions into Life and
Practice. And this was the concluding Argument of S. John, by which he
demonstrated the Growth of this excellent Christian; Namely, His Crediting of
the Truth by agreeable Practices, whose Charity was a real Fruit grafted upon a
right Stock, even Faith in the Blood of Jesus. Now that Religion is most
Genuine, and Conformable to the Mind of its Blessed Author, which is expensive,
and draws something from us, which we highly value, and would not part with,
but for Conscience Sake. Instrumental Duties being cheap and easy, may be
performed by mere Impostors, and Hypocritical Pretenders, but Good Works are
not so easily Counterfeited, for Men seldom act a Part in Religion to their
Great Cost; In this Case the Danger of being imposed upon is far less, or none
at all; Devotional Acts may have base Ends and sinful Mixtures, they must be
Tried and Weighed in the Balance, and oft-times they are Light, and found
wanting; the Whore in the Proverbs had paid her Vows. Whereas a Good Life, a
bright Charitable Conversation, is like the purer sort of Money, which passes
freely from Hand to Hand, and is never questioned in any Payment. When the
Actions of a Christian testify for him in the Gates, and his Worth is attested
before the Church, Malice it self is struck dead; Nay, the Publick-spirited
truly Good Man stands entitled to the Blessing of Demetrius in this Epistle,
and has no Enemy, or rather should have none, but Satan the common Enemy of
Mankind. Our being Members of the Church, and our using the Means of Grace, are
fair Arguments of Probability, these are likely Signs that we shall, but Real
Acts of Piety and diffusive Beneficence, are certain Evidences of our having by
God's help already prospered. And yet he that advances thus far on the way to
Heaven, and makes a full Stand here, shall never (unless by an extraordinary
Mercy) arrive thither; for Christianity proposes no fixed determinate Degree
of Virtue beyond which there is no advancing. The Spiritual Stature is at no
Period, like the Natural at a full Growth, but always growing. Our brightest
Graces are still capable of Accessions, and must shine more and more to the
perfect Day. For Men to get into a Road of Religion (and yet alas how many are
more unhappily engaged, and upon the broad way to Destruction!) and to be
content with living after the old customary Rate, is plainly to deceive
themselves. They may in such a Case be no Blemishes to their Profession; but by
the strict Rules of it, they ought to press forward, and commence Encouraging
Examples, Visible Patterns of Righteousness, which is a Station both of Safety
and Honor. And as the Voyage is never reckoned prosperous, till the Dangers of
the Seas are past, the Storms rid out, and the Vessel brought safe into
Harbor; So neither ought we to conclude our selves free from Temptations, and
foul Relapses, till we come to the New Jerusalem; Our Felicity grows on this
side, but is there only in maturity and perfection. This is the full
Scripture-Nation of Spiritual Prosperity. which was the first Point to be
settled according to the proposed Method.

The Second General Head, and now falling under Consideration, is, An Account
of that Bodily, and External Welfare, which is strongly rooted in our Common
Nature, and too often sought with raving Importunity. The Body being of a mean
Original is incapable of the forementioned Discipline and Cultivation; never to
be raised in this World to an higher Character, than an Heap of Dust and Ashes;
and yet overlooking its mean and corruptible Qualities, many bestow on it the
Greater Care. This is an Object of a very distinguishing Passion, and no Means
are forborne, no Cost spared, to prop up and adorn it; which is the degenerate
Folly, the reigning Sin of Mankind. However, God having formed the Body, and
made it the Mansion of the Soul, which always acts by the Mediation of it, we
have it plainly granted in the Text, that the Welfare of it is a Real
Philosophic Good, and the Object of a Christian Wish, which consists mainly in
three things.

I. In the Health of it. Grotius in his Comment observes, that S. John wishing
Corporal Prosperity to Gaius, set down Health, as the most necessary and
excellent Part of it, without which his other Satisfactions had been of little
Worth. This preserves the Organs, enables us to judge of Tastes, and Sounds, and
all other sensible Objects; it gives due Quickness, and Agility, and makes us
capable of living with any Pleasure to our selves, or Profit to our several
Generations. The want of Health caused the most patient Man to desire
Strangling rather than Life. A Blessing of that vast Use and Consequence, that
God reserves it in His own Power, and makes it the Reward of Religion, which in
Scripture is expressly said to be Health to the Navel, and Marrow to the Bones.
It may be greatly preserved where it is, and restored where it is lost, by
Human Remedies, but without His Blessing the Art of Man is vain, a mere Empiric
Prescription. The great Importance of it, its giving a true Relish to all
outward things, makes it the common Form of Salutation in all Countries; We
still greet our Friends with particular Enquiries about the State of their
Health, and bid them Adieu under the Influence of an Hearty Concern for it. But
this is our Unhappiness, that this Fundamental Blessing does not make us always
grateful to Him that gives it; the Value of it is seldom sufficiently
acknowledged, till we are deprived of it, and smitten with Sickness. For this
Reason some Persons have magnified the Goodness, for giving them weak and crazy
Bodies, which might keep their Souls always waking, and upon the Wing; An
healthful vigorous Constitution, which was designed by God, as an Instrument of
his Service, and the Owners eternal Good, being too often put to quite contrary
Uses, to make them Slavs of the accursed Spirit, and Servants of Corruption.

II. Wealth succeeds as an Object of the sensitive Appetite, by which ought
never to be understood barely what is necessary to keep us from starving, but a
convenient Portion of outward things, such as is suited with the Obligations of
the Posts we fill, our Characters, and Relations in the World. That may be
convenient Food to one Man, which, if given to another, would but make him the
more hungry, raise, and not satisfy the Appetite. That may be too scanty and
strait an Allowance for a Person advanced to an high Station, which, if
conferred on a Man of less Figure, would oppress, and run him into Distraction.
The Doctrines of some relating to the Point in Hand are most Absured and
Superstitious, who would tie down all but themselves, to mere Necessaries, and
talk of the World with that Air of Contempt, as if an Earthly Body could
subsist by Intuition, and the slender Accommodations of a Cell were sufficient
in the midst of the City; But such Speculations are plainly confuted by the
Words of that Apostle who Preached the Religion of the Cross; and we are
otherwise instructed by the God of Nature, viz. not wholly to extinguish the
Desire of Earthly Convenience, but to correct the Keenness of it, and keep it
Regular. Who having made the Pleasant Garden in Eden the Station of Adam at
first, is so far kind to his Posterity, as to make their Bodily Life easy and
delightful. No Labor is assigned them that is purely Penal, their greatest
Toils are mingled with Sweetness, and by proper Encouragements turned into Play
and Diversion. Wealth is made the Subject of His Promise to the Virtuous, and
is most certainly a Blessing, when honestly acquired, and managed with Wisdom,
so as to cause many Thanksgivings unto the Donor. It is true indeed, the
Acquisition of it can never be directed by any certain Rule, because it depends
upon lucky Seasons, and unforeseen Accidents, and often flows from hidden
Springs; But a known visible Instrument of procuring it to any Land, is
Commerce with Foreign Nations. When in the Reign of Solomon, Silver and Gold
were plenteous as the Stones in the Streets of Jerusalem; much of that vast
Treasure was the Growth of other Countries, it was brought from Ophir by the
Navy of Ships, which the King had formed in Ezion Geber, and by the Merchants
that had the knowledge of the Seas. This is the great Support of Human Society;
Merchandising unites the most distant Nations; we are in some measure fed and
clothed; by those whom we never saw, nor can see. This Promotes Industry, and
make as a suitable Compensation for the various Perils, and Difficulties of
Mankind. But tho all Men are strangely dazzled and captivated with the
Brightness of Secular Wealth and Grandeur; yet there are but few whom God
thinks fit to entrust with it; nor is it always an Argument of His Favor to be
so entrusted. Riches may, and frequently do, flow in upon Righteous and
Excellent Men in great Abundance; Those who have been most eminent for Piety in
their several Ages, have been so for their Wealth too. But the Want of it, is
no absolute sign of wrathful Dereliction, and that we are shut out of the Care
of God's Providence, Who can, and if there be need, will prepare a Table for
his Servants in the Wilderness, and by infinite Ways beyond the Ken of Reason,
and to them surprising, reward their Dependence on Himself; Who can turn Penury
into Fullness, and Bondage into a State of Liberty. To expect always the
Completion of our Wishes, and to sail with a full Gale, is plainly to mistake
our Right to outward things. Freedom from Evils is the Happiness of Glorified
Saints above. Earthly Pilgrims can only depend on Succors proportioned to the
Weight of their Sufferings, and to be so supported in this World, as not to
miss of the durable Glories of the next.

The Third main Attribute of External Welfare, is Peace; a Blessing necessary
to Guard, and secure us in the Enjoyment of the Two before mentioned; under
which Term, the Jews were wont to comprehend all Prosperity whatsoever. And as
the Fullness of time drew on, the latter Prophets foretold the undisturbed
Possession of Peace, as the peculiar Blessing of the Reign of the Messiah, as
an Honor reserved by God to accompany the Manifestation of his Son, Esaias 2. 4.
And he shall judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke many People: they shall
beat their Swords into Plow shares, and their Spears into Pruningbooks: Nation
shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more.
Which Prophecy receiving no Literal Accomplishment in the Condition of
Christian States, which are but the more unhappily expert in the Art of War,
and draw their own Blood without the Assistance of the Heathen, is expounded to
be praedictio consilii, non eventus. With respect to Christ Himself, it is read
with the Brightness of an after-Relation; for as He made his Entrance into the
World in a quiet Hour, so was the promoting of Peace the whole Endeavor of His
Life, and the thing it self bequeathed as a common Leagacy to His Disciples at
his Death. A Blessing of that High and Public Nature, that the Heathens looked
upon War to be the most terrible and afflicting of all Temporal Evils, and to
us Christians surely, who by the Favor of Revelation stand in a clearer Light,
it can have no milder Appearance. War, when extorted from a Nation in its
Common Defense, is a sore Judgment to be lamented, and not gloried in as a
brave, and lofty Undertaking. Victory it self can scarce hold up its Head for
shame, when represented as the Purchase of Christian Blood. The Evils of it are
too much felt to need a Description, and God alone knows when the melodious
Voice of Peace shall be heard in our Borders; of such as may not foster, and
invite New Injuries, or present us with a Second, and more perfect Edition of
the Old. The firm Possession of the Truth will in strictness compensate the
Loss of it. Eternal Slavery to Idolatry and Superstition, is the greatest
Misery which can befall any Nation, which is not already enslaved; so that to
ward off that fatal Blow, Wise and Good Men will calmly undergo lesser
Hardships and Calamities, slight Essays of Misery, when compared with the
Depredations, Ravages, and Military Executions of those Countries which are the
Seat of War. And God who orders nothing in vain, much less for destructive
Ends, does certainly ordain the Suspension of Peace it self for our Good. There
are frequent Interruptions of it in all Kingdoms for wise Purposes; the Peace
of the Land of Israel was often shaken and destroyed, when the Government of
that Nation was Theocratical, the longest Period of it which the Scripture
mentions, is that set down Judges 3. 30. The Land had rest Fourscore Years. And
without such Intermixtures of Public Good and Evil, Peace would scarce be
thought a Blessing; did not the Night succeed, the Light of the Sun would annoy
us, and Constant Day would be an insupportable Burden; and were it not for
Sicknesses and Poverty, Health and Abundance would have no Relish in them.

This then is a wise Method in the Hands of God, to make us sensible of His
Favors, and from caressing the World and the Body, the meaner gratifications
of Sense, to exalt us to a more Christian Employment, to render us more careful
in the improving of our Souls, which cannot, exceptin Negatives, be desined by
us, and must last for ever. As long indeed as we are compounded of these
different Principles, the Animal and the Intellectual, it will be an allowed
necessary Duty, to endeavor the Welfare of both: But then abundant care is to
be used by us, that our Attendance be proportioned to the Dignity of the
Object; that we keep the worse part under the constant subjection of the
better; for it looks like a rank Infidelity to spend Six days in the week in
providing for the Needs, nay, too often for the Sins of the One, and to grudge
God's own Day as too much to promote the Salvation of the other. Both indeed
are comprehended in the Prayer of the Apostle, but still in a distinct Order,
the one in a perfect Subordination to the other: For supposing Gaius to have
already prospered in Virtue, He thereupon prays for an agreeable external
Prosperity: And in the very same Order, and animated by the like Hopes of You,
I proceed

In the Third and last place, To comply with an Essential Duty of the
Ministerial Function, which is positively expressed in these Words, I wish
above all things, etc.

It is here most humbly acknowledged, that God is the Author of all Success and
Prosperity; which is never to be obtained whilst he is neglected and left out
of our counsels and consideration. The expression of the Prayer is noble and
high, and shows it to have been the Language of the Heart; and doubtless the
Supplication it self was the more prevalent with God, because presented by a
supreme Officer of his Son. Nor was this a strain of Devotion peculiar to S.
John, but a common pitch, equaled by all the Apostles, nay, visibly excelled
by S. Paul, Romans 9. 3. When he wished himself accursed from Christ, for his
Brethren his kinsmen according to the flesh: A strange expression of Love! An
overflowing Charity! To be content himself to turn out of the Sheepfold, and
stand utterly excommunicated, if by that means the Jews might come in and be
saved. And in the Church of Corinth no unkindness that was offered to his
Person, no disparagement that was cast upon his Doctrine, could abate his Zeal
for their Salvation; and when constrained to execute the severest Censures upon
the incestuous Corinthian, he urges the charity of the End to justify the
severity of that Action, by alleging, That the flesh was destroyed, or
punished; that the Spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord.

These then are our Patterns, and show us how to demean our selves in the
Church of the Living God: We are sent out as so many Laborers into His
Harvest; and whatever be the Reward, we shall not fail of Work enough. Our
Labors are thick and more abundant, even such as may bow down the greatest
strength, and caused him who was divinely Inspired, to complain of
Insufficiency in the discharge; and none of our manifold Labors can succeed
well and prosper in our hands, without the especial Grace of him that sent us:
For there is no ground so well prepared, as to bring forth nothing but good
Wheat; Tares will more or less grow up with it; and unless the Soil be kindly
seasoned, our Endeavors are lost. The best Counsels must perish in the
delivery without attentive Dispositions in the Hearers; who are therefore to be
weighed rather than numbered by the prudent Messenger of God: And when instead
of growing better, they are but the more refractory and contumacious Sinners
under Instructions, we have no power to cut down and to destroy; to use any
force, were to betray and abuse our Authority. We do preach a Law which is
enforced pon mankind with the highest Penalties, even under pain of having
their Souls and Bodies eternally Tormented; but those invisible Terrors are
slighted, and the most real Torment declared Metaphorical. Scandalous Offenders
may indeed be debarred Communion, and denied the Public Comforts of Religion,
but that to them is no Punishment. Nor are we appointed only to contend with
the Infidelity of Mankind, but with their Ignorant Mistakes and Prejudices,
things more to be pitied, but often equally difficult to be removed. The
Profane are without Apology, because they outface God Himself, and despise His
Threatenings: And the Careless are never to be excused, who expect Virtue should
grow up in their Souls without their own Concurrence, and be nourished there
without Moral Reflections; which is a Method of thriving as improper and
preposterous in Religion, as in Civil Business, and yet gainful Opportunities,
and good Markets must be narrowly watched to drive on the One, when no means
are held necessary to the obtaining of the Other. And among those who subscribe
to the Use of Means, and frequent the Sanctuary, there is much Barrenness to be
found also; the main end of Public Instruction is often defeated by the
partiality of the Affections, which are biased and bribed beforehand; so that
all is rejected, or swallowed in a Lump, without the solemnity of Chewing and
Examination; and not the Doctrine that is recommended, but the Person, or his
Character is chiefly regarded; and the Holy Gospel is received as the Word of
Men, and not as it is really, and in it self, the Word of God; who takes it for
so High an Affront to be shut out of his own House, and denied so much as a
partial Influence in His own immediate Service, that he often withholds the
Increase, as no slight expression of his Anger, to let men see the necessity of
looking beyond Earthen Vessels, and confess that the Excellency of Power is of
Himself.

So that for the removal of these and other Impediments of Spiritual Growth,
Recourse must be had to the single Remedy in the Text; We are to beseech God to
speak to the Hearts of Men, and to put an effectual check to the daring
Impieties of the World, to awaken the Many who sacrifice to their own Lusts,
and to Encourage the Few who are Devoted to his Fear, Lifting up the hands
which hang down, and the feeble knees. And He might have interposed His Power
sooner, but that He seems resolved to keep us in a depending Posture, and to be
owned as our sure Refuge in Extremities: And in this the Obligations of our
Church are most express and particular, which regard the Circumstances of the
Absent, that He may be moved, To bring into the way of Truth all such who have
erred and are deceived; and tho they may scatter dreadful Anathema's against
us, our daily Prayer for them, is, That they may see their Errors, and be
saved. Remembering always, that there is but One Heaven, and no possibility of
coming thither, but by Him, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life.

This is a Divine Charity to be extended to the most Pious Votaries, who can
never be raised above it; but on the other side Men may sin themselves out of a
Capacity of receiving any Advantage by it; This is the Opinion of our Apostle,
1 Ep. chapter 5. 16. There is a sin unto death; I do not say that that he should
pray for it. This is a Wickedness of a strange Taint, like the Sin of Saul
which is interdicted the Sanctuary, beaten off from the Horns of the Altar, and
not to be mentioned in our Prayers; But whatever be the Nature of that Sin, we
are sure it cannot dwell in those who maintain a visible Care of their own
Salvation. For you the Duty may be performed not only without offense, but with
Gracious Acceptance; And this Holy Office may be executed at a Distance, when
we are no longer to converse with our Friends by public Instructions, and
ought never to be omitted by my self. For as the World goes, and is like to go,
we must reckon it a piece of Civility to have our Legal Rights cheerfully paid,
that slender Maintenance of God's House, which escaped the Sacrilege of former
Ages, and hitherto the Envy and Malignity of the present; And consequently,
where the Recompense of our Sacred Employment is precarious, the Obligation is
heightened, when our Pains are thought worthy of any Requital. And some have
expressed that unmerited Kindness, and undissembled Friendship, which for me
not to own, would be somewhat worse than common Ingratitude. The Pulpit was
erected to shut out all Flattery and empty Complements, but still to continue
the Chair of serious Truth, and a grateful Behavior is no where more becoming.
But I forbear, and shall use the words of the Roman Orator, longiorem or
ationem res postulat, nature a vestra breviorem: The subject requires a longer,
but your Nature a shorter Acknowledgment. Others must be-told of nothing, but
their Virtues, but you more humbly disclaim all Merit, and choose rather to be
told of your Sins; and faithfully admonished in the ways of Life.

So that my best way to pay acceptable Thanks to this Congregation is, to
Magnify my Office, and to Employ these last, and softer Minutes of Speaking, in
calling upon you, to mind the great Affairs of your Souls, which is a certain
means of enlarging your Fortunes. For when all is done, Religion is the most
faithful Servant to our Worldly Interest, which is respected by it, though not
as the chief Motive, yet as a collateral Reward; It is of the Pious Man that
David speaks when he tells us, that whatsoever he does shall Prosper, Psalm. 1.
3. And the observation holds with equal truth, nay, with greater strength, with
respect to Public Bodies, who cannot have a reasonable assurance of finding
success in their undertakings, but by recovering the Ancient Reputation of
Truth and Virtue, which are deprest, wellnigh stiffled and lost in a thick
Crowd of Errors and Immoralities. God is expressly said in Scripture to have
pleasure in the Prosperity of his Servants, His Providence is still awake over
them for Good; But this is a Favor with no modesty to be expected, whilst men
persist in a wilful opposition to his Laws, set loose from all obligations of
Honor or Conscience, so indifferent what Religion they take up, or whether any
at all, He shall deliver the Island of the innocent: and it is delivered by the
pureness of hands Job. 22. 30. And in this Case the Theatrical shows of Purity
are not quite contemptible, because the very Form of Godliness is not to be
confronted, and baffled by any thing besides the real Power of it. The
Mockeries of Superstition are less provoking than open Infidelity, and a
Religion upon Beads is not so bad as a downright insolent Contempt of Holy
things. This is the highest and most desperate Pitch of wickedness, to which
when great Numbers in any Nation have advanced with Impunity, it must
necessarily bring on its Fatal Period. For this height of Sin is impregnated
with misery, nay actually travels with public Desolation, and God alone can
strangle it in the Womb, It being time for him to Work, as the Psalmist
expresses it, when men have made void his Law.

In Consideration therefore of your own Private Good and of the common Interest
of your Country, Stand in the old Paths, inflexible to insnaring Doctrines and
wicked Examples, and let me entreat you once again to be Masters of so much
Christian Thrist, Method, and good Order, that the Exchange and Shop may not
entrench upon the House of God; That your temporal and Eternal Interests may be
carried on without defrauding each other, without undue competition, with
Religious smoothness and success. Your decreasing in Wealth under Emergent
circumstances is but a Misfortune, but your not improving in Virtue will will
be ever a Fault, that being placed within the reach of human Industry assisted
by the Grace of God. And suffer me to say, that there is no Dream so idle, no
Practice so ridiculous, as that of seeking Happiness in a Vale of Tears, and
placing it in the Multitude of the things we possess. For the greatest Banks of
Wealth may be swallowed up in a Moment, this glittering Idol, like the River
which brings it up to your very Doors, Ebbs and Flows continually, and is never
at a certain point, with the most Righteous Owner; A thousand chances may, but
Time must destroy it. Whereas the welfare of our Souls is not to be impaired by
the Iniquity of Times, or any external accident. Virtue gathers strength,
increases by being shaken, and is the more Prosperous under Trials. The want of
Corporal supplies indeed may run us upon lesser Evils and Inconveniences, upon
those of Faring the harder, or Dying so much the sooner: But to want the
Spiritual, to have the Soul covered with darkness, sick of Passions, and
polluted with Sin, is to stand exposed to an Eternity of real Miseries. But our
Case is better, and there is no invincible necessity of our being miserable in
either Respect. Either Happiness singly considered is humbly confessed too
valuable for the best men to expect as their right, but both put together are
not too Great for God to bestow, who having created our Souls and Bodies with
different Faculties and Desires, directs a suitable provision for the Natural
and Spiritual Life, and is ever pleased with our earnest Labor, and Devout
contention for the Prosperity of both. Of which God of his Infinite Mercy make
us all partakers through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.

