THE Good old Way AND TRUTH Which the Ancient Christians many Ages and
Generations ago witnessed unto in the World from Age to Age; even from the
days of Christ unto this very time, wherein the same Doctrine, Life and
Practice is witnessed unto by us who are in contempt called Quakers, through
many Tribulations.

Which our Ancestors, the most ancient and true Christians that ever were upon
the Earth, sealed unto, with the loss of their Lives and Liberties.

By which, in short, is fully manifested, in what is treated of herein, that
the Doctrine of the Quakers, in denying to Swear any Oath, and their refusing
to pay Tithes, and many other things they practice, was the Doctrine and
practice of the most Famous and renowned Christians, both testified of in the
Scriptures of Truth, and the Books of Martyrs.

Also, A brief Discovery of the Ground and Rise of Tithes; manifesting them no
Gospel-Maintenance; but was testified against by the Best and most Ancient
Christians many Ages ago.

Written by a Branch sprung from the Ancient Stock of David, which has long
been compassed about with wild Beasts; but through the tender Mercies of the
Lord yet remains alive; whose earthly name is Ambros Rigge.

Printed in the Year, 1669.

TO THE READER.
OH, Let not prejudice possess thy mind in reading this small Treatise, for
then thou will reap no benefit thereby; but let thy eye be single to the Truth
herein expressed, and thy whole body shall be full of Light; for God never
respected men's persons in manifesting his firm and ancient Truth, and Mysteries
of Life, which were ever hid from the wise and prudent of the World, as it is
at this day; yet not so hid, but that it is universally tendered to all without
respect of persons, even from the King upon the Throne, unto the Beggar upon
the Dunghill; and therefore is man's destruction of himself, as God said to
Israel; because man has so much dependancy upon his own wisdom, and natural
gifts and parts, that the things of the Spirit of God are foolishness unto him,
as they were to the Rulers and chief Priests of the Jews in the days of old,
whom Christ called Blind-Guides, though they had natural learning enough, as
Pilate who crucified Christ, had Latin, Greek and Hebrew, which any natural
man may have, who does not know the things of the Spirit of God, because they
are spiritually discerned: Oh, therefore, lean not upon thy natural wisdom, for
it will prove a broken Reed in the Day of the Lord, which hasteneth; but
receive and obey the Manifestatiof the Spirit of God, which he in infinite Love
has given thee to profit withal; for that is the Talent that he will assuredly
require of thee, with advantage, and happy for ever are they who can give an
account of the improvement thereof.

A. R.

The Good Old Way, etc.
IN every Age and Generation of the World since man had a being upon the Earth,
God had a Seed, either invisible in being, or visible in manifestation, by and
through which he manifested himself in his own way, time and manner, according
to the good pleasure of his Heavenly Will; which Way and manner, in every Age
of the World, since sin entered into the World, was contrary to the will and way
of Mankind in the Fall; and therefore were they in whom God brought forth his
Seed in all Ages, to give testimony in the World unto his Eternal Name and
Truth, persecuted, and made a prey upon by the earthly powers, who was not
acquainted with these secrets of the Lord, which was ever hid from the wise and
prudent of the World; and therefore did the Jews and chief Priests with the
Scribes agree together to Crucify the Lord of Life, and after them many
Heathen Emperors rose up against his Members, and destroyed many thousands of
them for the Testimony of Jesus and Word of God, as both the Scriptures of
Truth, and the Histories of the Ancient Christians, which immediately succeeded
the Apostles, does largely and plentifully witness, testify and declare; so
that since Man's Fall, He that was born after the Flesh persecuted him that was
born after the Spirit, Gal. 4. 29. even as it is manifest at this day, for the
Enmity yet remains between the Seed of the Serpent, and the Seed of the
Woman, Genesis 3. 15. and so will continue until the desolution of all things.

Now in the 11th Month in the Year 1668/9 did the Word of the Lord come unto
me, Saying, Write, and give a Testimony for my Name thereby, and spread it
amongst those who have multiplied thine, and many others Sufferings, for my
Name and Testimony, these several years last past, that they may all be left
without excuse when I call them before my Judgment Seat, to give an account of
the deeds done in their Bodies, who have not yet repented of their evil, but in
secret have vindicated themselves, as that they have done me service in
persecuting them whom I have sent to be Witnesses for my Name and Truth in the
Earth.

These Words lay upon my spirit the most part of the aforesaid Month, being
willing to wait upon the Lord, that he might further manifest his Will and Mind
unto me, what I should write, rather choosing to continue in silence many years,
then to set Pen to Paper to declare any thing which the Spirit of Truth would
not seal unto; which burden of the Word of the Lord continued still upon me,
till I gave up thereunto: And upon the 21st day of the same Month, in the year
aforesaid, I begun to write, and the matter that was first laid upon me to
write was concerning Swearing at all, for the denial of which, in obedience to
the Command of Christ, I had suffered strait and close imprisonment well nigh
seven years; besides other great afflictions that have been added to my bonds
by the hands of wicked men, in the said time; all which I have been both made
able and willing to bear for the Testimony of Jesus and Word of God; not
counting my liberty not life dear unto me, that I might finish my Testimony
with joy, being counted worthy not only to believe, but also to suffer for
that ancient Doctrine, Faith and Practice, which the best and most ancient
Christians sufsered the loss of their Liberties, and most of them their lives
for; as hereafter I shall make appear.

And furthermore, it is upon my spirit to give some Testimony against that
abominable Oppression of Tithes, under which many groan at this day, it being
never any institution of Christ to his Ministers, under the Gospel; nor ever
owned by the ancient Christians succeeding them, nor ever claimed as any Gospel
right for a thousand years after Christ's days, till the midnight of Popery
came over the Earth; in the which the several Popes ordered Tithes to be paid
to the Mother Church.

To the first, that the Opposers of Gods present Manifestation of this Way and
Truth in this our day, (who have magnified themselves against those whom God
has raised in the Power of his Spirit to revive the ancient Testimony of his
Servants in the Earth) should flatter themselves in their rigorous proceedings
against me, and many others at this day, for our constant obedience to the
Command of Christ, having no other thing to charge us withal, but concerning
the Law of Christ: Now I say, lest any who has appeared against us herein,
should vindicate themselves by or under color or pretense of any Scripture
given forth, either under the First or Second Covenant, or the Law it self by
which they now proceed against us, which was never intended to take hold of the
Innocent and let the Guilty go free.

Now under the Law of the First Covenant, while Israel stood in Covenant with
God, they were commanded to swear by his Name in some Cases, lest they should
swear by false Gods and Idols, as was the manner of the Heathens in their
days; as the Egyptians swore by the Life of Pharaoh; and after them the
Romans, by the Life or Fortune of Caesar, which was to neither of them any
Command of God, for they then were Enemies to him and his people.

But Israel was to Swear by the Living God, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God,
and him shall thou serve, and to him shall thou cleave, and swear by his Name,
Deuteronomy. 10. 20.

And in Leviticus, this was the Precept to Israel, Ye shall not steal, neither
deal falsely, neither lie one to another; neither shall thou profane the Name of
thy God; I am the Lord, Levit. 19. 11, 12.

And in Numbers, If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, and swear an Oath to bind
his Soul with a Bond, he shall not break his Bond, but do all that proceeds
out of his mouth, Numb. 30. 2.

Thus Israel in their infancy was commanded to swear by the Lord, and to
perform their Oaths unto him, by which they bound their Souls both to God, and
one unto another, which in its day and time was well-pleasing unto the Lord,
they answering his requirings therein; but take notice by the way, Israel was
but then under the Law of outward observances, which made nothing perfect, and
so it became them to swear by the Lord, as it becomes a child to suck; but not
a man: for when Israel was grown up, (viz.) when Christ came, the Oath of God,
who fulfilled the Law, and all the Commands therein, as they received him, and
grew in Grace, and the knowledge of him, they put away childish things, and
testified against all Oaths, and many other thing, which the Law commanded, as
being but typical, and Figures of good things to come, when the Substance of
all these things was brought in, who came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill
it, as he himself testified to them that were zealous for the Law, and despised
him, the Substance of it.

For Circumcision was an express Command of God to Israel, being Jews
outwardly, to them and their Seed for an everlasting Covenant, Genesis 17. 13. for
says God, The uncircumcised man-child whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that Soul shall be cut off from his people, he has broken my
Covenant, verse. 14. this had a further and more large extent then Swearing ever
had, yet when Christ came, the end of the Law for righteousness sake to every
one that believed, the Apostle told Israel when they were grown up, That if
they were circumcised Christ would profit them nothing, Gal. 5. 2. yet might
Circumcision have been more strongly pleaded for; when Paul spoke to the
Galatians, being God had commanded it to the Jews, and to their Seed for an
everlasting Covenant, which he never did Swearing, neither under the First nor
Second Covenant; so the Galatians had more ground to withstand Paul in crying
down Circumcision, then any has to withstand the People or God at this day,
for denying Swearing: And under the Gospel Swearing is more absolutely denied
and forbidden by Christ and his Apostles then Circumcision, being, but a little
after Christ began to Preach to Israel, under the Second Covenant, by his own
mouth, given in special charge to them then in being, Not to Swear at all,
Matthew. 5. 34, 35, 36, 37. and confirmed by the Apostle James, Jam. 5. 12. and
never practiced after by any of the Disciples, as was Circumcision; for Paul
afterward circumcised Timothy: Therefore you who are so zealous for Swearing;
why are not you so zealous for Circumcision, which was more enjoined in the
Scripture then ever Swearing was, and with less Authority (under the Gospel)
denied?

Object. And further, some pleads for Swearing, because the holy men of old
time did Swear, (viz.) Abraham, David and Solomon, Joseph, etc.

To which I answer, Moses, who gave forth the Law at the Command of God, said
unto Israel, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise unto you, like nnto me,
him shall ye hear in all things; and it shall come to pass, that whosoever will
not hear the voice of that Prophet, shall be cut off from among the People,
Deuteronomy. 18. 18, 19. which Prophet, was Christ, the end of the Law; and when God
brought him forth into the World, he commanded Israel to hear him in all
things, Matthew. 17. 5. who said, Before Abraham was I am; he commanded Israel,
Not to Swear at all.

The same Jesus said, that he was greater then Solomon, Mat. 12. 41, 42. and
was David's Lord, and by him God spoke to Israel, who was and is to be heard and
obeyed in all things; yea, Whosoever shall break one of the least of his
Commandments, and teach men so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven;
but whosoever shall do, and teach them, shall be called great in the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 5. 19. by which, all you Swearing Teachers, and Swearers
contrary to the positive Command of Christ and the Apostle, without any
exception, may read your portion; for they who love Christ, both keep his
Commandment, and teach others so to do.

For where Christ intended any exception in changing of the Law, in what it had
commanded, he plainly expressed it; as in Matthew, where it was said that Moses
suffered a man that would put away his wife to give her a Writing of
Divorcement, etc. Mat. 5. 31. but says Christ, I say unto you, whosoever shall
put away his wife, saving for the cause of Fornication, verse. 31. [Mark] saving
for the cause of Fornication; where Christ plainly expresses the exception
when he intended it: And at the 28th verse Christ expressed the exception again
when he intended it, (i. e.) Whosoever shall look upon a woman to lust after
her, [mark] to lust after her, has committed Adultery with her already in his
heart; so it is plain, that when Christ intended any exception in changing the
Law, he did not leave his work imperfect for vain man after him to rectify.

And immediately after this, in the same Chapter, Christ positively commands,
without any exception, his Disciples and Followers, Not to swear at all;
neither by Heaven; neither by the Earth; neither by Jerusalem, nor by the Head,
etc. Mat. 5. 34, 35, 36.

Now here is a plain change of the Law, which commanded Israel to swear by the
Lord, by him who had all Power in Heaven and Earth given unto him, Matthew. 28.
18. that he might rule all Nations with a rod of Iron, who fulfilled the Law
under which Abraham, Solomon, David and Joseph swear; so is their Swearing no
plea for any under the Gospel to immitate, but the contrary.

But it is objected, That by those of old time, Christ meant the Expositers of
the Law, who said, If men swear Truth, it was no evil; but only they were not
to swear to that which was false.

To which is answered, that this being an invention of the Objector, and no
where so said in the Scripture of Truth; It needs no other answer, but a
denial; for by them of old time, is spoken of them by whom God spoke to Israel
under the Law; let the Greek Readers speak if the word therein does not imply
so much.

But when Israel revolted from the Lord in their hearts, and yet kept the Form
of Swearing, and said, The Lord lived; yet the Prophet Jeremiah says, Though
they say the Lord lives, albeit they swear falsely, Jer. 1, 2, and 23. though
no truer thing could be said or sworn unto, then that the Lord lived; yet after
they ceased to walk with God in his Covenant made with them, but went into
Adultery and Deceit, and perverted Judgment, and judged not the cause of the
Fatherless, nor the right of the Widow; and last of all, the wonderful
horrible thing was committed in their Land, Their Prophets prophested fasly,
and their Priests bear rule by their means, and they loved to have it so;
therefore says the Lord, what will ye do in the end thereof?

So though it was true that the Lord lived, yet he lived not in them who were
in the aforesaid Abominations; they held the Form, but were gone from the Power
and Life; and so then it was a customary thing with them to swear, even as it
is now with the Apostate Christians, who are now in the very same Horrible
Abominations of Swearing, Lying, Killing, Stealing, and committing Adultery,
their Priests bearing rule by their means, more like lords over Gods Heritage,
then any Examples of the Flock, and the people loving to have it so; but what
will ye do in the end thereof.

But though Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah so offend: But come ye
not to Gilgal, neither go ye up to Bethauan, nor Swear the Lord lives: And Amos
says, They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and says, the God of Dan lives,
and the manner of Beersheba lives; even they shall fall and never rise again,
Amos 8. 14. but while Israel kept Covenant with God, as I said before, they
swore by the Name of the Lord in Truth and Righteousness; but when they
revolted they kept the Form, and swore without fear, and profaned the Name of
the Lord, and swore by the Heathen, by Malcam, and by the sin of Samaria, which
was no where warranted to them by God; even as the Apostate Christians in
ourage, swear now upon a Book, for which they have not the least color of
Scripture, it being made up of diverse Creatures, which was never commanded to
be sworn by, either under the First or Second Covenant, but forbidden.

Object. Again, It is said, the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews allows of
Swearing before a Magistrate, in these Words; For men verily swear by the
greater, and an Oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife.

Answ. To which is replied, that the Apostle there spoke, of men that were in
strife, and not of them who had learned of Christ, as is very clear and
manifest from his words, both in that place, and also in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, saying, He had fed them with Milk, and not with Meat; for hitherto
ye were not able to bear it, neither yet are ye able. For ye are carnal: for
whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions; are ye not
carnal, and walk as men? 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3. Now these are the carnal men that
swear by the greater, of which Paul spoke to the Hebrews, who were in strife,
and so had not learned Christ, who ends the Law in which the strife is: here
Paul makes a clear distinction to the Hebrews, between men in strife and
swearing, and grown Christians who had learned of Christ, and did abide in his
Doctrine; in saying to the Hebrews, For men verily swear by the greater, etc.
[mark] men in strife, and carnal; not you Hebrews: And again, An Oath for
confirmation to them; [mark] to them, (not to you) is an end of all strife; For
where envying and strife is, there is contention, and every evil work, Jam. 3.
16.

And there is no more ground given by the Apostle for the Saints to swear at
all, by any Oath, from the words before mentioned, then there is ground from
Christ's words to the Saints, to exercise lordship one over another, because he
says, Mark 10. 42. The Gentiles do so, etc. Besides, did not those that used
swearing in those days, do it to put an end to all strife? but is not Oaths
imposed at this day where no strife is? nay, are they not imposed for the
beginning of strife? let the Righteous judge how far these who would be
accounted Gospel Professors are fallen, that they are short of the practice of
those who were carnal, and lived in strife in days past.

And the Apostle James, to confirm Christ's words, when he spoke to his
Brethren, who had learned of Christ, and come out of the strife, saying, Above
all things, my Brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven, nor Earth, nor any other
Oath; but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, lest ye fall into
condemnation, Jam. 5. 12. This he spoke without any exception, as Christ had
done before to his Disciples; so as it was the perfection of the Jews under the
Law, not to swear falsely; so it was the perfection of the Christians under the
Gospel, not to swear at all.

Object. But some have said, that it is vain swearing that Christ, and the
Apostle James forbad, in ordinary communication, and not swearing in Courts of
Judicature, etc.

Answ. If so, then Christ did not more then what the Law had done before, which
is high presumption against God to say; for the Law possitively forbad all vain
and false swearing whatsoever, though it made nothing perfect; Thou shall not
take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his Name in vain, Exodus 20. 7. This shuts out all vain
Swearing, without any exception, before the better Hope was brought in, Heb. 7.
19. which was Christ in them the hope of glory, Col. 1. 27. who was and is the
Minister of a better Covenant then that which commanded Swearing, which was
established upon better Promises, Heb. 8. 6. So the Priesthood being changed,
there is made of Necessity a change of the Law, Heb. 7. 12. and Christ did not
only change that part of the Law which appertained to swearing, but diverse
other clauses and sayings thereof. As first, that of Circumcision, which the
Law strictly commanded, Gal. 5. 2. Secondly, Love to Enemies, which the Law
commanded to hate, Matthew. 5. 53. Thirdly, Overcoming evil with good, etc
whereas the Law commanded to take Eye for Eye, and Tooth for Tooth, etc. and
many other instances which I might produce; yet he came not to destroy the Law
but to fulfill it, Matthew. 5. 17. as the Jews who upheld swearing, and haring of
Enemies after Christ came, charged him withal, even as the Apostate Christians
now charges his Followers who abide to his Doctrine, and dare not swear at all)
to be Destroyers of the Law, and Contemners of Magistracy, and bringers in of
new Doctrine. Acts 17. 19. which the same spirit in the days of old (...) upon
him and them whom God raised up in (...) days to preach Repentance and
Remission of sins by Jesus Christ; who (...) Marvel not, my Brethren, if the
World hate you: 1 John 3. 13. For it hated me before it hated you; and the
Servant is not greater then his Lord, etc. John 15. 18, 19.

Object. Again, its said Paul swore from that Scripture, I protest before God,
etc. and in saying, I call God to witness; which is said to be an Oath.

Answ. As to the first, it is an intrusion of the Translation, It being neither
in the Greek Copies, nor in the Latin, nor some English Copies.

To the second, that he calls God to witness, is no Oath, but an earnest
attestation; for an Oath is that whereby something is sworn by; as Israel was
to swear by the Lord in Truth, Judgment and Righteousness; and calling God to
witness is no more, then to say, I speak in the presence of God, who knows the
hearts and thoughts of all men, and is no formal Oath, neither under the Law
nor Gospel.

Neither is there any command more full in either Law or Gospel, then Christ's
Command to his Disciples, not to swear at all by any Oath, without any
exception, being seconded by the Apostles command to his Brethren, as I said
before, enjoining them earnestly, above all things, not to swear by any thing
either in Heaven or Earth, lest they fell into condemnation, which Commands
were binding to all both then present, and the succeeding Saints and Christians
several hundred years after Christ ascended to the Father, and the Apostles
Testimony was finished in the World: yea, the ancient Christians many years
after their days, kept the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostle James,
testifying to their death against the Heathen Emperors, who would have
compelled them to Swear, affirming it a special mark and character of a
Christian, from Christ's words, not to swear at all, as shall be made evident
anon.

By all which it will manifestly appear, that the Quakers denial of all
Swearing is no New Doctrine, but the renewing of that which was commanded and
practiced by the best of Christians above sixteen hundred years ago, and
continued in force and practice many hundred years, even till the Beast that
John spoke of in the Revelation got up and made war with the Witnesses, and
with the Saints, and overcame them that kept the Testimony of Jesus and Word of
God, Rev. 13. 7. and then the power of Darkness came over the Earth, which set
up Swearing, contrary to Christ's Commands, under which many of the ancient
Christians suffered cruel Martyrdom, for standing faithful Witnesses for the
Name of the Lord in the Earth, and for denying to swear at all to those under
whom they were; as a cloud of Witnesses might be brought out af the
Ecclesiastical Histories of them that denied all Swearing in diverse Ages; only
for brevity I shall instance a few.

First, Polycarpus, who was, as its said, John's Disciple, and had been a
Christian Eighty six years, when he came to suffer Martyrdom, the Proconsul
requiring him to swear By the Emperors good Fortune, and By Caesar's Prosperity,
(Irenius lib. 3. cap. 1.) which was the Custom of the Romans at that time, and
diverse Heathen Emperors to set up their Images to be worshipped, and their
Persons to be Sworn by; but Polycarpus denied, and said, he was a Christian,
and would show forth the Doctrine of Christianity, if he desired the same, if
the Proconsul would appoint a day to hear it; so Polycarpus refused to Swear,
and kept Christ's Doctrine, for which he was led away to be burned, being an
old man, and full of days, Acts and Monuments vol. 1. fol. 55, 56, 57.

Secondly, Basiliades, an Officer, and afterward a Martyr, being required to
Swear, affirmed plainly, that it was not lawful for him to Swear, for that he
was a Christian: hence it appears that it was the proper mark of a Christian,
not to Swear. Acts and Mon. vol. 1. fol. 71. Eusebius. cap. 6. page 98.

Thirdly, In the days of Domitius Nero, who began to reign about sixty seven
years after Christ, under whom was the First of the Ten cruel Persecutions of
the Christians, he caused the Christians of all sorts to suffer; he commanded
Rome to be set on fire in twelve places, and to avoid the infamy thereof, he
accused the Christians with it, and caused them to be put to death. After him
began Domitian the Emperor to reign, who began the second Persecution of the
Christians, who was a Blasphemer of God, and an Idolater, in his days was John
the Evangelist banished into the Isle of Patmos.

This Domitian the Emperor, fearing the coming of Christ again, commanded, that
all that could be found of the Stock of David in Jury should be put to death:
The inquisition was this, they commanded those they suspected to be Christians,
to swear whether they were indeed Christians or not; but the Christians refused
to Swear, confessing that they were Christians, and could not deny Christ nor
his Doctrine; for which they were commanded to be put to death.

Fourthly, The Waldenses or Lionists, whose names are so famous among the
reformed Churches, and who are said immediately to succeed the Apostles, and
were the most ancient and true Protestants, professed it no way lawful for a
Christian man to Swear: In defense of whom, in the very matter, Bishop Usher,
(De Success. cup 6.) late Bishop of Armath, Primate of Ireland, pleaded their
cause against the Papists and Jesuits, who are Swearers, and Breakers of Oaths.

Fifthly, The Plowman in his Complaint, which is so much esteemed of, and
commended in the Book of Martyrs, says Lord thou gives us a Commandment of
Truth, in bidding us say yea, yea, and nay, nay, and swear for nothing: thou
give us also a Commandment of meekness, another of poorness; but, Lord, he
that calls himself thy Vicar on Earth has broken both these Commandments; for
he makes a Law to compel men to Swear, and by his Law he teaches, that for a
man to save his life may forswear and Lie; and so, Lord, through comfort of him
and his Laws, the people need reads to Swear or Lie; nay, oft-times to
forswear themselves; Lord, here is little truth, etc. Acts and Mon. vol. 1.
fol. 527.

Sixthly, It is one of John Wickliffs Articles, whose Works were as much
esteemed by the Protestants in England and Bohemia, as despised by the Papists
and their Clergy, having his bones taken up and burnt forty one years after his
decease; and his Books were also burned by the Papists; and this Article was
condemned, with many other, by the Counsel of Constance: That all Oaths which
be made for any Contract or civil Bargain between man and man be unlawful:
John Hus, and Jerome of Prague were condemned for holding of John Wickliff's
opinions, Ex Actis Consilij Con. stat. vol. 1. fol. 606.

Seventhly, Walter Brute, a Teacher among the People of God, in the Age of
Scorners called, The Devil's Servant, or Lollard, against whom the Pope and
King Richard the second, and the then ungodly Bishops, made so much ado to have
the Name of Truth extinguished, and the Professors thereof cut off. This is
Walter's Testmony concerning Oaths; I believe and obey the Doctrine of
Almighty God, and my Master Jesus Christ, which teaches that Christian men, in
the affirmation of Truth, should pass the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees of the old Testament, or else he excludes them from the Kingdom of
Heaven; for he says, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: And as
concerning Oaths, he says, It has been said of old time, Thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform those things unto the Lord thou know;
But I say unto you, thou shall not Swear at all, neither by Heaven, nor by the
Earth; but let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay, for whatsoever is
more then these comes of evil: Therefore as the Perfection of the ancient men
of the old Testament was not to forswear themselves; so the Perfection of a
Christian man is not to Swear at all; because he is so commanded of Christ,
whose Commands in no wise must be broken; although the City of Rome is contrary
to the Doctrine of Christ. Acts and Mon. vol. 1. fol. 653. Rich. 2d's days.

Eighthly, Chrysostom, who was a Bishop of Constantinople, in commendation of
whom much is said in the Ecclesiastical History; he blames them greatly that
brought forth a Book to swear upon; charging his Clerks, that in no wise, they
constrained any body to Swear, whether they think a man swears true or false,
saying. It is a sin to Swear well, etc. Acts and Mon. vol. 1. fol. 701, 702.

Ninethly, Jerome, who was an ancient Father and Teacher in the Church, whom
all the Protestants owned, upon that place, Matthew. 5. 37. and James 5. 12.
these were his words, It was permitted under the Law to the Jews, as being
tender, and as it were Infants, that they might offer Sacrifices to God, lest
they should sacrifice to Idols; so they might swear by God, not that it was
rightful so to do, but because it was better to swear by God, then by false
gods and Devils; but the great Evangelist admits not of an Oath, since every
true saying is equal thereunto, etc.

Tenthly, In like manner does Theophilist, an ancient Father of the Church,
whom the Protestants own, and have often cited his Doctrine, for proof upon the
place in controversy, says, Learn hence that under the Law it was not evil
for one to Swear; but since the coming of Christ it is evil, as is
Circumcision, and in sum, what ever is judicial; for it may become a child to
suck, but not a man.

Eleventh, And Ambross says upon Psalm 110. Let him then Swear that cannot
repent of his Oath; and a little after the said Ambross says, Do not immitate
him in swearing, whom you cannot immitate in following; and indeed the
principle solution given by him is, Swear not at all.

Twelfth, Many other Saints and Martyrs I might instance at large, both in
Henry the fourth, and Henry the sixth's days, whereof some were burned, some
cruelly handled, who said, It was not lawful to Swear in private Cases. Vol.
1. page 896. Hen. 6. days.

Thirteenth, In Henry the fourth days it is said, That neither the Pope nor
Prelates, neither any Ordinary can compel any man to swear by the Bible-book,
or any Creature of God; for says a Master of Divinity, It is not lawful
either to give or to take any Oath upon a Book; for every Book, says he, is
nothing else but diverse Creatures of which it is made: Therefore to swear upon
a Book, is to swear by Creatures, and this swearing is ever unlawful. Acts and
Mon. vol. 1. fol. 701.

It would melt any tender heart to hear of the Cruelties and Tortures which
that Blood-thirsty spirit invented to destroy the Bodies of those who kept the
Commands of Christ, and could not be forced to swear by all the Cruelties that
the power of darkness, either in Henry the fourth's days, Henry the sixth's
days, Richard the seconds, or Queen Mary's days could invent to torment their
Bodies withal, which was not a few, as may be seen upon record at this day in
the first, second and third Volums of the Books of Martyrs.

But they who loved Christ, and kept his Commands, in those days had power and
strength given them to endure what ever the Lord suffered wicked hands to
inflict upon them, by which their Faith and Patience was fully tried and
manifested; but after the Iniquities of their Adversaries were full, the Lord
brought swift and fore destruction upon them, diverse manner of ways, as a just
reward of their Blood and Cruelty, as may be read at large, in the latter end
of the said Books: For God in every Age showed his severe wrath against the
Spirit of Persecution about Worship and Sacrifice unto him, (Genesis 3.) even from
the days of wicked Cain unto this hour, that spirit is accursed, and drove out
from the presence of the God of Israel where ever it appears at this day,
even as it was in the days of Pharaoh, Saul, Nebuchadnezer, Herod, Pilate, and
all the Chief Priests; and after them the wicked Emperors and Kings; and after
them the diverse Popes and their Bloodthirstly Rabble of Clergy, and all other,
under what Name or Form soever at this day, where that spirit of Persecution
yet remains, the Curse and Vengeance of the Almighty does pursue it, where ever
it goes; though God suffer long, as he did Pharaoh and the rest, to vex Israel,
till their iniquities was full: even so the Lord in these latter Ages has
suffered many to act much violence and wickedness against his Heritage, for
their obedience to the Commands of his Son, and they who love him now keeps his
Commands, as they did in the days of old; for he says unto his, If ye love me
keep my Commandments, and his Commandments is not grievous but joyous, 1 John
5. 2, 3, 4. and John said, Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments; for he that says I know him, and keeps not his Commandments,
is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him, 1 John 2. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

By all which it is more then manifest that the most ancient true and faithful
Christians in their day and time gave a testimony against Swearing at all, and
suffered for it, both under the Pope, and many Heathen Emperors; but they who
would be accounted Christians now, having got the power into their hands, are
found in the same spirit of Persecution, as they were in, under which the true
Christians always suffered, and do act as furiously, according to the power
given them from above, as they did in days past, and no doubt would run as
high as they did, in Burning, Hanging Gibbitting and Strangling, if they had
the least color of Law to countenance them therein.

By all which, let the sober and honest hearted judge, whether the Quakers
Doctrine of not Swearing be any new Doctrine or not? and whether our Sufferings
this many years for our obedience to the Commands of Christ be not vindicated
both by Christ, and all his Disciples in their days, and by all the ancient
Christians before cited? and whether they, who now calls themselves Christians,
are not far degenerated from the Life and Doctrine of Christianity, though they
retain the name, and from the practice of the ancient Christians, breaking
Christ's Commands, and forcing others so to do, which in time will pull down
the wrath of God upon their heads, if they repent not; For it is not every one
that says Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that
does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 7. 21. It is not the name
of Christianity, nor a Profession of Christ's words recorded in the Scripture,
that will hide you in the day of the Lord that hastneth, which shall burn as an
Oven, wherein all the Proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble,
and the day that comes shall leave them neither Root nor Branch, Mal. 4. 1.
the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it: For the Earth is filled with violence,
and the Land mourns because of Oaths; (Jer. 5.) and the Proud are counted
happy, and they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God are
even delivered, Mal. 3. 15. and they that reprove Iniquity in the Gate are made
a prey upon; for which God has begun to visit this Nation with his sore
Judgments, which will bring desolation in the end to them who continue in the
aforesaid Abominations.

Object. And furthermore, some wicked and malicious spirits have said, we who
are called Quakers will not swear, because we desire to plot and contrine
mischief against the King and Government, etc.

This is altogether false and groundless, as many years experience will witness
for us, who were never found plotting against any Government under which we
have been, but have from time to time patiently born the rod of the wicked
since we were a people; and if we durst break the Command of Christ to Swear
any Oath, we should as willingly swear obedience to the Power and Government
under which we are, as any Oath that could be tendered us; this, for my own part
I speak heartily, willingly, and freely, without any reserve of mind whatever;
and if any should have power given them to imprison my body so long more as I
have suffered here, if I would not consent to hurt the Kings Person, or the
person of any, I could as willingly suffer for the denial of that, as I have
for my constant obedience and adhering to the Command of Christ, who says,
Swear not at all; for the same Jesus commands me not to war with flesh and
blood, but to love my Enemies; and though I should suffer five times more then
I have done, I could never be brought to redeem my self through the destruction
of the person of another, though never so wicked and ungodly; for I know
Vengeance is the Lords, and he will repay it, Romans 12. 19. and therefore have I
committed my just and innocent cause unto him, who in every Age and Generation
of the World recompensed Tribulation upon them that troubled his people, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. though he spared some of them long, to see if his long suffering
would lead them to repentance; but as they heardned their hearts against him,
and his people, he manifestly appeared in many Judgments against them, to
awaken them, as he has done of late years against those who have oppressed his
Royal Seed in this Age, which he has caused to spring up in his people,
scornfully called Quakers, which shall spread over the face of the Earth; yea,
it is as easy to stop the course of the Sun from running his course, as a
Giant, as to hinder the growth of the Seed of God; for he has blessed it, and
no enchantment shall prevail against it; yea, if all our bodies should be
destroyed in whom it is risen, yet after us shall all the Families of the Earth
be blessed in it; for the more it is persecuted, the more it grows; as when a
Vine tree is cut, the more it is cut, the thicker it spreads; so does the Truth
at this day, as in Ages past, He was made perfect through Sufferings, Hebr. 2.
10. and he is the same still, and will remain when all the wrath of man which
works not the righteousness of God shall have an end, and be no more; and
therefore we cannot fear him that kills the body, and has no more that he can
do; but are taught both to love and fear him, who after he has killed the
body, has power to cast both into Hell, Matthew. 10. 28, 29. and therefore are
we made a gazing stock to the World now, and have as little love from the
world, as our forefathers had in days past, marvelling not why the world
hates us, seeing it hated him who is the Prince of Life, and condemned him to
death as a Blasphemer and a Deceiver, before it hated us, Luke 5. 21. Matthew.
27. 63. for the Servant is not greater then his Lord; and it was the chief
Priests that was the chief Murderers of him, for they stirred up the Rulers to
do it, Luke 23. 13. which happily otherwise they would have dreaded; and so
brought Innocent Blood upon their heads, and upon their Posterity for ever.

And who is it now that stirrs up the Rulers against his Appearance? Is it not
the chief Priests, who both are, and ever were the greatest Enemies that he and
his people had upon the Earth? who knows, that if people should cease from man,
and follow Christ, and learn of him, down goes their Merchandise by which they
maintain their Pride and Pomp, for the preserving of which they will cry up any
thing that will promote their trade, as has been manifest in England within
these late years; but God has shaken his hand at their dishonest gain, and is
bringing contempt and misery upon them, Ezekiel. 22. 12, 13. and they will become
a byword to many in Ages to come; and the Arm of Flesh which they have so long
trusted in shall wither before them; and the Lord will more and more gather his
Sheep from their mouths, that they shall not always prey upon them, Ezekiel. 34.
10. the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it; and all their rage and madness shall
but heap Coals of fire upon their own heads; for they have over-passed the
deeds of the wicked in Drunkenness, Swearing, Whoring, Lying Couzening,
Cheating, Pride, Luxury, Wantonness, Covetousness which is Idolatry, a
Generation of Vipers, stinging, and most grievously persecuting all who will
not put into their mouths; I might fill a Volumn of their multiplied
iniquities, which ever were the certain tokens, and forerunners of desolation
and destruction, and the people through their evil example are overwhelmed in
all manner of debauchery and uncleanness, even drinking in iniquity as the Ox
does water: Oh, was ever Sodom or Nineveh so overgrown with iniquity, as
England now is? what will be the end of all these Abominations under which this
Land mourns? Oh, that my head were as water, and mine eyes a Fountain to tears,
that I might thoroughly bemoan the Calamity of this people; for all flesh has
corrupted his way before the Lord, their thoughts are the thoughts of vanity,
and their works the works of iniquity, destruction and misery is in their
ways, and the way of peace they know not, Romans 3. 16, 17. Oh, repent, repent,
and amend your ways, for the Kingdom of God is at hand, Matthew. 4. 17. the
Sword of the Almighty is drawn, it is fitted and furbished for a mighty
slaughter, and it shall wound the hairy scalp of every one that goes in
iniquity, Plalm 68. 21. Oh, therefore, return, return unto the Lord while he is
near, and seek his face while he may be found; for he wills not the death of
a Sinner; therefore, if ye perish, your destruction is of your selves.

A Brief Discovery of the entering in of Antichrists and false Prophets, with
their Marks and Fruits who instituted Swearing, contrary to Christ's Command,
and many other things which now are, and for a long time have been upheld
contrary to the Scripture, and practice of the Saints of old.
NOw you who call your selves Christians, open your eyes, and see from whom you
have derived Swearing upon a Book, which now you are so zealous for, that most
of you calls it an Ordinance of God, let both Christ and the Apostles
Testimonies be Witnesses against you herein; and not only them, but the
Testimony of the best and most ancient Christians, since their days, who
under-went most grievous Sufferings, both from the hands of many Heathen
Emperors several hundred years before there was a Pope; and after that Beast
arose out of the Sea, (which then had flowed over the Earth) under whom many
faithful Martyrs suffered for their obedience to the Faith and Doctrine of
Christ, who testified against Swearing, and many other abominable Idols, which
that Beast had derived from the Heathens, against Christ's Command, all whose
Testimonies stands as a Cloud of Witnesses against you at this day, who are
swearing upon Books, and laying your hands upon them, saying, So help me God;
which, at the best was but invented by Justinian the Heathen Emperor, and after
him by the Pope, from whom it is derived at furthest; and so condemns the
Quakers to lose all their Goods and Lands, and to lie in Prison during the
Kings pleasure, only because they cannot deny Christ, nor his Commands, nor
the practice of the Ancient Christians many hundred years ago; though there is
a witness in many of you that the people of God, whom you thus cruelly
persecute, never plotted any mischief against the King, or any man, nor ever
countenanced any who would; so that there is not any people in England,
Scotland or Ireland that the King may more conside in, then in the true born
Quakers, who cannot betray the Lord, nor the King; but they who are not
faithful to God and his Truth, can never be faithful to the King.

Here follows several instances of the Priests practices, for which they have
no Scripture, but were instituted by the Papists and Bishops of Rome.
1. Claudius Espontius a Popish Bishop, at a Council held at Pysoy in France,
in the year One thousand five hundred, ordained, that Infant Baptism should be
received by tradition, because it could not be proved by Scripture.

2. Ignatius, Bishop of Rome, was the first that ordained that Infants should
be Baptized, and have Godfathers and Godmothers; oh, what blaspemous words has
Antichrist brought in against God? how can these be God and Father, or God and
Mother to the Child? and how can they promise and vow that the Child shall
forsake the Devil and all his Works, and keep Gods holy Will and Commandments,
and walk in the same all his days, when as the same men and women do believe
before hand, that neither they themselves, nor the child can ever perform these
things? Is this Scriptural, or Papistical, answer Priests?

3. Pius, Bishop of Rome, built the first Temple after the Apostasy, in honor
to the Virgin Prudentia; and since the Papists have built thousands and
consecrated them, for which they have no Scripture, or example from Christ or
any of the ancient Christians.

4. Dionysius, in the year Two hundred sixty seven, divided both Rome, and all
their Places into Parishes and Diocesses for Bishops.

5. Silvester, Bishop of Rome, ordained, that all Churches should be Christened
and anointed with Oil; and called them St Peter, St Paul, St Katherine, St
Maudlen, St Hellen, St Dunston, St Anthony, St Gregory, St Clement, St Giles,
etc. which superstitious names are upheld to this day, by those who say they
deny the Pope.

6. Clement, Bishop, ordained Confirmation of Children, and said none was
perfect that wanted that; he also ordained, that Children should be smore on
the cheek, and signed with the sign the Cross.

7. At Lions in France they appointed holy days to increase their Religion,
(viz.) Christmas, Candlemas, Lammas, which was never ordained nor consecrated
of Christ nor any of his Servants, who neither went to Mass, nor observed any
Mass-Dayes, but kept Gods Command, who said, Six days shall thou labor and do
all that thou have to do, etc. Exodus 20.

8. Boniface the fourth ordained Stephen, Innocent, Lawrence, Michael, Martin,
John Baptist, and all the Saints days to be kept holy, against Gods command
before cited; and the Apostle testified against such Observations, Gal. 4. 10.

9. Gregory ordained, that Mass, or short prayer should be said over the Tombs
of the Dead: Now Priests, see the original of your Prayers over the dead, and
see if it be Apostolical, yea or nay?

10. Gregory also ordained, that neither Flesh, nor any thing that had affinity
in it, as Cheese, Milk, Butter, Eggs should be eaten on such days as were
Fasts; here came in that Doctrine of Devils, commanding to abstain from Meats,
which God has commanded to be received with thanksgiving, of them that believe
and obey the Truth.

11. Sabinianus ordained, that People should come together to hear Service, by
ringing of Bells at certain hours.

12. John the twenty second, Bishop of Rome, ordained Bells to be tol'd three
times a day; here was the original of your Bells and tolings, from the Popes
Decrees.

13. Singing of Mattens at set times Hicrom appointed, as Polydore and others
say.

14. Pelagius the second commanded Priests to say them daily; and Vtilianus
invented the decent tunes wherewith the Hyms be sung, and joined thereto the
Organs, etc.

15. Telesphorus appointed that Lent should be kept before Easter, and added
another week to it, which is called Quinquagessima; and also ordained Epistles
and Gospels; and Damasus divided them as they are read at this day in the
Reformed Churches so called.

16. Anastasius commanded that People should stand at the reading of the Gospel.

17. Higinus the nineth Bishop of Rome, ordained the Communnion to be
celebrated three times a year.

18. Pius, about the year Four hundred and seven, after Christ, the tenth
Bishop, ordained, that Easter Day should be kept on the Sunday.

19. Vrbanus the seventeenth Bishop of Rome, ordained Churchyards to be
hallowed, and forbad marriage of Priests.

20. Sextus the twenty fourth Bishop of Rome, in the year Two hundred and
twenty after Christ, ordained the Priests to wear holy Garments, as Copes, and
diverse other things, in imitation of Aaron; and then came in Surplices; he
commanded Images to be set up in Churches.

Much more such Trumpery might be instances too tedious to rehearse, which is
now upheld among the Protestants, so called, as great Ordinances of God, though
such things were never ordained by him in any Age of the World, but invented by
the several Antichrists which John saw entering into the World in his day, which
are upheld by the false Prophets of our Age, without any ground or color from
that which they pretend to be their Rule (viz.) the Scriptures, who have either
in matter or form erred from the Spirit of Truth and the Scriptures in every
thing relating to their Worship, professing in words to know God, but in works
denying him, being abominable and unclean, and to every good work a Reprobate.

A few words follows concerning Tithes, manifesting them no
Gospel-maintenance, but since Christ and the Apostle days invented by the
Papists.
Tithes were never commanded to be paid by the Lord to any but Israel under the
Law; neither was it ever payable, but by the Jews in the first Covenant, under
the Levitical Priesthood, out of the Land of Canaan, to such Levites as had no
part nor portion allotted them in the promised Land, the Tithe or Tenth part of
the increase thereof was commanded to be given unto them by the Lord, for the
Office of the Priesthood, and for the service of the Tabernacle, Deuteronomy. 18. 4.
and the Levites out of the Tithes were to offer up to the Lord a Tenth part of
the Tithes, and give it unto Aaron the Priest, for himself and his Sons, Ezekiel.
45. 13. and no other portion had the Levitical Priests out of the Tithes, but
the tenth of the tenths, for the rest had the Levites that did serve at the
Tabernacle, and it was also to relieve Strangers, Fatherless and Widows, Deuteronomy.
14. 29. So Israel's Tithes were not all given to the Priests, but the Poor was
maintained out of it beside, for there was not to be a Beggar in Israel; here
was the end for which it was at first instituted.

But Christ the Everlasting High Priest being come, he changed that Priesthood,
which was but to continue until the time of Reformation, Hebr. 9. 10. and the
Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change of the Law, that
took Tithes, Heb. 7. 12. after which there was never any Command given by
Christ to any of his Ministers or Servants under the Second Covenant, either to
take or receive Tithes of any people; and for Eight hundred years after Christ
it was never imposed upon the People, but they might give it to whom they
would, at their own pleasure.

And the Maintenance which Christ allotted his Ministers under the Gospel is
expressed in Luke, into whatsoever house they entered, to eat and drink such
things as were set before them, for the Labourer was worthy of his hire, Luke
10. 7, 8. This is the hire the Ministers of Christ are contented withal at this
day; but the Ministers of Antichrist are not contented with their Allowance,
nor the allowance of the First Covenant, which shows that they are Ministers of
neither, for if they were, they would act according to one; but their Fruits
plainly testifies to their faces, that they are Ministers of Antichrist, who
have run when the Lord never sent them, Matthew 7. 16, 17, 18.

Object. Now some have pleaded for Tithes from Abraham's giving the Tenth of
the Spoils of the Kings, etc. to Melchisedeck, etc. Heb. 7. 2.

Answ. This was not Tithe of Lands increase, neither was it any Command of God
to Abraham, but a free voluntary gift out of the Spoils he had taken in war;
(but Mark) He was yet in the loins of his Father when Melchisedeck met him,
Hebr 7. 10. and therefore no Gospel Plea: So who would have Tithes from the
Scripture, must go and meet the Soldiers as they return from the Spoils of
their Enemies, and receive the Tenth thereof at their hands, if they will give
it them freely; for it is evident, that he who changed the Priesthood, and
fulfilled the Law which commanded Tithes of Lands, sprang out of Judah, of
which Tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning Priesthood, Hebr. 7. 13, 14.

And it is yet far more evident, for that after the similitude of Melchisedeck
their arises another Priest, verse 15.

Who is not made after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but after the Power of
an endless Life, verse 16.

For there is verily a disannulling of the Commandment going before, [mark] a
disannulling of the Commandment, that was carnal, where Tithes were included,
for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof, verse 17, 18.

Because it made nothing perfect, but the bringing of a better hope did, by
which they drew nigh to God, verse 19. which better hope was, Christ in them
the hope of glory.

By all which it is evident, that whoever receives or pays Tithes as any Legal
right, denies Christ come in the Flesh, and such are the Antichrists which the
Scripture speaks of, 2 John 7. and this is the reason why they who now witness
him come in their Flesh cannot uphold that Priesthood which takes Tithes,
knowing that he has changed the Priesthood, and the Law also, and not through
covetousness to save so much of our Estates, as some have falsely judged; for
if we had no reason for the denial of Tithes, but to save our goods, we would
assuredly pay them, knowing aforehand, if we do not pay them, we shall
certainly lose three times so much, at the best; therefore humane reason would
not lead us to deny them upon that score; but it is only in Conscience toward
God that we cannot pay them, knowing the Priesthood changed, and the Law also
that commanded them disannulled, as is said above; land therefore, if we should
uphold that which Christ have disannul'd, we should be Antichrists, like them,
and woe would be our portion; And therefore we joyfully suffer the spoiling of
our goods for the Name of Christ, and the hope that is set before us, Hebr. 10.
34. knowing that the Captain of our Salvation was made perfect through
Sufferings, Hebr. 2. 10.

And because we could not deny him come in our Flesh, have the Chief Priest of
our Age devoured much of our Substance, even beyond the bounds of humanity, and
the Law by which they pretend to claim it, which, at most, allows them but
treble damages against them that refuse to pay them, yet they have not been
contented with five times the value; nay, it would pierce any tender heart to
hear of the havoc and spoil they have made of our Bodies and Goods throughout
this Nation, for our witnessing Christ come in the Flesh; appearing manifestly
worse then the Jews that scourged the Apostles of Christ, for they abated Paul
one stripe of forty every time they whipped him, 2 Cor. 11. 24. though their
Law allotted forty stripes, yet they would not go to the rigor thereof: But
these merciless Wolves have exceeded in cruelty, to the power they have had
given them, all that ever I read of in any Age; for proof hereof I refer the
Reader to a Book called, A Record of Sufferings for Tithes, wherein they are
thoroughly proved grievous Wolves indeed, Acts 20. 29. who have exceeded the
rigor of their own Laws many degrees, even to the utter undoing, as far as in
them lies, of whole Families.

Object. Some have pleaded the right of Tithes under the Gospel, from these
words, Ye pay Tithe of Mint, and Annis, and Commin, etc. these things ought ye
to have done, etc. Matthew. 23. 23.

Answ. This was spoken by Christ to the Scribes and Pharisees, who denied him,
and upheld the first Priesthood, and therefore he called them Blind-Guides, and
cried many woes against them, for their Hypocrisy, Matthew. 23. 16, 17. and
seeing they did not own own him who fulfilled the Law, they ought tithe their
Mint and Annis, etc. and so all those who know not Christ the better hope
brought into them to tithe their increase; but who so does, must not assume the
title of Christians, for they can never be received Jure Divino by any under
the Second Covenant; I suppose the Tythe-mongers have been ashamed of that plea
several years.

Therefore let us come to their plea Jure Humano, which is their main Prop or
Pillar; they say, by the Law of man, They have as good right to the Tenth part,
as the Owner has to the Nine parts, etc.

This is much like the Jews plea against Christ, to take away his life, John
19. 7. because they had a Law so to do, which made them bold and impudent, not
regarding the evil they did in executing their Law, when it turned against
Christ and his followers, neither would their Law they were so zealous for,
defend them from the stroke of Gods terrible vengeance, which after they had
filled up the measure of their Iniquity, came upon them and their Posterity,
though they were suffered to reign long over the Heritage of God.

But let these Tythe-mongers tell us, who first invented this Tithe to Priests
since Christ? and if they can clear the Pope of it, and deduct it from the
Scriptures, or the ancient Christians, let them; and then they will have some
color of Christianity to demand them.

But this Jure humano was the main plea in Oliver Cromwels time, by these
tything temporising Priests, to uphold their pluralities and Tithes, though
they could throw away the Common Prayer Book at his Command, and silently
suffer the people to want that which the same Priests now cries up as an Oracle
and Ordinance of God, and Divine Service; for the reading of which they now
wholly plead Tithe their due Jure humano, yet in those days, when that which
they now call Divine Service was rejected by them, they pleaded and ravened as
much for the Fleece as they do now, though they suffered thousands to perish
without that which they now threaten damnation to all who will not hear and
receive; which if they had been true Shepherds, they would have laid down, not
only their liberty and their Tithes, but their lives for their Flocks in those
days, rather then they should have been led away by those they now count
Wolves, John 10. 11, 12, 13. but the Love of their Tithes and Pluralities which
Oliver suffered them to enjoy, over-ballanced their love to their Flocks: and
no question, if the Pope come and hold out the Mass Book to them in one hand,
with Tithes and large Revenues in the other, and promise, in accepting of the
one, they shall enjoy the other, and for refusal shall lose both, these cunning
Steers-men, that can always sail in the eye of the wind, will no doubt swallow
this Pill with little or no difficulty also, and cry up the Mass Book for as
Divine an Oracle, and Ordinance of God, as the Directory was with them in its
day, or as the Common Prayer now is with all its Rites and Ceremonies now in
their esteem; for then also they may plead for their Tithes Jure humano.

And they who formerly endured turning out, could silently suffer their Flocks
to be devoured by them whom they counted Wolves, and durst not openly declare
against them, nor enter into their Synagogues and dispute with them, as the
manner of Paul, and the true Ministers of Christ was, Acts 17. 16, 17, 18. for
fear of loss of liberty, or some other profit; if such be not the Hirelings
that Christ spoke of, that flees before the Wolf, and leaves their sheep, I
know not any Hirelings at all; for was the Common Prayer Idolatry in Oliver's
days, and Divine-Service now? how was the nature and property of it altered.

The main and principal Foundation of the Law of England is the Law of God, so
says the Law-Book, Doctor and Student. cap. 2. page 4. in these words,

There is a Law written in the heart of man, which is man created in the Image
of God, and this Law is always good and righteous, stirring up the man to do
that which is good, and abhor the evil; and therefore against this Law, (says
the Book) Prescription, Statute, Custom may not prevail; and if any be brought
against it, they are void, and against Justice, etc.

If so, then let all who has the least spark of reason left in them judge,
whether it is not high presumption against God, and his unlimitted Prerogative
and Royal-Law written in the hearts of his people, according to his Promise by
the mouth of his holy Prophet Jerimiah? Jer, 31. 33. to set up man's Law above
it, and force the execution thereof against it; for in the Second Covenant,
wherein God promised to write his Law in his peoples hearts, Tithes and their
Law were abolished, as is said before; therefore Prescription, Statute, and
Custom that is brought against the aforesaid Royal-Law of God written in the
heart, is void and against Justice by the aforesaid Law-Book of England, which
will not admit of Jure Humano to prevail against Jure Divino.

Here follows several Presidents of the Ancient Christians, some in the
Apostles days, and some since, who had no Tithes from the People, who gave
Testimony against them that did require them.
IN the Churches of Antioch, Galatia and Corinth the Saints possessed every man
his own estate, where the Apostle ordained a weekly offering of the Saints,
that every man might offer freely of what God had blessed him withal, which was
put in the hands of Deacons for the maintenance of the poor, and other
necessary uses, Acts 11. 29. for Christ having in Luke 10. allotted their
Ministers their Maintenance, they were contented with it; and when they
returned to him again, they could say they had no want; but then they lived not
in pride, nor fullness of bread, nor went in long Robes, nor maintained their
Wives in pride and excess, as the men of our Age do; for such Christ never sent
in any Age; for they were not Lord Bishops, nor called of men Masters, but were
Patterns and Examples to the Flock, and and said to the Disciples and Brethren,
Be ye Followers of us, even as we are of Christ; but now if people should
follow none, but they that are Followers of Christ, the Tythe-mongers would
have none at all.

But the aforesaid contribution continned amongst the Ancient Christians about
Three hundred years till the great Persecution under Maximinian and Dioclesian,
as Eusebius witnesses, and so does Turtulian, Origin, Cyprian, and others,
here was not Tithes so much as spoken to of the Christian Ministers, but they
did abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and having food and raiment they were
therewith content.

After which time some Lands were given to the Church, but Origin says, It is
not lawful for any Minister to possess Lands, given to the Church, to his own
use.

Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, also testified the same, and shows how the
Church maintains many poor, and that her own expenses was full of frugality,
and her diet sparing and plain, Cyprian Epist. 27, 34, 36. Prosper also says,
That a Minister able to live of himself, ought not to desire any thing of the
people, and he that receives it, does it not without great sin. And the
Bohemians in their fruitful and Christian Exhortation to Kings and Princes, to
stir them up to zeal for the Gospel, in many Articles against the Clergy of
their Antichristian Practices: In the fifteenth Article against them, they say
thus, etc.

That they receive Tithes of men, and will of right have them, and preach, and
say, that men are bound to give them Tithes, and therein they say falsely; for
they cannot prove by the New Testament, that our Lord Jesus Christ commanded
it, and his Disciples warned no man so to do, neither did themselves so receive
them; but although in the Old Testament it were commanded to give Tithes; yet
it cannot thereby be proved, that Christian men are bound thereunto; for this
precept of the Old Testament had an end in the first year of our Lord Jesus
Christ, like as the precept of Circumcision; wherefore, Beloved, consider, and
see how your Bishops seduce you with things that have no proof; Christ said in
the 11th of Luke, Give Alms of those things that remain, but he said not, Give
the Tenth of the Goods ye possess, etc. Acts and Mon. vol. 1. fol. 860. Col. 2.
in Hen. 5. days.

But the first that restrained peoples freedom in this kind, was the Council
under Pope Alexander the third, Anno 1180. by whose time much Wickedness and
Idolatry was crept in among them, as History relates.

But the most strictest decree was made at the Council of Trent, under Pope
Pius the fourth, about the year 1560. they commanded Tithes to be paid under
the penalties of Excommunication. About the years 800, 900, and 1000. and
after, Tithes were called the Lord's Goods: So here was the rise of Priests
Tithes which for many hundred years they held Jure Divino, as they said, which
ever since they have exacted against the Law of God and right reason, and have
not only robbed God, but the poor also; and therefore is every Parish forced,
to keep the poor from starving, unto whom (if any) the Tithes do most properly
belong; and yet though the Priests go away with the Tithes, it is very hard, in
many places, to get them to contribute any thing to the Poor-Tax, manifesting
their Charity far short of the Levitical Priests, who formerly out of the
Tithes maintained the Widows and Fatherless, etc. and consequently far beneath
the Ministers of the Gospel: And furthermore, did ever any, either of the
Levites or Ministers of the Gospel sue any people at Law, that separated from
them, for Maintenance? nay, was ever such inhumane actions known from the worst
of the Merchants of Babylon (let History testify) as to tear four or five
times so much as they pretend their due, from them who do not like their Wares,
and troubles them for nothing; nay, Baalam, though he loved the wages of
unrighteousness; yet he durst not take it, but these are not contented with
three times so much, which modesty would blush to appear in; if these be not
the greedy dumb Dogs which Isaiah spoke of, which can never have enough, I know
not where they are, Isa. 56. 10, 11, 12.

The withholding of these pretended dues, at farthest, is but a ^^^spass
against them, and it is their manner often to pray to the ^^^d, to forgive them
their trespasses, as they forgive them that (...) against them, etc. Now let
the honest hearted judge, (...) they forgive such as trespass against them,
when they (...) the utmost rigor of the Law against such as trespass against
then, yea or nay? How do these men think to be forgiven of the Lord? For, says
Christ, if ye forgive men their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will forgive
you your trespasses; but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will
your Heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses, Matthew. 6. 14, 15. And Peter
said, Lord how often shall my Brother sin against me, and I forgive him, till
seven times? Jesus said unto him, I say not unto thee, until seven times, but
until seventy times seven, Matthew. 18. 21, 22. So if these Priests could really
prove that Tithe was their due, the withholding of them is but a trespass
committed against them once a year at farthest; now if Christ would not allow
of Peter's forgiving his Brother seven times, but would have him forgive him
seventy times seven, which is Four hundred and ninety times; what kind of
Christians are they who take treble revenge at least, and oftentimes five times
for every trespass against them? this is so far from Christianism, that Jews
and Turks would blush at it. Thus far it was laid upon me to give this short
Testimony against this abominable Oppression, under which many groans at this
day, that if possible the ears of people might be opened, and that they may see
how they have been blinded with things that have no Foundation, nor color from
the Scripture; and they who pretend the Scripture to be their Rule, may see
that they walk beside their pretended Rule, in either paying or receiving
Tithes as any Gospelright; therefore are they justly condemned and reproved by
their own Rule, which will for ever stand a witness against them, both in that,
and all other ungodly practices by them upheld at this day, for which they have
not the least color of Scripture to vindicate them therein.

Ambros Rigge.

Postscript.
I Could not let this little Book pass without annexing hereunto some few of
the Bonner like practices of Leonard Letchford, Priest of Hurst-Pierpoint, who
calls himself a Gospel-Minister, which within this seven years last past he
has done against Ambros Rigge for his obedience unto the Commands of Christ,
as before is expressed. And secondly, of the proceedings of the aforesaid
Letchford against Ambros's wife, because she could not in conscience pay him
Tithe, for the causes aforesaid, as knowing it no Gospel right.

To the first, it always has been the practice of the spirit of Antichrist,
the better to effect its mischievous purposes, to destroy and root out the
Flock of Christ's Fold; first to clothe them with Wolves skins, and then to set
the Dogs and Lions to devour and tear them to pieces.

Now in the year 1662, and since, this spirit has manifestly appeared in the
aforesaid Letchford; for when by the spiritual Weapon he could not at all
defend himself, as a Minister of Christ ought to do, he stirred up the Rulers
in Hurst, aforesaid, as knowing aforehand that for Conscience the said Ambros
could not swear, to tender him the Oath of Allegiance, on purpose to ensnare
him, for the refusal of which he was committed to Horsham Goal the 28th day of
the 3d Month aforesaid; after the said Letchford had effected this, he, with
George Vinter Priest of Cove-old, clothed the said Ambros with a reproach, as
though he had run away from his Wife and Children in Lincolnshire, and had left
them to the Parish; which when this report was spread, it was asked George
Vinter, who formerly was said to be a Lincolnshire man, out of what Town the
said Ambros run away; who before witness said, out of the Town of Eagle, which
after Examination proved an abominable Lie; for the best part of twenty persons
of the Town of Eagle in Loncolnshire, with several Officers both of their
Church and others, who had lived in the said Town, some twenty some forty, some
fifty years, and never knew any such man as Ambros Rigge live there in all
their time, as may appear by a Certificate given under their hands, yet to be
seen; yet these two Priests by these and other abominable Lies and
aggravations, got the Judge, at the Assizes following, to condemn the said
Ambros in a praemunire, at which Assizes Letchford appeared in person as one of
the fiercest of Ambros's Accusars, saying, he would aggravate the matter, at
which words the Judge reproved him, and stopped his mouth; so after he had got
what he then saw was possible against Ambros, he afterward stirred up the
Magistrates and the Jailer to add as much affliction to his Bonds as he could;
by the which R. Luckin, then Jailer, to whom he wrote many threatening Letters,
if he would not be severe toward Ambros, and keep him close; so that the said
Luckin said, that they would hang Ambros if they could, and seeing it his
opportunity to act his will upon him, and several others in prison with him for
Conscience sake, called them into the Wards, and begun, in the first place, to
deny them small Beer, unless they would give six shillings a Kilderkin for that
which was sometimes worse then water; and because Ambros, and others, could not
uphold that Oppression, was forced to drink water well nigh a year and a half;
and to try Ambros further, Luckins turned him into the low Goal among the
Fellons, and there kept him his own pleasure; and in the Winter following, when
the Frost and Snow lay thick upon the ground, the Jailer shut up Ambros again
in the middle Ward, and took away his Bed, and forced him to lie upon the
Boords for many weeks together, being close locked up, and would hardly suffer
his Friends to bring him food, and as difficult many times for him to get water
to drink; in all which trials and exercises the Lords presence was not wanting
to him, which made all these trials seem joyous unto him; it was not long after
but the said Jailer died. After him came John Moorcock to have some rule,
though but a Servant in the Prison, unto whom L. Letchford wrote a Letter, to
stir him up against the said Ambros, giving the flattering titles of Master
Moorcock, who being of as bad and wicked spirit as himself, was easily induced
by him to cruelty; in answer to which the said Moorcock, about the 8th hour at
night, in the depth of the next Winter, made a mutiny in the Town of Horsham,
pretending the Quakers had broke out of Prison, and raised a great Company with
Clubs and Staves, and brought them up to the upper Ward where Ambros was at
work, and without any occasion given them, they seized upon him, pulling and
haling him down stairs into the lower Ward, among the Fellons, where Moorcock
himself put great Irons upon him, and left him in that condition many days and
nights, which continued so long as the said Moorcock continued in any Office in
the Prison; and when Letchford saw that would not do his business, he writ a
grievous Letter to the Sheriff against Ambros, and spurred up the Magistrates
against him, who were more wise then to give much ear unto him, though he could
never justly lay any thing to Ambros's charge, that he had either wronged the
King or any man upon the earth; but only because he would not break the Command
of Christ to Swear; whom the said Letchford often threatened with the Gallows,
both in word and writing, and sought many ways to bring it to pass; but
hitherto the Lord has chained him by his mighty Power, glory and praise be
unto his name forever.

And when he saw that all these devices and strategems failed him, he pretends
to have Tithes due from Ambros his Wife, against whom he employed several rude
Bailiffs; and when they did not prosecute her to his mind, he turned Bailiff
himself, and joined himself to a rude, swearing, brutish Fellow, who, with
himself, pursued Ambros his wife, till they took her, who caused her to be set
upon the Bailiffs Saddle, and with mocking and jearing sent her along in the
man's Saddle to Horsham Prison to her Husband; and at the Assizes got two of his
kindred to swear falsely against her, whereby he proved eight pounds due to him
from her, as he pretended, for the levelling of which, he the said Lechford,
hearing that Ambros and his Wife had hired a Room or two, and had some Goods
for their necessary use in Horsham, sent four Bailiffs, who entered into the
said Rooms in Leonard Letchfords name, with an Execution in the name of Mary
Luxford, who brake, and spoiled, and robbed the said Ambros Rigge of Goods to
the value of thirty pounds; yea, they carried away Ambros's proper goods, which
he bought for his use in the Prison several years before, leaving not so much
as a Bed to lie upon in the Winter season; which goods aforesaid, Robert Ride
Bailiff of Horsham sold, at his own price and time, of which he would never
render any Account, though he was often required, and several times promised he
would; but the last time he was sent unto, he sent word, that he must have more
goods for Letchford from Ambros; and afterward one of Horsham asked Ambros, if
Letchford had not robbed him of more Goods? saying, that Letchford was heard to
say, that he would never leave off till he had undone Ambros; which though the
party was one of his own Judgment, could not but condemn him herein.

Afterward, this Letchford hearing that the King was like to take some pity of
Ambros, with many others, who had suffered many years strait and close
imprisonment, having nothing to charge them with, but obedience to the Commands
of Christ, he, with others, not unknown, stirred up all the power they could,
and got several hands to sign a Paper, representing Ambros to the King, a
turbulent Ringleader of the Sect of the Quakers, and a Stranger in the
Country, and not fitting to have liberty, thinking thereby to strengthen his
Bonds by these aggravations. Oh, that all who had any hand in this wicked
Return, may find repentance thereof before they go hence, lest it stand
recorded against them in the day of Account; for it was the same spirit that
accused Paul to Felix, Acts 24. 5. who said, they found him a pestilent Fellow,
a mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughout the World, and a Ringleader
of the Sect of the Nazarens: the same spirit also called the Lord of Life, the
Prince of Devils; and the Servant is not greater then his Lord; for if they
have called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how much more them of his
household. And this Priest, Nebuchadnezar like, has caused the Furnace to be
heat seven times hotter, then for false Swearers, who is but to remain a year
in Prison; but seven years imprisonment is accounted too little by him, for
those who cannot Swear at all, to break the Command of Christ; good were it for
such Persecutors of the Innocent, that their Cradles had been their Graves; for
then had not the cry of Oppression followed them to Judgment, which in every
Age of the World was the overthrow of the Oppressors, and pulled down the Wrath
of God upon their heads, and if they were to go into everlasting punishment, in
the days of Christ, that did not visit and refresh the least of his Servants
in Prison, what will become of them that sends Robbers to take away the goods
of the Servants of Christ which they provided to supply their wants in Prison?
such actions is scarcely heard of among the Heathens: Is this the way to
convince gainsayers? did ever either Christ or any of his Ministers use this
way of gathering the lost Sheep of Israel, though he had all Power in Heaven
and Earth given him, that he might rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron? were
ever Prisons, Gibbets, Stocks, Fire or Faggot to restrain or destroy the Bodies
of the worst of Heretics, ever used or commanded to be used by Christ or any
of his Ministers on Earth? you who so much pretend the Scripture to be your
Rule; what Examples have you therein of these things from the Ancient and true
Christians? but is not the Heathen Kings and Emperors, both in the Scriptures,
and the several Popes, and their Antichristian Clergy, since the Scriptures
were written, your pattern for these things? If you could prove those to be in
Error whom you so falsely accuse, the way that you take with them would but more
harden them therein; for it is a great dishonor to a Christian Nation to
oppress and abuse the worst Infidel in the World.

And have not you kept some of the Servants of Christ in Prison well nigh seven
years, whom you have judged Deceivers? now since their commitment and
confinement, how often have you sent your Ministers to convince them? Is not
your whole Flock of Clergy able to do it? If you had had the least love to
their Souls you would have traveled and labored night and day, by sound
Doctrine and Arguments, to have put to silence the ignorance of the foolish and
deceived, if you could have proved them such; if you had warred with them with
the Sword of the Spirit; viz. The Word of God, and have defended your selves by
that, we should have believed you had been sent of God, and guided by his
Spirit, but we see you are short of the Papists, who are gross Idolaters, for
before they delivered those they counted Heretics to the Secular Power to be
punished, they sent their Priests often to admonish them, and to convince them
by Arguments. From all these your proceedings we are bold to conclude, that if
there were no more Tithes and great Benefices in your Parishes to be reaped,
then there is at Horsham Goal, you would be as seldom seen there, as you were
in the Prison aforesaid, and have as little care over your Flocks, as you have
of them there. Oh, that you would consider what you are a doing, before it be
too late; for the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive with you; large
has been the day of your Visitation, which you have most grievously abused:
The Jews Chief Priests did think they had done well when they persecuted the
Servants of Christ, who had more color of Scripture for what they did, then
you have; therefore are ye more inexcusable before the Lord.

R. T.

THE END.

