A PREMONITION TO THE Bishops and Priests OF ENGLAND, etc.
With Twenty Reasons why the People of God in Scorn called Quakers do Refuse to
hear them.
GOD Almighty at sundry times and in diverse manners, has appeared to warn you
of his Wrath and sore displeasure, which has several Years hung over your
heads; even ready to be revealed from Heaven upon you for your manifold
abominations and Oppressions, the Cry of which has reached to Heaven; and
therefore has the God of mercy (who delights not in the destruction of the
wicked) put his word in the Mouths of his Servants and Messengers, who early
and late in word and writing, Year after Year, and Time after Time, have
exhorted you to cease to do Evil, and learn to do Well and to break off your
abominable Wickednesses and cruel Oppressions (under which the Land mournes) by
speedy and unfeigned Repentance, but you have hitherto despised, evil-intreated
and Persecuted his Messengers, and rejected his Word, till even now the wrath
of the Lamb is kindled against you, from which none can deliver you; for you
have provoked him (who delights in mercy) to wrath and jealousy days
without number, your Pride, Covetousness, Drunkenness, Whoredoms among you,
Lying, Swearing, Oppression, and lording it over God's Heritage, and forcing
Thousands to walk in the broad way to destruction with your selves (whom you
can prevail withal) is Recorded as with a Pen of Iron, and point of a Diamond:
Oh! my Heart is Rent because of the misery and sore destruction which God, will
bring upon you and your Posterity if you and they still harden your Hearts
against him, and my wrestlings are often with the Lord, not to pour forth the
vials of his wrath upon your Head, but rather give you penitent Hearts, if you
have not sinned out your Day: Oh! that there were such an heart in you as would
strip you out of your Pharisaical long Robes, and cloth you with Sackcloth and
Ashes upon your Heads, and cry mightily unto God, as the Men of Nineveh did,
that God may turn from you his fiery Indignation and sore displeasure, that is
ready to flame in fury against you; for your Repentance and not your
Destruction is the earnest desire of my Soul: Oh! that you knew in this your
day, the things that belong to your Peace with God, but the Day is very near
wherein they will be hid from your Eyes, for God's Spirit will not always
strive with you, as it has hither to done, neither will the place of
Repentance be always in your sight, which when hid, you shall seek Death and
shall not find it, and shall say in the Morning, would God it were Evening, and
in the Evening, would God it were Morning, for the dread and horror that shall
compass you on every side; then shall he that sits in Heaven laugh at your
Calmity, and stand far off from you when your fear comes, even as pain upon a
Woman that travaileth, for you have over-passed the deeds of the wicked; the
Land even stinks through your abominations, you have long fed your selves with
the Fat of this Land, and clothed your selves with the Wool, that you are more
like Sodomites then Christians, but you have killed, and cruelly Persecuted
those that God has fed with Bread from Heaven, like the false Shepherds of
Israel, whom God by the Mouth of Ezekiel cried woe against, Ezekiel 34.2, 3, 4. Oh!
what will you do in the end of these things, when the God of Righteousness
shall require his Flock at your Hands? What has People profitted under you
this many Years? Do not both them and yourselves grow worse and worse, you
deceiving, and they deceived? but if you had stood in the Counsel of God, and
had been Authorized by him, and had caused People to hear his word of Faith in
their Hearts, then had you been as so many lustrous Stars in the Firmament of
his power forever, but now you are left as Wells without Water, Clouds carried
about with a Tempest; for a little Storm will drive you East or West, North or
South, yea, wandering Stars, to whom (unless you speedily Repent) is reserved
the blackness of utter Darkness forever.

For the Light of the glorious day of God's power you have woefully hated, and
have loved Darkness rather, by reason of your Evil deeds; and you have shut the
Kingdom of Heaven against many, yea, even all whom you can prevail withal, by
hateing, slighting, and setting at naught the Key of David, which should open
the Door of entrance unto it, and yet would take it by the force and strength
of your earthly Wisdoms and brain. Knowledge, but this know, that neither
Fornicator, nor Adolterer, nor Idolator, nor the unclean has any part or
portion in it, 1 Cor 6.9, 10. Ephesians. 5.3, 5. but the Darkness which they have
loved in their life-times shall be their lot and portion forever, with the word
UTTER annexed to it, unless they Repent and turn unto the Light with which
Christ Jesus has enlightened them, and love it, and walk in it in your
life-times, which hitherto many of you Priests have most wretchedly despised
and blasphemed against.

Therefore, oh ye Bishops and Priests, and all your Judges and Officers, whose
proceedings are corrupted, who have taken the sheaf from the hungry, and have
not bound up the broken hearted, nor relieved the OpPressed, if ye will not
hear nor lay these things to Heart, the Lord will spread Dung upon your Faces,
and will make you a Hissing, and a Byword of of Reproach to Generations to
come, for your Iniquities are almost full, and you are daily heaping up Wrath
against the Day of wrath, they who work Wickedness are set up and Countenanced
among you, and they that tempt God every day are even delivered, and counted
your great Church Members, and Communicants; but they who reprove Iniquity in
the Gate, are grievously drawn before your Judgment Seats, and made a Prey
upon, both in their Persons and properties, which was never Christ's, but
Antichrist's way of Convincing gain sayers.

And how do you lead many blind to Destruction, by forcing them under the
penalty of Excommunication to eat and drink their own damnation; if it be
matter of Damnation to eat at your table without Faith in it, how many have you
drawn before your Judgment Seats, because they come not to your Sacrament, are
you certain they have examined themselves according to the Apostle's command, 1
Cor. 11.28. or do you know them to be worthy, or discern the Lord's Body? or do
you discern it your selves, without which, whosoever eats or drinks, does
it unworthily to his own damnation, verse. 29. And how can you ever stand clear
before the Seat of divine Justice, who force men under severe Penalties,
contrary to the persuasion of their own Hearts after Examination (by which many
have found their unworthiness) to eat and drink their own Damnation, or else
they must be cursed out of your worshipping Houses, and cast out of the Society
and company of their Friends and loving Neighbors? Oh! the Cry of these things
is loud, was this ever Christ or the Apostles way and manner toward them who
opposed them? did not Christ command his to bless their very Persecutors? And
did not the Apostle forbid the Saints to Curse? Romans 12.14. And did not the
Apostle James say, that out of one Mouth should not come blessing and curssing?
James 3.10. And was ever any forbidden to buy or sell, or have Society amongst
men, but only by the Power of the Beast spoken of by John, Revelation 13.16,
17. who made War with the Lamb and the Saints; now let the wise Judge who is
your example in your Court-proceedings, whether Christ or Antichrist according
to your professed Rule, viz. the Scriptures.

And if you prevail upon any, who through Fear of your Whip do outwardly
conform to your Worship, contrary to the Persuasions of their own Hearts; do
not you thereby make them Hypocrites, and twofold more the Children of the
Devil then before? God has turned the Hearts of many from you, and has
commanded them to offer a Sacrifice to him out of the Borders of Egypt, even in
the Wilderness, which is toward the Red Sea, in the Way to the Land of Canaan,
and your Pursuit of them here, will be to your own overthrow, as it was
Pharaoh's. Oh consider what you are a doing by your Courts and Proceedings; is
it not to draw them into Egypt again, whom God by the Cords of his infinite
Love has drawn into the Land of Goshen, where they enjoy and possess Light in
their Dwellings, and have forever turned their Backs of Egypt's Land, having
set their Faces Zion-ward, and are come to the Father's House (i e.) The true
Light) where they have Bread enough, yea, of the living Bread which is come
down from Heaven, by which they are nourished up to Eternal Life, so that your
Husk they utterly refuse, which you sell at a costly Rate, with which no weary
Soul can ever be, nor never was satisfied.

Therefore touch them not I charge you by the God of Heaven, nor offend the
least among them; for they are near and dear unto the Lord, and he tenders them
as the Apple of his Eye; and no Weapon formed against them shall ever prosper;
are you still so blind, as not to consider your ill Success in this Undertaking
this many Years? methinks you should have as much Wisdom as Gamaliel had, to
say, Let them alone, if they be of God they will stand, if not, he will
overthrow them, lest hapily you be found Fighters against God, Acts 5.34, 35,
36, 37, 38, 39. And you should consider the Parable of the Wheat and Tares, how
that the Lord of the Household of Faith would not suffer his Servants to pluck
up the Tares, but commanded that they should grow among the Wheat to the End of
the world, though he declared them to be the Children of the wicked one, Mat.
13.18. to the 44th verse. He was not of your Mind, to root them out from the
Earth, though he infallibly knew them to be sown by the Enemy, which you do not
pretend unto, and therefore cannot discern between the Children of God and the
Chidren of the Devil, but call Good Evil, and Evil Good; and put Light for
Darkness, and Darkness for Light, as your Forefathers did in the Days of old;
But if you fall upon that Rock you have so long stembled at, you will be
broken; but upon whomsoever it falls, it will grind him to Powder: Therefore
dread the Majesty of the great God of Heaven, at whose Rebuke all the Mountains
of the Earth tremble and are moved; and howl all ye idle Vine-dressers, whose
Vineyards are overgrown with Weeds; the Lord of the Vineyard is come to look
for Fruit, and behold* there is little among you, but bitter, four and
ill-tasted Fruits, your Vine is the Vine of Sodom, and your Grapes the Grapes
of Gomorrah, and the Lord of the Vineyard will cast you out as unprofitable
Servants, and idle Shepherds, unless you weed out all the Briars and Thorns,
and then, which of you can escape; for the best among you, who are guilty of
Persecution, are as a Bryar, and sharper then a Thorn-Hedge, from which no
pleasant Grapes can be expected, so that by your Fruits you are known, and not
by your Words, Mat. 7.2, 3. for you have got the good Words and the fair
Speeches, by which you deceive the Hearts of the simple; and if Covetousness be
Idolatry which none questions, then, who are greater Idolaters then your
selves? of whose covetous Practices the whole Nation is full, having a Cloud of
Witnesses in every parish. And how can you call your selves spiritual Persons,
when you so much resist the Spirit of Truth, and contemn those who own and
witness it to be their Guide and Leader into all Truth? for none can truly be
spiritual Persons, but who by the spirit of Truth are made so; for all men
naturally are carnal, sold under Sin; and none can judge for God, but they who
are led by his Spirit.

Now if you were led by the Spirit of God, you would let People alone to be
persuaded by it, in things relating to another world, whose Fruits have no bad
Aspect on the affairs of this, and especially they who desire nothing more then
to live a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty; but by
oppressing such, you not only seek the Destruction of their Souls, but of their
Bodies also; and if such be not ravening wolves there was never any in the
world.

And as your Fore Fathers did, so do ye begin at the wrong End, instead of
being a Terror to Evil doers, you make your selves such to them that do well,
and let Drunkards, Liars, Swearers, Whoremongers and Adulterers go free, which
God will judge, and because of these and many mroe Abominations the Land now
mourns; and there is but a small Remnant that fighs and mourns for all the
Abominations that are committed therein; but the great Number lives wantonly
upon the Earth, and kill the just one, and cruifie afresh the Lord of Glory,
putting him to open Shame, and give Occasion to the Adulterers of Foreign
Nations to blaspheme the Name of the God of Israel, which he will require at
your Hands.

And why do you suffer Foreign and other Cheats to come in and set up
Stage Plays in open Streets of Cities and Towns, whereby the Name of God is
dreadfully blasphemed, and youth and old ge woefully corrupted and debauched.
Oh! what will you do? or where will you appear when God arises to take
Vengeance for these things? My Soul is even bowed down at the Consideration of
these things, and often mourns in secret for the Abomination of Desolation,
which now stands where it ought not, therefore let him that reads understand.

And Nation is now appearing against Nation and Kingdom against Kingdom, and
Famins, Pestilences and terrible Earth quakes in diverse places, yea, many Signs
in Heaven, and Wonders in the Earth-beneath, of the breaking forth of the wrath
of the Lamb, whose Patience and Long-suffering being slighted, you are not led
to Repentance; but they wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived; even
heaping up Wrath against the day of Wrath, and the revealing of the righteous
Judgment of God.

Even as it was in the Days of Noah, so is it now in the coming of the Son of
Man; for the Earth is filled with Violence, and is corrupted by Iniquity, and
the dark Corners thereof are full of the Habitations of Cruelty, but an Ark is
prepared, and a small Remnant are gathered, and more gathering daily into it,
at the Command of the Lord; the like Figure, whereunto Baptism now saves us,
not the putting away of the Filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good
Conscience, by the Resurrection of Jesus; and now it is fulfilled, that as
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so is the Son of Man lifted up
in the Hearts of his People in this his Day, of whose Government there shall be
no End; and all are and will be accounted his Enemies, that will not suffer him
thus to reign.

But he gives Caesar his due at this Day (viz.) the Government in outward
things; for his Kingdom is not of this world, neither do his Servants fight,
but are made perfect through Suffering, as their Lord and Master was in the
Days of old.

Therefore awake, awake all you who have long laid in Security; for the great
and notable Day of the Lord is dawning, wherein all the proud, yea, and all
that do wickedly shall be as Stubble and the Day that comes shall leave them
neither root not branch; but unto them who fear the Name of the Lord, and
depart from Iniquity, and hate every evil way, shall the Sun of Righteousness
arise with Healing, and shall give them Beauty for Ashes, and the Oil of Joy
for the Spirit of Heaviness, under which they have walked many Years; and the
Cup of Trembling shall be taken out of their Hand, and shall be given into the
Hands of them who oppress them.

And God's Arm is not shortened that it cannot save, neither is his Ear heavy
that it cannot hear the cry of the Poor, and complaint of the Needy, who are
even at this day groaning under the burdens of an oppressed Conscience,
through the cruel unnatural impositions of men, having assumed that to
themselves, which is proper and peculiar to God alone, (viz.) The Government in
spiritual matters relating to another world, this is his honor which he will
not give to another, and if all Judgment be committed to the Son, what place is
left for the Bishops Judges? What Judgment is to them committed? And who gave
them Authority to set Judges over men's Consciences in matters of Faith and
Worship? do not the Scriptures say, that Whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin?
Romans 14.23. And without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. Now do
not you greatly dishonor the Son, who is the only Author and Giver of Faith,
who would impose a Worship contrary thereunto, upon his Servants? is not he
only spiritual Judge of Heaven and Earth, whose Judgment is just, and according
to Truth and Righteousness altogether? and how can you judge of spiritual
Things, if you have not the infallible Spirit, and so not sure of your own
standing, nor of the way you walk in to be Right; and yet Persecute others even
to Life, Liberty and Estate, because they will not walk in your uncertain way?
you presume higher then did the Scribes and Pharisees of old, (though short of
their Righteousness) for they were said but to sit in Moses's Seat, who had a
Legal ministration; but you pretend to sit in Christ's Seat, who has an
everlasting Spiritual Priesthood, and is only Judge of quick and dead:
Therefore down with your pretended spiritual Courts whereby you would limit God
in his Worship, and prescribe his Servants a way, which your selves do not
certainly know to be true, to worship God contrary to the measure of Faith they
have received from God, and let sound honest Judges in Temporal matters between
a Man and his Neighbor be set up in all Cases of difference in temporal
things, and let them be a terror to Evildoers under what Name and Profession
soever; for the Law was made for such, and not for righteous men, have you any
president in the Scriptures, in all the days of the Ministration of Moses, in
the days of Abraham, in the time of the Prophets, or in any of the
Gospel-dispensations, that ever any outward Law with an outward penalty, was
made against them, who did not Worship God in that way and manner, in which he
had appeared in those days? If you cannot, you must either judge them
deficient who had the ministerial Offices in those dispensations, or your
selves to take more upon you, then you have either precept or example for in
the holy Scriptures.

Here follows some of the weighty Reasons why we who are called Quakers, do
deny the Bishops and their Priests to be Ministers of the Gospel, and do refuse
to hear them.
Reason 1. YOU being made Ministers by the Will and Wisdom of Man, and what you
have received being from man, and taught you by man, and not by the Revelation
of Jesus Christ, contrary to the true Ministers in the Days of old, having not
entered in at the Door, but climbed up some other way, therefore we cannot own
you to be ordained of God, nor to be true Shepherds.

Reas. 2. After this wrong Beginning you have been inducted by men into great
Benefices, in every Place, as you could obtain them; and have preached for
Hire, and have spoken a Divination of your own Brain-study in your carnal
Wisdoms, and not from the Mouth of the Lord, as he has taught you, and
therefore have you remained, some Ten, some Twenty Years, more or less, in a
fat Benefice, and have not profited the People at all, Jer. 23.21, 22.

Reas. 3. You like the false Prophets of Israel have every one sought your own
Way, every one for his Gain from his Quarter, Ise 56.10, 11. And moreover, have
run from Quarter to Quarter where was most Gain, and so have made Merchandise
of People through Covetousness, as they did whom Peter testified against, 2
Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. This has manifested to us and all sober People, that you have
the Spirit of Error.

Reas. 4. You have run and the Lord has not sent you, therefore have you
turned none to Righteousness, nor profited the People at all; but if you had
stood in the Counsel of God, and had caused People to hear his Word, which is
Christ, then you should have turned them from the Evil of their Ways, Jer. 23.

Reas. 5. You have fed your selves with the Fat, and clothed your selves with
the Wool, and like Drones have lain within, and have eaten up that which many
have labored hard for, and have persecuted and killed them, who are fed by
Christ the true Shepherd; therefore is the Hand of the Lord turned against you,
and he will wipe you as a man wipeth a Dish, turning it upside down.

Reas. 6. You have born Rule by your Means, and have been called Lords and
Masters, and them who could not give you those flattering Titles, you have
hated and persecuted; and you have loved and strove for the chiefest Places in
the Assemblies, and the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and have gone in long Robes;
and for a Pretense have made long Prayers, being directly such as Christ cried
Woe against, Mat. 23.

Reas. 7. You have come to People in Sheeps Clothing, and through your Good
Words and Fair Sperches have deceived the Hearts of the Simple, but inwardly
are Ravening Wolves; you are known to the whole Nation by your Fruits being
written in great Characters upon your Foreheads (viz.) Pride, Covetousness,
Luxury, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Lying, Swearing, the Abominations of the
Heathen, and therefore are Evil Trees, which have no Promise, but to be hewn
down.

Reas. 8. You have cried Peace to every one that would put into your Mouths and
feed you with Tithes, Gifts and Rewards, but they who have denied you these,
you, like ravening Wolves, have devoured many Widows Houses, and tender Lambs;
and have far exceeded (in making Spoil of Peoples Goods who have received
nothing from you) all the false Prophets that ever I heard or read of, either
in the Scriptures, or any History since the Foundation of the World; and
therefore we cannot own you as true Shepherds, but as ravening Wolves.

Reas. 9. You have not been content with Christ's Wages to his Ministers (viz.)
into whatsoever House ye enter, eat and drink such things as they set before
you; for the Labourer is worthy of his Meat, Luke 10. therefore never truly
sent forth by him, but have gone in the Way of Cain, and after the Error of
Balaam, Jude 11. who erred from the Spirit of God, and then was more blind then
the Ass he rode on.

Reas. 10. You have followed your own Spirits, and have mocked and derided
those that possess the infallible Spirit of Truth, and therefore are Ministers
of the Letter which kills, and not of the Spirit which gives Life; for the
least Measure of the Spirit of Truth is infallible, and never deceived any who
were guided by it, but the whole Body of the Spirit of Error is fallible, and
works with all Deceivableness of Unrighteousness, its Fruits being such as
are mentioned in the nine foregoing Reasons why the Quakers deny the Priesthood
of England.

Reas. 11. You, when you have seen the Wolf come, have fled, and left your
Flocks to be devoured by him, when the Arm of Flesh turned against you; and
therefore are you manifest Hirelings, and not of the true Shepherd, who laid
down his Life for his Flock, John 10.12, 13.

Reas. 12. You have not turned People from Darkness to the true Light,
wherewith Christ Jesus has enlightened every man that comes into the World,
John 1.9. nor from the Power of Satan to the Power of God, whereby they might
witness Remission of Sins, contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of Christ and
the true Ministers of the Gospel, Acts 26.16, 17, 18. but you have kept people
in Darkness, and under the power of Satan; and have preached and made people
believe they must remain under Satan's power all the Days of their Lives, and
consequently have made the Death, Suffering and Blood of Christ of none Effect,
and the Second Covenant of no more Force nor Virtue then the First, nor the
Blood of Christ no better then the Blood of Bulls and Goats, which could not
cleanse from Sin; and therefore you and they dye in your Sins as Christ said to
the Jews, John 8.21.

Reas. 13. You creep into the Idolatrous Houses which were built by the
Papists, and consecrated to Idolatry, and there lead silly men and women
captive, laden with Sin and diverse Lusts, ever learning, and never able to come
to the Knowledge of the Truth, which is Christ the Light of the World, and so
Freedom from Sin, and Eternal Life in Christ is hid from your Eyes, and the Way
of Peace neither the Leaders, nor they who are led know; and therefore we call
you blind Leaders of the blind, as Christ did those who walked in your Steps,
Mat. 15.14.

Reas. 14. You have a show of Godliness, but deny, hate and persecute the Power
of Godliness in all, in whom it is brought forth; and for this Reason also we
turn away from you, according to the Apostle's Doctrine, 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7.

Reas. 15. You are Wells without Water, Clouds carried about with a Tempest;
for when the Storm came and beat upon your Houses, which you upon the Sand had
built, they fell, and you fled at their Fall, and great was their Fall; so you
are Hearers and not Doers, deceiving your own Souls, Mat. 7.26, 27.

Reas. 16. You dip or sprinkle Infants, and cause men and women to promise and
vow, that they shall forsake the Devil and all his works, the pomps and
vanities of this world, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, which you nor
they can never perform; here you are grievous Covenant-Breakers; for neither
you nor they in that state you stand in, can keep God's Holy Will, nor his
Commandments, one Day in all your Lives; and so lay heavy Burdens upon others,
which you will not touch with one of your Fingers, and cause many to break
their solemn Covenant with God, which will be charged to you in the Day of
Account; and so are the Covenant-Breakers spoken of, 2 Timothy 3.3.

Reas. 17. You deny Perfection, and Freedom from Sin in this Life, contrary to
the Doctrine of Christ and his Ministers, Mat. 5.48. Romans 6.18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23. Phil. 3.15. 1 John 4.17. and so make void the Gifts given by Christ at his
Ascension, which were for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.12.13.

Reas. 18. You have kept people in Doubt of their Salvation, in telling them
they must have a Body of Sin as long as they live, and not resolving them where
this Body of sin must be done away, seeing the Scripture says, There is no
Remembrance of God in Death, and in the Grave who shall give him Thanks, Psalm.
6.5. And again Isaiah says, The Grave cannot praise the Lord, nor Death
celebrate him, and they that go down to the Pit cannot hope for his Truth,
Isaiah 38.18. So unless you tell People where or when they shall be made free
from Sin, and prove the same by plain Scripture, you will be seen of all to be
manifest Deceivers, seeing no Unclean Thing shall enter into the Kingdom of
Righteousness.

Reas. 19. You deny Immediate Revelation, and Inspiration by the Spirit of God
at this day, through which the things of God's Kingdom both is and ever was
known, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Job. 32.8. Mat. 16.17. Mat. 11. and 27. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11.
And thereby do keep People from the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, whom he
has sent, whom to know is Life eternal, John 17.3. this again shows you (in
Doctrine) to be contrary to the Apostles and Primitive Christians, who were
Sons and Daughters of God, and led by the Spirit of God, Romans 8.14. So for this
Reason also we deny you, and turn away from you, as being Ministers of the
Letter that kills, and not of the Spirit that gives Life, 2 Cor. 3.6.

Reas. 20. You love to be called Lord-Bishops, and your Priests Master such a
one, and Master such a one contrary to the Scriptures and the Titles of the
Holy men of God therein recorded; for we do not read of Lord Timothy, nor Lord
Titus, though Bishops; nor of Master Paul, nor Master Peter, etc. This again
shows you to be more like the Gentiles, who exercised Lordship over their
Brethren, then Ministers of Christ; but Christ said, it should not be so among
his Ministers, but He that would be greatest should be Servant to all, Mark
10.43.

Southwark, the 24th of the 9th Month, 1676. Your Friend A. R.

THE END.

