A General Epistle to the People of God, in scorn called QVAKRES, in England,
and elsewhere.
Dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters,
UNto whom the visitation of Life in the Son of the Father's Love has reached;
when you were as dry bones scatterred upon the Earth here and there, the
Compassionate Eye of a tender Father was toward you, and his Word breathed
Life unto you, giving you Knowledge and Understanding: And gathered you
together to be his Household of Faith, in this latter Age of the world. The
Salutation of my dear and unfeigned, fatherly and brotherly Love at this time
extends it self freely unto you all, in the heavenly unity of that one Spirit
of Life, by which we were first quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins
as well as others: Oh that Grace, Mercy, Love and Truth, with all the Fruits of
Righteousness may grow, increase, and be abundantly multiplied in and amongst
you all, this my Soul daily breaths to the Lord on your behalf, who are heirs
together of the Grace of God, being planted into the likeness of his Son, to
bear his heavenly Image, and as Living Members, fitly joynted and framed
together under one Head, to be a complete Body in him; you are as Living
Epistles written with the Spirit of the Living God in one another Hearts, who
lives and moves in your Integrity, and continues in your first Love without
wavering, here you daily have and receive Mercies and Blessings from above,
with a daily increase of Life and Virtue in your Bosoms, whereby your strength
is renewed as the Morning, and you need go no more forth: for your Bread is
sure in your own Houses, and Springs of Water in your own Wells. My Soul
blesses God in the Remembrance of you, who are made Living Monuments of his
Mercy, and are daily waiting for the Consolation of Isreal's God, who in this
his glorious Day is fulfilling his ancient Promise in manifesting him, whose
Voice is not heard in the Streets, yet ordained of God to bring forth Judgment
to the Gentiles, and to be their Light and Glory, and this we are Witnesses of
in our day, through the tender mercy of our God in visiting us with his ancient
Gospel day springing from on high, who sat in darkness as well as others, and
were by nature the Children of Wrath; When we thus laid poluted in our Blood,
he said unto us, Live, and his Word was an everlasting Covenant. Oh! let all
who are made pertakers of so great Love and Mercy, live in the daily
Remembrance thereof, and walk worthy of so great Salvation in all Humility and
Godly Sincerity, as Lights in the world, that your good Works to them may
appear daily, which are the proper effects of that living Faith you have from
God received, by this alone your Faith will be seen to live, and you in it, for
all the Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works is dead also;
And being planted into the likeness of him who is from above, you may bear his
Image, and be clothed with his Righteousness, for no other Covering will hide
your nakedness from the World, nor keep your Beauty and Comeliness in the sight
of God.

And now my beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters, who are of the Household of
Faith, seeing the Lord has chosen you to place his great Name in, by the
Revelation of his Son, which Ages and Generations before you knew not, as sound
and honorable Vessels in the House of the Lord keep your places and station,
and let your Chaste Conversation coupled with fear and gravity in every place
where you dwell, be seen and known unto all men, for to this purpose were you
called and separated from the Ways, Worships, and evil Customs of this present
world, to be the first Fruits in the Lord's Vineyard, which he has planted
with his right hand in a very fruitful Hill; Oh! wait for his watering from on
high, which will be known and witnessed as your own Hearts are kept empty and
open unto him, for he is waiting to be gracious and bount^ful to his chosen
Seed, Flock and Family every where, who keep his Word and Covenant, to them he
is and will be as the shadow of a mighty Rock, though in a weary and desolate
Land.

But he will sift the Nations in the Sieve of his Wrath, who have despised his
Word, Grace, Life and Consolation, which is the Root and moving cause of all
true Worship and Service to him; This the Cornerstone which Babel's Builders
have rejected as useless to them, and thinks to reach Heaven without it, this
will bring Confusion upon all Religions on Earth* if they continue rejecting
this Stone, their buildings, though never so high, will fall, for the Judgment
of the great Whore is come, who has made Nations drunk with her glittering Cup
and the fall of Babylon as a Millstone into the Sea is at hand, and all her
Lovers who have made Merchandise of the Souls of men, shall mourn and be
astonished at her destruction.

And now my beloved Friends and Brethren as the Lord has called us out of her,
and has opened our Eyes to see her Whoredoms and Abominations among all sorts
of Professions, whose Hearts and Minds are adulterated from God, though in
words they make a large profession of him, yet in Works deny him; This is
Atheism in nature, look not back at her again, nor stay with her in her
Suburbs, neither let any thing of her Language, Customs or Nature remain, for
that will lead to depart from the living God and his heavenly Jerusalem, to the
love of her again, who is the Mother of Harlots and Abomination of the Earth.

Oh! the exceeding Riches of the Father's Love, who has not called us unto
Wrath, but to obtain Mercy, in turning every one of us from our Iniquities, who
have loved and obeyed his Truth. Therefore as dear Children of one Father, let
us live in all humble subjection unto him, who has begotten us again unto a
living hope by the Word of his Power, to be the first Fruits unto his Glory in
these latter Ages of the World, in which he will be glorified, in, by, and
through us, or without us: For of Stones he can raise up Children unto Abraham,
who shall glorify his Name in the day of their Visitation, by walking in his
Light and Covenant. But if we walk in the Light as Children of the day, in
watchfulness, sobriety and honesty, we shall keep our holy Union and Fellowship
one with another, without Jar or Strife, Debate or Contention, and the Blood of
Jesus Christ his Son, we shall daily witness to cleanse us from our Sin, and
then the good purpose of the Lord will be answered in visiting us with his
heavenly Gospel day, which dawned and sprung in our hearts, by which the Seat
of Antichrist has been discovered, and the hidden things of Esau brought to
light, which nothing could manifest but the arising and appearance of the Son
of Righteousness in the Hearts of the Sons of men, by this Gospel-day with
which God has visited us, is all false Spirits upon the Earth discerned, and
every deed of darkness manifested, yea the very Seat of Antichrist discovered.
In the first breaking forth of this day God made us a willing People, and put
upon us the Helmet of Salvation, and girded us with the Sword of the Spirit,
and made us able to War with the Dragon and his Power, and through Faith gave us
many and great Victories, yea we were made more then Conquerers.

Oh! the sweet remembrance of this day is now with me, who am warned to warn
you, to live in a daily sense and consideration of the height, depth, breath
and length of the love of God, and his tender mercy to us ward, who are by
Nature Children of Wrath as well as others, and sat in darkness and in the
region of the shadow of death; And when we recount the vile sort of men, we can
say such were some of us, but God has mercifully washed our Garments in the
Blood of his dear Son, and has put upon us the Garments of Praise for the
Spirit of heaviness, which surrounded us in the long and dark night of
Apostasy, which has been over the world for Ages and Generations before we had
our beings; but the Darkness is past, and the true Light now shines. Oh! that
the remembrance of that exceeding Riches and kindness which God has manifested
in us, may ever be with us, and that we may walk worthy of so high a Calling in
all holy Conversation and Godliness, for to this end were we called and
separated from among many, to be the first Fruits unto God in this latter age
of the world, and hereby will his Name be renowned throughout the world by us,
as we daily walk in a holy Conversation coupled with fear, lowliness, and
tenderness, for so is our subjection to him manifested, and the same Witness
which we have received be reached and raised in the Hearts and Consciences of
the Sons of men* who will not otherwise be reached, and they will bless God on
our behalf in the day of their visitation. But if any walk loosely, and let go
the Girdle of Truth, and begin to eat and drink with the Drunkards, and to
contend with, or beat their fellow Servant, or draw back into a fleshly
liberty, whereby the Cross of Christ is thrown aside, neglected and despised,
the Lord of that Servant will appear in a day when he is least aware of him,
and appoint him his Portion with Hypocrites, where is weeping forever. For God
will not now be mocked with any People or Profession; they who sow to the Flesh
shall dye, wither and inherit Corruption, but they who sow to the Sperit of
Truth, and walk in its Law, shall live and flourish, and reap Life and Virtue
daily; For its Ministration is the last and greatest the world shall be visited
withal, whereby Life and Immortality shall again appear to all Nations,
Kindreds, and Tongues upon the face of the Earth; if they receive and walk in
it, for it is ordained of God to be the guide of Life to all the Sons and
Daughters of Adam, to lead them out of the fall into the way of Peace, and
shall fulfill the last and great Prophecy, Rev. 21. 24. That the Nations of
them that are saved shall walk in the Light of the Lamb, and the Kings of the
Earth shall bring their glory and honor unto it, and the Glory and Honor of
the Gentiles shall be brought unto it, ver. 26. This is begun to be fulfilled
in the Earth, and many are come and coming to the brightness of his rising,
whose coming is as the Light which arises in the East and shines to the West,
that none may be left unvisited with this glory; but all who shut their Eyes
from this glorious Sun shall have no benefit by his appearance, but shall
stumble and fall, and rise no more unto Life, Peace, and Salvation, and shall
dye in their Sins and perish in their Unrighteousness, for none can have the
benefit either of the Death, Passion, or Resurrection of Jesus, purposed of God
for all mankind, but who does believe, receive and follow him, who went before
and trod the Wine Press alone. And as the rejecting of him in his outward
appearance, was the ruin of the outward Jews even so the dispising of him in
his inward and spiritual appearance will be the ruin and downfall of the
outward Christians, this Testimony I must leave to the world, and it shall live
and be fulfilled when Iam gone hence, no more to be seen.

But you my dearly beloved Friends and Brethren who have accepted of this day,
and have opened your Eyes to ^ehold the glorious Son of Righteousness, which is
now risen wi^h healing in his Wings, let your moderation appear to all men, and
walk honestly as in the day, and keep on your Breast Plate of Faith that the
Enemy wound ^ou not, for your Sincerity is within your Spiritual Armor, in
your holy Mountain where no devourer can come.

And though the Lord has taken Peace from the Earth, where Righteousness
dwells not, and one Mountain rises against another and beat one another to
dust, be not troubled at these things for they must be, and also Famines,
Pestilences and Earthquakes in diverse places, they are but the beginning of
Sorrows, to them who have despised the Mercy and Long-sufferings of the Lord,
and has slighted and neglected the day of their Visitation, which has been
for many years, in which he has strove with them by his Spirit, and has
waited to be good and gracious to the worst of men, but they have not known nor
considered in this their day, the things which belong to their peace. I pray
God it be not hid from their Eyes, but we are commanded to say, whatever
befalls the world, it shall go well with the Righteous in it; therefore stand
still in your Tent doors, and quietly wait to see the Salvation of God through
all these Overturnings which he suffers to be in the Earth.

Often would the Lord have gathered ENGLAND under the shadow of his Wing and
Power, but they [I mean the greater part.] have refused to be gathered, and
hate to be reformed, of this I am a living Witness, they were invited to the
Marriage Supper of the Lamb, but they have made several Excuses, yea wilful and
obstinate refusals to come, which has kindled the wrath of the Master of the
Feast, to say they shall not taste at my Table. And he will invite other Guests
more hungry and willing to come, who shall fill his House: Of this we have, and
may yet be more Eyewitnesses, for ^e is shaking the Earth and Heavens, that
that which is to be shaken may be removed, that the Foundation which cannot be
shaken may remain sure forever. And he will gather his Sheep out of all
Kingdoms, and from all barren Mountains where they have been scattered in this
cloudy and dark night, which has continued for Ages and Generations before us.

Therefore dear Friends, lift up your Heads in the dominion of Gods power, of
which you are made partakers, for your deliverance by it (if you continue in it
to the end) is determined of God, let none expect deliverance by outward might
nor power, that is by the Arm of flesh, for that will fail and wither as the
Gras^. But in Mount Zion is deliverance, according to the Word of the Lord, and
in the Remnant whom he has chosen. So mind not the Busles and Hurryings in the
world, nor the Overturnings among men, for through all these things will the
Lord set up the Kingdom of his beloved Son, which is a Spiritual Kingdom of
Peace and Righteousness.

The Earth was filled with Violence before the Flood, and as it was in the days
of Noah, so it is at the coming of the Son of man, and had Noah joined with the
violence of the Old World, he had been drowned with them, but he loved
Righteousness, and walked in it before the Lord in that Generation; and
therefore the Lord ^ad mercy upon him and delivered him from that general
destruction which drowned the World of ungodly men.

The Earth is now filled with Violence, and corrupted through Iniquity, and the
Lord has begun to visit the Nation with his sore displeasure, therefore to
your Habitation in the Lord, Oh! ye his Israel: And power is given to the
Devourer, who is without to destroy much flesh; The unbaptized in heart shall
fall by the Sword of the Lord, who has resisted his holy Spirit, as did the
uncircumcised in the days of Old; this was, is, and will be the Ruin of all
empty Professions upon the Earth, for he is not a Christian that is one
outward, neither is that Baptism that is outward in the Flesh, but he is a
Christian who is one inward; and Baptism is that of the Heart in the Spirit,
whose praise is not of men, but of God. And the saving knowledge of Christ is
not after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5 16. For henceforth know w^ him so no more, that
is after the flesh, and n^ man knows the things of God but the Spirit of God,
it must be received, and knowledge wai^ed f^r, by and through it, which ^lone
is ordained of God to give to all mankind, knowledge and understanding in
things relating to his Kingdom, it is the Root and Foundation of all true
Religion, and without it there is none true in the Earth, the true Worship
stands in it now as in times past, which shall end the Temple worship, that
stands in bodily exercise; it will be left to be trodden down of the Gentiles,
for it is the outward Court, where the glory of God shines not; but the inward
Court are the Spiritual Worshippers before the Al^ar, where the presence of God
opens Life and the treasury of it to the Soul, which they partake of, who wait
to be renewed in Spirit before the Lord.

And now my beloved Friends and Brethren, as we are made a complete Body in
him, our heavenly Head, let an holy and heavenly Harmony he continued amongst
us, for Unity is our strength, therefore labor to retain and keep it every
where, that every Member of the Body may be nouri^hed and kept alive by virtue
of the Life within, and have a tender care of disjoynting any living Member,
but let all be edified together in Love, and every Member act in its place to
the honor of the Head; and above all, keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace, for so is the Will of God concerning us, that our Sons may be as
Plants growing up in their Youth, walking the Steps of their Fathers, and our
Daughters as Virgins with their Lamps trimed and burning, waiting for the
Bridegroom, and be steadfast in him, and in the Word of his Grace, and keep the
holy order of the Gospel without wavering, and let every wholesome Order that is
established among you, [which is Comely and of good Report] be kept up and
practiced, and keep the Reign of Truth and Power of God over every Evil-doer,
without partiality, so will the Lord crown you with dominion over the power of
darkness every where, for the true Light of which we have born testimony, is
the Seed of the Kingdom of God, which must increase till by it the knowledge of
the glory of God again cover the Earth as the Waters cover the Sea; therefore
cherish this Seed every where, in whomsoever it is arising; for it is the Life
and Power of Godliness, not the form, that must in rich the World with
Righteousness, and fill the Earth with Blessings.

And if we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel, or proclaim any
other Name then that which you have received, and in which you have believed
and found Salvation and deliverance, receive us not into your Houses, for God
is one, and his Name one; and there is not another by which any man can be
saved, and this name is Jesus the Anointed of God the Father, who is now come
to save his People, from [not in,] there Sin, [mark that] for so he was Gods
Salvation in the true Gospel Day, and so we have proclaimed him in our day, and
many have so received him, to whm he has given Power to become his Sons and
Daughters, Servants and Handmaids in his House, who are his Flock and Family,
and has Bread enough, and living Water in their own Vessels, and none need go
no more forth, all holy Praises be given to the Lord, and to the Lamb forever
and ever.

Finally, dear Friends and Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, and the God of Peace be with you all, strengthen, stablish, settle
you upon the Rock of Ages, in full and perfect unity with God, and one with
another, in which I bid you all Farewell, and remain

Reigate in Surrey the 2d. of 9th, Month, 1693. Your true Friend and Brother in
the Bond of Love and Peace, AMBROSE RIGGE*


