To all who IMPRISON and PERSECUTE THE Saints and Servants of GOD, for Meeting
together in his Name and Fear, to Worship him as he Requires.
THe hour comes, and now is, wherein the true Worshippers do worship the
Father in Spirit, and in Truth, who witness the Prophecy of Christ fulfilled,
John 4. 23. And such also do witness with the Servants of God in the days of
old, That God who made the World, and all Things therein, dwells not in
Temples made with Hands, neither is he Worshipped with Men's Hands, Acts 17.
This God is an unlimited Spirit, and therefore his worship cannot be limited to
any particular House or Place. Though a Temple was commanded to be Builded at
Jerusalem once, unto which all the Regions of the Jews were to be gathered, and
to worship; yet when Christ the Son of God came into the World, he Prophesied
the Destruction of it, and said Their House should be left unto them Desolate,
Mat. 23. 38. And for this the Jews slew him. And he gathered great Multitudes,
sometimes upon the Mountains, sometimes by the Seashore, and sometimes in
Houses; And they that were his Ministers, sent forth and Authorized by him, did
not limit People unto such and such Temples and Houses, set up in such and such
Parishes, called Churches; but taught People Publicly, from House to House,
testifying to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward Jesus Christ, Acts 20. 20, 21. And Christ said, Where two or
three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them, Mat.
18. 20. Now he did not limit in what Place People should be gathered together;
for as he was no Respecter of Persons, so he was no Respecter of Places; and
Paul Dwelt two whole years in his own hired House, and received all that came
in unto him, Preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching those things which
concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no man forbidding him, Acts
28. 30, 31. Here was Preaching the Kingdom of God in a House, and a Meeting in
a House, and not forbidden, as it is in these our days; neither was he
Persecuted for Preaching in his own hired House: And the same Apostle did greet
the Church that was in Aquilla and Priscilla's House, Romans 16. 5. And Paul
again writing to the Corinthians, said that the Church in Aquilla's House did
salute them, 1 Cor. 16. 19.

Now here was gathering in Houses in the Primitive times as we may read of,
which was approved of God, and of his Ministers, under the Gospel, and were
not haled out of their Houses by any, except by Saul and the like, who made
havoc of the Church, entering into every House, and haling Men and Women, and
Committed them to Prison, as we may read in Act. 8. 3. Here are many Saul's in
these our days abroad in the World, who go under a better Name, and would be
counted Christians, but are walking in the same steps that saul the Persecutor
of the Saints did, entering into Men's Houses, and haling Men and Women, and
committing them to Prison for Meeting together, in their own Houses, peacoably
to worship the Lord, in Spirit and Truth; and would have them to promise to do
so no more; which I do not read that Saul did do; So you manifest your selves
to be worse than him; And in the days of the Prophet Malachi, They that feared
the Lord met often together, and spoke one to another; and the Lord said, They
should be his, in the day that he made up his Jewels; and Paul Preached unto
the People till midnight, in an upper Chamber, where they were gathered
together, Acts 20. 7, 8. And we do not read that the Magistrates sent
Constables to break up their Meeting, neither did they limit them to a
Parochial Church, as it is now called; and Paul writing to the Colossians,
saluted the Brethren which were at Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the Church, which
in his House, Col. 4. 15.

Now none of these Assemblies were forbidden, neither broken up by rude Men, as
many Christian Assemblies are now, who Meet together for no other end, but to
Worship God in Spirit and Truth, according to the Scriptures of Truth; and Paul
writing to Timothy, said, He willed that Men Pray every where, lifting up Holy
Hands, without Wrath and Doubting, 1 Timothy 2. 8. He did not limit Men to such
and such Places to Pray in, as this Generation of Men do; and Daniel kneeled
down upon his Knees three times a Day in his House, and Prayed, and gave Thanks
before his God, as he did aforetime, though the King had Signed a Writing, and
a Decree to the contrary, Dan. 6. 9, 10, 11. For which he was cast into the Den
of Lions, Dan. 6. 16. Now he could not be subject to the King, nor his Lords,
in forbearing to pray in his own House, though he could suffer what penalty
they inflicted upon him; yet God delivered him out of the Lions Mouths, Dan.
6. 22.

And the Magistrates commanded the Apostles Not to speak at all, nor teach in
the Name of Jesus: but Peter and John answered, and said unto them, Whether it
be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you, more than unto God, Judge
you? for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard, Acts 4.
18, 19, 20. So now, you who are commanding things contrary to the Commands of
God, whether it be right in the sight of God to obey Him, or Ye? judge of this
your selves, this thing is no ways different from what it was in the days of
old: and in Acts 12. 12. Peter came to the House of Mary the Mother of John,
where many were gathered together Praying: this was not called an Unlawful
Assembly by him, neither forbidden, as such Assemblies are now by them, who
prosess themselves Christians and Ministers of the Gospel; but their end shall
be according to their Works, not according to their Words; for they have gotten
the good Words, and the fair speeches, and by them have long deceived the
Hearts of the Simple, but the day is broken forth, which has discovered all
their evil Deeds: Therefore all you Rulers and Magistrates, of what Degree
soever, Take heed what you now are doing; for if this thing which you are now
striving against be of God, you cannot destroy it; but if not, It will come to
nothing of it self. But in the mean time, take heed that you be not Fighters
against God, for in as much as you have done this, to the least of his Children
and Servants, you have done it to him, for so it will be laid to your charge,
in the Day of his Account; Be not High-minded, nor Stout-hearted against the
Lord, nor any of his Chosen Ones, who Assemble together in his Name and Fear,
in Peace with Him and all Men, and Dare not forsake the Assembling of
themselves together, as the manner of some is, lest they should loose the Sense
and Feeling of the Presence of the Lord, which has been often manifested in
their Assemblies.

For always the people of God, for Worshipping of God, were Imprisoned, or
Suffered by such that Imposed things upon them, that they could not Obey, but
Sin against God: Therefore by such they were judged as Transgressors of
Commands and Laws, as the three Children to Nebuchadnezzar, and as Mordecai to
Haman, and the Jews to the Heathen, and the Christians among the Jews and
Heathen, amongst whom they witnessed Christ the Substance; though the thing
that was Just and Equal, and righteous in the sight of God, and all Men for
Conscience Sake, and the Lords Sake, they were willing to obey and yield
themselves to the utmost: And likewise in Queen Mary's days, the Martyrs were
put to death as Rebels, because they could not obey her Laws that compelled to
her Worship, which were contrary to Christ, and the Apostles Doctrine, a^^ the
true Foundation that was laid at the beginning of the Christians; for Christ
and the Apostles did not go on, in the Jews forcing Laws, and putting Men to
Death that opposed them, but stood in that in which they had love to Enemies;
and Christ said, Let the Tares and Wheat grow, and stand till Harvest: for them
that go about to pluck up and persecute, have denied the Exercise of Patience,
and the Doctrine of Repentance, whereby People might have a Space to Repent;
For if the Christians should have put Saul to Death, because he was a
Blasphemer, and because he was a Heretic, and Christ, if he had Banished, or
Imprisoned any, or spoiled their Goods, then the Christians might have had an
Example from the Apostles, and Christ, for Prisoning, and making the
Contrary-Minded to suffer; but that is not Christ's way, but the Jews and
Heathons Way. And as for Meeting together to Worship God in his Fear, that
cannot be Offensive to good Government, and to the Creation, but rather a
preserving of it, for such seek the Peace of all Men, and their Eternal
Welfare and Prosperity; which Ballad-Singers, Stage Players, and all manner of
Plays, and Sports, and Games, these Meetings are not good for the Creation,
nor for a Commonwealth, by which the Name God is so daily Profaned, and
Blasphemed; nor these Meetings we see not broken up by Armed Men, with Clubs
and Constables, but they make such a noise in the Streets, that people can
hardly do their business, or hear one another speak, the Towns are so filled
with Ballad-Singers, and things that tend to the stirring up Strise amongst
People, Mis-naming, and Lying, and Slanderi^^ of them; which its much, that
here should be such as are call Ministers and Bishops, that profess themselves
to be Ministers of Christ, and Preachers of the Gospel, how they can without
much Shame or Blushing walk in the Streets, to see the Wickedness and
Profaneness of their People and Hearers, and see what fruits they have. Surely
though they take upon them these Names and Titles, yet they do not regard the
Apostles, Paul's and Peter's Exhortations: for such things are not of a Good
Report to them, though we can Patiently bear, even as the Lord moves us: For
this we know, That every one that Names the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
should depart from Iniquity.

But as for all Murtherous Plots and Conspiracies against any, We are, and
always have been clear, and Innocent, and in the Srength of the Lord are
resolved to stand clear to the end; for the Weapons of our Warfare are not
Carnal but Spiritual, and our Kingdom is not of this World, neither is it for
an Earthly Crown that we strive: Neither can we rejoice at the destruction of
any, but that all may come to the knowledge of God, and be saved; but if any of
us be found in any Unirghteousness, Invasion, or Insurrection, in any of our
Assemblies, contrary to Truth and Righteousness, in the sight of God and all
good Men, let us suffer accordingly: But you turning your Hand against Meek,
Quiet, Innocent and Harmless Men, and throwing them into Prison, who wrong no
Man, neither in Thought, Word nor Deed, will give a great Occasion to many, and
may turn many against you, which otherwise would not; for if peaceable men
cannot be suffered to live in Peace with God, their Neighbor, and all Men,
what Encouragement will this be to all Plotters, and Peace-Breakers? So
Consider in Meekness, whose Work you are now doing; for the Cry of Innocent
Blood, and the Oppression of such, will be more against you than all your
enemies: many of your progenitors have fallen by such things, by the Stroke of
Gods Hand only, though they whom they Oppressed did never Avenge their own
wrong; yet by such things, and for them did God take an Occasion to vex, and
scourg his and their Adversaries, and cut them off in his hot displeasure.

These things are laid before you in tender Love to your Immortal Souls, that
you may not go on in their steps, less their and be your reward.

This from a True and Faithful Subject in the Kingdom of England, who wishes
it is Peaceable Government in Righteousness called. Ambr^us Rigg.

POST SCRIPT.
ANd the great Noiseis, God save the King, God bless the King, amongst such as
do not fear God, and are not sencible of Gods blessings, nor of his Salvation,
that be out of Gods fear; which they that would have him Savesl and Blessed,
and all Men upon the Earth, such live in the Fear of God, and depart from Sin
and Evil that leads into Destruction from God, from Blessing and Salvation,
and they that live in the Fear of God, know Salvation, know the Blessings, and
would have Him and all Men blessed and saved: but all who live in Sin in
Unrighteousness, in Ungodliness, Cursing, Swearing Drunkenness, and in
Unrighteous Ways, and Corrupt, Wicked, and Perverse and Unholy Lives, such
live out of the fear of God, and yet may say God Bless the King, and God Save
the King, in Deceit, Hypocrisy, and Flattery, and in taking Gods Name in Vain,
being out of his Fear, which grieves them that are in Truth, and the Fear of
God, who can say those Words in the Truth, and would have all that name the
Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, Depart from Iniquity, and who would have him
Saved, and them Blessed, and all Men upon the Earth.

THE END.
Printed for Robert Wilson in Martins Le Grand.


