THE ADVENTURES OF (Mr T. S.) AN ENGLISH MERCHANT, Taken Prisoner by the TVRKS
of ARGIERS, And carried into the INLAND COUNTRIES OF AFRICA: With a Description
of the Kingdom of of ARGIERS, of all the TOWNS and PLACES of Note thereabouts.

Whereunto is added a Relation of the Chief Commodities of the Country, and of
the Actions and Manners of the People.

Written first by the Author, and fitted for the Public view by A. Roberts.

Whereunto is annexed an Observation of the Tide, and how to turn a Ship out of
the Straights Mouth the Wind being Westerly; By Richard Norris.

London, Printed, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little
Britain, 1670.

To his very worthy Friend THOMAS MANLEY ESQUIRE.
Sir,
HEre I send unto you the Memoires of our Deceased Friend, that you have
ofttimes desired to peruse; I hope you will meet in them with that satisfaction
that you do expect; for they contain many useful Observations, adorned with
variety of most pleasant ADVENTURES: They may appear very strange to such as
have seen nothing but their Cradle; with them they may obtain the Credit of a
well humoured Romance: But Sir, You are sufficiently acquainted with the
integrity of the AUTHOR, to cause you to put a higher value upon this Relation;
and I know that you are so well informed of the Proceedings of the African
People, that you will not find in it such incredible Wonders as prejudiced
persons may imagine. Two or three Passages look like Miracles, but they may be
confirmed by several of our Nation, both Merchants and Travelers, that have
seen in those parts the things related; from them any may be further informed.
The Author was not willing to let the world know so much of his Life, had he
not been solicited and almost forced to it by the importunity of those whose
Request he did not dare to deny. Death has carried him another Voyage while he
was writing this, and forced him to leave his Work unperfect in my hands; could
he but return, I doubt not but we might have another Relation from him as
pleasant as this, and no less wonderful.

This Age in which we live is apt to discredit what it understands not, or sees
not acted before its Eyes; but its Malice or Censures will never injure the
Author; he is safe out of the Reach of Envy: So may this his Relation be in the
Protection of so powerful and kind a Patron. I am,

Sir, Your most Faithful Servant, A. ROBERTS.

The Adventures of an English Merchant taken Captive by the Turks of Argiers,
and carried about the Inland Countries of Africa, with many excellent
Observations both curious and profitable.
THere is nothing appears more wonderful than Gods Providence in the Governance
of the World, and in the disposition of Mankind; it carries us through various
Estates, it brings us in Dangers and Miseries, and in a due time leads us out
again by means not discoverable to our shallow foresight; it causes us to meet
with such different Accidents, which some may attribute to Chance; but if we
take the pains to examine and question them, we shall find them to be appointed
by a Divine Wisdom for the Public and our own Advantage: Joseph in Egypt is a
Famous Instance; He was sold by his Brethren, he past through Potiphera's House
to the Common Gaol, and from the next door to the Gallows, he was promoted to
Pharaoh's Elbow, to preserve that Kingdom from the Fury of seven years Famine.
Some it raises from a Cottage to a Throne; it tumbles others down to the most
despicable condition: We may see a Bellisarius the most successeful Warrior of
his time reduced to beg his Bread in that City that he had rescued from the
Enemies hands; A proud Bajazet who makes the World bow to his Scepter, serves
many times for a Footstool to his Enemy. Modern and Ancient Histories are full
of such strange Examples of the Proceedings of Providence, which tend many
times only to fashion and frame us to a certain temper that may make us more
useful in our Generations.

I shall not engage my self to show all the Intrigues, all the Reasons and
secret Actings of Gods Providence, that is the business of a Divine, and not of
one whose Profession is to Trade.

Some of my Friends have earnestly desired me to give the Public an Account of
some Observations that I have made in my Travels into the Inland Country of
Africa, where my Misfortune carried me; I hope that some may make no small
Advantage of them.

My Name will be useless to the Judicious Reader; I will only tell him, That I
was first designed for a Scholar; but an old Pedant soon frighted me from my
Studies by his extraordinary Rigor; he gave me such an aversion for Learning,
which formerly I esteemed, that I could not endure the sight of a Book.

My Estate being that of a younger Brother, and but very small, I was persuaded
next to embrace the employment of a Merchant; therefore I was bound an
Apprentice to a noted Trader in London. After five years abode in his house* he
resolved to send me as his Factor to Smyrna, and other Places within the
Straights.

At that time, in the Year 1648* my Father dies, and my Elder Brother was
killed in our unhappy Troubles. They left me an Estate which might have obliged
me to reside at home, had not the desire of seeing Foreign Places, and the
vainglory of being named a Traveller, with my Masters Commands, forced me
abroad, and to continue in my former Design. Before my departure, I sold some
of my Estate, and bought a Cargo of Goods to the value of two thousand odd
hundred Pounds.

With this and some Goods belonging to my Master, I embarked toward the latter
end of July in a Vessel of Hamborough of 350 Tuns, called the Sancta Maria,
whereof Peter Janson was Master, in the River of Thames.

The Wind favored us very much out of the Channel, and although we met with
contrary Gusts, in 20 days we reached as far as the Cape St. Vincent.

Our Business made us direct our Course toward Cadiz, where we had some Goods
to unload.

As Soon as we came near the Cape, we saw two Ships to Windwards, making all
Sail to come up with us; we began to be jealous of their Intentions, and to
prepare for our Defense. The Decks were cleared, the Guns charged, and every
one had his Place and Office appointed him; we were all between hope and fear,
as in such Cases is usual, until their Colors had satisfied us. Many idle
Conjectures did spread amongst us; some imagined them to be French by the make
of their Ships, others that they were Turks; one wiser than the rest, knew them
afar off, and affirmed them to be Ostenders, the same in which he had formerly
sailed, naming the one the St. Patrick, the other the Capitain. Our distrust
made us seek the shelter of the Land, until at last we saw French Colors out,
and heard a Gun that commanded us to strike Sail. Some of our Company well
acquainted with such Tricks of Pirates, advised our giddy headed Skipper not to
trust their Appearance, but to continue still his Course. But his ill Fortune
and ours would not suffer him to follow such wholesome Counsel, which might have
put him and us out of all danger. For although it was the Morning when the
Chase began, and that the Enemy had won much upon us that day, they could never
have come up to us until Evening; and in the Night we might have made our
Escape, and got into the Harbor. But he had a Design which we never could well
understand. Therefore (...) he commanded to lay by the Wind, until the Ships
came within Call. They came too soon for us; at half a League distance they
discovered themselves to be Turks Men of War by their bloody Colors, which
they put out instead of the White: Then began our Skipper to be amazed, our
Company to be frighted, and every one to bestir himself. I observed a Fellow
who before had some Disease in his Legs and hands much like unto the Gout,
which made him unprofitable all the time of the Voyage, when he saw the danger,
he began to skip about, and handle the Guns as if nothing had ever ailed him.
We had then aboard about a hundred Men with the Passengers of several Nations,
and thirty great Pieces of Ordnance, with other smaller Guns. It had been an
unworthy Act to deliver our selves into the Enemies hands without a stroke,
being so well provided for our Defense.

About seven of the Clock in the Afternoon the Turks overtook us, and the
foremost Vessel gave us a Broad Side, the other followed, and saluted us in the
same manner. We stood not still in the mean while, but returned them the like.
The Fight was furious and bloody on both sides for four hours: Our men hehaved
themselves gallantly; neither Death nor Wounds could force them from their
Charge and Posts. Some when their Limbs were all bruised, their Bones
shattered, and their Bodies torn with Splinters, did obstinately continue to
handle and manage the Guns. Every one resolved to die with his Weapons in his
hand, rather than to shrink in the least from the Fight.

In the space of four hours we received near fifty Broad sides, and our Enemies
were as obstinate as our selves.

At last our Number was reduced to 18 men, and those were wounded in several
places, the rest were either dead or disabled. The Skipper was shot through the
Thigh, my self through the right Arm; so that we could no longer resist the
Numbers and Fury of our Enemies, that continued still to pour upon us great
and small Shot: Besides we had another Misfortune that happened unto us happily
as it fell out; our Ship was wounded with a great Shot between Wind and Water,
so that being in such a crasie Vessel, and with such crasie Bodies, we made but
a faint resistance, which the Turks perceiving, and fearing that the Sea would
at last swallow us, and deprive them of their Booty, they resolved to venture
to board us: On both sides they grappled with us, and entered their men, which
we from our Fore-Castle and Steerage did force aboard again with our Murdering
Pieces; at last, for fear our Obstinacy would cause our Ship to sink under us,
and deliver us into the hands of a more merciless Enemy, the raging Sea; we
called for Quarter, which the Turks were glad to grant, having almost lost all
Courage and hopes of forcing us to a Surrender; therefore they willingly
accepted of the first Motion: We found that near 300 of their men had been
killed, and their Ships were miserably torn and maimed. One thing passed during
the Fight worthy our Notice, and which I did then look upon as an ill Omen; at
a Broad Side one great Shot was forced back again, and split in pieces; we did
conceive that it had met with a more violent one, which had driven it upon us.

The Turks treated us very generously, that we expected not from Enemies which
we had angered by so long a Resistance. They commended our Courage, and
wondered at our Resolution. And when they saw the rich Loading that they had
got into their hands, they quickly pardoned us the Injuries we had done them.

The Captains and Owners of the Turks Ships called me and our Skipper to an
Account for the Bills of Loading, which, when there was no remedy, we delivered
into their hands.

I made some Reflections upon my former Condition, and wished my self upon some
Christian shore as poor as Job; Liberty was sweet to me that was taken a Slave:
I remembered then that excellent advice, Trust not unto uncertain riches, etc. I
then condemned the joy I had felt for the rich Patrimony that was left me, and
the earnest desire for to see Foreign Places. Now to my sorrow I began to
remember my former Condition; but all these Reflections and Regrets could not
turn the Wind, nor stop our Course from Argiers, where we were bound next; for
when our Ship had been seized, we that were alive were disposed of into the
Enemies Ships, and stripped of our best Attire, which some lusty Rogues did us
the kindness to wear for our sakes before our eyes.

Our dead Bodies, and those that were wounded desperately, of whom there was
small hopes, were stripped naked, and sent in that condition to feed the Sharkes
and other Ravenous Fishes of the Sea; some we saw at that Instant waiting upon
us, as we did conceive, for that intent: It may be they were as sensible of
dead Bodies amongst us, as Vultures are, who constantly hover about a House or
Tent in these Countries, where the Sick are contained that will infallibly die,
in hopes to enjoy the Prey when it is to be exposed and carried out.

During our stay a shipboard, we were as civilly treated as we could expect
from Turks, and did feed as they did upon Garlic and Rusk, poor John, Rice,
and such like food. I observed them very inquisitive to find out our Qualities,
and the Estates that we had remaining, our Friends, and what Assistance and
Favor we might expect from them. To know these Particulars, we were examined
apart: We had been forewarned of this Proceeding, and therefore we had prepared
our Answers, that we might not be found in a contradiction. I had desired our
Company to make me pass for a poor Fellow, whose Industry had obtained the
Trust of that considerable Cargo, which as we did give out did belong to my
Master.

This Answer satisfied them for a while, but meeting in the Ship with some
English Renegadoes, by an inconsiderate Discourse about several Particulars,
one of them began to have some suspicion and knowledge of me, because he had
seen me at the unloading of some Goods by the Water side, and did remember that
then more respect was paid to me than such a poor Fellow could expect or claim.
I labored to excuse my Rashness, and to justify my former Declaration;
nevertheless one word made me to be suspected for an eminent Person, powerful
in Friends and Acquaintance, which made them put a higher Value upon me, and
hope for a greater Ransom.

We sailed into the Streights, and at the Entry, over against Gibraltar, we met
with a Spanish Man of War at some distance from us; he labored to come to
speak with us, but the Turks were not in a Posture, nor able to answer him in
his own Language so loud as he could speak; for in the desperate Fight they had
broken some of their Ribs, and weakened themselves; therefore they hoised up all
their Sails, and made away as fast as the Prize-Ship could sail. She received
some Chase Guns from the Spaniard, who had almost retaken her, but the Evening
drawing on, she had the opportunity of saving her self in the dark night: And
the better to hinder the Spaniard from further Pursuit, one of the Turks staid
behind, and resolutely gave a few Broad Sides to his Enemy.

In the mean while the Prize got out of sight, and the Turks Vessel followed
with all speed. The Night coming on apace, rid them of the importune company of
the Spaniard.

The next day we anchored in the Bay of Algiers, where some Officers of the
Town came to take notice of our Number, and of the Prize that was taken; one
was a Cornish man, that by his Apostasy had procured unto himself great Wealth
amongst the Turks; he was a Trader in Slaves, and knew well how to make his
advantage of his own Nation. He drew near us that were English, and enquired of
us in what part of England we had been born; such Questions being unpleasing to
us, I desired as he was our Countreyman, that he would show us some Favor, and
buy us for himself; we hoped to meet with a kinder Entertainment from one of
the same Language and People: He told us that if we did give him hopes of
returning his Money, he would venture to lay out some to do us a pleasure, that
we might not fall into severe hands that might endanger our Lives by a rough
Usage. He informed us, that if we came on shore, we should be led to the
Market, and there sold as Horses; That there are constantly waiting some that
knew how to find us out, that would treat us most inhumanely, and oblige us to
redeem our selves; That they would exact from us the remainder of our Estates
to be at liberty; That we had best come into his hands; That he being our
Countreyman, would endeavor to be our Friend, and take no more from us than it
cost him: Therefore he conjured us to discover our selves if we did love our
own safety and welfare, and to tell him what Encouragement he might have to lay
out his Money for us, and what Security to have it returned. We began to look
one upon another, to understand with our Eyes how inclinable each was to comply
with his Desire. We were something jealous of the Turk's Faith, and did believe
that he that had not kept it to his God, would scarce be more careful to keep
it with Men. We were long silent, and knew not what we should do in this case;
but at last I ventured to deliver the Sense of the Company, and to thank him in
the name of four or five English that we were, for his kind Information,
telling him that our Losses were great, that our Friends were many, that we had
something yet left at home able to redeem us, were not too high a value put
upon us, and that we could give him sufficient assurance that what I said was
true.

At this Discovery all my Comrades began earnestly to entreat him to show some
Favor to his Countrymen promising to requite his Kindness with double
interest.

Unto all our Offers the Deceitful Turk began to listen diligently for we
afterward saw that he intended only to make a Prey of us and get such
Information from u^ as might serve his turn. We began to suspect him, and be
sorry for our credulity, when we perceived him in the company of the Owners of
the Ship, offering for the most considerable of us large Sums of Money, leaving
the rest to their ill fortune, without the least regard: They could not then
agree about the Price, so that we were transported ashore. At our first
Landing, great Companies flocked about us to see us, having been fore-informed
that we had behaved our selves like men of Courage in the Fight. Some whose
Relations had been killed, gave us such Welcome as became the cruelty and
impertinency of Heathens: They loaded us with Curses and Imprecations, and did
strangely insult over us. Had not our Guardians protected us from their
Violence, I think we had been torn in pieces. One amongst the rest was animated
with a strange fury and desire of revenge for the death of his dear Comrade;
both were Spanish Renegadoes: He drew his Cymeter at us, and begged the liberty
to sacrifice one of us, promising to pay his Ransom: When that could not be
obtained, he desired only to cut off our Ears. I know not how it happened that
he came near one of us, and with a Blow struck off part of the Cheek of a
German, which he took and greedily swallowed, telling the Assistants that he
never tasted so sweet a Morsel in his days as that was; so strangely Vengeance
had transported him, that he was content to feed upon us. It was our happiness
that our Lives did not depend upon his pleasure, we had then accompanied his
Comrade in the other world; but our Keepers did safely convey us into the City,
where we found our Chains ready made that waited for us. Every one of us had a
great strong Chain about twenty pound weight linked to our Legs and tied to our
Girdle, that if we did meditate an escape, it might not be without difficulty.

We were conducted next in this strange equipage with our jingling Chains at
our sides to the Kings Palace; we did not a little wonder what they intended to
do with us in a place of so much Honor. We past the first Guard, and entered
into a large and spacious Court paved with white Marble-Stone, of which there
is a great quantity in that Country; especially in the Quarries about old
Carthage or Tunis. There was a high Brick Wall that enclosed us, and before us
opened a large Gate Checkered with diverse Colors, which led into a great Hall,
where our Keepers led us, and commanded us to rest our selves until the King of
Argiers did give us a Visit; an honor that we expected not; but it seems it is
the Custom that all Slaves should come in his sight when they first Land; for
out of them he chooses for himself the Tenth Person; and when that Number is not
complete, he nevertheless takes one whom he pleases.

We were placed round about the Hall to be prepared for his Coming in, which
was not speedily; for being about Noon, he had been bathing himself, and
afterward taking another Recreation, which is usual at that time of day in the
hot Climates.

About Two of the Clock in comes a lusty Officer clothed in Scarlet, with a Rod
in his hand, and a great Turbant about his Head; it seems he was the King's
Gentleman Usher: He was followed by six Persons of good Mien and Appearance:
They were armed with Cymeters.

Next came a Grave Fellow with a Turbant almost as big as our English Half
Bushel; at one side of it he had a Set of Diamonds, that did sparkle as his
Eyes; his Vesture was green, his Legs were bare, on his Feet he did wear
Sandals.

We had time to observe him as he entered the Door; for his Pace was slow and
grave: I could have numbered 20 between every Step; He marched in that manner to
the upper end, where there was a Canopy of State over his Head, and two Turkey
Carpets, with a large Pillow covered with Damask under him; he sat upon it,
and then the Owners of the Ship that took us, presented themselves before him,
kissing the Hem of his Garment; they discoursed among themselves about an hour,
showing unto him our Bills of Lading; a German of our Company understood
something of their Discourse, he told us that the King, who only sat, all the
rest standing about him, was displeased that they had not followed his Orders
when they set out; for it seems he had commanded them to sail along the Coast
of Genoa, and to endeavor to revenge him for the great loss which he had
lately sustained, when one of his best Vessels that was sent out upon his
private account, was made Prize by the Galleys of that Republic.

The Dispute ended with the submission of the Owners of our Vessel, and a
Present very considerable in Cloth and other rich Commodities taken out of our
Prize.

The Kings Displeasure was soon abated, when he saw such an Honorable Gift
enter into his Hall. He took a view of it, and then commanded us to come before
him one by one; He looked upon us with a stern Countenance, and took notice of
our Features and Stature; for it seems the Turks are excellent in the Art of
Physiognomy; they know a man and his Inclinations at the first view, as well as
an expert Farrier can the good or ill Qualities of a Horse: It concerns them
much, especially those that trade in Slaves. He cast a Jest upon every one of
us, which gave the Company a great deal of Mirth, and increased our sadness. I
was informed that he said, That he advised him that should be my Master, not to
trust me too much with his Women.

At last, when he had considered us all, he made us stand before him together;
out of the Company he chose my self, the Skipper, and a pretty German Boy of a
ruddy Countenance: I did not a little wonder at this last Choice, because there
were some of whom he might expect a greater Ransom than of the Child, who was
born of poor Parentage; but I understood the good old man was a greater Lover
of his Pleasures than of Money, and therefore he pitched upon him as upon one
who might procure unto him some in his old Age; a strange Fancy possesses the
minds of all the Southern People; they burn with an unnatural Fire, which
consumed Sodom and Gomorrah.

It is strange to see how passionate they are for handsome Males: I was glad to
be in the possession of the King, for I hoped to prevail with him and get my
Freedom to return for England; but I was much deceived of my expectation, as
you shall learn. The King being returned to his private Chambers sent for me,
and enquired of my Quality, and of my Friends, and what Trade I understood
best: I was puzzled at this last question, and knew not how to answer him best
for my advantage; I was afraid to render my self too necessary to him, that he
might not retain me in his service; or to make my self too considerable, that
he might not put a higher value upon me than I was willing to pay for my
Ransom: Therefore I told him that I was born of poor Parentage, who not being
able to keep me, put me to be an Under-Cook to a Noble Man of our Country; that
from that employment I was removed to be an Apprentice to a rich Merchant, who
received me because he found me able to do him service; and that I was sent
with his Goods to Smyrna, and other Parts, as his Factor; that it was true,
some of the Bills of Lading did mention my Name, but the Goods did belong to my
Master, and some Friends who had entrusted me with them.

I saw the Information pleased the old man, especially when he heard I was a
Cook; for one that had served him in that employment was lately dead. I was
sent immediately to the Kitchen, and had order to dress a Couple of Wild Ducks
for my Master; that I did without much difficulty: but when I had other Meats
less usual in our Country, I made such mad Sauces, and such strange Ragoux,
that every one took me for a Cook of the Antipodes, whose People have Palates
that relish things that ours abhor: I was full of Mistakes; sometimes I put Oil
instead of Vinegar, and Salt instead of Pepper. But that I might keep up my
Credit amongst the Beholders, I did handle my Meat so nimbly, that they all
believed I had been used to Cookery.

I had not been long in the Kitchen, but I heard that the King lamented the
Death of his former Cook, and was not pleased with the Sauces I had made;
nevertheless I continued in my employment about six Weeks, more esteemed for my
newfound mismashes than I deserved.

At a great Feast that my Master made, I had several sorts of Fishes that I
never saw before; the Liver of one has a most loathsome taste, I thought it good
in the Sauce; therefore I sent it up stewed under the Fish, with a Dish
garnished with many sorts of Flowers: The Guests seeing so pleasant an
Appearance, expected the Fish to be as extraordinary as the Beauty; they all
prepared their Stomachs to feed upon this Fish, and neglected others that were
much better; but when they tasted the Sauce, they imagined some had put a
Sir-reverence in it, and all began to spue and spit. I angered so much the King
with this Masterpiece of Cookery, that he gave Order that I should receive for
my Sallery ten Bastonadoes. It was in vain to plead Ignorance, and our Country
Fashion; I was forced to suffer the punishment with Patience.

At the Feast there was an Inhabitant of the Town who had been very much
pleased with the Sauces that others did dislike; when he saw the King so angry
with me, desired him to part with me for the usual Ransom; he refused it for
the present: but afterward he was glad to be rid of me at any rate.

I was removed from being Master Cook to a lower place, and a Spanish Slave was
placed in my room. He did so domineer over me that I could not suffer his
Impertinencies: I played him several Tricks; once I made a strange Infusion in a
Dish that was to be presented to the King; it almost cost the Slaves Life; he
excuses, and laid the Fault upon me: I pretended a great deal of Ignorance, but
was not believed. This caused my removal to another employment, which I
heartily longed for. I was made by a wonderful change of Fortune Keeper of the
Kings Bath. It seems some of his Women had seen me in the House, and interceded
for me when the last Disgrace happened to me. I thought my self then a pretty
Fellow, and not inferior to my former Estate; but Fortune left me not long
rejoicing at my Promotion; her sudden Favor was followed by a grievous Frown,
that almost sent me to my Grave: The occasion of it was this; One of the Kings
Wives having so happily pleaded for me, as the good man thought, out of a
tenderness natural to all that Sex; and as she then pretended, out of a
Kindness for People of my Nation, she sought a fit opportunity to discover her
self to me, and make use of my Bath when the King was abroad: I was at first
more respectful than she did desire, and left her to the Attendance of her
Women Slaves; one that was her Confident, informed me of the Matter of her
Mistresses Pleasure, and added, that I should do well to comply, and not ^^^^ry
or disappoint her Kindness by any ungrateful severity.

The Business came soon to the Kings Ear; his jealous Pate had an Eye upon a
young Stripling that was not unworthy to supply his place; but it seems he
never had a right Information, only some light suspicions of our
Correspondency; they were sufficient to cause him to remove me from my pleasant
Office; which angered me more than any thing that happened to me all the time
of my Slavery.

I found an opportunity to make my Complaints to my good Lady, who was no less
troubled at the old man's peevish humor than my self.

There was no Remedy to our Grief, but the hopes of meeting in some other
Corner of the House.

I was sent next to work in the Fields, where I met with such difficult and
painful Labor, and such cruel Taskmasters, that I fell grievously sick; my
good Lady did not forget to administer Comfort unto me by the means of her
Spanish Woman: In my lowest Estate she vouchsafed to pay me a Visit, and would
not suffer me to want any thing that Credit could procure.

It was a happiness to me to meet here with such a true Friend* I could have
wished that my Sickness had lasted longer for her sake.

I was no sooner recovered, bu^ my old doting Patron fearing a Relapse, or
rather growing more jealous of me, gave order that I should be led into the
Marketplace and there sold: I had made my application to him to be redeemed, I
had sent Letters into Spain and England, and endeavored to be released, but all
in vain; he looked upon me as so needy a fellow that could not procure the
ordinary Ransom of a Slave from my Friends. I had labored to persuade
something of it, during my abode in his service.

When I saw my self with an ill-favored Turk, leading me by a Chain, as a
Horse or a Bullock, thorough the streets, I then began to lament my hard
fortune, and remember my former Estate; I knew not what Providence had prepared
for me, nor what surly Master I should meet with next: I went with a sad
Countenance, and as sad a Heart to the public Place, where I was to be exposed
to Sale.

The Turk that led me, cried before me in Franca Langua, Who will buy a
Christian? Who will buy a Christian?

It was a grievous change of fortune, in so short a time as a year, to be
reduced from that honorable Estate in which my Father left me, to the lowest
Misery, to a Slave, to be sold as a Beast, in a strange Country, where I had
no Friends that did dare to own me. I must confess I was never so dejected as
at this time. I did complain of my hard Fate, and did send up many sighs and
groans to Heaven, to implore the assistance and care of Divine Providence: In
this low Condition I knew not what it had prepared for me.

As Soon as I was come into the Marketplace, a Fellow, a Stranger to me,
addresses himself to my Keeper, and offers Money for my Person: He seemed to be
a man of no great Appearance; yet his Looks discovered him to be a good man.

Several others came about me, and amongst the rest, that ill-natured English
Renegate that enquired of our qualities so exactly on shipboard, accosted my
Keeper, and would needs have me at any Rate: I trembled for fear of falling
into his hands, knowing how grievously he had handled some of my Comrades.

My Keeper made advantage of the Press, and asked a hundred Dollars more than
he was commanded to take for me. The first would not let me slip out of his
hands; therefore he paid the money, and led me away with him to a House next to
the Grand Mosque of the City, very near the Kings Palace.

I was not a little pleased to be so near the Place from which I might expect
some Assistance; much more, when I saw the good Spanish Woman pay me a Visit
from her Mistress.

It seems she had ordered this Fellow to watch when I was to be sold, and to
buy me for her Service. I thought my self happy to be a Slave to so excellent
and kind a Lady: I never dreamt of a Change whilst I belonged unto her: I had
no reason; for nothing was wanting unto me useful to the Life of Man. I only
wore a Chain out of Formality, because otherwise my good Fortune might have
been suspected. I did also employ my self in slavish work for that intent, but
not above measure.

The Lady became very devout after my coming to that place; she seldom missed a
day, but came in some Disguise to pay her Devotions at the Mosquette, from
whence there was a passage into my Lodgings,

By this frequent and constant Attendance at Public Prayer, she purchased unto
her self a very great esteem with the People, and a favor with her Husband;
and ever after she was named a Saint.

I continued her Slave about two years, in which time I did view the City of
Argiers, and took an especial notice of many Particulars worth the public
knowledge.

It is a City not so large as populous, fortified by Art and Nature; the Walls
are 60 foot high, in some places 70 and 80; they are built with square Stone
and Flints: they are about 12 and 13 Foot broad.

The City is not above a Mile round. At the East Side, on the top of a high
Hill stands a strong Citadel very well fortified, built at first by the
Spaniards: It is furnished with 40 or 50 Pieces of Ordnance, and kept by 300
Renegadoes in Garrison.

At the West side another Castle somewhat less, but altogether as strong, does
overlook the Town. In the Harbor is built a very commodious Mould, able to
contain above 200 Sail. Upon it stands a strong Fort, that threatens
Destruction to all Vessels that dare adventure near without leave, or in a
Hostile manner: Three Tier of Guns are planted in it; the lowest is level with
the Water.

The Mould lies in such a crooked manner, that no Ships can with their full
Sail come straight in without turning: So that it is a very difficult work to
break the Chain and enter it by force.

This Nest of Pirates is very well prepared for the Attempts of any Christian
Enemy. None can do them the least injury by Land or by Sea: so that here they
retreat as the Wild Beasts in their Dens to enjoy their Thefts and Prey.

That which renders the Town more strong, is, that it is built upon a hard
Rock, and cannot easily be undermined.

I have taken notice of 3 Places in the Castles that are but weak; In the great
Citadel, on the South side, is a rising Hill as high as the half of the Wall,
if it was possessed by a powerful Enemy, it might serve very commodiously
either for Battery or Mining.

On the East side is but a weak Wall, that would not endure long the Fury of
the Canon.

The other Castle has many little Hills that are equal in height; besides, the
Wall in the Town in one place is not so strong, but an Enemy might enter by it.

Charles the 5th. attempted to drive these Pirates out of their Nest, but it
was to no purpose that he brought a Navy by Sea, and Landed a puissant Army to
besiege the Town; the violence of a storm broke his Vessels to pieces, and
forced him to raise his Siege with the loss of a hundred Ships, and many
thousand Men. Since that time Argiers is much stronger, and better fortified:
Daily something is added to the strength of it; so that unless the Christian
Princes join together, or some powerful Monarch by Sea and Land lay siege to
it, it will be one day impregnable but by Famine.

In the City the Houses are very pleasant, and more beautiful within and
without than in other Parts of Africa. The greater lie open in the middle,
with handsome Galleries and Turrets.

Several Mosquets are built for Public Devotion, into which no Christian has
liberty to enter, unless he intends to Apostatize; for he must either burn or
turn that enters the Place of their Prayer, that handles the Alcoran before
Witnesses, or that repeats their Illa Alla Mahumet, etc.

They have a great number of their Talubs, Religious Men, whose Duty is to read
their Public Prayers. They have many other sorts of Men appointed to attend in
their Mosquets; some are to expound the Mahumetan Law, and they are called
Cadirs; others are to invite the People to their Devotions, and they are named
Dervises; some live by the Alms of the People; others are Prophets and holy Men.

Over all the Religious Orders there is one established as the Supreme Judge of
all Controversies, and he is honored with the Title of Marabut: He is the
Judge between Man and Man, of Matters of Equity and Justice. A certain stipend
is allowed unto him from the Public Treasury. He lives not upon the Inferior
Orders; every one has a settled Salary. The great swallow the little ones, as
Fishes; they feed upon them, and from their Labors derive a maintenance to
their idle Bodies: a sad encouragement to Laziness and Vice, and the grand
Cause of the Disorders of a Nation.

Other Persons besides the King and Bashaw are eminent in this City; the Lagaw
is the Chief in the next place, He is the first person of the Duan, and is the
General of the Armies abroad: Under him are the Cheuses, which are like our
Justices of Peace, or Sheriffs. The next are Boulgebushes, Men like our
Bailiffs; they are Servants to the Duan: They remain three years in their
Offices, and then go out with the Armies as Controulers of the rest.

Besides these, are other Bushes, Captains and Officers of the Militia; they
wear a Badge of Honor on their Heads, and are distinguished from the rest by
their Turbant, that is wound about in the form of a Sugar Loaf; behind a Red
Cross falls down: It is not lawful for any to take this Attire but themselves.
It is the Badge of their Office, as the Red Scarf is the Sign of Command
amongst Christians.

In the Camp there are other Great Men; as Daventees, Mouchees, etc.

An Acha Basha is an experienced man amongst them, one that has been in
several Encounters, who commands a Party when it is separated from the Main
Body. He must be an old man, and when once he comes to that Employment, he can
rise no higher as other Officers can.

About the City are most pleasant Gardens, Orchards, and fair Houses belonging
to the Inhabitants.

Further in the Country, very good Corn grows upon the little Hills that
appear round about.

Here is plenty of all things unless it be of Wine, which is not made by the
Turks or Moors. They of Argiers are not so scrupulous as the stricter sort;
their Consciences can suffer them to be drunk with Wine when they take good
store in Prizes.

In the City, toward the East side, is a very strong House built, and some
Soldiers to keep guard. I enquired what the Place was, and I was informed that
it was the Public Treasury-House: Every year they cast in vast Sums of Money,
according to their happiness in the Encounters with Christians. They never take
out of it: It is thought there are many Millions shut up in that Hole. The last
Barbarossa built it for the Public; and to encourage the rest to give
liberally, he put in 2000 Dolars.

When the Ships come in, and when the Lots are made, there is always something
for the Treasury, and a good Portion for Mahomet.

It seems these Heathens have Religion enough to make them honor their
Prophet, and those that represent his Place amongst them; for the most part
such are good for nothing else but to say the Public Prayers: Yet the People
are so far from despising them, that they bear a great respect unto them; and
suffer not any to be in want that attends at their Devotions.

This Portion which is called the Portion of Mahomet in the Division of the
Prize-Goods, is put into the Hands of a Treasurer appointed for that purpose,
and he distributes equally to all their Religious men: If they find at any time
that he has converted the least part to his private use, he is put to death in
a most cruel manner: He is stripped naked, and at the Door of the Marabut he is
empaled alive, and then in that manner raised to the top of the Steeple of a
Mosquet, where he is exposed to Public view for three days; and then his Body
is carried out of the City, to be given for food to the Wild Beasts.

His Estate is all sold for the benefit of the Religious Men; for they look
upon it as consecrated to Mahomet, when the least part of what belongs to him
has been mingled amongst it.

This People has wisely provided against their Covetousness and disorderly
Behavior, that rob or diminish from the Maintenance of those Orders of Men
that serve the Public in the Worship of God, and that keep up the Honor of
Religion amongst them; for they are sensible that the preservation of
themselves and Government depends upon their esteem, their Credit and
Prosperity, who only are able to persuade men to submit to the established
Laws; therefore there are here most severe Punishments inflicted upon all those
that venture to injure such either in their estates or Persons. And there is
very good provision made that they may not fall into the disesteem of the
People.

There are excellent Orders to stir them up to the Service of God: they are
often summoned to Prayers; In the Morning, which time they call Salam, at
Twelve of the Clock, named Dochar, at Four in the Afternoon is their Assara; at
Sunsetting, Mogharb; at Twilight, Usher; at Midnight is Ou-el; the next is
Istanay: At these several times great Numbers of all sorts do resort to their
Mosquets, and there in an humble manner they pray to God and Mahomet.

Those that are negligent or careless in coming to Prayer, are taken notice of,
and if they have been formerly Christians, they are excluded from all hopes of
Employment, and at the least offense severely treated.

The Ceremonies observed in the Consecration of their Religious Men are not
unworthy of our Notice; The Father of the young man must bring him to the
Marabut, when he sits in the Chief Mosquet of the City with a numorous
Attendance, to be Witnesses of his Dedication to that Service. They enter the
Place, the Father holding the Son by the Right hand, and both together go
straight to the Marabut, and kiss the Border of his Robe. After this Ceremony,
the Marabut asks the Father whether he can read; the Father answers, Yes. A
Book is immediately presented to the young Fellow, usually the Alcoran, who
reads in it a Page: If he does not miss a word, but pronounce well and
distinctly, he is then admitted: The Marabut calls him by his Name, and causes
it to be enrolled in the Catalogue of the Order: Then comes a Fellow with a
sharp Knife, and cuts in his Right Arm the Figure of a half Moon; into the
Wound is put some Gunpowder, which being blown up, leaves a blew Impression,
that nothing can take away, unless the place be cut off.

Afterward some Prayers being made, tending to the Confirmation of him into
their Holy Orders, he is obliged to swear by Mahomets Lock of Hair to observe
certain Rules.

He is then clothed in another manner before the People, and the Marabut takes
him into his Arms, and gives him a Kiss, which sanctifies him for ever; the
solemnity ends in Music and Dancing. This is practiced at their admittance
into that Rank of Men which they esteem holy, and who only may publicly read
the Alcoran.

I shall say nothing of their Marriages and Circumcisions, their Customs are
not much different from the Turks.

I did observe many particulars in the Happy time of my Slavery, for I had
liberty to view the City, and to walk up and down; my business and work was
only to wait upon my Lady at the time of her Devotions, sometimes it was at
Moghar, and sometimes in the Day at Dochar. I did discover my self to her, and
told her of the happiness of a Christian Life in our Country; I labored to
persuade her to escape out of the old Man's reach; I promised my Assistance, and
that if she would consent unto it, I engaged my self to her to Marry her. She
had two Children, a Boy and a Girl, that kept her in that place, otherwise I
think I had then got my Freedom and carried her away; but she would not for
that cause hearken to my persuasions, nor suffer me to talk of my Liberty,
telling me, that I should want nothing whilst I remained in that place, and in
her service; that if I rendered my self unworthy of it, by offering to run away,
I should become the most miserable of all men.

I was ever after more humble and dutiful, and was afraid she should discover
in me an inclination to be gone.

During this time I received several Letters from Cadiz, Malaga, and other
English Factories, that mentioned my Redemption, but I could never expect to
obtain it from my kind Mistress.

About that time she departed this Life, and left me sufficient cause to
lament: Another of the Sultan's Wives was suspected to have poisoned her,
because the Sultan had conceived a greater Love for her, by reason of her
constant Devotions, than for the other. Before her Death, about six months,
she was brought to Bed of a pretty little Girl, somewhat whiter than ordinary;
the old Fool thought himself to be the Father of it. I was once admitted to see
it; but now my Mistress was dead, I was left to the Misfortunes and Miseries of
a slavish Life. I was forced again to return to a hard Service, although her
Goodness had labored to free me; for she sent to the man at whose house I lay,
being her Cousin German, to speak with him before her Death: She did then make
him promise to give me my Release after her Burial in requital of my good
Service, and by her Gentlewoman sent me a Present of Gold, to a considerable
value, which I did not possess long. You may easily imagine my grief to part
with so true a Friend: It was not a little increased when I perceived the
Fellow would not perform his Cousins request; but instead of sending me away,
carried me to the Market again to be sold. I did long expostulate the business
with him, but could never have other Reasons of his proceeding but this, That I
should not anger him for fear he should publish the Mystery, which would
infallibly cost me my Head.

I was forced to submit to his unjust pleasure. He led me to the Market, and
there I was sold for 300 Dollars; for I never made my self known to him; he
always looked upon me as a pitiful Fellow, unable to redeem my self.

My next Master was by Profession a Gardener, he had me into his Orchards, and
there with a good Cudgel he made me understand a trade I never knew before. I
endured much with him; for he gave me such great Tasks to perform, that I was
not able to hold out.

At the least displeasure he threatened to stab and kill me; therefore the fear
of Death made me seek my efcape. I was sometimes sent to fetch Lime for a
Building that he had in hand near the Seashore. A Vessel was lately arrived
from France, to redeem the Captives; it lay without the Mould.

At that time that I was on the Sand it was dusky, a French man offered me his
assistance, I accepted of it, and went into his Boat; but I was discovered
before I could get off the Mould, and sent back to my Master, that punished me
with a hundred blows on the Soles of my Feet, which rendered me incapable for
his Service many days.

He was soon weary of my Company, and sold me to the English Renegado that came
on board our Ship at our Arrival. I expected from him a kinder entertainment,
but found less: He was cruel and severe to me, he made me work night and day. I
often treated with him for my Ransom, but found his Demands to be so high, that
I could not comply with him. He abused me most sadly about five Months, and
then Death delivered me of his Tyranny.

His Executors sold me again amongst his Goods and Chattels. I fell next inro
the hands of an Italian Renegado, named Ishmael Reiz, who was not kinder to me
than my former Masters; my Work was painful, my Diet mean, my Labor continual,
and my Rewards the Blows of a hard Cudgel.

I could not suffer long this Service; therefore I sought to displease my
Patron, and make him sell me to another.

He gave me next to an Officer of the Militia called Hally Hamez Reiz, who was
so well pleased with my Person and Countenance, that he resolved not to part
with me for any Money. I offered unto him 800 Dollars: He told me I should
first go with him in the Country, and at his return I should have liberty to
be redeemed if I behaved my self well.

At that time the Turks did send out a strong Army to gather the Contributions
of the People, and to relieve Tremsen or Climsan, a strong and populous City in
the Country.

There is a Garrison of Turks that are sent every year to that place, and
another that comes from thence; for as it is a great City, the Country round
about do always submit to those that are Masters of that Place. It concerns
therefore the Turks to fortify and preserve that City for themselves against
the Attempts of the Arabs, that are their deadly Enemies.

Having run through so many strange and unexpected Fortunes, I did not hope to
meet with less Variety in this Expedition, in the which I was engaged amongst
the rest; my Master was a Commander of a hundred Men: He was very passionate
and lascivious, nevertheless Valiant; as I did afterward learn.

We marched out in very good Order, with our Flying Colors and some few
Fieldpieces very small.

The Army was composed of Twelve Thousand Men; Four Thousand were to go
Westward, and gather the contributions along the Seacoast as far as Tetuan and
the Kingdom of Fez: The next Four Thousand were to march toward Tunis; and the
third Four Thousand were to enter into the Country.

The Custom of the Turks is to gather the Contributions upon the Inhabitants
who do not pay willingly; therefore they venture not amongst them but in great
Numbers, well armed, able to oppose an Enemy, or prevent a sudden surprizal.
There is a Natural Antipathy between them. The Moors that dwell in the Kingdom,
and the Arabs do hate the Turks, because they are imperious, and and because
they are obliged to pay unto them an yearly Tribute.

The time that these Armies set forth was in June, the Harvest, when the Corn
was ripe and fit for use: then the Country was able to furnish the yearly
Revenue either in Corn or Money.

The Commander of the Western Circuit was Abel Hamed Simon; of the Eastern were
two Chieftains, Halac Rigla Reiz, an old Renegado of Spain, and Halec Sim Haly,
a young Blade that had more Precipitation than Wisdom; they met with many
Mischances, as you shall afterward hear, and had it not been for our
unexpected Approach, the whole Army had been cut in pieces.

Our Commander was a judicious man, but very unfortunate; cruel, bold and
valiant, a great Enemy of the Arabs; his Name was Ben Osman Bucher, he had been
a great Commander at Sea, and fought in many notable Encounters against the
Christians, never with so much success as in the Year 36. against a Portuguese
Caraque, near the Island of Tenerifa, sailing from the East Indies, and bound
for Lisbon, laden with very rich Commodities to a great value. His share was so
considerable, that he was raised from a poor and a mean Estate to a good
Fortune, and to the Esteem of the Divan; especially because the good Success of
that Fight was attributed to his Valor and Resolution: For the Christians
making a stout resistance, the Turks were discouraged from further Attempts,
and not willing to continue their Enterprise longer, when he with his drawn
Cymeter did compel some, and persuade others to try again the Portuguez
Courage, and so by that means won the Ship, and brought great Riches into the
City: He was ever after highly esteemed, and employed in great Affairs where
any danger or difficulty did appear. For that Reason he commanded the Army that
was to go the middle Circuit; because there are a sort of People very valiant
and stout, that sometimes make a strong Resistance to the Turks, and when they
see their advantage, they refuse Tribute.

Our Army was composed of Horse and Foot; a thousand Horse, and two thousand
Foot were numbered at the Musters, besides Slaves and Servants.

The Cavalry was composed of Turks born, and Moors that had quitted their
Countries interest to serve them of Argiers; and for the most part they were
Inhabitants of the City, and had there their Wives and Children.

The Infantry was made up of Renegado-Christians, whereof there are such number
in that place, that they bear all the sway and command both by Sea and Land.
They are as Imperious over the rest as the Janissaries in Turkey over the Greeks,
and the Mamalukes in Egypt were over the ancient Inhabitants.

The Divan is composed of this sort of men, who are most skilful because they
are acquainted with the Affairs of Europe, and better able to manage the
Public Business relating to that part of the World, and to give Orders. Some
of them do get vast Estates, others are miserable and poor, and therefore are
obliged to the meanest Offices.

With this strong Party we set forward, and came to a Place the first day
called Atsabah, at two Leagues distance from the Sea: It was a pretty little
Town situate on the Decline of a pleasant Hill, that was covered on the right
hand with a Large Wood, extreme Bushy, about two Miles in length. The Houses
were more handsome than we could expect in a Country Village. About it were to
be seen the Ruins of old Buildings that did only appear out of the Earth. A
Christian Renegado that had studied in the University of Salamanca, informed
me, that this place was named anciently Stilpeia, and that it had been an
Episcopal See in the time of the Christian Churches.

The Chief man of the place was a Turk, retired from the Affairs and Noise of
the City, here he was resolved to spend the rest of his days, that were not
very many; for I conceive he was above fourscore.

We lodged that night about this little Town. Round about Argeirs there are
many such, at some distance from the place.

The next morning we marched by break of Day, and went five Leagues before we
did rest. We passed by the Tents of many Arabs, who had gathered all their
Corn. The Chief of every Family paid our Receiver in Dollars and Gold, whereof
there is a great quantity all along the Seacoast. They informed our General
that a small number of their Countrymen were met together, and were resolved
to dispute unto us the passage of a River.

This News made us stand upon our Guards, and was the occasion of frequent
Alarms given to our Camp; for at the sight of a few Horsemen, we did imagine
the Enemy to be at their Heels, and ready to charge us.

This days Journey was very pleasant; for although I had my Masters Lance, and
a Gun to carry on my Shoulder, our Victuals that we brought with us were not
yet spent, the way was very good, and we had several Accidents that we met
with, that gave us a great deal of sport; besides I had accosted an English
Turk, with whom I did entertain my self of the Affairs of our Nation; I found
him desirous to seek his escape, because he had not lighted upon so good a
Fortune as others in their Apostasy, and because he had been put by an
Employment that he had sought after; and I think his Conscience did a little
trouble him to have obscured that Truth that he knew to be so; therefore when I
took the liberty to lay it before his Eyes, he could not restrain his Tears.

Our General had no difficulty this day; for several came and brought in at the
place appointed theit usual Tribute. The Inhabitants are so near the City, and
have so great a dependency upon it, that they are afraid to disoblige it in
the least. Therefore when those other people that were in Arms, did think to
revolt from the Turks, they sent some to solicit these to join with them.
They did all wish to be delivered from the Turks Tyranny, but they were afraid
to venture, because their near Habitations were likely to suffer first the
Turks Vengeance and Fury.

The Country we found very fruitful of Corn and Fodder. As we passed by a Wood,
we had the sight of several Wild Beasts that returned from seeking their Prey.
Our Vanguard did shoot at many of them; one of our Company, to show his
Valor, met a Lion that advanced toward us, and with his Cymeter in his hand
encountered him: The sport almost cost the Fellow his Life, for the Lion was
very strong, and with his Paws he had twice struck him down, the last time the
Lion in a rage had bit off part of his Arm; he had instantly devoured him, had
not we all shot at him, and fixed above 100 Bullets in his Body. The Fellow we
found almost dead with fear, under the Lion. He was glad with the loss of some
of his Flesh, to be so happily escaped; none pitied him, or was sorry for his
wounds, his rash Enterprise did deserve no less.

We journeyed about three Leagues, and we came to a little Valley very fruitful
of Palms and Olive Trees, a small Rivulet, covered with Strawberry Bushes, did
run through it, and water the Plain; at each end a Grove did grow.

In one, as we passed, I saw a Flying Serpent, about the bigness of an ordinary
Dog, with a long Tail, and a Head like an Ape, with a larger mouth, and a long
Tongue, the Body had about four Foot in length; we shot at it, but could not
kill it: It threatened some of our men when they ventured to come near it, and
could not be obliged to depart until a great number of us were arrived at the
Place. I saw it near a pleasant Fountain that did rise in one side of the
furthermost Grove. I enquired of the Name, but could not learn it; it had Wings
of diverse Colors, the chief were Red and White: It hovered long over our
heads, and had not the Noise of our Guns frighted it away, I think it had
ventured amongst us again. I could not distinguish of what substance the Wings
were; they were bigger than those of our winged Fowls; all the Birds that saw
it at a distance were glad to fly. I imagined it to be a kind of Basilisk, a
desperate Serpent, and extraordinary Venomous. This sight was no less wonderful
to the rest than to me; for all professed to have never seen the like: That
made me believe it was some Inland Creature not usually seen near the
Seacoast.

We met in this Journey nothing else remarkable, but some Ancient Pillars of
Marble; upon one I saw some Arabic Letters; A Moor told me that they signified
the Name of a great Commander that won a Battle fighting against the
Inhabitants, when he led the Arabians into that Country, I Zidi Dockra Moukadem
under the Renowned General and Prince Abel Hamed, do erect this Pillar in
memory of a great Victory obtained of the Brabbers, in the which I killed their
Commander with my own Hands, whose Name was Azoret Moudem; he was followed by
6000 Stout Soldiers; I had only 2000 of my Contrymen; but our good Prophet
would not suffer us to be oppressed by his Enemies; he lent us a favorable
Assistance, and in one hours time we destroyed 3582 with the loss of 37 of my
Men, and of the Hageria 130.

About a League farther we met with several Heaps of Stones, and near unto
them, in the way side, a large Cave, into the which, with my Masters Leave, I
entered: It was hewn out of a Rock, there were several Chambers about five Foot
broad, and as many long; there was nothing remarkable but several heaps of
Bones: It seems the Wild Beasts did make it their Retreat when they had seized
on their Prey. I imagined it to be a Place made for the Dwelling of some
solitary Anachoret of the Primitive Christians, retired out of the World into
that remote place. That which confirmed me in this Belief, was a great Number
of Crosses and Crucifixes artificially made in the Rock, in the inner Chamber,
which had no other Light but that which entered in by Reflections from the
Caves Mouth through the other Rooms. I had only time to look upon this
Religious Place; for the coming up of the Rear hastened me away. That Night we
reached as far as Boumelli, a good Town situate upon a River side, very
pleasant because of the Medows that did encompass it, and several little Hills
that were to be seen afar off, crowned with Orange and Limon Trees that are
always green in those Countries. The Inhabitants furnished us with all things
necessary, and when our Army began to approach, they came in a very humble
manner to pay homage to our Commander in Chief; the Shack of the Place went in
the Head of them on foot, and kissed the Hem of our Generals Garment, and
presented unto him a Basket full of Loaves, two white Cows, and half a dozen
young Barbs. The Present was accepted, and they were confirmed in the
possession of their Lands.

There were in the Town about 600 Houses or Huts; some were pretty
considerable, and adorned with Marble Pillars, and good Workmanship.

They were most Graziers; for we found hereabouts several Droves of Cattle very
fat.

The Country People informed us of the Design of the Arabs to resist us: They
were gathered together beyond the River Talna, where they were resolved to try
the Fortune of a Battle: All their Substance they had transported to the Top of
a high Mountain, called by the Inhabitants Azar, unto which they were resolved
to flee, if they did lose the Day.

The reason of their Revolt, as was pretended, was the Turks Tyranny, the
Poverty of the Year not able to furnish for their own Livelihood, and for the
Tribute demanded from them; therefore they had made haste to gather up the
Corn, and had prepared themselves to make resistance.

This kind of People did not want a Resolution to fight, nor good Conduct in
the management of their Affairs; for they had dispatched away several
Messengers into the Neigbouring Countries for Aid, and had drawn a great
company to their Assistance.

Our General gave notice of all things to the other Armies, that they might
draw toward him, if Occasion did require it: Nevertheless he proceeded in his
March, and did send every day several Parties of Horse from the main Body to
receive the Offerings of the People.

The third day, which was according to our Account the 20th of June, we past
over high Mountains fenced on all sides with craggy Rocks; we were obliged
sometimes to climb over them: Our Horse took a compass about by a way more
easy.

About Noon the Sun was extraordinary hot, which obliged us to seek a Repose
under the shady Trees that grew in this Stony ground; as I was resting my self
at a distance from my Patrons Company, a great Scorpion spies me in her way,
and as I was between sleeping and waking, the venomous Creature fixed her sting
in my naked Leg so gently that I had not felt it, had not my next Neighbor
advertised me. I had heard much of that Beast; when I saw my self wounded by
it, and my flesh swelling, immediately I began to fear the increase of the
Venom, but some had already killed it, and brought the Blood unto me to apply
to the Wound. It was wonderful to see the present cure that the Blood gave; it
had no sooner touched the tumor, but it began to decrease, and out of the
little prick came forth a Liquor white as Milk, by that I found that the blood
of the Scorpion has an attractive virtue.

I had no sooner escaped this Mischief, but I fell into a worse; my Master had
sent me to the Rear to buy Victuals for himself; for there were some in that
place that did sell Bread and Meat ready dressed: As I was returning loaded, I
fell down with my burden a steep Rock, and bruised my self; but the fear lest
my Master should cudgel me for my Misfortune, rouzed me up, and made me speed
toward him.

From this unhappy place we removed up Hill through a Country that was not
inhabited, unless it be by Monsters and Wild Beasts, whereof we saw a great
many; some not known to me before.

It seems the Design of our General was to surprise the Arabian Army on a
sudden, and to come upon them by a way that they least suspected. We marched
here through Woods, over Rocks and Hills three days together. I had the
satisfaction for my pains to see several Creatures; of which I shall give a
brief Account.

This Mountain is part of the Atlas, it runs all along through this Kingdom,
and that of Fez, and reaches as far as the main Ocean; some part of it is very
high.

We came to a place in this hot time of Summer, which was very cold: In the
Corners that were not exposed to the Sun was a great deal of Ice and Snow. This
place which gave us a Prospect over all the Country, was in the second Region
of the Air.

Here we found plenty of woods and Trees, and several sorts of Birds; one we
did kill that had four Legs as a Beast: Its Body was as big as a Turkie-Cock,
the Head was like an Owl, its Tail was extreme broad, the Plumes were gray, and
the Head only black; it did not fly very swiftly, therefore our people had not
much difficulty to kill it.

We saw several sorts of Lions; toward the Evening they did go out of their
Dens, when the Jackals began to bark.

The noblest sort of Lion is that which is called the Royal; it is the biggest
and the strongst sort; it has a Shape somewhat differing from the rest, and a
Voice more stout: When any of the others do meet such an one, they seem to
yield a respect unto him. He is more grave in his Motion, more fierce in the
Encounter, undaunted in the greatest danger.

There are other sorts of a lesser Size. Every night we were visited with
several Companies of wild Creatures; some had the boldness to break in upon us,
but these never returned again to their company to tell News.

In an Evening we discovered afar off a great Beast; some of us went nearer to
it to discharge our Guns at it: It was a Monster of a large Bulk, the Head was
like a Lion, the Paws like a Bear, the hinder parts much like to an Ass; when
it was killed, every one in the Army had a sight of it; I then did remember the
Saying of the Romans, Africa semper apportat aliquid novi; every year there is
some strange Creature or other to be seen in these remote places.

Some make it their business to watch them at the Season of the Year that they
usually come into the World, and employ all their Art to catch them, that they
might lead them from place to place alive, to show them to the Inhabitants for
money.

There are here a great number of wild Goats, we had the sight of some that
climbed up the steepy Rocks, but could not come within Shot of them.

Another Creature I saw here much like unto a Dog, very nimble and quick
sighted, but yielding an extraordinary stink; it is called by the Moore Subsib.

There is also another of the same shape, only this difference, that it has a
white Tail, and adventures in the night amongst the Inhabitants to steal the
Good-wives Hens and Geese; it is called Thaloub; it is of the nature of our
English Foxes, very subtle and crafty.

I saw here in this wild place several other sorts of Serpents and Beasts, of
which I could not come near to take a full view, therefore I shall not
adventure to describe them.

I had almost forgot one of a strange Nature; it appeared unto us as a White
Lamb, something differing in the shape, as we were marching through a Valley;
but when it perceived us to approach in such Numbers, it fled before us; our
Captain thought it had been some straggling Lamb belonging to some Mountainous
People, and because we were not well provided with good Victuals, he sent some
of us to overtake it before it got into the neighboring thickets of a rising
Hill: I had Order to pursue it, and accompany the Hunters. As we came within a
hundred Paces of it, it made more haste than ordinary, and began to shift for
it self amongst the Trees; but as it could not well escape from us, because it
was already weary, and very fat, we overtook it at the entry in of the Bushes;
but perceiving us so near, it ran under one, and that we might not find it, it
changed in an instant its white color into the same with the Bush, which
unexpected alteration gave us a great deal of trouble. We had never found it
again, had not one of the Company discharged a Musket; at the Noise it rose up
in a fright, and began to run for its Life; we little thought it to be the
same, nevertheless some of us did venture after it, and some remained in the
place, seeking the white Beast: The Pursuers shot off one of its Legs, and then
cried to us to forbear seeking, and that the counterfeit Lamb was caught. We
went to be Eye witnesses of the Wonder; it was the same shaped Beast, but the
color was no more White as before, the Milky Color was changed into a
Blackish Gray: Its Coat was a fine Wool, the Head was like a Wolf, not
altogether so long, it had very sharp Teeth, and a fierce Look, the
Hinder-parts were like a Sheep: It is one of the strangest Creatures I ever
saw. I wondered how it could alter its White Wool into a Color so different: I
imagined this to be the Beast mentioned by the Learned, that takes the Color
of the place where it lays; a good Emblem of an Hypocrite.

We spent three days climbing over these mountainous places, and fighting with
strange and unknown Creatures to me: But as this was not the business we
intended, we made haste into the plain Country; our Horse and Carriages we had
sent by another way, a little about, so we arrived at the Passage of the River
before them.

The Arabs slept in great security, little thinking that we would adventure
over the Mountains and Rocks.

Our General Commanded us to rest, and fit our selves for Action, for he
imagined, that as soon as we should come into the Plain, our arrival would be
known to the Enemies, and that they would not fail to make Attempts upon us on
a sudden. We refreshed our selves all that Evening, until the next Morning,
when an Alarm was sounded, at the which we all ran to our Arms, and put our
selves in order, expecting the Onset of some Arabs, but no Enemy appeared,
unless it was a company of Apes pursued by a few Jaccals, who made such a noise
in the Wood that was near us, running up and down the Branches, that those upon
the skirts of the Army thought them to be the Enemy, that took the advantage of
the place to fire upon us; their needless Fear did as soon appear as the nimble
Creatures recovered the tops of the highest trees, to whose protection they did
dare to commit themselves; nevertheless the Allarm continued, and ran, as
nimbly as the Apes, all over the Army, it could not be stopped until every one
was informed of the cause of the Fright.

We Marched all that Morning until Noon, and then came to the foot of the
Hills, where our General was resolved to stay till Evening, intending with a
Party at Midnight to fall upon the Enemy, who was not above six Miles distance
from us: as it began to dawn, we advanced, and found some few Tents straggling
from the rest; the Arabs that were in them, told us that the main Body was at
the Ford of the River Tafna, expecting our Arrival; that they had broken down
all the Bridges all along, and were resolved to fight us; they further informed
us of the cause of their Revolt: A Person of a Noble Family of one of their
Tribes, named Isha Muker, whose Parents had been very considerable in the
Kingdom of Fez, was that year come amongst them, with all his Substance; that
he was looked upon as an Eminent Commander, skilful in Affairs of War and
Peace, and that he was therefore well received, because also that he was very
rich; That this was the man had persuaded them to shake off the Turkish yoke.
At first they were timorous and fearful to revolt; but at last he encouraged
them, by representing how imperious they were, the poverty of the Year, that
could not furnish the Tribute-Money, and to their subsistency. Besides he told
them that the Turks were not true Mahometans, that they were Heretical in their
Opinions, and profane in their Practices, and that it was not lawful to submit
to, and own such for their Masters. These Reasons had worked upon the
multitude, but could not cause them to take up Arms until he had advised
himself of this Stratagem; A Fellow was lately come into those Parts from
Mecha, and feigned to be lame; His Pilgrimage was much more esteemed because of
the pretended Impediment of his Feet.

Before he was arrived, Elmswar Tapnez, for that was the Noble Man's Name, had
sufficiently instructed him how he should behave himself: He brought with him a
Letter which was directed to the Chief Leading men of the Country, from the
Keeper of Mahomet's Temple; the Contents were, That Mahomet had appeared unto
him in a Dream, and commanded him to signify unto them that it was his
Pleasure to assist them this year in a notable manner, and free them from the
Slavery of the Turk: It promised besides the rewards of Heaven to those that
should be valiant, and eternal punishment to the Cowards and Disobedient.

This Letter was given almost at the same time to the Grandees, and divulged
all abroad amongst the Arabs in the Kingdom; some did give credit to it, others
did look upon it as an Imposture. Nevertheless an Assembly was called of the
Chief of them, where the Letter being again produced in the presence of Tapnez,
the Hage or Religious Pilgrim seeing him come in, fell on his Face and kissed
the hem of his Garment; the Assistants wondered at this humility, not usual in
persons of that Holy Order, until he had told them the Cause: He affirmed that
the Great Prophet had appeared that night unto him, and in consideration of his
great pains he had suffered in his Travels to Meccha, he would cure him of his
Lameness, that he had showed him the Person in his shape that should lay his
hand upon him and cure him, and that it was this same man that was present:
Tapnez seemed to increase the number of the Wonderers, and would not be
persuaded the Revelation had been real, until the Hage or Holy Man with all the
Assembly earnestly requested him to try what he was able to do: At last he
consented to their Prayers, and with his Right Hand began to stroke the Lame
man.

He no sooner felt the others singer, but he began to leap, and falling at his
Feet, adored him as a Holy Man.

The Assembly taking notice of the Cure, and the manner of it, did really
believe the Hage, and without delay established Tapnez for their General and
Chief Commander, until they could give notice of their Designs to some of the
Blood Royal of Mahomet, who only may command over them as King or Emperor. It
was then resolved also that they would no longer pay Tribute to the Turk:
Tapnez confirmed his Credit by many other feigned Miracles; so that he was
looked upon in the the Country as some extraordinary Fellow sent from Heaven
to their Assistance.

He had gathered together thirteen thousand Horse and Foot; the Country People
reported more: and with this Army was resolved to wait for the Turkish Army
that came that way to gather Contributions, and to relieve the Garrison of
Chinsan or Tremisen, a City in the middle of the Country, not inferior to Fez.

The Numbers of our Enemies did startle us when we heard how they were resolved
to revenge themselves for all past Affronts; therefore the Commanders did
desire the General not to expose them to so eminent a danger until the other
Armies had joined with him.

His Courage was great, he could not yield to this wholesome advice; his Hopes
were greater: He was resolved to get all the honor of the Victory to himself;
therefore he proposed to fall upon the Arabs that night; he showed it to his
Captains, to persuade them, what an easy thing it was to rout the Enemy that
was so secure, and that had not any notice of their Approach; and that unless
they did speedily make use of the Opportunity, the Horse and Baggage would be
delivered into the Hands of the Arabs, whose Numbers were able to oppress the
small Party that came directly that way. It was too late to go back, we were
now so near, that unless we did surprise the Enemy, it was impossible to escape.

According to our Generals Orders, as it began to dawn, we marched with all
speed into the Plain along the River, and about two or three hours in the night
we came within the Noise of the People in the Tents.

Our General divided us into three Parties, appointing over each a skilful
Leader, an Acha Basha, and commanded that we should fall upon the Arabs in
three places.

Out of the Main Body he had separated a certain number to seize on certain
straggling Horses which might be feeding about the Camp; These he intended to
employ in case he put the Army to flight.

As Soon as we came within a quarter of a Mile of the Enemy, we found a small
Party lodged in a hundred Tents, which we surrounded according to our Orders.
We killed all that we found alive, with very little noise. In the Medows and by
the Bank of the River great Companies of Horses were taken for our use.

It seems these Tents had been placed to guard them from Mountainers or Wild
Beasts: Our General made very good use of them in the Disorder and Confusion of
the Rebels, for he caused them to be mounted by some of his own Party, and
commanded them to pursue the Enemy.

As Soon as we came to the first Tents, we fell upon them without Mercy, and did
great Execution. The two other Parties entered the Camp by several ways, having
fetched a Compass about; we found no resistance until we came to the middle of
the Tents.

There was a large Spot of Ground unto which the Arabs did run together at the
sound of the Alarm: They had not time to put themselves in a good Order;
therefore at the third Volley of Shot they began to disperse, and to shift for
themselves by diverse ways. The two other Parties met several Companies of them,
which they either killed or took Prisoners. The most of them recovered their
Horses, and fled for their Lives.

Our small Party of Horse was not idle in the mean whiles; they ventured after
the Enemy with more Noise, than Ability to do harm.

In the dark their Numbers could not be well discerned; but this hindered them
from viewing us the next day; for knowing that we had both Horse and Foot, they
would not hazard themselves near us, until they had been informed by some
Runaways of our small Numbers.

They fled to the next Hills, where all their Substance had been stored.

The Plunder of the Camp was but small; such things we found that Beggars would
scarce lift from under their Feet; a few nasty Tents we erected of such pitiful
Stuff that I never saw the like. It seems the Arabs delight not in rich
Household Stuff, but in numbers of Sheep and Camels.

Some few Horses fell into our hands the next day.

In this Attempt we lost about 50 men, and 435 of the Arabians were killed in
and about the Camp. Our General found in some of the Tents Letters sent from
the Arabians in the other Kingdoms, to encourage these to resist the Turkish
Power, promising all assistance that they could furnish: For fear therefore
that the Enemy should receive from their Neighbors and Brethren such Supplies
as should encourage them to revenge themselves, and for fear we should lose the
passage of the River, which was of so great importance to the Turkish Affairs
and Designs, our General and his Council resolved to fortify themselves on
both sides in the best manner that the place would permit; and with all speed
to dispatch away some Messengers to the other Armies, to hasten them in their
March to his assistance; for he knew himself unable to encounter the Arabs, or
to proceed in his Designs and March toward Chinsan with his small Number.

Three Trenches were drawn on the Enemies side, and one on the other. There we
thought our selves secure; for the Enemies Horse were not able to come to us,
their Foot were poor and miserable, ten of them do not dare to look a Turk in
the Face.

The situation of the Place did favor our Enterprise; for the Ground on both
sides is higher than the rest at the Ford. The River is deep in all other
places, and runs in a narrow Channel; but when it comes there, it spreads it
self, finding more Elbow room: The Rising Ground forces it to run in a larger
Stream, and then again the Water is confined to a lesser Channel; so that only
in this place we may pass on foot without fear of Drowning.

Two days after the Battle, our Cavalry and Baggage came safe to us, although
they had been met by several Parties of Arabs, and forced to skirmish many
times.

By this new Supply our Courages began to increase; we were better able to
resist our Enemies Attempts in case they should be so bold as to force our weak
Fortifications,

We lay not long in this Posture, before we saw many resolute Parties of Horse
and Foot daring us out to Battle. They began to contemn those that they
formerly feared, when they knew our numbers: Every Night we had two or three
Alarms given unto us.

The second day after the arrival of our Cavalry, a strong Party of Horse rid
within Musketshot of us, calling us Cowards and Heretics. Our Generals Courage
could not suffer long these small Affronts unpunished, therefore he commanded
the Cavalry to hasten out and to charge them stoutly. It was a sad Enterprise
to many of them; above a thousand went out, but scarce five hundred came back
again. The cause of their Defeat was this; At the first Charge the Enemy
retreats in good Order; but when the Turks gave another Onset, they ran away,
only with a Design to draw us by that feigned flight far from the Main Body,
and into a strong Ambuscado that was hid behind a Hill about a Mile from the
River: Our men perceived not the Design, but with more haste than good speed
pursued them without consideration of the danger.

As Soon as they were past the place, a good Company of Foot salutes them with a
Volley of shot on the left hand, and then the Ambuscado of Horse rises on the
Right, at the same time the pursued Party turns their backs, and our poor men
were surrounded, disordered, and killed like so many Sheep: Had they not had a
stout Commander to lead them on and bring them off, they had all perished in
the place; for the unequal Numbers of the Enemy did overpower them. About 500
escaped from the Slaughter.

This Misfortune did wonderfully heighten the Courage of the Arabians, and give
Credit to their Arms.

It made our General more wary for the future, and prevented greater
Destructions which might have happened unto us, had we not been made wiser by
our Losses.

The Enemy at several other times did endeavor again to catch us in the same
Advantage; but our General was grown wary by Experience.

That the Spirits of his men might not be dejected, nor the Arabs too proud of
their Success, he drew out both Horse and Foot, and put them in a readiness to
fight.

The Enemy came to look upon us; our Horse was sent to take a view of them:
They returned again after a light Skirmish, in which the Rebels had the worst.
Every day we did encounter with them, sometimes to our Advantage, sometimes to
our Loss. We lay not long in this place before we heard of the approach of the
Eastern Army, Commanded by the two Generals. They had not met with any
opposition in their Circuit, until they came within a days Journey of us; then
a strong Body of Horse opposes them, and forces them to seek the shelter of a
Hill, where they were better able to receive the Onset of the Arabians. It
seems they had heard of the March of that Army toward us, therefore to prevent
our joining together, or rather to defeat them before they came up with us, a
great number of them had stolen over the River secretly, at a great distance
from us, and had expected them in their way.

As Soon as this News came to our Camp, our General resolved to meet them in
person, leaving in the Fortifications a sufficient number to defend it, and the
same appearance of his being present. It was my Masters and my Fortune to
accompany the Army.

At a place called by the Arabians Stefee, we came up with the Enemy: A Party
of Horse charged us very stoutly with Lance and Musket: Not many of ours were
wounded, only four or five killed. They met with as stout resistance, which
forced them from us, not without loss. Our Horse had the Chase of them a Mile.
We did not dare to adventure again after them farther; besides, they were more
nimble than ours, because they had not been tired with so long a Journey.

By this small Encounter and Victory we opened a way to our men that we found
in no small distress for want of Provisions and things necessary.

They could not proceed in their Journey for fear of the Enemy, that had had
great advantage over them.

We found them entrenched in a strong place, in such a manner that all the
Arabians were not able to drive them from thence, unless it were by Famine.
They informed us of what had passed between them; that the Arabians had beaten
them twice, and killed above a Thousand Men. The first time they laid an
Ambuscado in their way, near a thick Wood, and when some Companies were past
the place they fell suddenly upon them without mercy, and had not the Generals
exposed their Persons to the Peril, and maintained a Fight with the Victorious
Enemy, until the others had rallyed again, they had been all utterly lost; for
they were in such a disorder, that they killed one another to make way for to
fly.

Our Men were possessed with so strange a fear and apprehension, that when our
Vanguard came near the place, they imagined them to be the Enemy; their joy was
no less than their fear, when they perceived their error. They received us as
their Protectors. We supplied them with all things that they wanted, and then
Marched back again to our Camp, unto which the other Army soon arrived.

With this recruit it was resolved we should stay no longer there, but beat up
the Quarters of the Enemy: Accordingly the next day we Marched out Bag and
Baggage, having left a small Guard in the place to keep it, to secure our
passage over again, in case we should meet with the Misfortunes of War, which
might oblige us to a Retreat.

At two Miles distance from the River, a small Party had the Courage to Charge
us, but they would not stand to it long. We Marched up the Hill with a great
deal of Courage and Resolution: Our men were so enraged by their former Losses,
that they would not pardon any of the Enemy that fell by chance into their
hands.

This Mountain is called Houlahka; it is about ten miles round; it reaches very
high; about it several Cottages are built, that serve for habitation to the
Natural Inhabitants of this Country, the Moors; they are poor and needy for the
most part, they feed upon such things as grow wild in the Valley; for although
this Mountain appears entire to the Beholders afar off, with a continued
Ascent, there are many Valleys in it, and it is composed of several little
Hills: The lower ground is extreme fruitful, watered with many pleasant
Fountains that pour down their streams toward the River Tapna.

This place is adorned with many goodly Trees and Woods, which as in most
places grow naturally without planting, in that ground which has not been
lately employed, whereof there is very much in the Land.

The Earth of it self abhors Idleness; when therefore it is neglected by reason
of the small Number of Inhabitants, or when it has been long without employing
its innate productive virtue, it then breaks forth into Trees and Wood, as in
the West Indies is sufficiently known: Our Plantations have been forced to make
way for their Habitations with the Axe and the Saw, to hew down the Wood that
did cover the Country; and in our Island, as some ancient Writers tell us,
Cumberland and Westmerland, and all the Northern Parts of England were full of
Woods, Trees and Bushes, especially upon the Mountains, where scarce any Wood
is now to be seen.

In this place the Arabians did think to find a safe Retreat; and the rather,
because there were not many Advenues to the Top: Nature had on all sides fenced
it, and distinguished it from the other Land by high and steepy Rocks. Five
Passages do lead into this Place; the largest is a way about a hundred feet
broad, in most places covered on both sides with Sandy Hills, Woods and Rocks
that seem to threaten the Passenger.

The Entrance into this Place was somewhat terrible unto us, not only because
of the nature of the Situation, but also because the Enemy had seized upon all
the difficult places and passages to annoy us.

Our Generals were resolved to beat them from thence, and to fight them in
their Nest.

Both sides of the way were lined with Armed men, that did cast upon us Stones,
Timber, and whatsoever they could get. We defended our selves with Offensive
and Defensive Weapons, and made a way by the Sword, until we came to a very
difficult Passage: On both sides were raised two Bushy Woods, in which the
Enemy were hid; when our men came near, they let fly against us several Volleys
of Shot, which put us all to stand. The Arabians thought us to be amazed at
this sudden opposition, of which they intended to make advantage, in an instant
came thundering upon us before and behind, the stoutest of them; so that we were
in no little trouble how to oppose them. Our Generals shared amongst themselves
the danger and the honor of the Victory; they seeing the craft and power of
the Arabians, separated themselves, and turned their several Companies against
the next Troops of the Enemy, and did so handsomely behave themselves, and so
wisely manage their business, that the Arabians were forced to leave us the
Masters of the Field, with the Victory. One thing did very much contribute to
the obtaining of it; not far from that place an easy Ascent did lead to the
other side of one of the woods, where the Arabians had secured themselves: By
this, one of our Generals steals up, and falls upon the back of the Enemy, that
thought next upon nothing but how to save themselves by flight. Our men pursued
their advantage, and left not their business half fininished; they seized upon
the place, and drove the Arabians quite out of the Wood with great slaughter.
Their Fellows seeing their disorder, and the Resolution of our Men, that would
not retire back, imagined some such thing might happen on their side, therefore
they all ran away; so strange a passion is Fear, that when Men are inclinable
to it, the least accident causes them to tremble; all the World would not have
been able to have beat them from this place, had they maintained it with
resolution; but the sight of an Enemy behind, which they least suspected,
frighted them away. They recovered the other side, where their Horses stayed
for them, and so saved themselves from the Turks Fury. They lost here above
1500 Men. in the Valleys we found many hundred Head of Cattle, Sheep, Oxen,
Cammels, and all sorts of Beasts, feeding in the Pastures: It was wonderful to
us to meet with such a fruitful place in the midst of so many Rocks and such
barren Hills. For all these Losses the Arabians would not return to their
former Obedience, but continued still to resist us: Our Camp did receive
several Alarms, especially in the Night, so that we were all tired out with
Watching.

Above three Weeks we were pursuing the Enemy amongst the Hills, from one Hill
to another: They did fly continually, and because we were not so strong in
Cavalry as they were, we did not dare to adventure against them, only with our
Horse; our Foot were not able to pursue them so fast as they did save
themselves: The Plunder that we did find in these places, did abundantly
satisfy for the yearly Tribute. The great numbers of Cattle that we got into
our hands, caused the Arabians to fall out amongst themselves; which coming to
our Ears, our Generals sent a Flag of Truce, to invite them to submit to the
Turks Empire; a part of them accepted the offer of Peace, and came in to us;
the others with their Captain was said to have fled away, so that meeting with
none to oppose us, we received some Hostages from the Enemy; and because their
Losses had been great, our Generals would not exact from them any other
Tribute, than what they had recovered by force of Arms. They had full liberty
to return to their former abode, upon condition that they would Manure the
Ground, and pay unto them of Argiers their usual Tribute-money; they promised
to be always obedient to the Grand Seignior, and to the City of Argeirs;
afterward they were dismissed: There were about 1600 Families that did return to
their Duty with all their Leaders.

Our Army took another way out of these Mountains than we came. No Enemy
appeared all the way, until we came to a narrow passage between two high Hills;
the way was a difficult Ascent: Here we found it stopped up in such a manner that
no Horse could pass. Before we imagined our business had been done, when we saw
so many of the revolted Arabians return to their Obedience; it did not
therefore a little surprise us, when we found so many left to oppose us at this
Passage, it was not possible for us to come near: Several of our Companies did
endeavor to storm the place, but the Enemy was so strongly fortified on all
sides, and so well furnished with Weapons, that we were forced to sit down and
consider what to do: A Council was called of all the Commanders, where it was
resolved not to go back or seek any other passage, because if they did leave
such a powerful Enemy unpunished, and on foot in the heart of the Kingdom, it
might very much endanger their interest there; for as soon as they should be
gone, they would endeavor to corrupt the rest, and draw them from their
Allegiance, either by force or fair means; besides, they did consider that they
that had submitted unto them, were forced unto it, and that they were as
inclinable to stand out as these, were there any hopes of prospering in their
opposition against us; and that it would be no small Disgrace to a victorious
Army to be overcome by a vanquished Enemy: the least News of this would be able
to encourage the rest of the Turks Subjects to revolt: For these and many other
Reasons they thought it necessary to make way through that place and no other.
The difficulty was to find out the means of compassing their Design: By plain
force they did see it impossible.

We had given several Attempts to no other purpose but to discourage our men
with the loss of their Companions. My Master was wounded with a Stone cast from
a Sling. It Seems some of these Arabians are excellent Marks-men, and very
dexterous at this old kind of Weapon.

There was no other way to come to fight with these People but one, which was
also so well fortified, that we lost our Labor and Men to attempt it. Our
Generals were afraid that this small Party that held out against us, would
increase by degrees, if they did once oblige us to a stand, and that they would
lessen the reputation of our Men in the Country, if we could not overcome them.

First they resolved to send a Flag of Truce, to try whether they could win
them to a peaceable compliance without Arms: The Arabians were glad to see this
expression of our Weakness, which they might have improved to their advantage,
had they accepted the Offers that would have been made. They had been received
again at their own terms, but as people that rely upon their own strength,
they took this as an open acknowledgment of the impossibility of our passage
without their leave, and thought themselves sufficiently secure against all our
Attempts; therefore when our Messenger came with Offers of Peace, they were
ready to beat him, and would not read the Letter sent to their General, but
contemptuously, before him, trod it under feet, telling him, that they knew our
Demands without reading the Letter, and that they would speedily return an
Answer in the Company of Thirty thousand men. This unexpected Return to the
Civility of our Leaders did not a little trouble them; for they imagined that
so proud and confident an Answer did proceed from some powerful assistance
expected by the Enemy from their Brethren of the neighboring Provinces: Their
Conjecture was not in vain; for they had lately received the promises of a
speedy supply from them of Fez, Angad, and Snatta, three Provinces, very large,
where several of the Tribes of the Arabians do inhabit with the ancient Natives
the Affricans, the one in Tents, the other in small Villages. They were upon
their March when they heard of the first Defeat that the Turks had given to
their Brethren at the difficult passage. Fame had increased the Number of the
slain, and represented the slaughter to them ten times worse than really it was.

Some time before they had dispatched a Messenger with News of their coming,
which Messenger did according to his Orders, give an Account of the Numbers and
Resolution of them that sent him to the Besieged. They relied upon his words,
not knowing of the contrary intentions that the change of Affairs had produced
in them; for as soon as they heard of the Turks Successes, and their own
Misfortunes, they returned back again, leaving their Friends and Brethren to
our Mercy, and their own Protection.

This we knew not when the Messenger returned with such a resolute Answer:
Therefore our Leaders thought it their Interest, to overcome the Enemy before
any Supply might come to them.

We lay several days not knowing what course to take, until the Arabians
themselves furnished us an occasion to overcome them: They sent out about Fifty
Men to steal Cattle, these we trapand and took every one of them: As Soon as
news came to our General of their surprisal, he commands 50 choice Men to be
picked out of the Army, some of them spoke the Arabian Tongue well, so that they
could not be distinguished, these he causes to be habited as the Arabians were,
and to be armed with four Pistols a piece, which were hid in their Bosoms; then
he gives them about an hundred Head of Cattle to drive before them toward the
Arabians: Having sufficiently instructed them what to do, and informed them of
the signal to be given, in case they did succeed, he Commands them to March.

They accordingly ascend up to the narrow Passage, where the Enemy kept a
strong Guard, as soon as they came within Call, they were ordered to pronounce
Mahummed i shur, the Word that was given the Thieves, to distinguish them from
others; at that the Passage was opened, and they drove in the Beasts without
any opposition; the Purchase did not a little please our Enemies, because they
had been put to some straits for want of Victuals; they had some a coming from
the other side, but it was not yet arrived; but when the Drivers of these
Cattle proved to be none of their Friends, their joy was turned into fear.

Our Men were no sooner entered but they left the Conduct of the Beasts to some
other Body, and fell to their work; they killed and surprised all the Guards
thereabouts, and possessed themselves of the Advenue, giving notice thereof by
a sudden flash of Gunpowder to the Turks, who presently ascended the Hill and
entered the place; had they not arrived in time, all our Men had been cut to
pieces, for they were mightily oppressed with numbers, but we came opportunely
to their assistance, and forced the Arabians to seek safety in their heels.

Our Army passed into the Plain Country again, in pursuance of their Enemies,
who being tired with so many Misfortunes and Losses, and seeing none come to
their assistance, they sent some of their chief Men to treat with us about
Peace; their Message was acceptable to the whole Army.

That which most persuaded them to submit unto the Turks, was, because many of
them had left their Wives and Children in the last Engagement behind them, to
the Turks disposition. Their Captivity did highly concern their near Relations,
therefore they sought all means to recover them again by a firm Treaty. They
excused unto us the impertinent Answer, and the great Contempt of the Turks
first Offers, upon a certain number of them that were then amongst the dead,
assuring us that those that were alive, had been led into this Rebellion
against their Wills, by mere necessity, because they had a depency upon the
Chief Men of them that were killed: For they have several strong Factions
amongst them, the chief Disposers of all the rest, according to his pleasure;
they swear by Mahomet to maintain and follow him whither soever he goes.

Our Generals received them into Favor again, upon condition, that every Year
they should pay a double Tribute, as a punishment to their Rebellion. Elmswar
Tapnez their Chief Captain fled with all speed toward Angad, that lies full
South of the Kingdom of Argiers, so that he could never come into the Turks
power. We dismissed those that yielded unto us, and returned them their Wives and
Children.

Our Generals having so happily made an end of this War, that threatened the
Turks Interest in those Parts, began to separate again, and to proceed in their
Journey over the Kingdom, to gather the Tribute-money.

The People pay by the Head two Dollars, that is nine Shillings a Head, Men,
Women and Children; those that are very rich in Cattle are forced to part with
more, when the Army goes the Rounds; and if any is extraordinary poor in a
Family, his Neighbors and near Kinsfolks must supply his wants, and pay for
him; so that the total Sum of this Tribute is very great, I have heard some
speak of ten Millions of Dollars, besides the Expenses of the Army. This Money
is brought into Argiers, some part of it is sent to Constantinople to the Grand
Segnior, another part defrays the Expenses of the Militia and Officers of
Church and State, and another part is cast into the Public Treasury.

Our Army proceeded right to Chinsan or Tremisen, a strong and populous City,
kept by the Turks with a numerous Guard that is relieved every year. Our
General was designed Governor of this place, and was sent thither with his
Army to Command it.

We had a very pleasant Journey from this Mountain to that City, thorough a
fruitful Country that did furnish us both with Money and good Entertainment;
some of them had been in the Rebellion, but the Turks would not deal with them
more severely than with the others, to oblige them to a greater Fidelity; for
their is no greater tie to Obedience than Love, and the sense of former
Obligations: Our Army might have treated them as Enemies, sold their Goods,
taken their Wives and disposed of them as Bondslaves; but they knew that this
dealing would serve to no other purpose, but to exasperate the Spirits of the
rest, who might then have reason to seek an occasion of a Revenge. It is never
good to deal with Men as with Beasts; the latter are awed into obedience, but
the first must be persuaded: The Magistrates sword may scare me, but it shall
never win me.

This Practice of the Turks was very commendable: They thought it unworthy
their Courage to tread on the Neck of a vanquished and yielding Enemy. Our
General, to oblige the Chief of the Families and Tribes, did invite several of
them to eat with him; he bestowed Gifts upon some of the Arch Rebels, imitating
the practice of those Princes that bestow their Favors upon those that are
suspected, or that have been rebellious, to oblige them to be more faithful to
their Interest for the future.

At a small Town, called by the Turks, Canatudi, and by the Moors, Canahaal,
there was a great Feast kept for the Marriage of one Elmswar Bidow Ben hemmed,
an Alcalde of one of their Tribes; our General coming to the place at that
time, honored the Solemnity with his presence, and caused all his Captains and
Chouses to pay their respects to the Bride and Bridegroom.

I cannot pass further until I take notice of what is observed by this People
in such occasions; the young man that has a mind to marry, demands the
Daughter from her Father, or next Kindred; if they grant her, he never troubles
himself to win her consent; this is an excellent way to spare a great deal of
hypocrisy, and to save the poor men much Courtship: The man makes a great
Feast according to his Quality; some do treat their Friends seven days; the
first day he sends to his future Spouse by some Kinswoman, a Vail, to recommend
unto her Modesty; the second day, a Suit of Apparel, such as they wear; the
third day, a Mill to grind Corn, and Instruments to spin, to remember she may
not be idle; the fourth, an Alcoran; the fifth, a pair of Slippers handsomely
made and gilded; the sixth day he sends a Cock and a Dog, to teach her
Diligence and Watchfulness; and the seventh, a Ring of that Country Fashion,
with a Dish of Meat, and a Staff with this Motto about it, I will punish all
Offenders. All this while the Bridegroom has not so much as seen his future
Spouse, but sends to visit her often with some course Complements, as as is
usual amongst Moors. On the eighth day, which is that of the greatest
Solemnity, the Bridegroom comes to the Fathers house, accompanied by all his
Friends and Kindred, and there in the presence of them all, the Father delivers
all his right, title and interest in his Daughter, to the man, by giving unto
him her hand, and saying some words proper to the business in hand. They go
next to the place of Prayer, which in Tents is near the middle; and there a
Thaloub blesses the married Couple, adding several Prayers to God, and
Mahomet, and to the Angel Zadiel, that governs, as they say, the Planet
Jupiter, to favor this Conjunction by some happy influence. Then they all
march in order to the Fathers House, where a great Feast is prepared for them:
The men by themselves in one Room make merry; the Women in another, are jolly
until the Evening: Then the Bride in all her State, with all her
Household Stuff, Servants, Gifts and Money, is carried to the man's House; she
usually sits mounted on a Camel, glittering in Gold and Silk, and about her are
all her Kindred and Friends. When she comes to her Husbands House, she then
pulls off her Vail, because Modesty is no longer in season, nor proper to that
place. Some do keep several Feast days afterward, and spend much of their
Estate, according to their abilities, or the love they bear to the Spouse.

I was an Eyewitness of several Ceremonies observed in this occasion, which
are related in other Travels.

We stayed in this place several days to refresh our selves, and then we
continued our Journey toward Chinsan, where we arrived on the third of October.

It is a large and populous City, inhabited by a kind of People called
Lhebdiah; round about are most pleasant Gardens and Orchards. The Soil is good,
the Climate wants nothing but People worthy to receive and enjoy the good
things that it affords.

We found here great store of Fruits, Apples, Pears, Melons of diverse kinds,
Grapes; for although the Mahumetan drinks not Wine, he loves the Grape, and a
kind of Drink that is made of Water and Raisins, called Africana; it is very
pleasant, and proper for this Climate.

Here is a strange sort of Tree made up of Leaves, one Leaf grows on the top of
another; the Leaves are thick two or three inches in the middle; they are above
a foot large and long; an excellent Fruit grows upon them, which the Arabs call
Asholoch, our English, Prickle Pear; the Substance is cold and refreshing; it
is ripe about Midsummer, and of a yellowish color. Every Garden is furnished
with such a Tree: The Rind is full of little Prickles undiscernable; therefore
it is not to be handled with naked hands. I have since seen some in other parts.

Here is also a beautiful Tree of diverse Colors, that the Great Men cause to
grow in the midst of their Gardens; it serves as an excellent Ornament to a
place: Its Body is of a deep green, the Boughs red, the Leaves yellow as Gold,
with a mixture of white. Some told me that this Tree could not grow in any
other Climate or Soil, and that some had labored to transplant it on the
Seashore, but that Air had rendered all their Labors and Endeavors to little
purpose.

Here is great abundance of Dates: That Tree never produces unless there be a
Conjunction of the Male with the Female; they usually join their Boughs
together.

I had time in this place to take a view of all the Rarities: It appears to me
to be one of the ancientest Cities of the World; it stands upon a plain ground,
fortified with a strong Wall, beautified with many square Marble Pillars, very
white, the rest of the Wall being built of a brown stone; on the top the
Bulwarks are adorned with Turrets of diverse colors. The City yields a pleasant
sight to the Beholder when the Sun shines. The inside is no less beautiful. The
Streets are straight and broad. The Heart of the City contains many excellent
Buildings. A stately Mosque supported by a hundred Pillars of white Marble,
with several Arches of very curious work; the Governors Palace, where there
are a hundred large Rooms very neatly adorned with several misshapen Figures of
diverse Colors; for the Mahumetans abhor Images and Statues; therefore they
have not the use of Pictures, nor do not allow them to appear publicly in any
place.

Here is also a Townhouse, a place appointed for the meeting of the Chief
Persons when any urgent Business calls them to consult together: It stands upon
an Arch supported by two Rows of Marble Pillars. It has a Steeple to it built
with half Brick and half Stone, very high and large. The top has a Prospect
into all the Country as far as our Eyesight will reach; and in one side is a
large Room full of the ancient Records of the Arabians since the first Conquest
of this Country, with many Large Volumes.

The next Place to it is the Court that belongs to the Cadir, the Chief
Justice, where he sits upon a Seat covered with a Canopy of Cloth of Silver,
the Seat is elevated above the rest in the manner of a Table spread with Turkey
Carpets, upon which he sits as a Tailor. A Fellow stands at his Elbow with a
naked Cymeter; about him a little lower, sit several of his Assistants, whose
Counsel he takes in difficult Affairs. Over against stands the Parties to be
judged without delay; they usually receive the Punishments due to their
Offense, at the same time that they are judged; for they admit of no Reprieve.

There are many other Houses very well built; they are flat on the Top; some
are curiously painted according to the Mosaique Fashion. The Inhabitants do
sleep upon them in the Summer, covered with an Alhage, to defend them from the
venomous Flies, and from the Musketa's, pernicious Creatures that suck their
Blood.

In the middle of the City is a large Marketplace, and round about many
Cloisters of the Religious men amongst the Moors. One is more remarkable than
the rest, because of the excellent Workmanship and ancient Fabric, and because
of a great Library, a curious thing amongst this rude People: I know not with
what manner of Books it is stored; for Christians have never the liberty to
handle them; but as I did learn from the Keepers of the Door, they were Books
that had been picked up in all the parts of Africa by one of their Princes, and
laid in that place, for the benefit of the Students, whereof there are very
few, unless it be of Magicians, and men that study the Virtues of Simples.
Other Arts and Sciences, as Astrology, Logic, the Mathematics, etc. are
almost extinct amongst them.

In the time of my abode among them, I have perceived that they pretend many
times the assistance of the Devil to work miraculous Effects, when they do it
by the Knowledges that they have of Nature.

They are very superstitious, and listen very much to the Reports and Whimsies
of their Soothsayers.

Some never undertake a Voyage of any Concern, without consulting these
Oracles. Many in these parts make a great advantage of the Peoples Folly.

There is a Society amongst them that profess Fortune-telling. It is not so
much discredited as in our Kingdom: They are persons for the most part of
Honor and Reputation that are admitted to a familiar acquaintance with the
infernal Spirits. They vouchsafe not to appear and discover themselves to every
idle Rascal. I have seen wonderful Cures performed by their means, not so much
by the secret operation of the Spirit, as by the virtue of Herbs and Medicines
applied to the Patient, which were directed and revealed by the Evil Spirit;
for the Devil is a good Physician, he may dispute the Palm with Hypocrates and
Galen. I have seen a deaf man, whose Organ was only obstructed, and not
incapacitated, cured by the Application of an Herb like unto our Sorrel, called
Hegn by the Moors. Agues and Fevers are driven away by the touch of some of
these Magicians; other Diseases require a longer time, and other Remedies.

This City is full of this sort of People that openly acknowledge themselves to
be such, and own a familiarity with several infernal Spirits: Their Names and
Appearance I could never know from them. I was very inquisitive to understand
something of their art; but their Grandeur could not suffer them to entertain a
Discourse with a poor Slave. I have seen them make Figures and Images of Clay
and Wax, which they put upon the top of their houses, especially in the two
Solstices, in the Equinoctials, and in the full Moon; the reason, as I did
conceive, was to make them receive some quality which the Stars do send down at
such seasons upon the corporal Bodies.

There are many sorts of Trades in this place; but as in most Cities of
Barbary, they all live together in one Street that are of the same Profession.

At one end of the Town hard by the River Elouad that waters the Fields of
Climsan, is erected a stately Castle, the Seat of the Lieutenant or Governor
of the City: It overlooks the Town, and commands it with a hundred Pieces of
Ordnance. Nothing is here remarkable but the Antiquity of the Buildings and
Fortifications.

It was first erected in the time of the Vandal Kings, to keep this Inland
Country in subjection, and especially this great and populous City. It has
been since enlarged by the Saracens. In the middle stands a Pillar full of
Arabic Letters, written in blew Figures upon black Marble, to signify the
memorable actions that have been performed in the time of Saracen or Arabic
Kings. They have reigned in these parts many years before Charles the Fifth
attempted to win Argiers. A small History and Account of their Names and
Actions I shall annex in its place.

This City is the largest in the whole Kingdom, which is limited on the North
side by the Mediterranean, on the East by Tunis, on the South by Angad, another
large Kingdom in the Land, and by Snatta, Province that has almost nothing but
Mountains and Rocks; and on the West it borders upon the Kingdom of Fez. It
contains 250 Leagues in length, from the Sea in the Land as far as Angad, and
about 160 in breadth, from Bousema to the Cape called by our people Cap de
Bugaremo. It contains several Cities well fortified, the chief are Argiers and
Tremisen, or Climsan, so called by the Inhabitans; on the Seacoast are
Cercelli, Bougia, Gigiari, Mastagan, Bische, Gileto, Guien, Arseni, Oran, that
belongs to the Spaniard; where a Marquess commands the Country about ten Miles
round, with seven or eight hundred horse; Zereni, Arsebiba, Buazia, Corban,
some of these are Cities, others but small Towns.

In the Land are many good Towns and Places of Note; these are the chief,
Benibachul, Albori, Tegdeme, Stefe, Canatudi, Medua, Calamou, Lori, Albron,
Segmes, a large Town that gives name to a Province so called; Hagroah,
Bibroehl, and several others, whose Names are hereafter mentioned: I have
reckoned up here above a hundred Villages inhabited by the Africans, that are
Servants to the Arabians, and they are Subject to the Turk: Some of them retain
the ancient Language. In the Province of Snatta they have a particular Speech,
not understood by any but by themselves: Some told me that it is the old Punick
Language; for they that inhabit these Mountains and barren Places, were driven
thither by the Wars and Cruelty of the new Inhabitants, who had ground and room
enough without troubling that poor sort of People; therefore they always left
them to enjoy their own without disturbing them; only they have obliged them to
receive the Law of Mahomet: That was not difficult to impose upon a People that
before had scarce any Religion; or if they had, it was accompanied with so much
Ignorance and Superstition that they knew no reason to oppose that Religion
that appeared round about them, so successful, and so universally received.

In this City of Climsan I remained 3 years with my Master. At our first
Arrival our General took possession of the Government, and of the Castle, and
the former Governor took Charge of the Tribute-Money to be conveyed to
Argiers. A week after our coming, he set forwards with his Companies that had
been weakened by the Diseases of the last Year: His Commission ordered him to
meet the Western Army, and both together to return home with their sums of
Money. Our Destiny staid us in this City, in which I met with various and
strange Adventures. I was (...) times obliged to undertake a ^^^^ney with my
Master in the (...): first was toward Angad, in which Province is a famous and
ancient City called Bedtua, not inferior to Climsan, unless it be in the
largeness and excellency of the Buildings.

The Country round about is full of all sorts of Fruit, and is not so hot as
one might imagine. I found several sorts of Commodities at a very cheap Rate,
which we purchase with large Sums, and great labor and hazard. Hides, Honey,
Beeswax are here in a great abundance.

We past over a Sandy Valley about half way to Bedtua, where we found a great
deal of glittering Sand, much like to that of Gold. In the middle is a large
Lake, unto which the wild Beasts and Serpents resort; above 50 or 60 did
threaten us when we offered to approach.

Our Business in these parts was to treat with a great Commander of the Arabs,
the Prince of this Kingdom, about some Business of Importance to our Garrison.
My Master was dispatched as an Ambassador with a considerable Guard to defend
him from the Attempts of wild Beasts and Lawless Thieves, of which the
Mountains are peopled.

It is needless to relate all the Particulars of our Journey, and the manner of
our Reception.

We passed through many Companies of Tents. They had chosen for their Situation
the most pleasant Valleys, and fruitful Ground. The first day we had a sharp
Encounter with about a dozen lusty Lions; they hunted after their prey, and met
with death at the end of our Muskets. They could not be killed without
receiving some damage: One of our men was wounded with the Paws of one of these
Furious Beasts, that leaped upon him after that he had been struck through the
Belly. The danger of our Companion made us dispatch him sooner out of the way.
This danger was followed by another more fearful; but we escaped out of it as
happily.

The next day we passed through a large and Sandy Plain of about ten Leagues
long, and four broad, called by the Moors, Scidduahr; in it were raised several
little Hills moveable with the Wind, between which of necessity we were to
pass. We were no sooner entered, but a strong Easterly Wind raises the light
Sand, and threatens to bury us alive: It was a fearful thing to us to behold so
much Earth flying in our faces; the Air was thick with the dusty Sand; in a
moment a Hill was removed from one place to another; besides that we had to
encounter with the boisterous Wind, our Horses were half buried in a moment, we
could not make a stop in this dreadful place for fear of being past hopes of
returning.

The rest of our Journey was far more pleasant; for it afforded us variety of
Objects, not ungrateful unto us; besides, the way was less dangerous and less
troublesome.

In eight days we had a sight of the Walls of Bedtua: We were kindly
entertained at the Princes Cost. He was a Person of a middle Stature, very
swarthy, in his Face the Characters of Majesty did appear, and in his Garb and
Attendance those of his Dignity. At our arrival 500 Horse were sent out to meet
us at some distance from the City; they came in very good Order, and led us to
an Apartment that had been prepared for my Master Reception as soon as they
heard of our Approach. We received here the Complement of many persons of
Quality.

As Soon as the Prince was arrived from the Fields, we were sent to wait upon
him. The Ceremonies observed on this Occasion I took exact notice of. The
Princes Guards clothed with a thin Stuff of a Scarlet Die, with red Bonnets
and white Feathers flying upon it, yielded a most pleasant sight on both sides
of the way, that were lined with them. At a convenient distance stood the
officers, whose Garb and Mien did make us take notice of them for Persons more
eminent than the rest. They were as full of Civility as Honor, when my Master
passed by them; paying unto him as much Respect as an Ambassador from the Grand
Seignior could expect.

We passed through three large Streets in view of many Thousands that did look
upon us from the tops of the Houses and the Windows: Before us matched two
grave Fellows very neatly dressed; next went my Master, followed by two Turks
bearing the Presents designed for the Prince. We were attended by many of his
Officers.

When we came to the Palace, the Guards that were at the Gate obliged us to
leave our Sandals behind.

It is a very large House, built of Marble and Brick; the white and red Colors
do yield a pleasant sight: We entered into three Courts very handsomely adorned
with curious work; at the first my Master was complemented by the Princes
Secretary, at the second by his Brother, and led into the third, where He
Himself was lying in State. In the middle of it was erected a great Tent of
green Silk; at the four Corners, and on the top were Flags of red Silk, having
the Arms of Mahomet, and of the Princes Family very neatly wrought: At the Door
my Master was met by the Prince himself, who is bound to pay that respect to
any that comes in the Name of the Grand Seignior. Some Discourse and kind
Expressions passed between them, which I could not approach to hear; they went
next both together, and ascended three Steps at the further end of the Tent,
and sat upon a large Table, my Master at the left hand of the Arabian Prince;
over their Heads a stately Canopy was hung, and round about Persons of the
greatest Quality stood, to honor and increase the Solemnity. My Master
acquainted him with his Business and Design, and received from him a very
favorable Answer, with a Promise to endeavor his speedy satisfaftion.

I saw here nothing of that rudeness, which our People imagine to be in all the
Parts of Africa: The Place, and Attendance of the Prince, had as much of State
and Glory, as is usual amongst the little Princes of Europe. I found nothing
barbarous but their Language, which I could not well understand.

The Arabs all about Africa are People very polite, and well bred; they have
nothing of that baseness and uncivil carriage, which other more remote Nations
have: They are imperious amongst the People that they have Conquered, because
otherwise they could never retain them in subjection to their Empire; but to
Strangers that come amongst them, they are affable, hospitable, courteous,
kind, and very liberal: If any harm is committed to a Forreigner, it is not by
them, but by the rascally sort of People, the ancient Inhabitants, that look
upon all Strangers for the Arabs sake as Enemies, by Race of Black-Mores,
whereof there are here great Multitudes subject to the Arabians. My Master was
about three hours in Conference with the Prince, and we as long waiting at the
Door of the Tent; all the time a rough sort of Music played, five men with
several sorts of Instruments made a Consort of Tunes very harsh to our Englist
Ears.

When the Discourse was ended, my Master was led to the Door of the Tent by the
Prince, and then by his Grandees he was conduced back to his Apartment with
much Pomp and Joy.

Before I proceed, I must give a further Account of the Prince that Commands so
far in the Land; his Name is Moses Zim Kush, a man of about forty years of
Age, of a middle Stature, not so swarthy as the ordinary Moors; his Body is
straight and slender, his Face full of Majesty; nevertheless he has a very
loving Aspect; his people have a great respect for him: He has the Command of
three great Tribes, that have seated themselves in these innermost Countries,
amongst the Sands and Mountains. He had formerly some dependency upon the King
of Fez and Morocco; but now by the death of the last Emperor, he became
absolute, as I did then understand. And as he commands a great Compass of
Ground, and has no little power in regard of the Number of his Men and good
Incomes, all his Neighbors have sometimes need to seek his Favor.

My Master went not so much to Court it as to treat with him about the public
Concerns. Several Commodities do grow in his Country in a great abundance,
which the Kingdom of Argeirs do want: My Master had a Commission to procure
from him the Liberty of free Trading, and to suffer them to be sent out of his
Dominions without such excessive Tribute as he did formerly require, to the
great prejudice of the Turks, that were obliged to buy them for want of others,
at any Rate. He had Order also to complain of several Violences committed by
the Princes Subjects upon the Borders; for some few Tents had lately been
pitched in the Turks Confines by these Arabs, that would not acknowledge their
Jurisdiction, and had robbed others that were under their Command, of about a
hundred Head of Cattle, under pretense that the Owners did suffer them to go
out of their Limits, and graze where they should not. There were other
Robberies done of late by them of Angad; for which my Master was to make
complaint, and demand restitution of the Goods. His business was also to desire
this Prince not to suffer his People again to send any assistance to them of
the Turks Dominions, as they had done of late; and to settle a firm Peace and
Amity between the two Kingdoms of Argeirs and Angad. These several Affairs did
require much time and pains to bring to a Conclusion; for great difficulties
did present themselves, that had almost cast my Master into a despair of
accomplishing his Design: The Princes Interest did apparently oppose it self,
and persuade him not to listen to the Ambassadors Proposals. His Honor and
Word were also engaged not to suffer his Brethren to be crushed in pieces
without assistance; and besides, some of the Rebels were fled out of fear, to
his Court, where they had made a strong Party to oblige the Prince to favor
them and their Concerns, to the prejudice of the Turk.

These Difficulties that did appear in this Negotiation were not to be overcome
by an ordinary Judgment and Courage. Four persons of the Sultans Council were
appinted to receive and answer the Ambassadors Proposals. At first they would
not listen to them, but returned a Smile and a Jest to his Demands, as if they
had been ridiculous: My Master did often treat with them, but could not have
any satisfaction; They answered, for the Robberies that were done, they could
not be prevented, that the persons demanded were not be found in those parts;
that if any such had done such violences, it was without the Princes knowledge,
against his Will; and that the persons were removed far into the Country, from
whence they could not be fetched with ease: The truth was, that the Prince
himself had received some presents, and a considerable part of the Booty, which
he was not willing to let go again. Unto all the other Demands they gave
unsatisfactory Answers, which did oblige my Master to patience, and a
resolution: First he labored within a few days to consider the diverse
Interests that did rule, and the present Estate of that Court, which did help
him on in his business; for he made use of those persons that were able to
serve him, and did work upon them according to their Inclinations and
Interests, to put an end to his Negotiation. He had by this wise Conduct
brought it to a very fair pass; after much labor and perswation he had obliged
the Prince to a restitution of part of the Plunder, and to promise to maintain
Peace, and not to suffer any Injuries to be done by his People to the Subjects
of the Turk. But this did not satisfy my Master; he was resolved to oblige him
to consent to the rest of his Demands, and to force him to abate something of
the great Customs that were raised upon the Commodities of the Country, that
were transported out of the Limits; but this could never have been obtained,
had it not been for an Accident that happened afterward; My Master was so
discouraged when he came from a Meeting where the Commissioners were present,
that he gave me order to prepare all things for his speedy departure. I saw
that his Melancholy look did discover his Discontent, and his Commands the
cause of his Displeasure: I made bold with him to comfort him in this occasion,
and did offer him at all adventures a remedy to his dissatisfaction, if he
would be pleased to tell unto me how his business did stand; he had often tried
my experience in affairs, and had no little confidence upon my Fidelity and
Wit. This was not the first time that I had been useful unto him to help him
out of difficult Affairs; therefore he proposed to me the whole state of his
business. Sir, said I to my Master, Trouble not your self, I will cause the
Prince to give you full satisfaction. You cannot so easily do what you have
promised, replied my Master. I answered to him, that I was much mistaken if I
had not found out a way to bring him to consent to things more contrary to his
Interest than what he had proposed. He was desirous to know; I told him the
Plot, and wished him to put it speedily in execution; for difficult Causes
require a stout resolution, and a great diligence. My Master found my Discourse
so reasonable, and the Design so probable, that he began to embrace me, and
promised my freedom his return to Argiers, in case he should be successful in
this business; he proceeded in it as I persuaded him, in this manner: The
Prince of Angad, who is honored with the Title of Sultan, had a Nephew Heir to
his Estate and Fortune, of a great Courage, and of as great Ambition; the
People had for him a particular respect, because his Father had sacrificed his
Life for the public Good, and because he had an insinuating presence, that did
command both Love and Reverence from all that did behold him; he was besides
grown very popular, setting his Genius, his Inclinations and Actions to the
temper of every one; which Carriage did wonderfully win unto him the esteem of
all the Arabs; his Name was Zidi Hamed Hochbush. Since my Masters arrival in
these parts, he did often visit him, and delighted much in his Company: I know
not whether he had a design to ingratiate himself by that means with the
Garrison of Climsan, or oblige the Turks to his assistance, in case any thing
should be undertaken against him. My Master, according to my Advice, bestows
upon him at the first Interview, in secret, all the Flatteries and Praises that
he was able to express, telling him that so noble a Soul was never born to be a
Subject; that the whole Country did love him entirely, as one that was worthy
of their homages and respect; that he would do well to look to himself, lest
any Difference or Jealousy, as is usual in such Occasions, should arise
between him and his Uncle, which might cost him his Head; that it would become
the greatness of his Courage and Birth not to stoop to such mean Offices as he
was employed about; and that that was done purposely to abase him in the esteem
of the People. This Discourse my Master sweetened with strong protestations of
his Love and readiness to do him Service, promising to publish his worth among
the Turks his Countrymen.

The young man perceived not my Masters Design, but began to conceive very
haughty thoughts of himself and Abilities.

Within a few days after he came to pay my Master a Visit. They both entered
into an inner Room, admitting none to enter in to them but my self, and there
they fell upon the same discourse: My Master omitted nothing, to make him
believe that Nature and Providence had designed him for the Throne, as soon as
he was Born. As we had before determined to give him a Regalio, my Master sent
for three Leathern Bottles of Wine, that I had secretly conveyed amongst his
Baggage, and brought to Bedtua; for the Turks conscience may drink Wine
privately without a Dispensation: The Young Man had never tasted such a Liquor
in his Days before, for although they have in that Country abundance of
Grapes, they have lost the use of Wine: How pleasing therefore this reception
was to him, may be easily imagined.

My Master continued in his Hypocrisy, and protested, that out of a sincere
respect for him, he did offer this rarity to him: The Young Man was soon hot
with a little of this Liquor; it made him reveal unto my Master several
Intrigues, that were not unuseful unto him afterward; but the chiefest
Operation of this Wine, was, when he met with the Prince his Uncle, who began
to chide him for some undecent action that he had done, he then fell into such
a Passion, that all imagined him to be Mad; the Prince cast a Lance at him, and
had he not declined the Blow, he had there ended his days, and frustrated our
design.

There grew such hatred immediately between them, that they could not suffer
the sight of one another: The Prince did not dare to cast him into Prison,
because of the People; and the Nephew would never trust him for the future.

The dissension was increased daily by false Friends, who do advantage and
please themselves with the ruin of others: At last, the Young Nephew grew very
jealous of his Uncles Designs, and began to meditate an Escape out of his
Dominions: My Master persuaded him not to delay, but speedily to fly for his
Life; for if it were once suspected, his Uncle would not be retained by any
consideration from depriving him of his Liberty, it may be with his life; for
that end he gave him a Horse, an excellent Courser that he had brought with
him: He made haste toward the Borders with a few followers, where he raised
the Country, that came in to his assistance; so that within a few days he
appeared at the head of 10000 men. News came daily of some Parties that did
join with them, and at last we heard how the Turks of Argeirs were resolved to
assist him were not their Demands granted.

My Master began to take his leave as soon as this was reported in the Town: The
Prince to prevent it, offered him his Demands, and loaded him with Civilities;
for he foresaw the dreadful consequence that would ensue if he offered to
offend the Turks, and if they did countenance his Nephew in his Rebellion, it
might prove the ruin of Himself and Kingdom; therefore to engage them to his
Interest, which was the most just, he courted my Master, their Ambassador, with
all expressions of kindness; our Lodgings were always full of Courtiers, and
every day we did feel and see some Tokens of the Princes Kindness or Fear.

This part of the Country began to be in no little apprehension at first; but
when my Master had received full satisfaction, he settled their minds with the
assurance that the Turks were too honest to approve of the Nephews Rebellion
against an Uncle: Yet such was my Masters kindness for the young man, that he
mediated for him, and obliged the Prince to invite him again to his Duty, and
pardon his Offenses; which he accepted of willingly, when he heard how we had
promised to lend our succors to his Uncle, in case he should remain obstinate
in the pursuance of his wicked Design. He quickly returned to Court, and was
there received with a jealous Countenance, that had always an Eye upon him and
his Actions: The fond Love the People had conceived for him saved his Life; for
none did dare to attempt to injure him that was so dear to every one.

The young man's confidence upon the Peoples Affection made him more impertinent
than otherwise he would have been: It made him appear more bold to oppose his
Uncle, and more negligent in his Duty toward him.

When we had our Dispatches, we left him to his own Fortune, and returned again
to Climsan, to the great satisfaction of all the City, who did hope to reap no
small advantage from this Negotiation. My Master had the honor of it, although
it was effected by my Contrivance. He ever after employed me in his difficult
Affairs, and admitted me into his private Council; An Honor that a Slave could
never expect from the Turks Severity.

We made some stay in this City of Climsan, in which time I took notice of many
Particulars of the several manners of Execution, which are these; Empasing,
They thrust a sharp Stake into the Body of the Criminal, which enters in
between their Legs, and appears again at their Mouth* This is their usual way
of treating notable Robbers, and Fellows that have acted against the
Government: It is cruel and inhumane; for it puts the Patient to a long Pain
when the Stake has escaped the Heart, and some of the more sensible Parts:
Some I have seen alive near six hours in this manner.

Those that commit Adultery, or that attempt any thing against the Lives of
them whom they should defend, are cast headlong down a Precipice, at the bottom
whereof sharp Stakes are erected to welcome them, and dispatch them into
another World. I have heard sad Groans and Outcries from such that have been
thus executed.

There is another manner of Execution, not usual in our Climates; when any have
committed Sacrilege, or done any Action to the dishonor of Mahomet, or the
Religion professed in this place, they pour scalding Lead into his Mouth,
which sinks in with a horrible Smoke, and burns the Throat to the Entrails: I
never heard any give the least shrick; for the burning Metal consumes all
before it, and causes the Windpipe to shrink.

Others are exposed to the cruelty of the Children, who with sharp Sticks and
Canes do prick them to death, that they might accustom these young Spirits to
Blood and Wounds, that when they grow to age they might less abhor it. I have
seen them take a great delight to thrust their sharp Reeds into the Sides and
Back of the poor Criminal, who is not able to defend himself, but with his
Tongue; for his Hands and Legs are tied in such a manner as he may only walk.
It is a very pitiful Spectacle to see a poor Creature bleed out his Soul
through so many Wounds. The sportful Outcries and Voices of the Children do
hinder the dying men from being heard. Some of them continue alive many hours,
sprinkling their blood wherever they crawl.

There is here another as strange an Execution as the former; In the great
Market place of the City a brazen Lion stands, hollow within, with a grim and
threatening Countenance, at his Side a Door opens, which is made to receive
those that are to be executed in that manner. They are persons that are guilty
of some horrid Crimes, and that have offended the Public in a grievous manner.
To recompense them therefore by their Deaths, they execute them thus, that they
that have been useless in their Lives, may give some sport at least at their
going out of the world to the People; they are shut into this new Invention,
and a Fire of Wood is kindled under it, which by degrees, as it heats the
Brass, it puts them to a greater torture: The pain forces them to complain and
cry out.

Now at the Mouth, Ears, and under the Tail of the Lion are holes artificially
made, out of which the Complaints and Cries of the Patient do burst forth
through different Windings and Turnings, in such a manner that several Voices,
or rather Tunes, are framed one after another; for the Cry is longer a coming
out of the Tail than the Ears, and so of the Mouth: Besides, the variety of
Cries yields a pleasant and a various sound to the Ears of the Spectators. This
cruel sport continues many times a whole day, to divert the people; for at the
Judges pleasure they kindle a lesser or a greater Fire, which causes the
Patient to die accordingly. I could never learn the Author of this inhumane
Engine which has been died with so much blood; for during my three years abode
in that place, I saw above twenty cast into that Oven. A Woman, a Child and a
Man were put in together; for it is very large: Their Crime was that they had
attempted to kill our Governor, by the solicitation of a Morisco Prince that
hated him. The Woman was to trapan and ensnare him with her Beauty, and convey
secretly some poison by that means into his Drink, when she should be admitted
into his Familiarity, and in case that Plot did not succeed, then the man was
to stab or shoot him when he could meet him at an advantage. Our old General
was not so aged but he had some Relics of his youthful Inclinations; when
therefore he saw her Beautiful Eyes, large and full of Spirits, he labored to
get into her more intimate Acquaintance, thinking to meet there with a perfect
happiness; he employed such means as he quickly compassed his Design, but not
to his satisfaction so much as was expected; for as they were together, she
discovered a Box which she was so desirous to hide from him, that he became
suspicious that it might be something that he understood not: As Soon as he saw
it, he judged it to be poison; but to be more assured, he tried it upon a Dog,
which suffered the strength of it instead of his Master, and died within an
hour after the taking of it. The Woman confessed her design, and that her
Husband was one that intended to perform what she had failed to do, in another
manner. They were both taken, with an innocent Boy about twelve years of Age,
and all three condemned together; the Child only because he had such desperate
and wicked Parents, to imprint a greater terror into the minds of such
Offenders for the future: There was no regard had to Innocence it self: The
poor Child was forced to accompany his Parents in Death, as well as in the
pursuance of their unlawful Design. Their different Voices and cries did yield
a most pleasant although a cruel Harmony, which was not ungrateful to the
Turks, who never pity the Moors.

They use in this City strangling as well as the Turks in other places, and
Drowning with a Stone tied to the neck, executing by Beasts, by the Sword, and
such other sorts of Death, common in other places.

Besides, there is another manner of executing Offenders proper to this place,
which I never heard to be practiced in any other. It is as cruel as it is
strange to us. Out of the Town is planted a high Post in form of a Cross, upon
which the Offender is laid; they first strip him naked and cut out his Tongue,
then they stretch him on the Post that lies across, and tie him to it both by
his hands and feet: thus they expose him to the fury of the ravenous Birds,
that soon smell him out. The Eagles and Vultures do dispatch him in less than a
day: The poor Creature lies at their mercy; he sees them fix their sharp Bills
in his flesh, and pluck out his Heart, not being able to resist them; he sees
himself become a Prey to the Birds of the Air; which cannot but trouble him, to
behold such base Creatures feed themselves with his Flesh, and insult over him,
without the least respect to his humanity. It is observed, that the Eagles seek
first for the Heart; they tear up the Breast till they have found it, without
any regard to the rest of the Body, until that be devoured. Sometimes Twenty of
these great Birds are seen at one time upon a poor Man, for this part of the
world is full of them. It is a sight that may move any bodies compassion, but
that of the Turks, to see one of the same nature thus torn and ripped up by these
cruel Birds: I was never so much concerned at any thing in my life as I was at
it: Had I not feared the Censure of the Law, I had ventured to protect the
miserable Body of one poor man from the those ravenous Birds; but it is no less
than death to hinder the Execution of the Judges Sentence.

The lesser Offenses are punished in a milder manner, but in such, as renders
the persons lame, and disables them from all business for a long time after;
the Bastinado either upon the Back, the Belly, or the Soles of the Feet, is
very common upon any light occasion. The cutting off of the Ears, Nose, and
other natural Ornaments of the Body is usual.

Besides, they brand others in the Forehead with a Character signifying the
Crime that they have committed.

They imprison some, and detain them long at a short allowance of Bread and
Water to tame their spirits. In this City, besides the Turkish Governor that
commands the Castle, there is in the Town a Magistrate called an Alcalde, an
Arabian born, subject to the Turks Power, who amongst the Citizens does Justice
to every one: He is assisted by nine chosen out of the nine parts of the Town;
all together do sit upon the public Business: The plurality of Voices always
carries it. They judge of all matters belonging to the Towns-people, as the
Governor does of the Militia.

The Country round about is very fruitful of all sorts of Corn; for it is
Champaign Ground, watered with many fresh water Sources and pleasant Rivulets:
Here is abundance of Wheat, Barley, Rice, etc. for Oats, they grow Wild in the
places that are not Ploughed; every Spring causes the Roots to shoot out, and
produce again this Grain; for the heat of the Summer renders all things
unfruitful, as the humidity of the Winter does restore unto them their native
fertility.

The Commodities of this Place are many; the ordinary, are Oil, Ginger, Silk,
Raisins, a Stuff made of the Barks of Trees, which the Inhabitants cause to be
Dyed in all sorts of Colors; Balm, which is here of such an excellent nature,
that it is a sovereign Remedy to all Wounds, within the space of four and
twenty hours it closes and heals a Cut in the Flesh. Here is also many sorts
of Drugs, which our Merchants fetch from the Indies, with vast Cost and Labor.
In some places here is a golden Sand, which, if any industrious People did see
and enjoy it, I think they might reduce it to true Gold, by refining all the
sandy and drossy part; but the Inhabitants make little use of it.

In the Desert Places of this Kingdom, are great quantity of Creatures, whose
skin makes the excellent Buff; they are about the bigness of an Ox, without any
Joints at their Feet, therefore they can hardly rise when they fall; they run
very swiftly: The Inhabitants take them in this manner; They observe the place
where these Beasts do rub themselves; if it be a Tree, they cut the Stump, and
prop it up in such a manner that it stands up, ready to fall at the least
violence; when these Beasts come to their usual place, they rub according to
their custom, leaning themselves against the broken Tree, which falls, and
they after it. Here are other sorts of beasts ordinary in our Climates: Tigers
are here of an extraordinary bigness, with Leopards, wild Asses, wild Horses
with a tumor in their forehead that is hard; which may have occasioned the
Fable of the Unicorn; for in some it shoots out in such a manner that it
appears like unto a Horn of a white Color, of a Cubit long. The Horses are all
either white or black: The Moors name them Bouchicoughs. I never saw any tamed.
They are so swift in running that no Horse can follow them; sometimes they are
surprised when they come near the inhabited Country, and are killed with Guns,
but it is a difficult business to catch them alive; their young ones are very
wild and swift, and are of a ruddy color until they come to be a year old.

There is here a great number of Ostriches; it is a notable bird, that runs and
flies very speedily; no Creature is able to keep pace with it. Many
extraordinary things are reported of it. The Country people say that they do
sometimes find their Nests in the Sands: They make them in this manner; they
scrape a round Pit as large as their body, where they place their Eggs in
order. They lay above a hundred before they cause them to bring forth, not in a
heap, but in several ranks; the Sunbeams warm them and cause them to burst
forth into birds; the Mother-Ostrich overlooks them, and when the first laid
Eggs are become birds, she takes the farthermost Eggs to feed them until they
come of age and strength to walk alone. It is a Creature that is careless of
her Fruit until they are birds, and then she nourishes them with care, giving
equally to all, showing thereby her Justice. She is a bird very temperate,
content with a small quantity of food, and able to digest the hardest
substance, as Iron, Steel, and Stones.

Near the City is a Fountain of a strange nature; it yields a plentiful Stream,
when the Moon is in its Full, then the Water is boiling hot; but it cools by
degrees as the Moon decreases, and becomes extreme cold when it is the last
day; the Stream also becoming lesser or greater accordingly. When any are
troubled with the Gout or any other Disease in the Limbs, they repair thither
from all parts to be washed in that Water, that is brackish. I have known many
that have been cured in the Bath that is joining to it, by washing themselves
several days in the full Moon.

One thing more renders this Place famous all over the Country, and causes
people from all parts to resort to it: Here is the Tomb of a great Hage, not
much inferior to Mahomet in the esteem of this People, as much respected by
all that fancy to have received any benefit from their Pilgrimages hither. Men
or Women that are troubled with Issues of blood, Agues, Tumors, Dropsies, and
many other Diseases, do take a great deal of pains to come and pay their
Respects to the Coffin of this old Saint, renowned in his Life time for
Physic, and after his Death, the Moors have fancied that his bones and
Relics had some extraordinary virtue contained in them, which they seek to be
partakers of by their Devotions in this place. So easy a thing it is to
persuade the Ignorant Multitude to Superstition: When men are esteemed for some
extraordinary qualities, the People fancy that these qualities do yet accompany
them in their graves, that they are inseparable from their bodies. The Heathen
Idols were increased by this means to that vast Army of Gods, and Rome has
filled her Oratories with an innumerable company of petty Saints by this
Expedient; for it is ordinary in the Popish Dominions to make them pass for
Saints that have excelled in any particular Art or Knowledge, when that
Generation is dead that has been acquainted with the Vices and Weaknesses of
the Deceased.

Besides, there is at a League distant from the City, toward the East, the
Ruins of an old Tower, and about it a large Cave, where, as the People of the
Town report, are frequent Appearances of Devils and evil Spirits that disturb
the Passengers at certain Seasons of the Year; some told me that thereabouts
was kept the Witches Sabbath, a general Meeting of those desperate Souls that
own the Devils Power. It is believed by the people that this place is dangerous
in the night, although I never saw any thing worse than my self when I have
past that way, going about my Masters business in all times of the day and
night. But when such kind of Reports are imprinted into the Fancy of the
People, the least testimony of a timorous person that hears the shaking of a
Leaf is able to confirm them in that belief, and nothing can remove it out of
their minds. I do not doubt but some Appearances have been of Evil Spirits;
none but a Fantastic Sadducee is able to deny this Truth that has all Ages
to confirm it; but we must not be of so light a belief as to credit all the
idle Reports of Appearances of Devils which fly amongst the vulgar sort of
people.

In this City of Tremisen or Climsan we made our abode longer than my Master at
first designed; but his good Services to them of Argiers deserved no less than
a grateful acknowledgement, by advancing him to a higher, employment, such as
might reward him.

At the return of the year, when the Turks Army came to relieve us, my Master
had order to be Lieutenant Governor of the City, and to remain still as long
as he should judge it convenient for his Interest. This place proved very
beneficial to him, because he had the Command of the Parties that did march out
in the Fields to plunder upon the Enemy; and when the Governor was pleased to
go out himself toward the Borders, my Master had the Governors small Fees,
that did amount to a considerable sum in such a large City. During this time
that we dwelt in this place several notable Affairs happened, which may claim a
part in this Relation: The unconstant Arabians did often rise and trouble our
peace, by their frequent Incursions; the King of Fez, made an Inroad as far as
our City with a considerable Body of Horse, thinking to surprise it unawares.
Several other Princes were troublesome to us, obliging our people to unusual
Tributes and Customs when they passed through their Country; for this City
entertains a great Trade with the Inland people, and with the Blacks. It was
therefore the Turks interest to entertain it, and remove all Obstructions which
might hinder a free Intercourse: For that intent we had several troublesome
Businesses both Warlike and Politic, which employed my Master all the time of
his being there. In the mean whiles I was not idle; I had several Affairs that
concerned my private Interest, and that I was to manage with Care and Industry.
The Sultan of Argeirs gave a judgment of my Ability and Person, which was not
contradicted by the Women with whom I was afterward acquainted.

I had as difficult Encounters, and as strange Adventures that happened to me
with them, as my Master had in treating with the Arabs. I was no sooner settled
in Climsan, but one of that Sex sought a fair occasion to discover her
Affection to me.

I was very wary how I entertained any such Proposition; for I was afraid of
my Masters Cunning, or any other Plot which might be set on foot to drive me to
a necessity of turning Mahumetan; for I was often importuned by my Master, and
invited with the promise of my Liberty, in case I would renounce Christianity;
but I could never consent to so much weakness, nor to act against so much Light
God had discovered to me in his Truth. I was therefore afraid that all
addresses that were made to me of that nature were but Designs to ensnare me,
and oblige me to Apostacy. I did not accept of so fair opportunities as were
offered to me, which created me a great deal of trouble; for those persons
became my deadly Enemies, they sought all occasions to do me mischief: Angered
Love turns into deadly hatred. The first whose Caresses I was to suffer was the
Wife of a wealthy Citizen of Climsan; her Husband was old and decrepit, and she
very young, and therefore more pardonable if she sought satisfaction abroad,
when she could not find it at home. I was often sent to her House for things
that my Master wanted; there she began to be acquainted with me.

The Women in this Country keep much at home, but their Minds and Affections
are more wandering abroad, because they are so recluse; whereas if they had as
much liberty as in other Countries, they would not be so furiously debauched:
Their Husbands also keep such strict guard over them, that when they can escape
their Eyes, they give the reins to their Passion, and labor to satisfy
themselves more abundantly; stolen waters are sweet: The more they are forbidden
and hindered from variety, the more pleasure and satisfaction they fancy in it.

It is not to be imagined what tricks and invention this Woman had to draw me
into her Retirement: She began to declare her kindness by offering unto me some
presents when I came to her Dwelling: I never went but she gave me something to
carry back for my self, discoursing with me very freely when her Husband was
not in the way. I did not know unto what period this growing passion might
rise, nor what sad consequences might follow; therefore I did shun her company
as much as I could: Still she labored to win me with her Kindness. At one time
her Husband being not at home, as soon as I was entered she discovered her face
unto me, and took me by the hand to lead me into a private Room; I followed
her, not thinking at that present of her meaning; we were no sooner entered, but
without fear or shame she began to woo me with all the Expressions of
tenderness imaginable. I was in a little trouble and haste, and not willing to
submit: My resistance did yet more inflame her; whiles we were thus disputing,
she to persuade me, and I to dissuade her, in steps her Husband in the other
Room next to us; his sudden arrival scared us both; for we had not escaped his
jealous Fury, had he seen me in so private a place with his Wife; but there was
no time to deliberate, nor way to escape but through the Door; the danger
therefore made her ingenious, and find out this Expedient; she rose from me,
and with a cheerful Countenance meets her Husband at the Door, taking him by
the hand, Ziddi, Ziddi, says she, I am glad you are come home, in the
Backside of our house is the strangest thing that ever you saw, and with that
led him to see a Beast that my Master had sent him, whilst I escaped another
way, glad to have saved my life. This danger could not make the Woman wise; she
yet continued her Love unto me, forcing me many times into the greatest
Inconveniences, because of her doting Husband, that did surprise us talking
together in a too familiar manner. She did still importune me with her
Kindness, and by that means the old Fool began to be so afraid of me that he
was ready to stab me. I declared the business to my Master, and made him the
Confident of that Love. He began to admire my Continency and good Fortune, and
desired me, if I were so reserved, that I would pleasure him by giving him a
favorable Meeting with that Lady; for it seems he was grown amorous of her;
but her fair Face, which made her be esteemed the greatest Beauty of the City,
made her Husband to watch over her day and night, for fear she should taste of
forbidden Fruit. My Master was glad at this discovery, he grumbled at me that I
had not sooner declared it unto him, assuring me that I might have been more
confident with him: I excused my self, and told him that had I known his
pleasure, he should have been already satisfied. I promised to serve him
faithfully in this business, in case he would appease the fury of her jealous
Husband, who did threaten me with death if I came near his house; he engaged to
do it, which accordingly he performed; so that I was admitted again into the
Citizens dwelling, and had there the same freedom as before. The Woman's passion
was not scared with her Husbands Displeasure and Jealousy; she still continued
her kindness to me: I began for my Masters sake to be more tractable; I
promised her full satisfaction, but told her that I did not dare to venture
into her House; she offered me any other Rendezvous; I mentioned my Masters
House unto her; she promised to find some Expedient to escape thither within a
day or two; I took my leave of her, sealing my Affection in the wooted manner,
which she accepted of with those transports of joy that become a passionate
Lover. I left her full of hopes and expectation, meditating upon some Expedient
how to procure unto her self a safe escape, free from the suspicion of her
jealous Husband; a thing very difficult to find, because Jealousy has a
hundred Eyes, and many times where they should not be; the least step abroad
would but increase the trouble of the doting Fool, especially if she was seen
to come in sight of the Castle.

In the House, besides himself, was an old Woman, and other people apt to tell
Tales of one Renowned for that they would willingly have. Envy in such cases is
apt to speak and invent more than is agreeable to Truth. The Ladies Love was
not frighted with all these difficulties; it found out a way to satisfy its
self: As her Husband was at Supper with her, she infused into his Drink the
Juice of an Herb that provokes to sleep. After the repast they went to their
rest, sending their Servants also to theirs, she had been careful to take into
her custody the Keys of the Door. The poor man was no sooner upon his Quilt
with this amorous Woman, but he fell into a dead sleep; in the mean whiles, she
rises, and comes with all speed up to the Castle: My Master having been
acquainted with all that had passed between us, had given order to the
Sentinel, not to examine too exactly one in a woman's habit that should come at
such an hour. She found the Guard very favorable to her, and my Masters
Lodging far more; for he was prepared to receive her with as much civillity as
she did desire: She quickly returned muffled up, and laid her self down by her
drowsy Husband, as if nothing had passed to his prejudice.

When Women once lose their honesty, nothing can keep them from that pleasure
which they fancy so sweet. This Woman having found so good entertainment at the
first, was resolved to make a second trial of our Kindness. She continued to
visit us, as often as her industry could find an escape, until the Old Man's
furious Jealousy disabled her from walking abroad.

Had my design been to make Conquests in the Empire of Love, I think none could
have been more happy. When a Man is got into the esteem of Women, his Fame
rests not in one or two Breasts, but speaks as loud, and with as many tongues
as these prating Creatures. The old Citizens Wife had whispered some of her
secrets to her intimate Acquaintance, and they to others, so that this good
opinion of my Ability spread and increased wonderfully in the Town; it created
me many temptations, and no little trouble to avoid them. Had I been unconstant
in Religion, I had made great advantage in this place of the Women's Kindness to
me; but here I could not fix without Apostasy, which was too big a Morsel for
my Conscience to swallow. That which was the most powerful temptation, was
offered to me by a rich Heiress, widow to a former Husband, of the most
considerable amongst the Citizens; she sent to know from my Master whether he
would part with me for any Money; he answered, that he could not sell me
because I had deserved my Freedom, and that he had promised it unto me. When
Gold (which finds in many places but a faint resistance) would not do, another
Expedient was set on foot; a Gentleman, or an Arabian Zidi addressed himself to
my Master and me severally, telling us his business in short, That there was a
rich Widow, no less handsome, without Charge of Children, that was desirous to
make me her Husband, and to give me all her Estate if I would become Mahumetan,
and remain in that place. My Master hearkened to this Proposition for the Love
he had for me, and began to exaggerate my good Fortune, and the happiness that
was offered to me, wishing me to accept of it, and not to suffer so great a
loss for the Fancy of Religion. My first Resolution was to despise all these
Offers, and to prefer the Life of a Slave with Honor, and my Religion before
the greatest Riches and the most pleasant Life: I remained still in it. All my
Masters persuasions could not shake me from it, when I considered within my
self such an action, to deny my Savior that redeemed me, to despise his Blood,
to renounce all interest in him, to abjure his Truth, that I knew to be such,
and own an Impostor (Mahomet); to prefer him and his Diabolical Religion before
that which Christ has established, this action appeared unto me with such an
horrid Aspect that I was frighted from the very thoughts of it: All the
Advantages proposed to me, the vast Riches and Revenues could make no
Impression upon my spirit; I foresaw also that if I ever did engage my self in
that Country by espousing so great an interest in it, I should with more
difficulty bring to pass my escape, and that instead of purchasing my Liberty
at such a dear rate, I should but enslave my self more, and in such a manner,
that there would be small hopes left of seeing again my Native Soil. These
Considerations preserved my mind from this powerful temptation, that wanted not
Art, Industry and Power to second it; but when my Master saw my disposition,
and how unpleasing the change of Religion was to me, he desired them never to
mention unto me such a matter again. He would never after suffer any such
Proposition to be made to me, wishing that I might live and die in it. By that
I perceived that he was inclined to favor Christian Religion, and that
Renegades are never grateful to the Turks, although they embrace their
Profession; Unconstancy and Infidelity are odious to them also that receive a
benefit by the Traitors. My refusal did disappoint the Moorish Lady, but did
not put a stop to her proceedings; she imagined all the ways possible to enjoy
what she so passionately desired. She contrived the means to speak to me her
self privately; she labored to trepan me, and drive me to a necessity of
burning or turning, hoping to obtain more easily her end; but all was in vain:
I had constancy enough, and was sufficiently wary, to frustrate all her
undertakings.

When she saw her self disappointed of all her hopes, which she had conceived
from the former means employed to woe me, she gave not over; her Passion was
more enflamed with this stout resistance, she therefore resolved to find out
some other way, to know the truth of what was reported of me: A Curiosity that
cost us both much trouble and hazard of Life.

The correspondency that she aimed at was dangerous, without something to
excuse and hide it from the Eyes of the World; the best Cloak was Marriage,
which seeing she could not obtain with me, was resolved to take some other that
might be favorable to her Passion, and give it the liberty of satisfying it
self; for that intent she addresses her self to a poor man of that place,
descended from good Parentage of the Moors, but his Fortunes were not
answerable to his Nobility; several Misfortunes had reduced him to almost a
begging condition, and he had lately lost by death his Wife, which during her
life he was scarce able to maintain. The Morisco Lady acquaints him by a trusty
Friend with her good inclinations for him, and appoints unto him both the place
and time to speak with him further about this business; he joyfully accepts of
the Assignation, hoping by this means to redeem himself and Children from
extreme poverty and Bondage: At the time he comes to the place, and there meets
with the Lady, who having dismissed all other Company and Witnesses, freely
discovers unto him her Affection for me, and my ungrateful Repulse, and her
Resolution to bestow her self and Means upon such a Husband that would not
search too narrowly into her Actions, but that would give her the liberty of
receiving the Visits of those persons that she loved passionately. The poor man
saw that what was proposed to him was offensive to his Honor, but advantageous
to his Purse. In the condition he was in he could not reasonably refuse the
Offer, although it was prejudicial to his Credit; he was therefore willing to
become a Cuckold to enjoy the Riches of this Widow, hoping after Marriage to
behave himself with her in such a manner, that he would reclaim her from those
idle and unlawful fancies: The Condition was agreed to, and all things
concluded on; the Marriage was performed with as much secrecy and with as
little Ceremony as was possible. When it came to the knowledge of her Friends,
they labored to divert her from it, but she was so obstinately resolved, that
nothing could hinder her from her design; which was no sooner accomplished, but
she labored to find the opportunity she sought after: Her Husband kept not his
word with her; he fell into a fit of Jealousy, that would neither suffer her
to see the Air, nor me to come near her Dwelling; so that she was forced to use
her wit, to get what she had bargained for. When the Fool grew rich, he forgot
his Benefactor, and remembered no more his engagement to her, never to disturb
and persecute her for Actions of Gallantry and Pleasure. He seldom met me in
the streets, but he sought all occasions to stab and shoot me, daring not to
vent his anger upon her, because of her powerful Friends, that were not pleased
with the unequal Match.

Whiles I remained in this place, I have run several other misfortunes; many
other persons did desire to be acquainted with me: I was once so troubled with
addresses, that I wished my Face had been disfigured, my stature more
contemptible, and that all the promising Characters of my person had never
appeared in me: At last, I made my Patron privy to all my Affairs; his favor
did wonderfully protect me: None did dare to make any attempt upon my person,
when he had published the kindness he had for me; otherwise I had never
returned from this City, but had left my Bones amongst these Heathens. It is
true, I did him sometimes the favor to cause him to share with me in my good
Fortune, and furthered the satisfaction of his Inclinations, an Office not
ungrateful to an old Lover, that has scarce any thing acceptable in him, but
the desire of well doing.

During this time that we did spend in Climsan, an accident happened that
caused us to make another Journey into the Country with about 1500 men. The
King of Fez, Bembouker by name, had sent out a Party to stop a Caravan of Turks
and Blacks, that brought a considerable quantity of Gold from the Inland
Country to our City: There were near about thirty Cammels laden with Gold,
and other Commodities of Guiny: It seems the Merchants were jealous of the
intentions of the Arabs about Fez, and therefore had divided their Caravan, and
sent six Cammels one way, with the most contemptible part of the Goods,
carrying the rest by another, that whiles they did seize upon the lesser part,
the greater might escape out of their Territories.

We had notice that a Party was upon the Road to wait for this Booty: Our
Governor presently dispatched my Master with 1500 men, well armed, to watch
them. We could not make such speed, but they had before our arrival taken the
six Cammels laden, and were driving them another way to Fez; as soon as we
heard of this News, we followed them, and about ten Leagues on this side of
Fez, in the ascent of a Mountain we overtook them; my Master was obliged in
honor not to let them escape out of his hands, but to fight them, although
they were far more in number than the Turks; he therefore thought it his safest
course to advance before them by a secret way, and lay an Ambuscado at the
Descent of the Mountain, where a large Wood did stretch it self along the sides
of the next Plain; we therefore took a small compass about undiscovered; for
they marched very secure, not dreaming that we had intelligence of all their
Designs. We arrived to the place before them; my Master disposed of his
Companies in several convenient places in the Woods, and as the Arabs came up
to the middle of us, we then gave them a Salute with our Shot from both sides
of the way, whiles a party of our men that was behind, did rise up from the
place by which the Arabs had passed, and came riding in all speed to them. The
Fight was desperate and bloody; for although they were surprised, they held out
a longer while than we could imagine, charging us again and again, until there
came up two fresh Companies of choice Foot, that met them in the way that they
were to pass. They were no sooner perceived by the Arabs, but they began to
faint, and think of a Retreat; for they were afraid to be enclosed; therefore
they all joined in a close Body, resolving to break through those small Numbers
that lay in their way; our men divided themselves on both sides, and as they
passed, they arrested about a hundred of these lusty Robbers, that fell to the
ground half dead with the shot that had wounded them. About 60 of our men lost
their Lives, and about 300 Arabians left us their Horses and Clothing for
Legacies, with our own Goods that they had taken. Our Horse pursued the Enemy,
but not very far for fear of a like Ambuscado; the Country being proper for
such Tricks and Sratagems of War. They brought back with them wounded some
Prisoners, and a few Horses. We enquired from the Blacks and two of our
Merchants what was become of the rest of the Company; for we had heard how they
had separated the Caravan; they informed us of the By-way they had taken,
resolved to die rather than to quit their Goods: They were in number about 300
men that came with the Camels. My Master sent all that he had recovered to
Climsan with a small Guard, conducting them part of the way as far as
Gorselveh, a small Town about ten miles distant from Climsan.

We then marched back again with all the rest of our men, to meet the other
part of our Caravan that was come to the Borders of the Province of Segelmes,
by a secret way unknown to many persons. They could never come so secretly but
the Arabs, (some were of those we had beaten) did lie in wait for them, hoping
to meet with better Fortune than in the former Encounters, and to recompense
themselves for their late Losses.

Our men did defend themselves desperately; but had we not opportunely appeared
to their Assistance, they had been overpowered with the Numbers of Arabs and
Moors. We no sooner appeared among them, which was in a Valley, watered with
some Branches of the River called now by the Inhabitants Soubhir. Our People
were on the other side of the River, and the Moors and Arabs on this, between
both was a little Ford easy to pass. The Dispute had been long when we
arrived; for the Enemy did offer to pass, and our men did resist them.

Our coming ended the Contention; for they no sooner saw us appear, but they
fled away in all haste. We contented our selves to have preserved our Goods, we
did not therefore pursue them, but marched toward Climsan, where our Arrival
was joyfully expected; for here all the chief persons of the Town were
interessed. This Caravan did enrich us, and fill the City with plenty of Gold,
Ivory and other Commodities, which were conveyed to Argeirs and other places on
the Seacoast, to be transported by Sea to Constantinople.

My Master and the Chief of the Party that went out, were well rewarded for
their pains; the rest did share amongst them the Horses that were taken from
the Arabs, and their Clothes, which were prized at a great sum of Money. My
Master had the honor of the good success; for every one did attribute it to
his wise Conduct and Valor. My Company was not unuseful to him; for besides
the Service I did render him in the first Engagement, I saved him when he was
in no little danger of his life; had I not been near to assist him, doubtless
he had been sent to convey the dead into the other world. He acknowledged my
Care and Love for him by his continual Kindness for me; for he did not treat me
as a Slave, but as a Friend, granting me as much Liberty as I could desire.

After this Expedition we remained about a year in Climsan, during which time
several Accidents happened; the great Mosque of the City fell to the ground by a
terrible Earthquake, and frighted the rest of the City; a few Houses joining to
this Religious place with their Inhabitants were buried in the Ruins.

Two Stars of a good bigness flew over the City; they were followed by several
other little Lights; they met all together in one point, and made a great Star,
that hung over the City about three days: The Astrologers and Negromancers of
the Country were consulted about the meaning of these Meteors; they all agreed
that they were significant and Prophetical. All the little Lights that joined
to make a great one, they said were several little Principalities that would
unite together to compose a great Monarchy that would not favor the Turks in
those parts.

The Inhabitants are very superstitious when any such Wonders do appear in the
Firmament; they run to their Mosquets, and fall to their Devotions, neglecting
all other business many days; for they never interpret such Signs to their
advantage, they look upon them as dreadful forerunners of public Calamities.
The people of this place were so much the more concerned, because these Signs
did appear only to that Region, and did hang over their City in a threatening
manner.

Another thing very extraordinary happened about the same time: A strange Monster
was born of a Morisco Woman; it had the Head of an Ape, the Feet of a Goose,
the Body of a Man, the Hands like the Claws of a Lion; many persons went to see
it; Several Reports were spread about the Town concerning these unusual
Accidents, which terrified the common people, susceptible of fear upon the
least occasion. Many Dreams also were divulged at the same time by the Turks
Enemies concerning the same business, tending to the destruction of the Turks
Empire in those parts. So that there was likely to be a great Commotion, had
not our Governor kept good Orders, and clapped one of these busy Prophets in a
deep Dungeon, to expect his Release from that Power that was to destroy and
drive away the Turks; but the silly Rascal would never expect that Hour; he
grew impatient in his Chains, so that he employed several of his Friends to
mediate for him, and procure from our Governor his Liberty, which was granted
upon condition that he would be more discreet for the future, and keep his
Dreams within the Circumference of his Couch.

Our Governor could not so well order his business, but that the Arabs
(forward enough to catch at all Occasions of ruining the Turks) made several
Parties in the Territories of this Kingdom, assuring the Inhabitants that now
was the time that they should pay no more Taxes to entertain the Pride and
Luxury of Argiers, and that if they would lend their helping hand, it was
possible to recover from thence what they had sent from year to year.

Some, as it always happens on such occasions, were so silly to believe them;
they formed therefore several little Parties up and down; they were
inconsiderable separated, but had they been together, they might have created
us much trouble and business. Several Companies of our Soldiers were sent out
to disperse them. The greatest Body was composed of two thousand Horse and Foot
met together about six Leagues from Climsan, at a Town called Tezrim, which is
stony by situation and Art. These had killed some that favored the Turks, and
were resolved to wait there to see whether any more would happily join with
them.

My Master was sent out with about 1200 men only, but chosen out of the
Garrison: We laid siege to this strong place, and at the end of six days it was
surrendered to us by Composition. The Conditions imposed were favorable; the
Inhabitants were condemned to deliver up their chief Leaders, and part with a
Sum of Money. The Leaders were sacrificed to the Turks vengeance, and sent into
the other world to raise Tumults there.

One thing I cannot omit very memorable in this place. At some distance from
Tezrim, in a little Meadow where excellent Grass grows, I saw the perfect
Stature of a man Buggering his Ass; it was so lively that at a little distance
I fancied they had been alive, but when I came nearer, I saw they were of a
perfect Stone. I enquired wherefore the Moors or Arabs, that naturally hate all
sorts of Representations, should show their Skill by making such Beastly
Figures, odious to Nature. I was informed that this was never made by man, but
that some body of former years had been turned into this Representation with
the Ass in the very moment of the Beastly Act. God by his power had changed the
fleshly Substances of the Man and of the Ass into a firm Stone, as an eternal
reproach to Mankind, and a Justification of his severe Judgments against us.

I did further search into the Appearances of this Report, and found the Stone
to represent not only the perfect shape, but also the color of every part of
the Man and of the Beast, with the Sinews, Veins, Eyes, Mouth, in such a lively
manner that no Artist with all his Colors could express it better; so that I
was convinced of the Truth of this Report. I did labor to move it, but some
that were in company did forbid me, telling me that some have labored to
transport it from thence, but could never away that Monument of man's shameful
Lust: Some have endeavored to their peril; either their Persons or their
Cattle, that did attempt it, were struck dead in the place. Gods Justice will
not suffer that to be hid or destroyed that he has placed there for all to
example by it. It is necessary that the Moors should have such signal Tokens of
Gods Displeasure always before their Eyes; for they are enraged to commit such
filthy Actions more frequently than other Nations.

An Account of this was Printed 14 years since under the name of Sir Kenelm
Digby.
I was informed by some of my Acquaintance that have been at Tripoly, that
there is some such Monument of Gods Justice near that Town about five days
Journey from it, toward the South-East amongst the Mountains called Gubel, far
more notable than this. Many of our English protest they have seen some pieces
of it brought by the Moors to Tripoly, and heard it confidently reported in
Town as an undeniable Truth. Some of our Merchants have had the Curiosity to
have gone to that place, and they also protest it to be true, that in the
Mountains about five days Journey from Tripoly there is a whole Town full of
these Representations; stones representing all manner of Creatures belonging to
a City, with the Houses, Inhabitants, Beasts, Trees, Walls, and Rooms, very
distinctly shaped. Our people have entered into the Houses, and there they have
found a Child in a Cradle, of stone; a Woman in a Bed, of stone; a man at the
Door looking Lice, of stone; Camels in several postures, of stone; a man
beating a Woman, of stone; two men fighting, of stone; Cats, Dogs, Mice, and
all that belonged to the place of such perfect stone, and so well expressing
the several Shapes, Postures and Passions in which the Inhabitants were in that
time, that no Engraver could do the like. Some may look upon this Relation as
Fabulous, but let them enquire of our Merchants, and Traders that have been in
that City of Tripoly, or in the Land, they shall find them all agree in the
Confirmation of this Relation. The Report that runs amongst the Moors is, that
this Town was very populous and fruitful, as may appear by the Trees of stone
of several sorts of Fruits planted round about it, and in the places that
retain the Forms of Gardens and Orchards, when the Inhabitants gave themselves
over to all manner of Vices, to the great scandal of humane Nature, God in a
moment stopped all their Actions, and turned their Bodies into firm Stone, that
future Ages might see and learn to dread his power.

At Athens there is another such like Figure; a stone representing two men
buggering one another. I know no reason wherefore we should doubt of the
possibility of these Relations, if we consider the Almighty power of God that
causes all things to subsist by his Influence, and can easily alter or change
them as it seems good to his Divine Wisdom. Or if we consider the necessity
that there should be such notable Examples of Gods Justice perpetuated to
posterity, which cannot be but by some such manner that it may express his
displeasure in future Ages, especially in this Country, where the People are
addicted to such like Villainies that Nature it self abhors. From those that
travel into these places every one may better satisfy themselves concerning
the truth of these wonderful Examples of Gods Justice, much like that of Lot's
Wife turned into a Pillar of Salt, which some very ancient Historians do affirm
to have seen remaining in their days.

We returned after that we had retaken all the Country that was revolted, with
more honor than profit; for we did make war against a needy, poor, miserable
people, that had scarce sufficient to subsist; besides they do craftily hide
all their best Movables in difficult and unknown places when they engage
themselves in any Revolt, that they may never lament the loss of the chief part
of their substance. Sometimes hazard brings their Enemies amongst their
Treasury, but they are so secret that no violence can cause them to confess the
place where it is laid up; only their Cattle and other Beasts do become a Prey
after the Victory. In time of peace they labor to redeem them by stealth and
Robbery; for there are no greater Thieves than the Country people of this
Kingdom: If any should pass single through their Territories, he is sure to
lose his Life and all that he has, by the Peasants that profess the greatest
submission to the Turks power.

At the coming of the Army from Argiers we took our Bag and Baggage, and
returned to that Maritine City. My Master was grown very rich and powerful, he
had got (besides a great esteem which the good Services that he had rendered
deserved) much Wealth. According to his Promise he gave me my Liberty, and and
a sum of Money to carry me home. I met then with a French Vessel of Marseilles
in the Harbor; in it I embarked, and sailed into France.

An Observation of the Tide, and how to turn out of the Streights-Mouth the
Wind being Westerly: Communicated by the Industrious and Experienced Seaman,
Richard Norris.
AT Tangier, and Tariffe, a South-west and by South Moon make a full Sea on the
shore; but in all parts of the Streights-mouth the Flood runs until a West and
by South-Moon, all the West part of the Streights-mouth has the Flood out of
the West, which runs in from Cape Sprat, and Cape Traffalgar on each side along
by the shore much stronger than in the middle to the Eastward, as far as Cape
Cabrita on the Spanish side, and Apes Hill on the Barbary side, and at those
two points meets with the Flood, that comes out of the Northeast, about the
point of Gibraltar, and runs S. W. into the Streights Mouth all the first
quarter flood, and the remainder of the Tide the flood sets from the Point
of Gibralttar, West S. W. toward Cape Cabrita, at the top of high water there
comes always out of the West between the two Capes a Race of a Current which
spreads the whole Streights-mouth from side to side, but continues on neither
side, seldom longer than half an hour; but in the middle of the Streights-mouth
the Current runs to Eastward very strong all the Tide of Ebb, and the Race of a
Current falls always, between Apes Hill and Cape Cabrita at a West and by
South Moon, and at that instant begins the Ebb on the West side of those two
Points, to run to the Westward; The Tide of Ebb on the Spanish side runs from
Cape Cabrita about two miles broad from the shore as far as the Island of
Tariffe, and runs between the Island and the Main. all the Tide of Ebb along by
the shore toward Cape Traffalgar, but on the South side of the Island the Ebb
runs very narrow except it be in a Set of fair Weather. The Tide of Ebb on the
Barbary side runs from Apes Hill, but narrow along the shore as far as the
point Alcasar, but on the West side of that point thwart of the Bay, the Tide
runs about three miles broad, and at Cape Malabata which is the Eastmost point
of the Bay of Tangier, about two miles broad, and so continues to the Westward
out to Cape Sprat, and from thence the Ebb runs South West along the shore,
toward Sally: The Ebb to the Eastward of Cape Cabrita and Apes Hill is begun
by the aforesaid Race of a Current, which spreads from one side to the other,
between Gibraltar and Seuta Point, and runs in East North east in the middle,
and from the Point of Apes-Hill to the Point of Seuta along the shore all the
first half Tide; and the remaining half Tide, the Current runs from Cape
Cabrita, East South-east, into the Streights by the Point of Seuta; and from
the Point of Gibraltar, the first half Ebb runs North-East into the Streights
toward Cape Fangerola, thwart of Cape Trafflagar, about three miles distant
from the shore lies a Rock 9 foot under water, between which Rock and the Cape,
you may sail through from the Island of Tariffa; West and by South lies a Ledge
of Rocks, 8, 9, and 10 Foot under water, which may be seen in foul Weather by
the Breach of the Sea. At the East side of the Island of Tariffa is a good Rode
for a Westerly Wind, in which you may Anchor between 20 and 13 fathom Water in
clear hard ground, but come not to an Anchor nearer to the Island than 13
Fathom, because near the South-east Point of the Island is foul ground; the
best of this Rode is with the South-west Point of the Island, West South-west
from you, and the Sand Hill West-North-west, and there you shall find 14.
Fathom water clear ground. Between this Island and Cape Cabrita there is no
danger, but what always lies above Water; in the middle of this Bay is a
Light-House, thwart of which you may Anchor in 12 Fathom Water, clear ground; a
fine distance from the shore, one third part of the distance from this
Light-house toward the Cape is 12 Fathom, the ground blew Clay, and that is a
good Rode for a North-east Wind, you may borrow on the Cape, the Rocks to the
Westward of the Cape to 5 Fathom, and on the East side to 7 Fathom, a little to
the Westward of the Western Point of the Bay of Gibraltar, thwart of a little
Valley in the fair way between this Point and Cape Cabrita is a Rock 8 Foot
under Water, and by the East side of this Rock is 12 Fathom. At the Point of
Cape Malabata lies a Ledge of Rocks joining to the Land that stretches a
little way into the Sea, but all above Water, and you shall have five fathom
water fair by the Rocks: Note the Tide of Ebb runs very strong to the Westward
by this Point, round the Bay of Tangier; To Anchor in the Bay of Tangier, in
clear ground, bring the Castle that stands on the North-west Corner of the
Town, over the North Wall of the Town, and Cape Malabata North-east, and there
is between 9 and 10 Fathom water at a full Sea.

To turn through the Streights Mouth, the Wind being westerly, you must ply to
Windward on the Spanish side from the point of Gibraltar, to Cape Cabrita, and
from thence to the Island of Tareffa, but you must turn about the Cape a little
before a high Water, that you may have time to make two or three short Boards
to the Westward of the Cape before the Race of a Current comes out of the West,
which continues but a very little while; which being past, the Ebb begins to
run to the Westward, which runs so strong that you may turn up to the Island in
one Tide of Ebb, (but if you cannot, you may stop the Flood any where betweeen
the Cape and the Island in 12, or 14 Fathom water) and there you must Anchor
until so much of the Flood be spent, that you may get over to the Barbary side,
to take the first of the Ebb there; and if you fall a little to the Westward of
the Point Alcasara, you may get into the Bay of Tangier by a low Water, from
whence you may, observing the Tide, turn out at pleasure.

FINIS.
These BooKs are to be sold by Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little Britain.
Folio.
CAssandra, the famed Romance, 1667. Briggs's Logarithms. Francisci Saurez
Metaphysica.
4o.
Dr. John Pell's Introduction to Algebra, 1668. Nich. Mercatoris
Logarithmo-Technia, sive Methodus construendi Logarithmos, 1668. Jacobi
Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae, 1668. Dr. Joh. Wallis, Opera Mechanica,
pars 1. 1670. Ibid. pars 2. now in the Press. Banister's Works. Hugh
Broughton's Consent of Scripture. Snellii Typhis Batavus, Lugd. Bat. 1624.
Observationes Hassiacae.
Petrus Paaw, de Ossibus Amstelreod. 8. 1633. A Letter from a Gentleman of the
Lord Howard's Retinue to his Friend in London, Dated at Fez, Nov. 1669.
8o.
Biblia Hebraea, Josephi Athias, 1661. Gualteri Needham, Disquisitio Anatomica
De Formato Foetu, 1667. The Fortunate Fool, 1670. Pharmacopoeia Londinensis,
1668. Buxtorsius's Epitome of his Hebrew Grammar, translated into English by
John Davis, 1658. Crow, Scriptores in Scripturam. Now in the Press.

