The Rise and Fall of the XXX. TYRANTS of Athens.
Fitly applied to the Tyrants of our Time. Seen and Allowed.
THe Thirty Governors, commonly called the Thirty Tyrants of Athens,
werechosen at the first by the people to compile a body of their Law, and make
a collection of such ancient Statutes as were meet to be put in practice; the
condition of the City standing as it did in that so sudden alteration. To this
Charge was annexed the Supreme authority, either as a recompense of their
labors, or because the necessity did so require it, wherein the law being
uncertain, it was fit that such men should give judgment in particular Causes,
to whose judgment the very Laws themselves (by which the City was to be
ordered) should become subject.

But these thirty having so great power in their hands, were more careful to
hold it, then to deserve it, by farthfull execution of that which was committed
to them in trust.

Therefore apprehending such troublesome fellows as were odious to the City,
though not punishable therefore by law, they condemned them to death; which
proceeding was by all men highly approved, who considered their lewd
conditions, but did not withal bethink themselves, how easy a thing it would
be to these thirty men, to take away the lives of innocents, by calling them
perturbers of the peace, or what else they listed, when condemnation without
due trial and proof had been once well approved of.

Having thus plausibly entered into a wicked course of Government, they thought
it best to fortify themselves with a sure Guard ere they brake out into those
disorders, which they must needs commit for the establishing of their
authority. Wherefore dispatching two of their own company to Sparta, they
informed the Lacedaemonians, that it was the full intent of the 30. to keep the
City free from all rebellious motions, to which purpose it behooved them to cut
off such as were seditious; and therefore desired the Lacedaemonians to send
them a Garrison, which they promised at their own costs to maintain. This
motion was well approved, and a Guard sent, the Captain of which was so well
entertained by the Thirty, that none of their misdeeds could want his high
commendations at Sparta.

Hereupon the Tyrants began to take heart, and looking no more after base and
detested persons, invaded the principal men of the City, sending armed men
from house to house, who drew out such as were of great reputation, or likely,
or able to make any head against this wicked form of Government: whereby there
was such effusion of blood, as to Theramenes (one of the 30.) seemed very
horrible, and unable to escape vengeance: his dislike of their proceedings
being openly discovered, caused his fellows to bethink themselves, and provide
for their own security, and his destruction, least he should make himself a
Captain of the discontented (which were almost the whole City) and redeem his
own peace with their ruin, wherefore they selected three Thousand of the
Citizens, whom they thought meetest, and gave unto them some part of public
Authority, the rest they disarmed, and having thus increased their own
strength, and weakened their opposites, they began afresh to shed the blood not
only of their private enemies, but of such whose money, or goods might enrich
them, and enable them for the payment of their guard. And to this purpose they
concluded, that every one of them should name one man, upon whose goods he
should seize, putting the Owner to death. But when Theramenes uttered his
detestation of so wicked intent, then did Critias, who of all the 30 was most
tyranicall, accuse him to the counsel, as a treacherous man, and (one main
privilege of the 30. was, that no one of them should suffer death at the
appointment of the rest, but have the accustomed trial) he took upon him to
strike out of that number the name of Theramenes, and so reduced him under the
trial and sentence of that Order. It was well alleged by Theramenes, that his
name was no mo^e easy to be blotted out of the Catalogue then any other man's;
upon which consideration, he advised them all to conceive no otherwise of his
Case, then as of their own, who were liable to the same form of proceeding: but
every man choosing rather to save his own life by silence, then presently to
draw upon himself the danger, which as yet concerned him little (and perhaps
would never come near him) the Tyrants interpriting Silence as Consent,
condemned him forthwith, and compelled him to drink poison.

After the death of Theramenes, the 30 Tyrants began to use such outrage as
excelled their former villainies, for having 3000. (as they thought) firm unto
them, they robbed all others without fear or shame, despoiling them of lands
and goods, and caused them to fly into banishment, for safeguard of their
lives; This flight of the Citizens procured their liberty, and the general
good of the City. For the banished Citizens, who were fled to Thebes, entered
into consultation, and resolved to hazard their lives in setting free the City
of Athens. The very thought of such a practice had been treason at home, which
had no other danger abroad, then might be found in the execution. Seventy men,
or thereabouts, were the first undertakers, who with their Captain Thrasybulus
took Phyla, a place of strength in the territory of Athens. No sooner did the
Thirty hear of their exploit, then seek means to prevent further danger;
assembling the three Thousand and their Lacedemonian guard, with which force
they attempted Phyla, but were with some loss of their men repelled: finding
the place too strong to be taken by assault, they intended to besiege it, which
purpose came to naught by means of Show that fell, and other stormy weather,
against which they had not made provision. Retiring therefore to the City,
which above all they were to ma^^ good, they left the most of that guard, and
two Troops of Horse, to weary out them which lay in Phyla, with a flying siege.
But it was not long ere the followers of Thrasybulus were increased from
seventy to seven hundred which adventured to give charge upon those guards, of
whom they cut off about an hundred and twenty: these small, but prosperous
beginnings added more to the number of those in Phyla, who now with a Thousand
men got entrance into Piraeus the suburb of Athens, lying on the port. Before
their coming, the Thirty had resolved to fortify the Town of Elewsine, to
their own use, whereinto they might make an easy retrait, and save themselves
from any sudden danger. It may well seem strange, that whereas their barbarous
manner of Government had brought them into such danger, they were so far from
seeking to obtain men's good will, that contrariwise, to assure themselves of
Elewsine, they got all of the place that could bear Arms, into their hands by
a train, and wickedly (though under form of justice) murdered them all. But
sceleribus tutum per scelera est iter, the mischiefs which they had already
done were such, as left them no hopes of going backwards, nor any other
apparent likelihood of safety, then by extending their cruelty unto all, seeing
few or none were left whom they could trust. When Thrasybulus and his fellows,
who as yet were termed Conspiratours, had taken the Piraeus, then were the
Three thousand armed again by the Tyrants, and brought to assault it; but in
the enterprise Thrasybulus had the better, and repelled his enemies, of whom
although there were slain to the number of seventy only, yet the victory
seemed the greater, because Critias, and another of the Thirty perished in that
fight. The death of Critias, and the stout defense of Peraeus, together with
some exhortations used by Thrasybulus to the Citizens, wrought such effect,
that the Thirty were deposed. Nevertheless there were so many of the three
Thousand, who having communicated with the Thirty in their misdeeds, fearing to
be called to a sharper account, that no Peace nor quiet form of Government
could be established: for Ambassadors were sent to Sparta, who craving aid
against Thrasybulus and his followers, had favorable audience, and a Power
sent to their assistance, both by Land and Sea, under the conduct of Lysander
and his brother; whom Pausanias the Spartan King did follow, raising an Army of
the Cities confederate with the Lacedaemonians; and here appeared first the
jealousy, wherein some people held the state of Sparta, The (...) and
Corinthians, who in the late wars had been the most bitter enemies to Athens,
refused to follow Pausanias in this expedition; alleging, that it stood not
with their Oaths to make war against that people, who had not hitherto broken
any one Article of the League: But fearing ineed least the Lacedaemonians should
annex the Territory of Athens to their own demaines. It is not to be doubted
that Pausanias took this answer in good part, for it was not his purpose to
destroy those against whom he went, but only to cross the proceedings of
Lysande, whom he envied. Therefore having in some small scirmishes against them
of Thrasybulus his party, made a show of war, finally wrought such means,
that all things were compounded quietly: the Thirty men, and such others as
were like to give cause of Tumults, being sent to Sparta: The remainder of that
tyranicall faction having withdrawn themselves to Elewsine, were shortly after
found to attempt some innovation, whereupon the whole City rising against them,
took their Captains as they were coming to parley, and slew them: which done,
to avoid further inconvenience, a law was made, That all injuries past should
be forgotten, and no man called into question for wrongs committed. By which
order wisely made, and caretully observed, The City returned to her former
quietness.

FINIS
OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. MDCXLIII.


