A SERMON PREACHED at the Cathedral of Norwich, UPON THE Annual Solemnity OF
THE Mayors Admision to his Office, being June 17. 1679.

By B. Rively, Curate of St. Andrews Parish in the said CITY.

Published at the Request, and with the Leave of all his Superiors in that
Place.

(...), 1. Pet. 3. 14. (...). 1. Pet. 3. 14. In the SAVOY: Printed by T. N. for
Samnel Lownds, and are to be sold at his Shop over against Exeter-Exchange in
the Strand. MDCLXXIX.

A SERMON, PREACHED at the CATHEDRAL of NORWICH,
Upon the Annual Solemnity of the Mayor's Admission to his Office, being June
17. 1679.
Rom the 13th. Verse. the 14th. For he bears not the Sword in vain.
WHatever some misopineing and mispractising Christians of late have Taught the
World to the contrary, there can be no Greater Friend to Civil Government
(whether Supreme or Subordinate) than Christian Religion is.

And, for Proof of it, if all other parts of the New Testament were silent, the
Five first Verses of this Chapter would be sufficient.

In the whole Discourse you have Two Generals,

1. strict and universally concerning Precept: And, 2. Mighty strong Arguments
to back it.
The Precept is in the first words of the Chapters; Let every Soul be subject
to the higher Powers: (...) the Authorities set over them; Civil Authorities
having jus gladii, as in my Text: 'Twas here the Roman Emperor, and his
Lieutenants (for the word is taken for the Persons of Governors as well as for
their Power.) To these every Soul is by the Christian Apostle enjoined
Subjection.

It Is a Catholic Precept, and given to the Roman Christians (whether under
Claudius or Nero, it is not material for they were both Persecutors) and,
therefore, how any that boast themselves. Catholic, and own themselves of the
Romish Communion (yet living under a very Constantine, and Theodosius) can
Evade the Force of it, I understand not.

Again, it is a Precept of the Christian Religion given to the first Christians
by an Eminent Apostle and Disseminator of that Religion; and therefore how any
that pretend to that Name, especially such as do it more Nicely, and Separately
then the rest of their Brethren, should be made to boggle at it, I do as little
understand as I did before. Yet so it is; As Catholic as it is, there are
whole Orders of Men in the Romish Church, that think themselves unconcerned
with it: And as Christian as it is, there were of old, and are still, whole
Sects and Parties of Men in the purer part of the Christian Church, that seek
to elude and baffle it.

Therefore, it is well our Divine Author does not barely propound it, but
enforces it with strong Reasons, which I come next to consider.

1. The first Argument for this Universal Subjection to Civil Government is
drawn from its Divine Original: For, there is no power but of God; and, the
powers that be are ordained of God, Verse. 1.

Here, not only Power in general, but the particular Order and Polity of it,
whether in the hand of a Nero, or a Constantine -- in a Supreme or a
Subordinate is made to be a Sacred Institution. There is an (...), and a (...),
both in the words, whereby it is asserted, not only to derive from God, as the
first mover, and highest principle in the rank of Beings; but, to come of God
too as the efficient cause; And therefore disobedience on this account must
needs be the more Criminal, as being upon the matter a fighting against God, a
russling and perturbing the Order and appointment of Heaven.

2. Argument; from the sin, and danger of resistance, verse. 2. Whosoever
therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and incurs
Damnation.

First, It Is resistance of the Ordinance of God, and so it is a sin; for, sin in
its pr per nature is the transgression of a Law; and, it is the greater sin,
because against a (...), a Living Law, for so the Magistrate is; it is against
Gods Image, as well as his Word.

Against the Power of God in the hand of Man; It Is all one who Commands, God's
Word, or God's Vicegerent, provided he commands nothing contrary to that Word.

This Consideration at once invites Obedience, and aggravates Disobedience:
Besides,

2. A person so sinning, incurs damnation, which is a mighty danger: the most
terrible thing within the compass of human apprehension -- importing, not only
temporal punishment, but, without repentance, eternal too. And if fear be one
of the most operative passions in the Human Soul, what should so just a cause
of it produce?

3. Argument from the end, and use of Government, in respect both of good and
evil men, ver 3. 4. For Magistrates are not to be feared for good works, but
for evil; Will thou then be without fear of the power? do well: so shall thou
have praise of the same: For he is the Minister of God for they wealth: but if
thou do evil, fear: for he bears not the sword for naught: for he is the
Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil. As if he had said 't
vere a huge mistake to imagine that Kings, and Governors were (...), Vain and
empty names, of no benefit or service in the Commonwealth. For how should Vice
receive its condign punishment, or Virtue come by its proper Guerdon and
Reward, but this way? How should the public Peace be preserved, the common
Good be maintained, or particular Rights be defended, but this way? Better set
under a Bramble-bush than have no shelter at all. It was better with Israel
under Abimelech, than when there was no Magistrate in the Land, to put them to
shame in any thing.

Let Governors be what they will as to their personal faults; Foxes as Herod;
Lions as Nero, yet by the design of their Place and Office, they are the
Ministers of God to men for their good. Gods Sword bearers toward evildoers,
and Gods Shieldbearers toward them that do well: Therefore for them that
should be Subjects, under what pretense soever, to cast off all aw and regard
to Authority, to turn Mutinous, Rebellious, or Seditious, and to lift up a
Battoon of popular fury against this Sword of regular jurisdiction, is to spoil
and defeat the most wise and experienced Instrument of Good, that ever was in
the world.

4. Argument from the necessity of subjection, and the nature of that
necessity, ver. 5. (...), etc wherefore ye must needs be subject, and that not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake; as much as to say, It Is not a
point of in lifferency, and arbitrary Choice that I am now upon, but of
necessary Duty, such as you cannot handsomely avoid, nor can any company of men
in the world, consulting to make a Law against it, possibly render it null, or
absolve you from it.

It Is a practice we are held to, by a Bond that nothing can untie, even by
Conscience, and that both natural and enlightened. Reason and Revelation guide
and hold us to it. It Is not only a prudential thing, to live in subjection to
them that are set over us in the Lord, as we would avoid the punishment
threatened to resistance, in the verse foregoing; but it is a chief part of our
Integrity and Conscience, both as we are honest men, and good Christians. And
by the way, this is worthy of serious consideration to such as would pretend
conscience against obedience to Governors in such Cases, wherein they have a
power to Command. -- But I forbear going further at this general rate; Thus
much was necessary to find out where the words of my Text are; they are part of
the Argument fetched from the use and end of Civil Government, as it relates
either to good or evil men; and they have (as you see) coherence with the
antecedent and subsequent part of the Apostles discourse, and are as
efficacious toward the pressing of the primary Injunction of Subjection and
Obedience as any of the others, and so I shall handle them under this
proposition, or principal head, viz. That Civil Government is by no means to be
counted a vain and useless thing in the world -- for so much the words do
naturally import, though they be concretively expressed, and only with reference
(as some think) to the coercive part of the Magistrates Office.

He bears not the sword in vain. The ( He) in my Text is the Power, the
Potestas, in ver. foregoing, Will thou not be afraid of the power, do that
which is, etc for he is, etc. So that the power is spoken of, as vested in some
subject, and the Power, and the Empowered mutually suppose one another.

And then for the ( Sword) I take it to be comprehensive of the whole power,
the Jus vitae, as well as Necis, and a Symbol of the defense of the virtuous,
as well as of the offense of the vicious: And especially when our Apostle
expresses both for the praise of, etc. as well as for the punishment of, etc.
and when he speaks not of drawingthe Sword, but of bearing it: -- It Is not
amiss so to understand it.

This then I shall endeavor to make good upon this occasion -- That
Magistratical power, wherever it is lodged, either in the Prince or his
Deputy, is not a vain or empty thing

1. It Is not so in its Institution and design. 2. It ought not to be so in its
execution and effect. The First will evince the Doctrine, and the Second will
apply it, and both will absolve my present undertaking.
^o the First (...). -- Magistratical power is not a vain thing in its
Institution and Design, because it is neither without Author nor End, and they
both such as will abundantly excuse it from vanity: for it has God for its
Founder, and it serves very useful and necessary purposes.

First, it has God for its Founder, so far it is from having no Author at all
(which is one notion of the (...) in my Text) that it has the best Author of
all. He that is the only wise God, and the God of Order, that can do nothing
amiss, and has done all things well, is in another style called the Blessed and
only Potentate, and the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords. 1 Timothy 6. 15.
that is -- the Source of all governing Power, whence all other powers derive.
For these words must be understood as the following, as he only has in ver.
16. God is the only Potentate, Immortality, i. e. originally and fundamentally.
It Is true, Angels, and the Souls of men are immortal, but it is by dependence
and derivation from God; and from the same Fountain, come these several
Authorities, and great Commands of Men in the world. David describes this most
Divinely in 1 Chro. 29. 11, 12. Thine O Lord, is the greatness, and the Power,
and the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty, for all that is in Heaven and
Earth is thine, thine is the Kingdom O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above
all: both Riches and Honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in
thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to
give strength unto all. -- Solomon also says the same thing. Prove. 8. 15, 16.
By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice; By me Princes rule and Nobles,
even all the Judges of the earth

Besides, what other sense can you make of that general and familiar Title of
the Kings of Israel? -- The Lords anointed. -- or of Cyrus and Nebuchadnezzar,
Heathen Princes being called God's servants, as they are several times in
Scripture.

Moreover, our blessed Lord himself authorizes this Doctrine in Jo. 19. 11.
where he looks through the Person of Pilate to his Power (as he confesses)
given him from above. And in Jo. 10. 34, 35. Where he plainly consures the Jews
unbelief, of his Divine extract by a concession of no less to their own Rulers.
And as the Master, so have his Scholars (I mean the Divine Apostles, and their
successors) been always thought to teach. --

I am sure St: Paul is direct to our purpose in that first sentence. There is
no power but of God, and the powers that be, i. e. the then obtaining powers,
though Heathenish, are ordained of God; all of them, whether supreme or
subordinate; for the superscription is the same upon greater and lesser coin,
and to confirmation of this, he abounds with words in ver. 1. you have his
(...), as I before hinted in ver. 2 (...), ver. 4. (...). ver. 6. (...). Nor
does St. Peter. contradict this, if rightly understood, for when 1 Ep. 2. chapter
13, 14. he calls for submission to the King and his Deputies, as to an
Ordinance of Man; Submit your self to every ordinance of man, whether to the
king as Supreme, or to Governors sent by him, etc. This is by no means said
exclusively of God, in their original Institution, as appears by the (...)
annexed, Submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake. God is not shut
out in the main, though there may be an allowance of human skill and policy in
the particular rankings and mouldings of civil power, it is as if the Apostle
had said, Submit your selves to your Governors, by whatsoever human Model, or
Creation, they do hold that Government; whether by Natural Inheritance, or
Legal Succession, or by election for Life, or for a certain Term: for, writing
to scatterd Christians (as in the first Verse of this Epistle) How could he
better accommodate his Discourse? Besides, Pareus himself, no forward Man for a
jus divinum in Civil Authority -- fayes, it is here called an Human Ordinance, or
Creation; not casually, as if it were devised, or brought in only by the fancy
of Men: but either subjectively, because administered by Men, or objectively,
because exercised -- about the concerns of Men; and, from the very word (...),
he picks out a notion of God, because Creation is a work pecusiarly his.

Now I appeal to you, if that which by all manner of Divine Testimony, by Old
and New Scripture Records, appears to be the product of an Almighty Power and
Wisdom, can be a vain thing. Especially if thereunto we can add rational
Evidence, in which this matter is easy to be done.

For I thus Argue -- He that made all things must needs have a right to govern
all things which he has made: and, this Maker and Governor of all things must
needs be God, because the Acts of Creation and Providence are accountable to
none but a Divine Power: and, if he gave not only a being, but order to all
other parts of the World, how can I reasonably think he should leave Mankind
only (which is his Masterpiece) in a state of confusion and disorder,
especially when he has given that Species of his work to a nature infinitely
loving and desiring the contrary.

And, as it is thus in power and rule abstractly taken, without any
modification, so it is the same, as it is vested, either in a Supreme, or a
Subordinate.

As to a Supreme Power -- in Reason there can be no order, Sine Relatione ad
aliquid primum, So speaks the Philosopher; which made Sen. ca in his Book of
Clemency use this expression, That even Nature did first find out a King.

A Government is like a Circle without a Center -- i. e. something that has no
being in Nature: it is an Utopick, ussless there be in it somewhere a Supremacy.
If Justice cannot be finally done, it is not done at all; and that can never be
without a Supreme, or Center, in which all Lines must meet -- All Motions,
Questions, Appeals, must receive a stop and determination: upon which account
it is observable, that even in those places where there is a seeming opposition
to Kingship, and Sovereignty, there they cannot avoid it for their hearts; as
among the Lacedaemonians where the Ephori had it in spite of their Titular
Kings; and among the Switzers at this day, where the People have it, for all
the^r Umbratile Magistrates: And, in what strange Names it was vested here,
while Monarchy lay a bleeding, most of us cannot but sadly remember. But, you will
say; Is there the like reason for a Subor^inate Power? I answer, Yes: even in
the very times of the Jewish Theocracy such a Power obtained, and was thought
requisite to be put into the hands of Men, that might exercise Coertion, and
work Deliverance, as Judges, or Lieutenants, in God's stead. And, what God
thought reasonable for himself, Kings, that are but Men, have all the reason in
the World to count wise for them to imitate. Therefore, in all Ages since, this
way has been practiced, and in the most absolute Governments. I might Instance
in Moses, as Extraordinary a Person as he was, both in Commission, and in
Ability; yet, not only to alleviate the Government to himself, but to
facilitate it unto the People, he was fain to admit of Rulers, of 1000 s. of
100 s. and of 10 s. under him Exodus 18. 18, etc. but, not to insist upon that,
we find afterward the Constitution of the double Triumvirates under the Jewish
Sanhedrim at Jerusalem; and also the Proconsuls, the Curators, the Presidents
of Provinces under the Roman Empire: in consideration whereof we are made to
understand (by the way) The reason of the variety of Terms, Governors come
under in the new Testament; sometimes we have no King but Caesar; andsometimes
who but Herod; sometimes we read of Augustus, and then of his Tetrarchs;
sometimes they are called (...) Principalities, and other-while (...) Powers,
one while (...), then (...).

So the Greek Authors express the several Banks of Magistrates in the Roman
Monarchy, meaning, by Kings, such as were in the Sovereignty -- the Emperors --
and by Governors -- All subordinate Officers under them. -- St. Paul runs it
thus, Kings, and all in Authority, 1 Timothy 2. 2.

And otherwise then thus it can never be, unless you can suppose Kings to
partake not only of the Name, but of the Nature of God, not only of his Image,
but of his Essence -- You may give one Sun leave to suffice a whole World for
Light, because it can so easily carry it, and convey it through the Universe:
but, Can you imagine a King that can as well serve for an Universal Monarchy?
It must be a very small Dominion which a Man can personally visit within the
time, which the Sun runs his whole Circuit: And, if there be a place in the
Kingdom, where neither the King is, nor no body for him, judge ye what Rule and
Government must be there? Therefore, by wise Speakers, the Sea has been
thought a fitter Emblem of Sovereign Power, than the Sun, because though it be
full of Water in it self, yet it is fain to make use of certain Streams and
Rivers to carry its Waters into the Continent, whither its self cannot come --
And so stands the reason of Subordinate Power, not to rival, or eclipse and
lessen, but to honor, aid, and fulfill the Supreme Power.

Now, by this time, you have seen not only Rule at large, but as it is vested
in a Supreme, and in a subordinate Hand, proved by Reason as well as Scripture.
God and Nature have given in their Suffrages, and we have a saying ( Deus and
Natura) God and Nature never did any thing in vain.

Second Particular -- (...), Magistratical Power is not in vain, neither with
reference to its end; It is not something that might be well enough spared, and
would not be mist if it were out of the way, for it serves very useful and
necessary purposes. Our Apostle had said before as much as this comes to, when,
in Verse the third, he thus speaks, Rulers are not a terror to good works, but
to the evil: which expression is well construed by St. Peter, 1 Epist. 2 Chap.
14 v. The Magistrate is the Minister of God to thee for good; (...): The Phrase
is so comprehensive, and Indefinite, that 'twill pose us to pitch upon any one
kind of good that it does not fitly tend to. The good of Personal, and
Relative; of Public and Private Interest: the good of our Bodies and Souls; of
our Lives, and Fortunes, of our Rights and Liberties, the good of Order and
Justice, of Peace and Quiet.

In a word, whatever is of Natural, Moral, Civil, or Spiritual benefit and
consequence, may be conceived to have at least its value and stablishment this
way, and if there be any Spiritual benefit and consequence, may be conceived to
have at least its value and stablishment this way, and if there be any other
Notion of Good which upon serious consideration of the innumerable evils of
Anarchy, and Lawlessness, does come into your Minds, you may justly place it
to this account. Whole Nations, and Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, and Cities,
and Churches, and all Societies of Men, and Millions of single persons too, (so
far as unbiast Reason and a sound temper of Mind, does prevail) are able to
give in their experimental testimony to all this --

I was fain (I confess) to put in that Parenthesis (so far as unbiast Reason,
and a sound temper of Mind does prevail) with reference to single persons,
because (in the Christian Church (more is the Scandal) there has been diverse
forts of Anti-Magistratical spirits, some that have sought to Fight down all
other lesser Monarchies, with the Introduction of a Fifth Great One; which some
would have Christ's, and some his Vicars. -- Others would distinguish-down
Magistracy, by allowing the Heathen not the Christian Magistracy; and
alleging, that now the Sword is a Carnal Weapon, and ought to be laid aside;
and, that the Christian ought to be a Law to himself and n^ded not to be in
Subjection, or Servitude to any Man since the Liberty obtained for him by
Christ --

But, how opposite soever this seems to be to the Doctrine of the usefulness of
Civil Power, and State-Government, I shall not need to spend time in its
Redargution, because it has more of Delirium than Sound Argument in it, it
falls apieces of it self. --

As for that of the Swords being a Carnal Weapon, and so not usable under the
Gospel; that is only to be understood (I presume) while its out of their own
hands: for, their Design is only by this means to get it there, and then they
have a Scabbard for it themselves; but, it shall sleep no longer in it then
till some Heretical Prince or such like Enemy to the Saints come in its way.
This is not only verified in the Sanctified Cutthroats of Rome, but in
John-a-Leydens Crew a great while ago; and, in the Levelling-Party you know
when; and, in another late Rabble of English Mammaluks; and, in a later then
that of Scatch Enthusiasts, which yet might be all the Same Men (for ought I
know) but Under several Disguises.

As for their Fifth Monarchy under King Jesus, it is a device quite contrary to
Christ's own assertion, who plainly tells us, his Kingdom is not of this World,
and how then can it come into Rank and Order with other worldly Kingdoms, so as
to be called Fifth or Sixth?

As for that of less need of Magistracy, upon pretense of more Religion since
Christ, sure God did never design such a present perfection should suddenly
come upon men together with his Gospel, that all other means of their good,
should be necessarily superseded; but the Gospel of Christ was to be the power
of God unto men's salvation, as bringing a blessing upon, and an efficacy into
other means which were lawful before, amongst which, (doubtless) this of Civil
Government was one, and might therefore keep its standing. Indeed if we could
make men, there would be less need to make Magistrates; but still there would
be need too, for when a man is as much a Saint as he can, yet he is not an
Angel, -- he may do evil and preventing Justice is an excellent part of the
Magistrates Office; but what need I talk at this rate! I would all were honest
men that call themselves Saints! You know Moses had a hard task on it, though
most of his charge were Church Members..

A flock of innocent sheep must have a Shepherd, for tho there be no Wolves in
the flock, there may be some about it; and some may be crept in too, for ought
you and I know; for W olves in Sheeps clothing you have heard of before now --

In fine, as for that so much vaunted liberty by Christ the (...) of
Antimagistratical men (as they construeit) it is a plain Lie; Christ brought in
no such thing as they pretend to. It Is a liberty from sin, but not from Duty:
It Is a liberty from Lust, but not from Law: It Is a liberty from Satan's Tyranny,
but not from God's Service. In a word, it is pure Liberty, not a Licentiousness
that comes in by Christ -- No man is authorized to do what he list, but what
God and his Ministers would have him; for all this Liberty by Christ, all other
bonds of like nature hold, as that of Children to Parents; of Servants to
Masters; of Wives to Husbands; and why should not this of Subjects to their
Governors and Princes do so too? It Is against the Principles, the Profession,
I, and the very Interest of Christianity to think otherwise, as might
abundantly be proved, if it were my present Province.

But I have said enough already in a matter, to which the sense of all good
Christians since Constantine, and the Prayers of all before him do agree. It
remains therefore not withstanding all this Libertine Talk, that I proceed a
little tell you, that State-Government is no vain thing, no, not now under the
Gospel: but the best Uses and Ends it always served for, it serves for still;
and for some better than it could serve for before; because a Christian, as
such, has a bigger fraught in the ship of the Commonwealth, than any other
man, and besides his Life and Liberty, Safety, Property, Peace, which he has
(by the benefit of the Government he lives under) preserved to him in common
with other subjects; he has also his Religion safe guarded, and defended, and
therefore that Government, by which this Jewel (in comparison whereof, all the
other things are but Lumber) is secured unto him, must needs be of greater
service and benefit.

The better men are, the more taste they have of the good of Government,
partly, because their interest is dearest, which is preserved by it (as I
hinted just now) and partly, because the miseries of Anarchy fall heaviest upon
such, being by their practice the more exposed to envy and mischief from wicked
men, and by their principles more disarmed from private revenge --

But I shall not confine my discourse only to them -- take any man in the
latitude of a Subject, and if he has but a spark of Reason awake in him, that
will inspire him with another sense of Government then to permit it to be
thought a vain thing.

It Is by this that he can say any thing is his; that he sits under his own
Vine, and Figtree in quiet; that his House is his Castle; That every spleenful
man is not Master of his life; that the Commonwealth is not a Cyclops Den,
where (...), That things are not disputed amongst men as amongst dogs (that is)
by the Teeth, and the greater force. That our places are not overrun with
Malefactors and Criminals, which are the worst sort of Vermin, and Wild Beasts;
as for example, When there was no King in Israel, every one did that which was
right in his own eyes, (that is) just right wrong; every Micah had a house of
God's, and the Levites went a begging, and one Tribe went to war with another,
to decide that by the longest sword, which a few hours serious debate, and
reference to public Justice, would have peaceably determined. And as it serves
thus by way of prevention, -- so again, it is by this that wholesome Laws are
made, and executed; that Justice is done; that Peace is preserved; that Vice is
punished; that Virtue is encouraged; that human Society is kept on foot; that
we enjoy our selves; and that we may serve our God. The Apostle gives it us in
short, that we may live quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty;
1 Timothy 2. 2. And if this can be a vain Invention that ferves to all these
purposes, I am very much mistaken. -- Let us therefore admire it, as a wise and
gracious provision of God, that we have such a Rank and Order of men set up
amongst us, as should do all this for us; and be as Fathers of their Countries,
and Shepherds of the People, and Nurse of the Church, and Heirs of restra^nt,
and God's among men; through whose vigilance all others might sleep; through
whose care they might be secure; through whose public employment they might
attend their private; such as might be Sanctuaries to the Friendless;
Treasuries to the Poor; Shields to the oppressed; a Praise to them that do
Well; and a Terror to Evildoers.

And well is it for the World, that this last part of their Office, is in any
competent measure discharged: for it is too obvious, that most of the Civility,
Honesty, and Religion too, that is amongst us, is owing unto it; men generally
walk more by sight than by faith, and the Magistrates Halter scares more than
the Ministers Hell: and though this restraint upon wicked men, by virtue of the
Magistrates sword, does not finally save their own souls, yet undoubtedly it
saves a great many other folks lives; which is so material a consideration,
that with it I will shut up the Expository part of my Discourse, and come to
Application.

Since the Magistrates Sword, as it emblems Use 1.
his Authority, is not in vain, as to its Author or End, neither ought it be in
vain, as to its Execution or Effect.

It ought not to be in vain in the execution. This is only applicable to the
Magistrate, and as subordinate too; for the making of Laws, and imposing them
-- that is the Potestas (...); the Legislative power is in the Supreme -- But
the execution of Law, and Administration of Justice to the people, is the work
of the Subalterne Officers and Deputies under him; Give me leave then to be the
Rembrancer only of such, that according to the Duty of their places, they would
be pleased to put the King's Laws into execution, lest they be thought
otherwise by God, and the People to bear the sword in vain.

The good of the public depends much upon subordinate means: Let the Kingdom
be never so well provided of a Wise and Gracious Prince, and of good and
wholesome Laws, if they that are to be the eyes, hands, and feet of him that is
the head, be either lame or blind, how necessarily must the whole Body suffer?
And if they that are to be as the Arteries and Veins to convey the Lifeblood
of Law and Justice through the parts, do not perform their Office, nutrition
must cease, and consumption must invade, and both will be charged upon that
obstruction.

It Is granted, the King's Authority virtually extends it self throughout his
whole Dominions; but how can it be actually exerted in particular and various
places without faithful and diligent Ministers under him? Let the
Lord Lieutenant in a County, or the Mayor in a City be a St. George on a
Signepost, and the people will represent the King of the Country, but as a
King in a Comedy by and by. Let the stagnation or stop of Justice be in the
lower Vessels, -- it presently redounds to the detriment of the Head, endangers
the Body of the Government, and in a little time brings an unprofitableness
upon the Ordinance of God; unprofitableness did I say? yea, it perverts it, and
makes it serve quite contrary ends, than it was in tended for. -- If the
Magistrate be couchant, it is ten to one but disorder and misrule will be
rampant If the Governor be a Log, no wonder if the Frogs and Vermin leap and
croak about it Unexecuted Law first gives impunity to Vice and consequently
Courage; for Evils unsupprest will soon grow insolent, and in a short time,
what was Leave at first will come to be Law, and a better Law than the Law it
self at last. And the face of the Commonwealth, shall be (much what as the
sluggards field in Prove. 24. 31.) Overgrown with Briars and Thorns, Wormwood
and Hemlock, instead of those Plants of Renown, Righteousness, and Peace, and
Order, and Truth, and Obedience. Gentlemen, I beseech you, mistake me not, I am
not so pragmatick as to go about to teach you your Duty, which must needs know
better than I, my design is only to mind you of it, and to excite you to
diligence, and faithfulness in it: you have your Rule before you, the Law of
the Land, and that (Blessed be God) wise for its contrivance, safe for its end,
and useful for its effect: It Is not meddling beyond this your Rule that I would
tempt you to, but actting according to it (I think) is justly expectable at
your hands. But so much for general Use; now let me proceed to a modest
particularity.

And First for you Sir, who must by and by resign up your Sword into another
hand, I have but two things to offer to you.

Take the best care you can that you go off the Stage with as much innocence as
you came on: for besides personal faults, there are a sort of sins called
Nostra ^liena, our other folks sins that a year of May oralty may be apt to be
charged deeply withal: Give glory to God in the humble confession of them, and
crave his pardon, in and through the merits of Jesus, and what you want of
perfection (a thing the best come short of) endeavor to make up in your
integrity. Be but able to make good Samuels close, 1 Samuel 12. 3. Whose Ox, or
whose Ass have I taken? whom have I defrauded, of whose hand have I received
any Bribe? I mean, let but God and your own Conscience acquit you, and no
matter whether the People give their Plaudite or no.

Moreover, I desire you Sir to remember, that though you now cease to be a kind
of Dictator in this Government, yet you must continue to be Consul, and though
the main Load shall be taken off your Shoulders, yet you must be willing to
lend a hand to the burden still: And this you have reason to esteem, not only
your Honor, but your Happiness because thereby you have an opportunity of
playing an after-game, and consequently of amending what you shall see amiss in
the fore one.

But if there be so much heed to be taken in an Act of Resignation, what is
there in an Act of Engagement? sure it is an easier matter to surrender, than to
undertake a Magistrates Office.

2. To you then Sir, that are our Rising Sun, let my Speech be next directed.

Consider that you may lawfully take that Sword, which God and Man both put
into your hands; and when you are invested with your power, use it for Gods
Honor, the Kings Service, and the peoples benefit.

Begin with God and Religion for a Gallio-Magistrate, that cares for none of
these things, is rather to be accounted a Herdsman of Cattle, than a Governor
of Christians. --

Pray first unto God your self, that he that girt you, may bless you, and then
entitle your self to the Prayers of the Church, by improving your Authority to
its singular advantage. Govern with your Example, as well as with your Sword;
and what of evil your Office cannot reach, let your Frown and your Eye scatter
away -- So says Solomon, A prudent Governor scatters away evil with his eyes,
Prove. 20 8. The good example of a Magistrate seems hugely reasonable upon his
own account, and other folks too: upon his own, because he would hardly punish
that in another, which he is guilty of himself; and so he would be tardy in his
Office -- And then upon others account, because there are a great many people
in the world, that look in no other Book but the Lives of their Governors, and
they go either to Heaven or Hell, as they are led by their Superiors.

But chiefly, let your power and zeal bend it self against those sins of
Swearing, Drunkenness, Whoredom, and Profanation of the Lords day, because
these are crimes grown too modish, popular and strong for to be ^awed by any
Church censure, or reproof. -- And the best way for Reformation that I know of
in this case, is strictly to execute the Laws of the I and against them.
Finally let that Religion have your constant profession and countenance which
has crowned this Nation with so many blessings, and such deliverances as seem
almost peculiar to it, I mean the Protestant Religion, as it is established in
the Church of England; and let her public Worship, pure Ordinances, decent
Rites, and lawful Ministers, never fail of your presence, support, and
encouragement.

But next to fear God, is Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2. 17
and this Sir, is as much your Duty, as any private Subjects, yea, and a
greater obligation upon you: and however your place exalts you above the common
Level, yet you must own a subordination, and accountableness to your Sovereign.
Though you have an Officer to carry the Sword before you, yet you are your self
the Kings Sword Bearer too. Your may have the Show, but he must have the
Service; you may have the Honor, but he must have the Duty of it; or else you
put the Kings Sword into your scabbard, and fight against him with his own
weapon.

Next to God's, and the King's, the peoples Interest is worthily considerable
to you: for Government is not for you that Govern, but for them that are
governed; not for private, but for public ends. It Is not to fill your own
pocket, but to shake down the Fruit to them that are underneath; that you are
advanced to a high place

The Sword you take is by no means an Instrument of Particular Favor, or of
Personal Revenge, but of Common Justice; and must be Weilded to the Public
Ends of Law and Right, of Defense and Offense, as Cases happen within the Verge
of your Government.

You are, Sir, in a diverse Notion, the Cities Master, and the Cities Servant:
as is Master you have a Port allowed you, which it is your wisdom to keep: for
he that despises himself, is the more easily despised by others -- Be not
wheadled by any Man out of your Authority, let him appear in what Cloak he
will. As the Cities Servant, you have all her just Rights, and Privileges to
maintain; and, for your Assistance, you have many Fellow Servants equally
engaged, whose Aid you need not want in their vindication and assertion -- Sir,
I have no more, but as Michaiah to Ahab (yet without his Irony) Go up, and
prosper.

Use 2. Let me now speak but one word to the People and I have done.

That the Magistrate should not bear the Sword in vain, by a neglect of his
Duty, I have both generally and particularly exhorted: Now, that the People may
not make him to do so, whether he will or no, I come to Exhort them, for, they
have a way of blunting and dulling the Magistrates Sword, let him Whet it, and
Weild it never so well: And that is, by their Obstinacy, and Perverseness, and
Resty Ungovernable Humor.

But, Brethren, and Fellow-Citizens, let me hope better things of you. That
which in the Designation of God, and in its own Nature is so useful and
necessary to Humain Society, do not you render unprofitable to your selves, by
a Peevish, Crofs, and unsubmissive carriage under it. -- Sirs, Do not you treat
those Scarlet Robes, as some bold Birds will do a Mawkin in a Corn-field; nor
contemn that Sword, as if it were but a Lath in a Velvet Scabbard; Do not
despise Dominion, or speak evil of Dignities, but preserve an awe and reverence
always upon your Spirits to Public Authority, as toward an Ordinance of God;
and believe it a matter wherein the Public Welfare, and the Honor of Religion
are very much concerned. Do but suffer that Lawful Sword of Government which
you live under to have its proper effects upon you -- to keep you within due
bounds of Order and Soberness, and Obedience, and you will thereby very much
prevent its being borne in vain: you will ease your Magistrates of a great part
of their burden, and you will gain unto your selves the reputation of Loyal
Subjects, and true Protestants. And now I think on it, this is a new Argument I
have to enforce this Duty upon you withal: You see at this day the great Cry is
against Popery, and that which most justly has made that Religion odious to
us, is, the Bitter Opposition it bears to the Government of this Nation, as it
is now to remain Refractroy, Ill-natured, Discontented with, and, in any way
(open or secret) Rebellious against the present Government, is plainly to take
part with the Papists, and to help on their Malicious Designs against us. And,
you can no way better approve your selves, not only Christians at large, but of
the best sort, that is, of the truly Reformed Stamp, and most agreeable to the
Primitive-Christian Spirit, then by living in Subjection and Obedience to your
Supreme, and Superiors in Church and State. It is too late here to meddle with
the so much exagitated Question, How far we are to obey Governors? this I am
sure; To pretend Conscience against Obedience, is expressly against St. Paul's
Doctrine, teaching us to obey for Conscience sake; and, to Disobey for
Conscience, in a thing indifferent, is never to be found in the Books of our
Religion.

Go home then, and if you be as you Profess, Christians and Protestants, show
it not so much by your Railery against the Pope, as Antichrist, and the Whore
of Babylon, etc. as by heartily loving and embracing that Church, which he
hates and pursues (you see) with all his Spite and Spleen; and confess at
last, that that Settlement must needs be of God, that has outlived so many
Wars, and Conspiracies, and Fires, and Swords, and Poisons, against it: and,
take it not amiss if (according to the Charge given to Titus, and, in him, to
all the Successive Ministers of the Gospel) I do, upon this occasion, put you
in mind to be Subject to Principalities Tit. 3. 1.
and Powers, and to obey Magistrates; which is nothing else, in effect, but to
strike in with the best Natured King, the best Constituted State, and the best
Reformed Church, against the Worst sort of Enemies in the whole World. --

FINIS.

