Rusticus ad Clericum OR, THE PLOWMAN REBUKING THE PRIEST, In ANSWER to Verus
Patroclus, Wherein, the False-hoods, Forgeries, Lies, Perversions, and
Self-contradictions of WILLIAM (...) are (...)

By JOHN ROBERTSON.

Vtque d^v^^^^^ verum
Nebulas, Manes and (...) aucupunt
Pariuntque Monstra^ q^^is nec est pes nec caput
^eu vacua Magnos a^^^innitus cient:
Prove: 4. 16. For they sleep not except they have done mischief, and their
sleep is taken away, except they cause some to fall. 17. For they eat the Bread
of Wickedness, and drink the Wine of Violence. Printed in the Year 1694.

Rusticus ad Clericus, OR THE PLOWMAN REBUKING THE PRIEST, In Answer to VERVS
PATROCLVS, etc.
FRIEND,
AS Our Neighbors and Contrymen, who are acquainted with our Principles and
Practices, know us to be Lovers of all Mankind, such as seek the Good of All,
and the prejudice of none; So we have no such Enemies as the Clergy now
Regnant, and some of their bigoted Disciples, whom they have bewitched with
fair words, and smooth speeches, to believe all they say without examining,
whether it be true or false.

This Tribe of Lying Levites, have now for many years made use of all the
unworthy Methods their Wi^ and Malice could invent, to Blacken, Desame,
Slander, and Misrepresent Us; This is no New thing: It is but the Doctrine of
Demetrius the Silver Smith; For they w^ll know that if people were taught to
believe according to the Scriptures, that GOD would reach his people himself,
And that be who knows not Christ in him, to teach him, is a Reprobate* That
they who know him not thus, let in to the Conscience, to parge it from
deadworks and to Reign as King, Lord, and Lawgiver, are at best but nominal
Christians; Than certainly their (...) Trade of Preaching for hyre would be at
an end, for upholding whereof, all his bustle is made in the World.

All their clamours concerning the Scriptures, Christ, Trinity, (so called)
original sin, etc. Are but mere pretenses: For let an Angel from Heaven teach
any thing contrary to the Westminster Consession and Catechisms, though never
so consonant to the Holy Scriptures, he must expect ^^ better acceptance from
these Men, then to be branded: with the odious name of Heretic, as if they
alone had becti commissionate to sect bounds to the Faith of all Mankind.

My Reader must not expect from me a long and Rhetorical Introduction, who have
been more accust^med to use P^ough then the Pen, for nigh Thirty Years
together, I was (...) and but (...) in the City; And therefore if I treat m^^^
Ad^er^ary with any lets decor^^^, then he may suppose to be due to a man of his
Robe: I hope my Rustic Education will excuse me, and the rather because I have
little or no knowledge of him, but what I gather from his Book, which at first
view gave me no good Character of him, by his falsing soul upon the Bishop of
Andrews. Certainly no generous man will strick a fallen Foe: And although he
would (...) that he did not complain for stopping his book, yet is evident that
he exposes the Bishop and his Brethren to the Fate of his Predecestor, if the
Rabble would but take the Allarum, The next thing I learn of him, is, that he
is a Presbyterian Preacher, (...) his seeking a License from the (...) of
Andrews, be no great sign ^^ his Zeal, and seems to intimate, that if the
Prelate should get a new Throw for the Chair, our Author might be brought to
cry peccavi Pater, etc.) If information hold, and if such, then consequently a
sworn Enemy to all Mankind, except those of his own Fraternity, by the Solemn
League and Covenant; Yea, his being a Clergy man is dangerous, For (as
Machiavel tells us) they have been now for more than a thousand years forming
and setting up an interest, distinct and separate from all the rest of Mankind.
And when the Popish Clergy were justly extruded because of their Cruelty and
Insolency: Lo, here we have their Successors no less insolent, ctnel, and
covetous, if they had but power; And this was foretold by the same Machiavel in
his Letter to Zenob, page 28. who faith thus, But this I will prophecy, before
I conclude, That if Princes shall perform this business by halves, and leave
any root of this Clergy, or Priest craft, as it is now in the ground. Or if
that Famous Reformer fled some years since out of Piccardie to Geneva, who is
of so great Renown for Learning and Parts, and who promises us so perfect a
Reformation, shall not in his model wholly extirpare this sort of Men: Then I
say, I must foretell, That as well the Magistrate as this Workman, will find
themselves deceived in their Expectations, And that the least Fibra of this
plant will overrun again the whole Vineyard of the LORD, and turn to a
diffusive Papacy in every Diocie, perhaps in every Parish, etc. Whether we
have seen this prophecy fulfilled by the Disciples of the same Reformer
Calvine, let the unbyassed Reader judge.

The next thing in his praeludium (all his work being like a Stage, play,) is,
That albeit this Knight Errant, with his Achillean Armor, and Titanian
Boldness, (words borrowed from himself, from the Blind Poet) has bid Defvance
to all that profess christianity, And has concluded them all (except his own
way) Heretics. Yet in opposition to the Quakers, he calls in for Auxihary
Forces, a Prelatick Preacher, and an Independent, and chiefly an Anabaptist,
(whom in his book he calls wicked and abominable,) as the Pharisees joined with
the Sudducees, Herodians and Romans to crucify CHRIST. As for the Prelatick
Clergy, he says, it is infected with the Hemlock of Pelagianism: And in his
Frontispecce, he has told you their Fate, that is, They are to be rejected.
But what more? Is then no Civil Sanction follows upon Presbyterian
Excommunication* If it (...) the S^ing it will be nothing regarded, ^^t of old
it was not so* For the first step (...) ^urse* th^^ (...) pr^scribe* And ^^
brought in alive, th^^ there was in sto^e prison^* (...) B^^^shments, Axes, and
Halters for Heretics* And our (...) is so (...)* delighted in (...) (...)
that it seems he covets the offi^e* but Blessed be the LORD, the Civil
Magistrates are now become ^^e^ than to be the Clergies (...); And their ^o^g
experience of the HONEST and PEA^EABLE PRINCIPLES of the QVAKERS, has
confirmed the Magistrate in a ^etter Opinion of Them*

As ^^ the (...) of his Adulatory Epistle to his Patron, I shall only say, that
he has rather (...) the^ oblidged his Patron, by ^^pousing him to such a
Cast-M^^^ress, as is the Controversy against the Quakers, which never Man yet
under^ook but ca^e off with Disgrace. After he has sufficiently (and a little
more then become a Protestant) rated the Episcopal Party*) he fa^^^ to the
(...) of his Dedication; About the end whereof, he has these words, Go on
therefore my Lord, espou^^ng the Cause of the true Protestant Interest, in
opposition to Popery, and whatsoever has attendancy thereunto: By this
tendency he certainly intends not so much the Quakers, as the Episcopal Church,
which may be seen in the 15th. page of his Dedication. But he must give me
leave to tell him, that the Episcopal Church of England has done, and suffered
more for the Protestant Interest than all the Presbyterians in the World; And
the three hundredth Lives laid down in the days of Queen Mary, were of more
service to the Protestant interest, than an hundred Thousand* ^ost by the
Solemn League and Covenant. And yet both Prelatick and Presbyterian Churches
departed from the Protestant Principles, in that they have first set up to
themselves an absolute Authority in matter of Faith and Worship. 2ly, That they
have not contented themselves with Excommunication, but have persecuted such as
could not comply. And 3ly, By this persecution thy have rendered themselves
guilty of all the Apostacle, Hypocrisy, and Dissimulation of such have as
complied out of mere fear: which three things, as none of the least causes of
separation have been charged upon the Church of Rome: And frequently casts in
her teeth by all Protestants: Yet has the Ruling Clergy of every Protestant
Church followed her footsteps, how soon they got Power: For this see a paper
caled the third part of Naked truth, Printed 1681. I need not here mention the
many troubles, Wars, Devastations and Miseries brought upon Europe by the
Romish Clergy these 1000 years bypast: But to come nearer home, and in our own
Age; Have we not seen the execrable Murder of One King, the banishment of
Another, the loss of an Hundred Thousand Lives, and infinite Treasure, the
ruin of our Native Country, not yet recovered; And all this to satisfy
Ambition, and avance of a contentious Clergle: Yea, and such contention as
amounted to no more than, whither the Precess of their Assembly should be
constant or moveable; And whither he should be called Moderator or Bishop,
which King Charles the first calls the Skirts or Suburbs of Religion. And yet
alace! Men have so mancipated their Judgments to the dictats of the Clergy,
they own that there is great cause to fear a Relapse.

I shall earnestly desire my Countrymen to consider what brought us to the
present condition we are in, but the artifices of the Clergy? The Popish
Clergy having got a King of their own Religion, have incessantly cried on him,
that the Churches, Colleges, Rents, Revenues, Tithes, and Benefices, were of
right theirs: And that it was Sacrilege to keep them out of Possession. The
Episcopal Clergy had the Reformation to plead, the sad sufferings of their
predecessors, and the Law of the Nation, their own piety, and Moderation (as
they pretended) But the Presbyterians think they have been but lately put from
it by the Prelates, they had gained it by the Sword, and that Major Vis is a
good Right; and they have been still attempting it since the year 1666: And
clamouring that the Nation is under a Solemn Oath by the Covenant to extirpate
all others, and establish them: So that we are brought into this present
confusion, only to satisfy the ambition and avarice of the Clergy; The Honor
and the wealth is the Bone of contention, settled Revenues, Tithes, and forced
Mantainance: and while the Civil Magistrates patronizeth any one of the three
in Possession of those; We need expect no quiet, but take away the Bone and the
Dogs will cease.

Having done with his Dedication, I must tell thee then shall expect none from
^he; Being --

Nullius addictus Jurare in (...) Magistri.

But I must look back to his Frontispeece, where he begins will Verus Patroclus.

What he intends by this, We must consider, Either he intends the Quakers, his
own Book, or himself.

If he intends is the Quakers, he is greatly mistaken, For (if we may believe
Tradition) Patrocius was a soldier at the siege of Troy, and borrowed Achilles
Atmour, to fight against Hector, by whom he was killed. Now the Quakers are so
far from borrowing Carnal Weapons, That they have beat their own swords into
plow shears, etc. and resolve to learn War no more.

If he intend his own Book, he has yet erred, lot we read, that Patroclus was
a very man like one of us, and had tongue and teeth as well as our Author.

But if he intends himself, I wonder how he calls himself, the True patroclus,
But it seems that by reading Virgils ath. Eclugue, he has d^^^med that Plato's
great year was come, Atque lterum ad Trojan Magnus mittetur Achilies; And that
he is the very patrochus, so being assured of his Fate, he attacks the whole
Christian World with great confidence. If therefore I some times call him
patroolus, some times our Author, and some times mine Adversary, I hope my
Reader will understand me.

He begins his preface to the Reader with a jealousy about the acceptance of
his Book (not without cause) He had told us before in his Dedication that it
could not be judged altogether superstuous, Because of the Hemlock of
pelagianism, wherewith the Bulk of the Prelatick Clargie is infected: Yet fears
after all this it may be called an Iliad after Homer, etc. And therefore that
his Babie may not be neglected, he tells the causes of its production over
again, and tho he told us it was designed for his Patron as a Testimony of his
gratitude for his education: Yet here it comes to be a Publict concern, and he
gives us three Fathers who have beget this Monstrous Birth upon one Mother, his
Brain, Viz. The danger of this deadly disease The prximoity of it, and the
readiness of its possions to broach Books.

It seems he means Truth to be this dangerous disease, but it is so to none but
such pedantick Chaplines as he who gets their Bread by lies; Not is it
dangerous to any but the Clergy, because its followers decry their Tyths,
their Belly, their God. As for its proximity, I know no sober man but likes
their Neighborhood, even the moderate among the Episcopal Teachers. And as to
their Broaching of Books: This is great impudence who was troubling him? Has
he seen any controversy written by the Quakers since the Year 1679. And now
when the LORD had moved the hearts of the Civil Magistrates to give them a
little respite from their sad sufferings; Beholld this Gladiator attacks them
(and by all the lies, Forgeries, and false Accusations that he can invent to
defame) provokes them again to enter the Lists in the defense of that Blessed
Testimony, which will for ever stand over him, and all such forgers.

And how unwilling we have been to broach Books, may appear by our long delay
to answer this Babble: Yea, had not some of their Preachers at Aberdeen, and in
the West, vainly boasted that it was unanswerable: We had not yet thought it
worthy to be noticed.

The next thing that occurs, is that he accuses the Nation of negligence, for
not comparing the Doctrine of the Quakers with the Scriptures. Oh! That he or
any else could awaken them to that diligence, and that they would put on that
Nobility commended in the Bereans, and come to an impartial search, not as
Patroclus, Faldo, and Hicks, represent them, but as they are indeed, But
Reader, he intends nothing less: For after all thy pains, except thou will
implicitly allow his Character of the Quakers, and take his sense of the
Quakers, he will be sure to Stigmatize thee for a Heretic. All their
clamouring the Scriptures, the Scriptures is but a mere Jugle, its their own
Gloss they intend. Interpres loquitur Litera Sacra silet. A little after he
tells us, ignoti nulld cupido, very true, for if the principles of the dispysed
Quakers were but well known, Patroclus Book would be hissed out of Doors: And
therefore in the end of this Epistle, he says, touch not, taste not, handle
not the unclean thing; strange Doctrine! try, and try not; I have told you what
they are, stop your ears and run upon them.

The rest of his Epistle (being all Satyr, composed of Railing Lies, Forgeries,
and false insinuations, I omit; he bringing me no better proof for them then
his own confident assertion, or rather impudent calumny in these words: in a
word, I say, That as the Doctrine of the Quakers is a heap of none such
Blasphemies, ^o their defenses are mere subterfuges.

Very well Patroclus, this is borrowed Armor indeed, and that from the (...)
in Cathedra, I say, ergo, verum est: Take his word Reader, and his book is
superfluous; This is no humble confidence, as he elsewhere words it: But if
(...) was puzelled to distinguish (...) a Pope and Presbyters in Hell, he would
not have been cleared of his doubts by reading this passage.

And now to his Book,
CHAPTER FIRST, Of the Holy SCRIPTURES,
HE begins with a citation of Scripture, A good Name is better then precious
Ointment, the more shame for Patroclus, who has labored to rob the Quakers of
it, by all the blackmouth'd detractions he could invent to defame them.

His first charge is, That the quakers deny that the Seriptures are or ought to
be called the Word of GOD.

Answer, This appears to me but a mere Logomathia in Patroclus; For that the
word Logos is diversely translated in Scripture we confess; As Preaching, 1 Cor;
1. 18. Utterance. 1 Cor: 1. 5. Speech Cor: 4. 6. And diverse otherwise. Now
that the Scriptures in such senses may be called Logos; That is, the speech,
discourse, o^ words of the Logos, or Word of GOD, which he spoke to the
Pattiarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, and by them recorded for the benefit of
the Church, we willingly grant: But the Word of GOD being a Name so peculiatly
atoributed to CHRIST JESUS, who being a Jealous GOD, will not give his Glory to
another; Out of mere tenderness of Conscience we can singly from the bottom of
our hearts say, and not in the least from any difesteem of disparagement of the
Scriptures (which are our delight to meditate in, and peruse often) do we
scruple to give them that Escential Tittle or Name of Christ, it being so
solemnly and frequently by the Scriptures themselves attributed to the Son of
God. As in that remarkable place. John 1. In the Beginning was the Word and the
Word was with God, and the Word was God, and the Word was mads Flesh (which can
no ways be said of the Scriptures.) And there be* Three that bear Record in
Heaven, The Father, The Word, and the Spirit. And his Name is called the Word
of God

Now len any sober unbyassed Christian People judge, whether we deserve all
these black Epithets this Author loads us with, merely for being tender of
Attributing the Sacred Name of the Creator, to a Creature,

But he brings a bundle of Citations to as little purpose as the Westminster
Confession uses to do in such case, As R. B. has remarked in the end of his
Confession of Faith. The Impertinency of which Citations may be clearly
apparent by inserting the Word Soripture in place of the Word of the Lord. As
Numbers 3. 16. And Moses numbredthem, according to the Word of the Lord:
Patroclus sense is, and Moses numbered them according to the Scriptures, whereas
yet there was none extant: Second is, Duter: 5. and 5. I stood between the Lord
and you at that time to show you the Word of the Lord, Now how impertinent
would it beto say, That Moses had the Bible in his hand to show the Israelites.

Among all the test of his Citations he lays most hold on Hosea 1, and 2. The
Beginning of the) Word of the LORD by Hosea. This says he is a Denying of the
Eternity of the Son of God; But how grossly he erreth here may be seen above by
diverse Accoptations we grant of the Word; As in Psalm 19, 2, The same Word
signifies Speech. Now to take this Word for the Scripture would be a gross
lie; For it was not the Beginning of the Scripture much having been written
before And therefore the true meaning of this place to all single heatted ones
(...) clearly the time when Christ, the Word of the Lord began to speak to
Hosea, Or as the Latin has it, Prinoipiam loquendi Domini in Hosea.

There are no more of his citations that seem to have any weight but that of
Mark 7. 18. compared with verse 10. I shall begin at the 9 And he said unto
them, full well ye reject the Commandment of GOD, that ye may keep your own
Traditions. Verse 10. For Moses said Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc.
Verse 13. Making the Word of GOD of none effect.

Now that this Word mentioned by the Evangelist was one of the Ten Words spoken
on Mount Sinai, we do not deny, And that every Commandment Precept, Promise,
or Threatening in the Scripture, is a Word of God, we fully acknowledge: And so
all he can make of this is; That the fifth Commandment here meaned is one of
the (...) Words that came from Christ the Word the Eternal Son of God.

And whereas he quibles upon the word Per eminentiam, or by way of Eminency:
This fifth Commandment before mentioned shall furnish us an Example. The King
of Scotland is an Epichet predicated of the chief Magistrate: Now I ask him, if
this Epithet can be predicated per emmentiam of any other Man, Book, or thing
in the Nation without Treason? And see if his Properly and Improperly will
serve him here. The very Committee of Estates, although it exercised the Regal
Power in the Late Rebellion did not usurp the Title of King, tho they were a
little too familiar with his Authority and Person. But I hope hereafter
Patroclus will be a little more tender of the Titles of the King of Kings.
Having granted the Contraversy in Terminis.

For in page 3* He grants that Christ is the ^ssential and Substantial Word
of God, The principal Dictator of the Mind of God. And that the Scriptures are
a discourse composed of Letters and Syllables The first he calls improper, the
second proper: But how pertinently the Reader may consider: If that which is
Escential and Substantial to a thing be not proper to it, he may tell us with
the next, what is more proper then the Essence or Substance of a thing is.
Henceforth according to him, we must call the Beams or Rays coming from the
Son, properly the Sun; But the Sun himself from whence they all come must be
improperly so called.

And now to show, That this is a mere strife about words, I shall sum up this
contraverfie thus, R: B: says, Christ is the Word of GOD: Patroclus says,
Christ is the Essential and Substantial Word of GOD: R: B: says, The
Scriptures are a True and Faithful Declaration of the Mind and Will of GOD,
revealed by the Word of GOD to his Servants: Patroclus says, Christ is the
Principal Declarer of the Mind of GOD. R: B: says, The Scriptures are the
Words of GOD. Patroclus says, The Scriptures are a discourse composed of
Letters and Syllables.

Now let the Reader judge where the Contraversy lies.

Page 4. About the end, He says (after some some scurrilous Language) That the
Quakers deny, The Title of Gospel to the Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
And then falls to hard words again, saying The defense of this wicked and bold
Contradiction of the Scriptures, William Peh undertakes in his Rejoinder to
John Faldo page 117. Where observe first, That he asserteth it a Contradiction
of Scripture; When he has brought no Scripture seeming to contradict what is
said. But Mark 1. 1, Which shall be considered in its place. Observe 2dly, That
to oppose Truth; The Presbyterians and Independants can join issue. (like Herod
and Pontius Pilate) Notstanding all the Clamonis we have heard in Aberdeen
about the Text; Holiness becomes Thy House, O LORD,

To prove this assertion, William Penn produces Scripture Reason, and the
Authority of Ancient and Modern Writters. First, The Gospel is the Power of GOD
to Salvation: To which he answers, That the Scriptures may as well be called
the Power of GOD to Salvation, as the Gospel. Here he has granted the
Scriptures to be one thing, and the Gospel another, and must come to his
Diversity of Acceptations properly and improperly, again for he has done with
it.

He says page 5th. It was the same Doctrine which the Apostles preached and
committed to Writting, Who denies this, or what says it for him, more then
Luke 1. 1. A Declaration of these things which are most firmly believed amongst
us: And this no Quaker ever denied. But Secondly, He tells us, that by Power of
GOD to Salvation can be understood no other thing but the mean Organ or
Instrument whereby GOD exerteth or put, teth forth his Power to the saving of
Sinners; And again in page 6. He says the Power of GOD, That is GOD Himself;
See the Man's confusion and self contradiction.

In the next place William Penn gives him another Scripture, Rev: 14. 6. Which
is nothing to Patroolus, except it suite with his mind; For after a few
Quibles, he says the Doctrine contained in these Books is the same with, and
therefore no less everlasting then the Gospel proclaimed by the Angel: This
William Penn grants, That they are a Declaratior Narrative of the Gospel,
and, that the thing they declare of is the Gospel.

Page 5th About the end, He cites William Penn saying, The Gospel is Glad^
Tidings; But Matthew, Mark, etc: are but Narratives, etc. and not Glad tidings:
Which last Words he has added like his Brethen, Hicks and Faldo. And in page.
6th. He says, They are diverse Narratives of the same Doctrine, and all which
Books contain the Glad tidings, etc: Yet after all this, he falls a failing,
Therefore I shall set down William Penn's Words, That the Reader may Judge how
he is dealt with.

William Penns Rejoinder page 118 Which is further proven by the signification
of the Word GOSPEL, To wit, Glade, which are to be understood of the coming of
Him that was the Savior of the World; Of whose blessed Appearance and
wonderful Transactions, the Scriptures are but Narratives: Besides one of their
Authors ( Luke) expressly calls them a Declaration consequently not the Gospel
thereby declared of; Which Definition Peter Martyr that superintendant
Reformer in England, chooses of all others, part. 1. cap: 6. of his common
places. Tertulian calls the Scriptures, Instrumenta Doctrinoe, That is
Instruments of Doctrine; And the New Testament Writings, Fuangelicum
Instrumenium: And Matthew he calls a Faithful Commentator of the Gospel:
Chrysostom being required to swear upon the Gospel, both denied those
Histories to be the Gospel and to swear as all, etc. Now let the Witness of GOD
in the Conscience of the Reader, compare this with the 6th. page of Patroclus
and Judge whether his contempt, railing and reproach, has been hereby
deserved, I shall only say, The LORD forgive him.

To conclude this Matter, he brings one Scripture, Mark 1. 1. After he has
asserted a great untruth; and then raised violently upon it, To wit, That
William Penn denies that the Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, contain
Glade tidings; Whereas William Penn has three times over called them
Narratives, or Declarations of the Gospel, or Glade tidings This is great
Impudence but common to Men of his Coat.

Then from the Scripture before cited, he brings forth a Dilemma, which is
easily answered by a Dilemma, which is easily answered by a distinction betwixt
the History and the Mystery of the Gospel, which he might have considered
before he had given us all this Trash* But to let him see what follows upon his
Sense of these scriptures he abuses, I will adventure (for once) to sylogize
thus.

The Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, are the Gospel.

But the Gospel is the Power of God, etc. Ergo, The Books aforesaid, Are the
Power of GOD, etc.

And again.

The Books before mentioned are the Power of GOD.

But the Power of GOD, is GOD, Himself or

Ergo, The Books before mentioned are GOD Himself.

I have here inserted nothing but what he has asserted in terminis, in his 4,
5, 6. pages, where mark that he calls it abominable Swo^k-^^ieldianism to
understand, Rom: ^. ^6, any other ways then of the Books before mentioned.

Page 6th. About the end, he begins with a kind of Scolding Oratory, to defame
the Quakers, Saying, They cloth the Scriptures with base Epithers and
contemptible Aspersions, as the Heathens did cloth the Christians with Beasts
skins, that the Lions and other wild Beasts might the more readily destroy
them: All this yet (...) Man not minding the Words of our Savior to his
Predecessors the Pharisees (who were no less Exaleers of the Scriptures then he
or his Brethren) Matthew: 23. 29. For in cruelty ye are nothing inferior to them.

(...) let us see what he has for this matter, first, the Quakers call the
Scriptures the letter.

Answer, so does the Scriptures themselves, in distinction from the Spirit, As
2 (...) 3. 6. Except Patroclus intend to turn Socinian, who understood this
place on Scriptures to be meant of the Gospel; or Scriptures of the New
Testament, as may be seen in the Cracovian Catechism Page, 162, 163. Asserting
the Holy Spirit to be the Ipsum Evangelium and at best to be but a certain hope
of Eternal life promised to us.

Secondly, (they call the Scriptures Writings, Is not this plain Soots for
Scriptura Or what difference is there betwixt Scriptures and Writings? It seems
the fault is that the word is not a little Latinized; But every Quaker is not
so good a Linguist as Patroclus.

His third charge is, that the Quakers call them them a letter, about the
meaning, whereof nor two are agreed.

Now Patroclus, I pray thee, for once deal ingenuously with me, and ommiting
many other instances, answer only these two; First, if the Scriptures be so
plain and obvious to every well disposed intelect (as your party word it) how
came the whole Ministry of Scotland to differ so fa^r in the year 16^0, about
so easle a case, as whether it was Lawful for the Mallignats to fight for their
Native Country against a Foreign Enemy.

And secondly, It is well known, that about the year 1661, and after diverse
Presbyterian Ministers were suspended from the exercise of their Ministry, who
notwithstanding did not submit, but continued preaching, and gathered to
themselves congregations in the desert to the great distu^bance of the Nation.
On the other hand in the year 1689, several hundreds of the Episcopal Ministers
have been suspended, and their Flocks left destitute; Yet all of them have
submitted and are silent. Now seeing both parries acknowledge the same
Scripture: Tellme I pray thee whether they be agreed about the meaning, and
bring me plain Scripture to decide these two contraversies, ^t eris mihi Magnus
Apollo.

After this in Page 7, he falls upon citations, where he promiscuously, and at
all adventures, cites Hicks and F^l^^, upon whose Bankrupt Faith he lays no
small stress. I always doubted Patroclus to be no sound Presbyterian: For sure
they who could not allow Malignants to fight for their Native Country, would
never allows Sectaries to contend for the Faith, which certainly is more
Precious then all outward things: But especially they being men who by their
open forgeries and falsehoods have forefeited their Credit with all Honest Men:

I shall be at the pains with one or two of them, tho they desorve no notice.

In Page 8, he ci^es one N: L: Cited by Hicks and says, he evinced by him
against Pen, That if the Bible were burnt, as good an one might be writ, these
words Hicks says, were spoken by N: L: To one he knows very w^ll, upon
publishing this in his Book; N: L: gives forth a Testimony under his hand,
dated London 29th. 3d. Month 1673, denying he ever spoke such words, or any
thing like them, calling it an abominable lie, and wicked slander, and appeals
to GOD to clear his ^(...): But after some search, Nicholas is sent to one
Henry Stout to prove the matter, who at last gave his Testimony in write under
his hand; thus,

I Henry Stout of Hartford, never in all my days heard Nicholas Lucas speak
the words (nor any of the like importance or tendencie as) charged on him, be
Tho* Hicks nor before any man else that I can call to mind* But am satisfied in
my conscience, that he has most grossly wronged N: L: To which I subscribe.

H: Stout.

So now let the Reader judge what seared Consciences, and Brazen faces these
men have, or our Patroclus to cite such a base and false calumny.

The second Citation, is that of William Penns Rejoinder, Page 70, 73. We have
good reason to deny them to be the rule of Faith and Judge of contraversy,
which can neither give nor govern Faith, nor Judge of Contraversies. If he
added the rest, I should have left it to the Reader to Judge without more; And
therefore I shall only add these following words as they ly* Viz. As the many
different perswas^ons in the World fully prove: For then all that have the
Scriptures would be of one persuasion, as it is most certain those are who
have, and walk by the one Spirit. Let the Word be joined and then Judge. The
other part of his Citation is Page 73, thus in short, the Scriptures are not
the Rule, but a declaration of Faith and knowledge; Here he stops: But I
entreat the Reader before he trust these men to be at the pains to read the
Book Cited by him: There he shall see wither William Penn and his friends
deserves to be called disparragers of the Scriptures, and that it looks more
like malice and interest that acts these men than the love of Truth.

The rest of his Citations, at least many of them, I never saw nor read, but in
such books as his.

Page 9. About the end, he falls upon a long Citation of William Penns
rejoinder, concerning the Canon; The Authority of those who gathered it, the
Transcribers and their dissentions, the exactness of the coppies, And lastly
that some learned men of our times tell us of little less then 3000 several
readings in the Scriptures of the N^w Testament in Greek. Answer, Can he say
William Penn has lied in what he has Written? If he do, I will produce him
Protestant Authors who confess no less; But if he had added the rest of William
Penns words he had done more honestly, but not so much to his purpose, and
therefore I will do him the kindness to set down a few of them.

Far be it from me (says William Penn) to Write this in any the least
undervalue of that Holy Record: It Is only to show the weak foundation my
Adversaries foundation stands upon. I believe great and Good Things of them,
and that from no less evidence then the Eternal Word that gave them forth;
Which has often times given my Soul a deep Savor of these blessed Truths it
declares of, etc: And after many such expressions he concludes We accept them
as the Words of GOD Himself; And by the assistance of his Spirit, they are read
with great Instruction and Comfort, I esteem them the best of Writings, and
desire nothing more frequently then that I may lead the Life they exhort to.

Thus William Penn, Whereby the Reader may perceive the malice and disingenuity
of Patroclus in concealling the Words which would have vindicated him from that
soul charge of vilifying the Scriptures. And I desire the Reader will only
compare Patroclus and his Party with the Pharase^s, who while they extolled the
Scriptures were found the murderers and persecuters of CHRIST and his Apostles.

Having thus dissingenuously dealt with William Penn, he fails upon R. B. in
these words: On the other hand of this Ethnic Army, R. B. Assaulteth the
intrinsic Arguments and Divine Characters imprinted on the Scriptures, Citing
his Apology, Chap: 2. That they do not think that the Authority of the
Scriptures does depend on any Efficacy or Virtue in these Writings, etc: And so
runs on for a whole page in tragical Exclamations.

To all which I shall only return the words of Calvine, instit. cap. 1. Numb:
24. Quare, si Conscientiis optime consultum volumus, ne instabili dubitatione
perpetuo vacillent altius petenda, quam ab humanis, vel rationibus, vel
judiciis, vel conjecturis scripture Authoritas: Nempe ab Interiori spiritus
sancti Testification: Etsi enim Reverentiam su^ sibi ultro Majestate conciliat,
tunc tamen demum serio nos afficit cum per Spiritum obsignata est cordibus
nostris. And a little after, Talis ergo est persuasio quae rations non
requirat talis denique sensus qui nisi ex caelesti Revelatione nasci nequeat.
Non aliud loqu^ quam quod apud se experitur fidelium unusquisque. Thus Calvine.
In English thus,

Wherefore, if we would take the best course to provide for the peace or
clearness of our own Consciences, that they may not perpetually fluctuat^ with
an unstable uncertaintie, the Authority of the Scripture is to be deduced
higher, then either from Humane Reasons, Judgments, or Conjectures: viz. From
the Inward-witnes* bearing of the Holy Spirit: For albeit its own Native
Majesty does gain to it a peculiar Reverence, yet then does it seriously
affect us, when it is sealed upon our hearts. And a little after, Such then is
that Persuasion which requires not Reasons, and such; that Perception which
cannot be bred but of a Revelation from Heaven. I do not speak any other thing,
then what every one of the Faithful finds experimentally true in himself.

And now let the Reader judge whether R: B: has said any more then Calvine
has said: That every one of the Faithful experienceth in himself; Yet what is
sound Doctrine in Calvine must be Heathnism in R: B:

And whereas he says, shall the writings of Livie, Virgil, and Cicere carry
such evidences that they were theirs, so that a Humanist may distinguish, etc.
Shall then GOD Himself be outstriped and overcome by these Writers!

Answer, Albeit we neither deny the Majesty of Style, Harmony of parts, or any
other Divine Characters in the scriptures, which may declare their Author: Yet
we confidently affirm that the forelaid writings of Livie, Virgil, and Cicero,
which are the things of a man can only be known by the spirit of a man, and not
of a beast; So we say, the scriptures being the things of GOD, can only and
alone be known by the Spirit of GOD, as says the Apostle in so many words.

But he proceeds, and cites the word, (as he alleges) of Benjamin Furley,
and for his Author gives Hicks the Forger; And then he falls a glorying as if
he had done his business fully, saying, by this time I have abundantly
justified my charge. Soft Patroclus, till thou put off thine Armor. An: I
cannot but wonder with what confidence, or rather impudence this man and his
brother Brown can cite these books of Faldo, Hicks, etc. Which have been so
fully and manifestly convicted of falsehood, forgery, and perversion, that
their Authors are become detasteable to all honest and unbyasled men, and whom
our present adversary accounts Heretics: And what a case must the Quakers be
in, if such Janissaries in Religion, who have been known to undertake the
contraversy for hire, and have been found to be men of no integrity; I say, if
such men their sworn Enemies shall be held sufficient witnesses against them?
If I should produce the Papists Testimonies against Luther and Beza, what would
Protestants say? And albeit R: B: charge Brown with it as a callumniator, yet
our Author has not brought the least proof to mend the matter, nor the
Citation of any book but his beloved Baptist Mr. Hicks (as he calls him.) And
whereas he says they have Cited book and page for their other Citations, so
did Patroclus cite William Penns Rejoinder, when he accused him for saying the
Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John did not contain glade tidings, so the
Proverb is veryfied in all of them. A Priest, a Liar, no news; And so till he
prove these to have been the words of Benjamine Furley I have done with him.

And here I must tell Patroelus I have seen Browns book which was lent by an
old and learned Minister, so called of the National Church, with the Caveat. I
would not, said he, lend you this Book, but that I know ye would get it from
some other: For if all the coppies were in my hands, they should never be more
seen. I acknowledge they are a scandle to our Profession, and the Anthor a
stain to his function; But, ( said he,) do not think we allow them. And the
truth is, except Polwart and Montgomeries flyting, I never r^ad its fellow.

But to return to what R: B: answers in the matter of Benjamin Furley, he
has set it down at large, and spends a deal of labor upon it. He begins with
R: B: his delemma, to which he answers: Seeing R: B: insinuates, that there
are an subjective Revelations and, elsewhere clearly denies that there are
any, therefore his dilemma is impertinent, etc. Now let the Reader judge what
cander we can expect from this man who has out done both Hieks and Faldo, they
cired book and page, yet were found Forgers; He cites nothing, yet would be
trusted, let him mend this fault with the next before he produce his argumentum
ad hominem, and his absurd and malicious consequence upon it: Which is, that
according to the Quakers, men are not oblidged to abstain from Murder, without
such an immediate objective Revelation as Moses and the Prophets had.

Answer, This is very dissingenuous, did ever any Quakers pretend to give a new
Law to the World, and confirm it by miracles, as did Moses? Or did they ever
teach, That the Foretelling of things to come (as did the Prophets) was
necessary to Salvation? The Quakers pretend to no new Revelations of new
things, but to a new Revelation of the good old things, as shall be seen more
hereafter; And for such stuff it may take with Patroclus Hearers, but every Man
of Sense will deteast such dealing.

His second Answer to this Dilemma, is yet no better; For says he, Tho the
Illumination of the Spirit be of abjolute necessity, for such a knowledge of
the Scriptures whereby we may know GOD revealed in them, and have true Love and
Faith, and Fear, etc. Yet he that shall deny that any Reader of the Scriptures,
tho endued with sound reason only, can distinguish betwixt Commands given to a
particular people for a certain time; and these that hind at all times; must
have abandoned the exercise of Reason. This the Sum of what he says.

Answer first, What he means by the Word ( Only) I see not, Except he think
Reason can do something more, But what this is he has not been so honest as to
tell us: He has said before, that the Illumination of the Spirit is absolutely
necessary to such a knowledge of the Scriptures, as i^ useful to beget Faith,
Love, and Fear of of GOD. etc. But he would teach us another Knowledge which
reason cannot produce. But if he will allow me the first, I shall allow him the
last to get his Living by. Only I must tell the Reader, that in this he outdoes
the Socinian who in his Catechism aforesaid. Cap 3. quest: 3. Laid the blame of
the Differences about the sense of the Scriptures on their not imploting the
Gift of the Holy Spirit which GOD has promised to those that call upon Him.
And lastly, I wonder to see a pretended Presbyterian cite the Examples of the
third and fifth Commandemen^s, Of which two precepts they have been such
notorious Transgressors.

His third Answer is as unhappy as the rest, For he labors to ca^se R. B. to
contradict B. F. While he has neither cleared his Brethren Hicks and Brown
from being reputed Calumniators: Nor has attempted any way to prove these to
have been the Words of B. F. But thinks the World is bound to believe him,
because he says it, Where I leave him to rave till he bring better proof.

He tells us Fourthly, That it is impertinent to say that without the Operation
of the spirit, men cannot obey the Good of their own Souls, And is says he,
falcem pro ligone dare. Answer, It seems the Man intends an Obedience which is
not for the good of Men's own Souls; And what this can be, except it be either
superstition or supererogation I am to learn. As for his Proverb; I fear if the
Men of his Robe did not get the Sickle before the Spade, That is did not eat
the Fruit before they planted a Vineyard, we should see many of them with Lean
cheecks, and Lank sides. But as he has told us before of two kinds of
Knowledge, one from the Spirit, another from Reason. So he tells here of two
kinds of Duties, one profitable for the Soul, but the other he has not told us
for what, and such are many of his Duties like to be.

In the fifth place he charge B. F. with Blasphemy, for saying that it is
(as he alleges) the greatest Error in the World that ever was invented, and
the ground of all error to affirm, that the Seriptures ought to be a Rule to
Christians: And then he tells us the palpableness of the Blasphemy is an
Antidote to the poison; and has rendered R. B. speechless.

Well Patroelus! And is this all the proof that yet we have against B. F. Now
three times printed without proof; And R. B. might have justly rejected it at
first, and here with falls what thou brings in the last place, which was a
sufficient answer to I: B: and is yet to thee till thou clear him of these
ignominious Epithets of Fool and Calumniator (as thou calls them) which neither
thou nor he have ever yet attempted.

But I must ask thee a little, What thou intends here by blasphemy? For
whatever the old signification of the Word may have been; I am sure a
Blasphemer is now taken for a Man, who by injurious word or thought hurts the
Divine Majesty; So that except the Scripture be Patroclus God, he cannot find
Blasphemy in the foresaid Words.

Lastly, All the Proof we have is, If, says he, the words were falsified, he
was bound to have vindicated and delivered them. Here we have a new Law; if any
Man call Patroclus a Thief, he is bound to prove himself an honest Man; And
hence it shall follow that no Liar can be punished.

To conclude this particular, Not withstanding this Author accuses the Quakers
as Velifiers of the Scriptures. Yet GOD is our Witness, that it is far from our
Intention, but on the contrary we have a high and reverent esteem of them, And
although some years ago this Language might have passed for good Coin; Yet now
(Blessed be the LORD) we are better known both by our Principles and practices,
not only to our Neighbors, but to many knowing Men all Brittan over, then we
formerly were, So that a malicious Priest will not be so readily trusted, being
a kind of men who cannot sleep unless they have wounded some, either in their
persons or Reputations I shall here only desire the Reader to see Duplessis of
the Trueness of Christian Religion, cap: 6. Where he shall see, That before the
Canon of the Scriptures were filled up, yea before many of them were written,
CHRIST is called the Word of GOD, not only by the Jews, but by the Heathen
Philosophers and their Oracles; So that there was a Word of GOD before the
Scriptures.

And secondly, If the Preaching of the Gospel be glad Tidings, Then the
Preaching of Patroclus is not the Preaching of the Gospel, According to Luke 2.
10. Behold I bring you good Tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people;
Whereas his Doctrine of Reprobation, is the most sad and lamentable Tidings
that ever was preached to Man: kind. For first by their Confession of Faith,
cap. 3. A certain number are elected from Eternity and the means foreordained
to bring them to Glory, and all the rest of Mankind are ordained to dishonor
and wrath, Now the means whereby this end is attained and fore ordained for
that purpose, are (according to their Catechism) The Word Saoraments and
Prayer. And so according to Patroclus, All Mankind who want these men's are
reprobates, consider then Reader; into how narrow a Compass he brings all
people: The World being divided into 30 parts, There be yet 19 of them Pagan,
and six Mabumitan, and only five Christian; The half of this five is of the
Romish Communion, and want the use of the Bible! The Lutherans, he says, in
his Epistle to the Reader, deserve not the Name of Reformed, but are to be
accounted Capital Adversaries; The Church of England is infected with the
Hemlock of Pelagianizm, and Episcopacy is an Antichristian Hierarchy; The
French Protestants are for passive obedience, and Non Resistance; And even
Geneva it self errs in two great points, Viz. In allowing Lawful Recreations on
the Sabbath day, and denying Tithes to the Clergy: And our English
Presbyterians are such enemies to the Scottish Covenant, that they have gone
near to Anathematize it For R: Baxter in his hundredth propositions, wherein he
says, all Protestants are aggreed; Propos. 99 says, If any will make their
unnecessary forms of Synods, and other adjuncts to seem so necessary, as to
enter Leagues and Covenants, to make them the terms of the Churches Unity; GOD
will not own such terms nor waves, nor will they be durable, etc. With much
more to this purpose. And now let the Reader judge whither Patroelus Gospel be
glad tidings to all people.

We are now come to the Rule of Faith, and Life, page 17, where having begun
with a great lie, Viz. That in the judgment of the Quakers the Scriptures are
in no sense to be accounted a Rule.) He cites William Penn, to prove it,
Rejoinder page 76. I beseech thee Reader here to take notice of this man's
double dealing, and dissingenu^ity: For first William Penn in page 69 and 70,
confesses the Scriptures to be a Rule, but not the Rule, by way of excellency,
as the Reader may see there, and in R^ Barclays, his appologie Theses Tertia.

And because he Cites William Penn to prove his false assertion, let the
Reader know they are no words of William Penn, but of one Thomas Colliar, a
great Professor, whose words William Penn Cites against Faldo, some whereof I
shall transcribe, General Epistle, page 249.

And truly, my Brethren, it is my earnest desite to see souls to live more in
the Spirit, and less in the Letter, then they will see that we judge of the
Litter by the Spirit, and not of the Spirit by the Lett^er: Which occasions so
much ignorance amongst us, and these who profess themselves to be our Teachers,
are chief in this Trespass. The Spirit of GOD who is GOD, is the alone Rule of
a Spiritual Christian, and in page 48, he says, That some seting the
Scriptures in the Room of the spirit, they make them an Idol.

His next Citation of William Penn in page 18, is his Rejoinder, page 71,
where he Cites these words, the scriptures are the verbal and Historical Rule
of Faith, which is the devels faith, William Penns words are these: For Faith
in his (I; Fald^) sense rises no higher then so many articles laid down
(suppose truly according to the letter of the scriptures which the devil can
belive as well as he: This Faith I call merely verbal and Historical, etc. And
this is the candor of our insulting adversary; Let the Reader judge whose
reputation can be safe who deals with such an impudent Calumniator.

In the same page, and in contradiction to himself, he mentions a distinction
of primary, and Secondary. Well Patroelus, it seems the Quakers own the
scriptures in some sense to be a Rule, therefore Patroclus consesseth himself
to have belyed them in the foregoing page.

His third, is Huberthorn, The words are, except by a Miraculous Revelation
from Heaven, These words sound harshly, and so fit to defame the Quakers; But
(if yet thou have retained any shamesacedness, or the least grain of honesty) I
charge thee tell me: Have not George Keith in his Books on that subject, and
Robert Barelay in his Appollogie sufficiently cleared the Quakers in that
point: So far, that if thou will rightly state the contraversie, thou must lay
aside all these expressions of miraculous extraordinary, and the like; But who
can expect fare dealing from a man of thy manners?

And therefore to stop the mouth of this Callumniator, I shall tell the Reader
what George Kieth says to obviat such accusations, immediate Revel: page 2.
First, we do not understand the foretelling things to come, etc. Secondly, (
page 3) We do not bereby understand the Revelation of an other Gospel, etc.
Thirdly (in page 7.) Not an outward audible voice, etc. Fourthly, Nor any
outward audible voice. Fifthly, Nor dreams and visions, etc. Sixthly, Nor any
outward Miracles, etc. And now let the Reader judge with what candor this man
has represented us.

Page 18 and 19. He says in order to the Production of true saving Faith, two
principles are required; First the declaration of the object, or thing to be
believed, etc. Now the thing he would have me believe, is, that the scripture
is the Rule of Faith and Life, and in order to this he presents me the Bible;
Is I ask him, how shall I believe this book to be the Rule of Faith and Life?
He answers me, the book says so (tho there be no such word in it) And this
is objective Revelation, and needs no more but an application of this
Revelation already made. And the second he calls subjective revelation, but he
must excuse me to tell him, that before he can perswaed me to believe that
proposition laid down in the Westminster Confession or Catecbism: Quest: 2,
that the scripture is the only rule.) He will need to produce me better
arguments for the Holy Ghost (according to the Westminster Confession, Chap 7,
Act 3) must be given to make men willing and able to believe, and this is more
then an application.

He tells us that this revelation was either mediate or immediate. Who denies
this? But I hope when it was mediate, it needed the immediate operation of the
spirit to make them able and willing to believe, and so the operation of the
Spirit was the Rule of this Faith whereby they choosed or rejected these
mediate Revelations.

That the illumination of the spirit is necessary for understanding of the
soriptures, no man denies; But it is to be regarated that he and his Brethren
take upon them to expond scripture to others, while they have it not, and mock
and persecute Others who bear witness for it.

To prove subjective Revelation, he brings several Scriptures; Among others
Luke 24. 46. The Words are these, And said unto them, Tbus it is Written, and
thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day. Now
the Question will be, whether this was an objective, or a subjective
Revelation; I affirm it to be Objective, and that CHRIST did here reveal to
them things they never knew before, nor had occasion to know, albeit they might
have been darkly shadowed forth in the Scriptures; So that Christ speaking to
them, and at the same time opening their Understandings, both Patroclus
principles concurred immediately to the production of their Faith with out the
Bible: Neither is he limited to Scripture words, tho he may and often does make
use of them; And these words He spoke are not to be found in all the Old
Testament. And the Quakers do not pretend to revelation of New Things, but a
new Revelation of the Good Old Things.

Secondly, Consider that he calls his first Principle a Declaration of the
Object or Thing to be believed Now the Scriptures are the Object or Thing to be
believed; And therefore (according to himself) the Declaration is necessary.
And I must ask Patroclus what this Declaration is? Sure he can intend nothing
here but the Glosses, Commentaries, Paraphrases, which he and his Brethren make
upon the Scriptures, whereby they get their Living. But if Men were but once
convinced that Christ's sheep hear his Voice, and that his Spirit teaches them,
and brings all things to their remembrance whatsoever they have heard of (or
from) him; Then that sordid Trade of Preaching for h^re, and Divining for
money, would soon come to an end; And Men would say with Thomas a Kempis Let
not Moses and the Prophets speak to me, but thou, O LORD my GOD. And with the
Psalmist, I will bear what the LORD GOD will speak in me. Whereas now (pretend
what they will) they are as positive in their dogmatising and no less angry to
be contradicted then their Ancestors the Papists. Hence it is evident, that it
is their Interpretations, sense and Preachments upon the Scriptures, which they
would have to be the Rule of Faith, and the Declaration of the Object.

In page 20 He makes a digression, wherein he tells us the same things
overagain; therefore I shall only touch suchthings, as, chiefly concern the
matter in hand, if yet lawful for a Plowman to touch his schoolterms, by which
that Trib have darkened Counsel with words without Knowledge: And if Patroclus
be a Parochus, or Parish Priest, I am sure the tenth man of his Hearers cannot
understand his Terms.

First, He confounds the Matterial with the formal Object, saying as the
Scriptures hold forth other Truths, so they evidently declare and manifest the
Characters of their Divinity; Even as the Sun proves himself to be the Sun by
his own ltradiant and illustrious Beams: And this in contradiction; both to
Calvine and him; self. To Calvine in the place before cited; Where he says,
That to settle the Conscience, such a Persuasion is necesseary as needs no
Reasons; And such a sense as cannot be attained but by Divine Revelation. To
himself in page 23. Where he says, We being demanded, how we know the
Scriptures to be the Word of GOD? We answer by the Testimony and operation of
the Spirit. And herein he may reconcile himself to himself and his friends when
he has Leisure.

Secondly, In page 22, speaking of subjective Revelation, he calls the spirit
an Instrument in the hand of GOD: This Language sounds not sweetly to me, for I
believe the Spirit is GOD, and therefore cannot like these Words; GOD an
Instrument in the Hand of GOD.

3ly He tells us in page 23 That subjective revelation is more properly called
an Application then Revelation it self. And yet in the same page he calls it
the Testimony and Opcration of the Spirit: Now a Testimony is a Witness
bearing; And we know a dumb Man cannot be a Witness; But he has told us, That
the Spirit speaks neither to the Ear nor the Mind, and so cannot bear a
Testimony: This is palpable confusion.

Fourthly, page 24. He says, so that we can Reason, because surch spirit ( v;
g:?) He that confesleth Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is said by the
Scriptures to be of GOD; Therefore I know and believe that is true Doctrine,
and that this spirit is of GOD. If this Scripture be taken Literally by
Patroclus, and that he intends as he Writes, I must confels I expected not so
much Charity at his hands; For at this rate he accepts Papists, Lutherians,
yea and the Palagian Chureb of England, who all believe that Christ is come in
the flesh; But I will expect a Commentary upon the Words with the next.

Fifthly, In the same page he says, We do not with the Fanatical Enthusists
reason thus; The Spirit bids me believe that such and such Books are the
Scriptures; Therefore I believe them to be so: But he has given us no Reason,
why he believes such and such Books to be the Scripture^, For which we must
wait his Leisure.

Sixibly, His lame example of the Sun and Ey-salve is no better; He says by
means of the Salve he sees and knows the Sun; And again by the Sun Light he
may perceive what is Ey^salve, and what is not: But he might have considered,
That tho he see that Sun and Ey-salve both, he needs his Natural
Understanding to know the Sun, and to discern what is Ey-salve and what is not;
And as in Naturals, so in Spirituals. No man knows the things of a man, but
the spirit of a man which is in him, so the things of GOD no man knows, but
by the spirit of God.

Seventhly, In page 26. He charge R. B. for calling the Westminster Divines
dark, etc. Because they not separate the Word from the Spirit; But said that
the Testimony of the Spirit was in ant with the Word; And then reflects upon R.
B's. Vindication, page 33. But takes no notice of what he says page 33. and
34. Because they were too hot for his fingers. He cites Isaiah 59. 21. My
spirit which is in thee, and my Words which I have put in thy mouth, etc:
Observe First, That the Tenot of this Covenant is Spiritual; My Spirit which is
in thee. Secondly, That they are distinct tho not contrary, else they needed
not the copulative Conjunction: (And) Tbirdly, They are called Words and not
Word. So then Patroclus confesses, That GOD puts Words in his mouth to
preach to his People; I shall allow him to be concerned in this Covenant. And I
hope he will not here after be angry with the Quakers calling the Scriptures
the Words of GOD.

Eighthly, He says there was never the least contraversy betwixt the Bri^tish
and Transmarine Divines on this head, but an entire Harmony. This is another
Lie, I shall instance one Jo^ VV: Bajer, Profeslor os Divinity at Jena in
Germany, writting on that Subject against the Quakers, page 33. and 34. Says
the in ward Illuminations and Operations of the Spirit are altogether necessary
to beget true and saving, Faith in Men, and that these inward Illuminations are
objective, or by way of Object; Which is not very Harmonious with Patroclus
Doctrine of Application. And this is all the discovery he has made of R: B's.
Non such weakness and extreme disingeunity, which he has left undiscovered
till his next Printing.

And now in page 26. He says, he comes directly to the Objection. Saying
First, The Work of the Spirit, the necessity of which we maintain is only
subjective, being rather if we speak properly, an Application of the things
revealed in Scripture, then a Revelation of Testimony strictly so taken.
Observe First, That this being granted, all these words of Protestant VVriters,
such as the Testimony, Illumination, Inspiration, Persuasion of the Spirit, are
but mere cheats and impostures put upon Mankind; And that Calvine when he
speaks of Divine Revelation as necessary to beget True Faith, meant no such
thing, nor any of these Authors he cites, are to be understood according to
their own words, but according to Patroclus sense, and thus he and his Brethren
deal by the Scriptures. Headds, Whereas the Revelations to which the Quakers
pretend are altogether objective, like that of the Prophers. This is another
Lie, for the Quakers own both Subjective and Objective Revelations, as has
been showen above. I shall here and Luke 24. 32. Did not our Hearts burn within
us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the
Scriptures. Now let the Reader judge whether this was an Objective Revelation
as well as Subjective; Their bearts burnt, and he opened to them the
Scriptures: Now Opening presupposes a Shulting, and the Lamb only is found
worthy to open the Seals of the Book; That is, Poreveal the Object.

In page 27. He says, we assert the sufficiency of the Scriptures as a Rule
containing all things necessary to be believed or done, which they deny. This
is another Lie, For the Quakers believe the Scriptures to be a Rule subordinat
to the Spirit, containing a full and sufficient Declaration of all Christian
Doctrine.

Thirdly, Says he, We believe the Scriptures to be the principal and ultimat
Rule, into which our Faith is lastly to be refolved, For answer to this, I
shall only set down the words of one of his Brethren, Viz: The Author of that
Book called Melius Inquirendum, page 303. I would sain be informed (says he)
what an ultimat Rule signifies, with him that pretends to speak plain English,
to then that understand nothing else: I have heard of a subordinate and ultimat
End; And I have heard also of a near and a remote Rule, but an ultimate Rule
like that Monster which was like a Horse, and yet not a Horse, is like Sense,
but in Truth very Nonesense. Thus he, and yet as great a Calvinist as Patroclus.

After some Repetitions he comes to his Citations, and begins with Luther in
these Words; If any thing should deliver any Doctrine which it could not prove
by Scripture he would spit in its face, knowing certainly that it were the
Devil. I know no Quaker but will say as much; Yea, I know no Protestant but
will say as much: Yet the contraversies are no whit leslened by all this,
because they reject the Spirit by which alone the Scriptures can be understood,
and without which they are a sealed book as well to the learned Patroclus as to
the unlearned Plowgh man. And here let the Reader observe what is become the
fate of the Fathers as well as of the Scriptures, To be cited By all parties,
Papist against Papists, and Protestant against Protestants, and Calvine is made
to speak for all ends and all purposes: But he has told us, that such a
persuasion concerning the authority of seripture is needful, as cannot be
brought forth but by Divine Revelation. Inst: Chap: Numb: 24.

All these his citations for three pages serve for nothing else but to make one
party of his pretended Transmarine Divines, contradict another. If he had done
any thing, he should have proven R: B's. citations to have been either spurious
or impertinent, else if they contradict his citations, Patroclus errs in his
affirming an Harmony among them. In page 31, he says (after some of his
Brethtens Rhetoric) it can be made out by the unanimous consent of all the
reformed Churches But has taken no notice of what R: B: has cited out of
their Confessions, but we must take his word.

In the end of page 31, and the beginning of page 32, he summeth up what he
has said, and has done the Quakers a favor, that whereas some of his blind
brethren have called them Papists, he has set them and the Papists at such a
distance, as he has left room for himself to hang betwixt them, as Erasmus is
said to have hung betwixt Heaven and hell: For says he, page 32 The Papists
have gone too low, resolving their faith ultimatly in men; The Quakers on the
other hand attempting to go too high (that is) to resolve their Faith in GOD;
Patroclus resolves his faith in a Book, and neither in GOD nor man; Let the
Reader judge which of the three is the best Foundation.

He concludes with a Greek fable of Ixion (Et quiquid Graecia mend^x audet in
Historia) and most profainly compares a desire after Divine Revelation (which
Paul's commands to pray for) to the adulterous desire of Ixion after Juno, and
then talks of the production of Hipocentaurs, that is in broad Scots Troopers,
or if he will, Apostolical Dragoons; Like those of France. And now let the
Kingdom of Seotland judge from forty years experience, whether the Quakers or
the Presbyterian Clergy have been most fruitful in producing such Hipocentaurs.

In page 32, he lays down his Thesis thus: The scriptures are the adequat,
complete and primary or prineipal Rule of faith and manners. Observe first, the
word primary signifies first, and he has before called them the Vltimate Rule:
This is the first and the last, he has called them The word of GOD, he has
called them the Gospel, and now the first and the last, which are Epithets
belonging only to Christ: Tertul: ltb: 2 Carm: Adversurs Mar:

Atque ideo non verb Librised Missus in orbem.
Ipse Christus Evangelium est, Si cernere vultis.
Thus Englished.
Not the words of the book but Christ who is
Into the World sent, the Gospel is.
Observe Secondly, That he has here given away the Cause, for the Catechism
says, The Scriptures are the only Rule, Whereas his asserting a Primary
implies a Secondary.

And now we are come to his Arguments, whereof the first is; That which was
dictat or given out by the Infallible God, and contains the whole Counsel of
GOD, may well serve to be a complete and principal Rule; But the Scriptures
were given out and dictate by the Infallible GOD, and contain the whole
Counsel of GOD. Therefore, They may well serve for to be a complete and
principal Rule.

Answer first, Observe, That all his boasting is come to no more then a May be,
saying, It may serve to be a Primary Rule: And I must tell him, That a
Cart-load of May-bees, are not worth One-is.

Secondly; I must tell him, That his definition of the Rule of Faith and
Manners is New, and I cannot accept of it. And before I proceed to take notice
of his Arguments, I shall give my Reader an account of the Scope of this Man's
Labors. First, He cannot deny that the Quakers own the Scriptures for a Rule,
and his Work proves no less (tho in contradiction to himself in page 17.) And I
can assure my Reader, That it is the constant care of every true Quaker to
square his Life according to the Scriptures. Secondly, His offering to prove
them to be a Primary Rule implies (as I have said) a Secondary: And this must
be the Teachings of the Spirit, for he has not told us of another: Hence the
Reader may see, what the Tendancy of his Argumentations is, To wit, To exalt
the Letter above the Spirit; The Creature above the Creator, a Book above GOD;
In which I cannot agree with him; Yet GOD knows I reverence the Scriptures as
much as any Presbyterian in the World: And if the Quakers slighted them (as
this false Accuser slandereth them) I would have no fellowship with them. And
certainly it is not so much the Scriptures, as their own Glosses and
Interpretations they plead for: For if Patroclus would speak what he thinks, I
doubt not but he would say, That the Westminster Confession and Directory;
Especially having the Covenant joined to it, might serve for a Rule of Faith
and Life.

His Argument set down before erreth in the very form, according to the Rules
of Logic; Which are when both Propositions are particular, nothing follows.
And again particular, nothing follows. And again the Major being particular in
the first figure cannot rightly conclude. Now that this Major is particular
will be evident, if he explain himself what he means by the word ( That) By
which he cannot understand Man nor beast, nor Angel nor any other thing, if he
speak sense but that Book: And so his Argument will run thus, That particular
Book which was dictate, etc: But the Book called the BIBLE or the Scripture was
dictate, etc: Therefore, etc: If he thinks I have wronged him, let him explain
himself next, and make his Major universal.

Secondly, This is a direct begging of the Question, for it is denied that a
Book can be the Primary Rule of Faith, for there was Faith before there was a
Book in the World, and the World was two thousand years without Scriptures, and
if they had no Rule nor Law to walk by, then they had no sin; For where there
is no Law there is no transgression: If they had a Rule, it was certainly Prior
to the Scriptures, and consequently the Primary Rule, except that Patroclus
would say, That GOD had changed his Rule!

His Minor is a very uncontravetted Truth in the first part of it; But he must
excuse me to distinguish the second; And contains the whole Counsel of GOD:
Which I think Robert Barkelay has done to very good Purpose; That the
Scriptures contain a full account of all the Essentials and fundamental
Doctrines of the Christian Religion: But that many things occurr daily of which
the Scriptures do not clearly determine our Experience clearly proves: And
first as to Faith, I desire he may give me plain Scripture for Persons in the
God. head? Sacraments in the Church, and keeping Holy Sunday. This was required
by K: CHARLES the Martyr, from Alexander Henderson; But how it was Answered,
the Papers which past betwixt them will evince.

Secondly, As to Life, I ask whether it was lawful for me in my Youth to take
the League and Covenant? Being first contrary to the Command of Christ, Swear
not at all; And then contrary to the command of the Supreem Magistrate; Yea, in
opposition to Him, whom the Scripture commands me to obey. This was a Case of
Conscience to me, and yet by the Presbyterian Church I was commanded ( his non
obstantibus) to take it; And by George Gillespie in his Casses of Conscience,
the refusing of the Covenant is called sinful in it self, a great dishonor to
GOD, and a great scandal to the Church, no less punishable then the killing of
the Apostles. Nevertheless, I must say, I can find no Scripture which allows me
to take it. And again there is a great doubt at present seeming to arise in the
minds of many Protestants and Well-wishers to the Government; Which is, whether
the Popish Monarchical tyrranie in Church Government, or Presbyterian
Democratical tyrranie be more eligible? for it is now become a common Litanie;
from Popery and Presbytrie, libera nos, etc. As for that great and incureable
Schism, which destroyed Presbytrie in the Assembly at Dundee; Whether a
Malignant having in the Nation an Estate, Wife, and Children, might lawfully
fight in defense of his Native Country; In Case of a foreign Invasion.

These and such like doubts (says he) page 56 Are to be resolved by the
Scriptures, applied in Christian prudence, and Spiritual Wisdom. This is
strange, That there was neither Christian prudence nor Spiritual Wisdom in all
the whole General Assembly! That they split upon such a trivial Question, and
never reconciled again to this day: But the cause was, They lacked Wisdom, and
did not ask of GOD who gives liberally, and upbraideth not: For had they been
taught of GOD and received the Word of Wisdom from his Mouth, they would have
seen this contraversie to be as impertinent as that about Easter in the
Primitive Church.

Next in page 39, he says, The corruptions of men are to be charged with all
these defects: This is very true, for the corruptions of men, and chiefly of
the Clergy have separated them from knowing, or seeking to know the mind and
Counsel of GOD, by the teachings of his Spirit, and to lean to their own
corrupt Wisdom, their natural and acquired parts, hence some of them have not
stuck to affirm, that a wicked Reprobate, a man void of grace, and of the
spirit of Christ, may be a sufficient Minister.

Before I leave his first argument, with his spurious definition of a Rule, I
will give him another, which I think he will like the better, because it comes
from his brother the Author of Melius Inquirendum; Who says, The mind and will
of GOD, however notified to us, is the Rule of our obedience. Now if Patroclus
will prove that the mind and will of GOD was never notified or made known to
mankind before Moses wrote the Pentateuch. I shall grant to him, that the
Scriptures are the primary or principal Rule, for the words signify no more
but first, or belonging to first, for the two words Primary or Principal being
Latin words signify no more but first or belonging to first, if we believe
our Lexicons.

To prove that the Scriptures contain the whole Counsel of GOD, he cites Acts.
20, 27. Whert Paul says to the Elders of Ephesus, That he had not shuned to
declare unto them all the Counsel of GOD. Here observe that this was before he
had written his Epistle to the Ephesians, and therefore I entreat Patroclus to
inform us where we may find Paul's Preachings recorded that he mentions here,
wherein we may find all the Counsel of GOD; For it seems the Fathers at the
Counsel of Laodicea have forgotten to add them to the Cannon.

His second Argument is thus;

That which was the Principal rule to the Jews is the Principal Rule to us: But
the Scriptures were the Principal Rule to them, therefore they must be the same
to us.

Answer, To begin with his Major, he says it is Robert Barkclay's; This is the
hight of deceit, dissingenuity, and Impudence: For in the second Chapter of his
apology cited by our Author, there is no such word to be found. In this
Chapter he chiefly treats of the formal object of faith, and but little of
the Rule, he proves that indeed that Divine immediate Revelation was the formal
object of the Faith of the Ancients, and cites Noah and Abraham for examples,
whom I believe to have had Faith, and also a Rule for their Faith before there
was either Scripture or a Jew in the World; So that granting the Major he gains
nothing by it, unless he can prove that the Scripture was the Primary Rule of
Noah and Abraham's Faith, or else, that GOD has changed his Rule.

His Minor I deny for the same reason.

Secondly, I acknowledge that Moses Law which is a part of the Scripture was
more a Rule to the Jews, and more binding upon them then upon any of the
Nations, or any living either then or since, And this is all that his after
reasonings can prove.

But what if I should say with other Protestant Writers, that the was
givenparticularly for that Nation, and was binding upon no other Nation in the
World, as J: Humphry in his book called Medioeria, to which Richard Baxter a
Famous Presbyterian, assents and subscrives, I am of the same mind. R: Baxter
of the Covenants, page 14. The Old Covenant is that which GOD made with the
Jews, when Moses led them in the Wilderness, the new is that which we have
under the Gospel; the Old Covenant then is not the Covenant of works, for that
was made with all in Adam, and as written in our hearts must be Eternally
obligatory; but the Old Covenant was made with the Jews in opposition to other
Nations, and as peculiar to them is vanished and binds not: And for the same
reason he says it is not the Covenant of Grace, which is called the New
Covenant: But says he, the new is not the old.

The argument he brings to prove his Minor is that from which the Jews might
not swerve to the right nor left hand, and to the decision of which they were
ultimatly bound to stand in all doubts and contraversies, and that upon highest
pains, was the principal Rule; But from GOD's Writtin Law, etc.

Therefore to them it was the Primary Rule.

Answer, First, This argument proves no more then this is already granted,
Viz. That Moses Law was a more Principal Law to the Jews then to any other
Nation. But until he prove the Children of Israel to have had no Law, no Rule
of Faith nor Life before Moses wrote that Law, his argument can conclude
nothing.

Secondly, Mine Adversary may tell me, whether they were to stand to the
decision of the Law in a matter which the Law did not decide? for we find that
after the Law was given; In many things the Law giver, Moses, could not decide
without immediate Revelation, as in the matter of the Daughters of Zelophehad:
But when the case was proposed to him, he went and enquired of the Lord; And
again, when the Law was finished, and Joshua to succeed him. What says the
LORD: Numb: 29. 21. And he (to wit) Joshua) shall stand before Eleazer the
Priest, who shall ask Counsel for him after the judgment of Vrim before the
LORD. If this be ultimatly to recurr to the Scriptures of Moses Law, the Reader
may judge.

To prove his Minor he cites one place which I cannot omit, Dut: 17, 9, 10, 11
And thou shall come unto the Priests, the Levits, and unto the Judge that shall
be in those days, and enquire, and they shall show thee the Sentence of
Judgment, and thou shall do according to the sentence which they of that place
(which the LORD shall choose) shall show thee, and thou shall observe to do
according to all that they inform thee. Now Reader, could the Pope of Rome have
sought out a Scripture more fit to have established his universal Dictatorship
over Christendom then this? Is there one word of Scripture, Law or Testimony
here? No, but the Priests, the Levites, and the Judge: That is in Broad Scots,
The General Assembly, and Committee of Estates, who were as absolute in their
Determinations, as ever the Pope and his Conclave: But Patroclus must know that
he and his Brethren are not Levites, although they take the Tithes, nor am I to
take their Counsel, till they assure me that they have the Judgment of Vrim.

His second Proof for his Minor is, Isaiah 8. 20. To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to these, it is because there is no
light in them.

This Scripture has been so much tossed by the Adversaries of Truth, and so
often answered, That Patroclus who promises greater Matters then his Brethren
had brought, might have let it alone.

He denies that this Law and Testimony can be inward; And says, For this
Exposition we must take their word, etc: But he has forgotten (it seems) that
William Penn in his Rejoinder has given him other Men's words for it, and
perhaps better Men's then himself; And because the Book is not so common among
Presbyterians; I shall here insert some of the Testimonys cited by William Peen.

First Dell: Trial of Spirits, page 16. Wherefore they who are true believers
(says he) and have received Christ's Spirit, their Judgment is to be preferred
in the Trial of spirits before a whole council of Clergy Men: And they only
who can try Spirits by the Spirit of GOD, and Doctrines by the Word of GOD
written in their hearts; by the Spirit can in measure discern all Spirits in
the World. And the Spirit of Christ which dwells in all true Christians
cannot deceive, nor be deceived in the trial of spirits.

Collier: General Epistle, page 249. and page 258. Obj: Is It, it is said Isa: 8
20. To the Law and to the Testimony, etc: Ans: Truth; There is the Law and the
Testimony in the Spirit as well as in the Letter, The Law of GOD is in the
Heart, There it is written and there it testifies the Truth of GOD; And if any
Man speak not according to this Rule, it is because there is no Light nor
Morning arisen in them. the Spiritual Man judges all things, yet be himself is
judged of no man.

These were the words of two Famous Professors who were no Quakers.

Next he cites some Scriptures to prove that Moses Law is understood by the
Law and Testimony; As if GOD had made void his Promise, To write his Law in
the Heart, and put it in the inward parts: But of this a little after

In page 35. He begins with a Question drawn from Deuteronomy: 17. 18, 19. Now (says
he) Shall any be so stupid as to believe when a doubt arose, That the King was
not bound to apply himself to this written Law for the discusing thereof? Or
tho the King's doubt had been most clearly discussed by the Law; He was bound
to wait for a miraculous Revelation from Heaven to determine him? I say who in
his Wits will believe this? Very well Patroclus, I am one so stupid as to
believe that when a doubt arose, which Moses Law could not clearly determine,
that the King was bound to enquire of the LORD; Of which the Scriptures gives
us many examples. As 1 Samuel 23. 2. 4. and 30. 8. 2 Samuel: 2. 1. and 5. 19. 1
Kings 22. 7. And 2 Kings 22. Where the King, the High Priest, the Scribe, and
some others, had the Book of the Law and knew not what to do with it, but sent
to enquire of the Lord, and that by the mouth of a Woman. But he has been so
warrie in his second Querie as to add; Tho the Kings doubt had been most
clearly discussed by the Law; Yet has not the Candor to tell us, what the
King was to do, in case his doubt was not clearly discussed by the Law. As for
the word Miraculous Revelation, etc: It is his own, a fine bugbear to fright
his silly Disciples from asking Counsel of GOD; For I am apt to believe, that
Divine Revelation is now a miracle among Presbyterian Priests.

To trace him in all his Raillings and Boastings, reflections against To:
Barkelay and Geo: Keith, were very needless; The Reader may see them of no
weight. I shall therefore here take notice of some of the Scriptures cited by
him in page 34. To prove that by the Law and the Testimony is understood the
Law of Moses on Exodus: 32. 15. And Moses turned, and went down from the Mount,
and the two Tahles of the Testimony were in his hand, etc. 34. ^9. With the two
Tables of Testimony in Moses hand, etc.

Now I beseech the Reader to consider what this Man can make from hence, or
from any of the rest, to prove that Isaiah meant the two Tables of the Law to
be a Primarie Rule either to Jews or Christians. Was never the Moral Law a Law
to Mankind, until it was written in Tables of Stone? Then certainly Cain had
not sinned in killing of Abell; If there had been no Law against Murder; Or
what more can he make of this Scripture (if he make the Law and Testimony to
be the Ten Commandments?) But this, That whoever speaks or acts contrary
unto them; It is because he is dark, not knowing the Mind of the LORD; nor
harkening to the Voice of the Divine Light in him, which would have taught him
to speak and act according to that Moral Law.

But I would willingly learn of him, whether he would have the whole Law of
Moses, Moral, Judicial, and Levitical, or Ceremonial, to be the Primarie Rule
to Christians now a days: For the Moral is confessed by all parties to be
binding upon all Mankind, and that it was Imprinted upon the Souls of all Men,
even before it was written: But the Judicial Law as well as the Ceremonial Law
has been rejected by all Christians, except the Presbyterians, who composed
Cargils Covenant. What then would the man be at? I can conjecture nothing but
this; The Presbiterians have three beloved Doctrines, Viz: Swearing, Fighting,
and Tithes, which no one Line of the New Testament seems to favor, and
therefore they would have the Law reinforced, least these their Darlings fall.

To conclude: The Law was added, (says Paul) because of Transgression.
Therefore there was a Law or Rule transgressed before this Law was added: And
that it was a Written Law, let Patroclus prove with the next.

I shall now come to his third Argument, page ^9. Christ and his Apostles
proved their Doctrines from the Scriptures referred their hearers unto them,
for the final decision of the most grave and weighty Contraversies that ever
arose in the World; And sent all people into them as a most sure and
undeceiving Light, by the Guiding of which we may pass through this dark World,
and be kept from Hell in the close: Ergo, the Scriptures are the Primary Rule,
etc.

To prove the Consequence of this Argument, he sends us to the Definition of
( a may be) Rule in his first Argument; which is proven to be lame, and a
begging of the Question.

Next to prove his Antecedent, he cites a Bundle of Scriptures, for merly
adduced by his Brethren, and answered diverse times: But he thinks all the rest
but Bunglers, and therefore he will have at them again.

The First is, Mat. 22. 29, 31, 32. Te do err not knowng the Scriptures, nor
the Power of GOD.

He begins with a parcel of Presbyterian Rbetorick, saying, Our Adversaries are
like Baits, etc. Let the Reader judge, whether I have occasion here for a
Repartee, but Ple spare him.

There be Two Things in the Citation, for the Ignorance of which the Jews are
blamed, to wit, Of the Scriptures and the Power of God. Now if this prove one
of them to be a Rule, it cannot miss to prove the other to be a Rule also: And
so the Contraversy remains in stain quo prius, that is, Whether the Scriptures,
or Christ the power of God, and the Wisdom of God, Teaching and Revealing the
Mind and Will of God to his People, is to be preferred. The Quakers never
denied the Scriptures to be a Rule, but only that they were subordinat to the
Teachings of Christ by His Spirit, Whom He promises to send, and that he
should Teach them all Things: And this I say is preferrable, and he has
brought nothing to prove the contrary.

This clears George Keith from what he alleges, of his confounding the Rule
with the Power: And as for his Simile of Euclid, it will nothing mend his
Matter; for certainly Euclid had a Rule by which he wrote his Book, which was
the Dictats of his Reason; and except his Propositions can be demonstrated to
me by Reason, I am not bound to believe them. Therefore the Dictats of my
Reason are a more Noble and Excellent Rule to me than Euclid's Propositions,
tho the Book be an excellent Help for me to attain to that Art.

And whereas he has talked very disdainfully, though wrongfully, of
consounding the Scriptures and the Power of God, he should have remembered that
in Page 36. He has said, That to seek to the Scriptures is all one with
seeking unto GOD: Whether this vergeth upon Blasphemy, let the Reader Judge.

But to put our Stupidity or prejudice beyond doubt, he brings us another
simile of a King.

Answer, Above all things he should have shunned dilcoursing upon this Topic;
For it is impossible to keep a Presbyterion Priest within his Bounds: Here he
has described a King in Querpo, subordinate to the Laws and limited by them.

Whereas it is well known, That the King is the fountain of our Law, our
Legislator: And by the same Authority whereby he makes Laws, can cashier annul
and rescind them: And it is a known Maxim in Law, Rex non potest peccare; But
this is the old Doctrine of Lex Rex, and Jus Populi: And that famous piece, The
Hynd let loose.

Now if this his Simile prove any thing, it will be this, That as (according to
their Dialect) The King can do nothing but what the Law of the Land allows: So
GOD can do nothing but what the Scripture allows: And consequently CHRIST could
not command the Man to take up his Bed and walk upon the Sabbath day, because
no Scripture then written allowed it.

The next place is, John 5. 39. Here he challenges R. B. as a Papist, for
saying the Words ought to have been Translated, Ye search the Seriptures: But
Patroclus, If I shall cite Bellarinine against the payment of Tiths (who say
they, Are not due by any Law of GOD or Nature, since the coming of Christ) Will
thou also call me a Papist? If thou do, thou at mistaken; And so art thou in
him. And when thou can prove that there are no errors in the Translation, thou
may stick by this. The Scriptures thou brings prove nothing for this
Translation, for they do not mention it; And we never denied it, that the
reading of the Scripture was both commanded and commended; Yet thou art not
ashamed to say, They are sufficient to convince these Men of palpable falsehood
and blasphemy. This is Language for the Pulpit among the Hood-winked hearers,
but will trouble no unprejudiced Reader.

As to the great stress he lays upon these words, And these are they that
testify of me; Therefore they are the Primary Rule. Did he not say, The Works
which I do, They hear witness of Me? And if we may believe History, the Sybills
testified of him: Does this prove that they were the Primary Rule?

But the very foregoing Verse is to be considered, And ve have not his Word
abiding in you, for whom be has sent, him ve believe not. And verse 36. I have
a greater Witness then that of John; For the works which the Father has given
me to finish, the same works that I do bear witness of me, that the Father has
sent me. Here let him consider, that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses,
every thing is to be proven. Our Savior brings here four Witnesses, The
Testimony of John, The Works which he did, The Word of GOD abiding in Men, and
the Scriptures. The contraversy is not whether any of these or all of them were
Witnesses, but which of them was the greatest and most Preferrable? And if the
Works which He then did were a greater Witness then the Testimony of John (who
was inferior to none of the Prophets) Then the Works which He now does in the
Hearts and Souls of Believers by His Word abiding in them, in healling all
their Infirmities, quickening and enlightening their dead Souls, and speaking
peace to them; is a greater Witness then the Scriptures.

He falls next upon R. Bs. Dilemma, Which he says, has not the weight of a
Walnut; It seems the hardness of the shell has blunted his teeth, that he has
not reached the Kernal. For (says he) If the words are to be taken in the
Imperative mood, as we have even now demonstrated, then it is as clear as the
Noon Sun, etc.

But how has he demonstrated it? That the Word bears not the Indicative
Signification; as well as the Imperative, is obvious to any that understands
the Conjugations. And the Scriptures brought to prove it. I shall touch some of
them Deuteronomy: 17. 18, 19. And be shall read therein all the days of his Life:
Ergo, The Words John 5: 39. Are to be taken in the Imperative Mood, If this be
not as wild a consequence as to say William Jamison is verus Patroelus by a
Metempychosis, Ergo, The whole Church of England are Heretics, (which he has
boldly asserted in his Adultory Epistle to his Patron) I leave it to the Reader
to Judge.

The next he brings is, Deuteronomy: 29. 29. The Secret things belong to the LORD our
GOD, but those Things which are revealed belong to us and to our Children for
ever, that we may do all the Words of this Law. Ergo, The Words of John are to
be taken in the Imperative mood; Who would follow such an Adversary at this
Rate?

But seeing he is so good at Wall-nuts, I will give him another of the same
kind to break,

Either the Words of John the Baptist, (who was as great a Prophet as Isaiah)
were as much a Rule to the Jews when spoken by him, as they are now to us when
recorded in a Book, or as the words of Isaiah formerly recorded in a Book; or
they were not? If they were, Then the Works which Christ works now in the
Souls of His Servants, must be a greater Witness then the words of John
recorded in a Book; As well as the Works he then did were a greater Witness.

But if he say, they were not so much a Rule when spoken, as when written I ask
him, how they came by that excellency by being Written? Or was it the Council
of I aodicea that gave it?

Page 43 He says, He has broken one of the Horns of his Dilemma, and made his
Consequence a mere Nonsequitor. And why? Because he has confessed (says he)
in a word, That the Words of Christ and his Apostles, as then spoken and now
recorded in Scripture, were of themselves no less binding upon the Jews, then
these spoken by Moses and the Prophets.

But this has strengthened the Dilemma, for if they were as binding, and yet
needed a Rule to try them by; Then the Writtings of Moses and the Prophets
needed a Rule to try them by, and that Rule another Rule; Et sic infinitum.

That all Doctrines of Men may be tried, and ought so to be by the Scriptures,
was never denied; And has no way given away his Cause. But as for what
follows, That it might be lawful to embrace any impulse or suggestion, which he
thought was the Spirit of GOD; Without further Examination thereof, is a gross
untruth, but ordinary to him and his Brethren; And therefore he has wisely
foreborn to tell us where R: Barkelay said so.

His third Scriptute is, Acts 17. 11. He says, His Adversaries can find
nothing to darken and deprive it, and therefore he waves it. Not being willing
to meddle with what R: B: says there: To wit, If the Bereans were oblidged to
believe and receive Paul's Testimony, because he preached the Truth to them by
Authority from GOD; Then their using them, or his commending of them for using
the scriptures; Will not prove the scriptures to be the Primary Rule, Yea more
a Rule than the Doctrine they tried by it. For it the Doctrine preached by Paul
to the Bereans, had been but recorded in a Book, it had presently become a
Primary Rule.

The fourth is, 2 Peter 1. 19. We have a more sure word of prophecy, etc. This
place he will have to be meant of the scriptures. His first proofi is, Because
(says he) This presupposes, that there cannot be immediate Revelation where
the senses go along: And so their spirit is contrary to sense.

But this is an old Cavil against Christianity, and brought on the stage by
Julian the Apostat, in his Book against the Primitive Christians. This Doctrine
(said he) sigbteth against common sense: See Chron: Carionis, page 278.

To this he adds another, Why should this Glorious Vision of which the
Apostles had Divine and infollible Evidence, etc: Be accounted uncertain and
suspected in respect of the Spirit ^ Answer, Why should uld it be uncertain and
suspected in respect of the scriptures? And why should it become the Primary
Rule when recorded in a Book, and not the Rule when spoken immediately on the
Mount; If thou say, Because it is more obvious to sense, then it seems thy
Religion is more sensual than Spiritual.

His second Argument is, That this Revelation (according to us) brings along
with it its own self Evidence, and persuades the Soul to embrace and close with
it as Divine: But this is both groundless, and therefore false (says he)
because we assert, that unless the Understanding be well disposed, Revelation
tho immediate, is not evident.

Answer first, He here brings nothing to prove this, That it is groundless and
false; except his ipse dixit; And therefore I may not take his word.

Secondly, What had all the Patriarchs before Moses Law, and even Moses himself
to try their Revelations by? Yet they believed them upon their own self
evidence: Yea, Balaam who had no well disposed Intellect, yet knew and believed
his Revelations to be Divine. And Lastly, Doctor Barron in his Book against
Turnbul, says, That the most noble kind of Revelation is, that which is by
intellectual speaking or illumination, as Thomas and Swarez teach.

Thirdly, He says, We insinuate, That the Apostle in this Comparison, gave out
that one of the things compared was more certain than the other; Which (says
he) is most false; Seeing considered in themselves, both have all certainly
possible. But in respect of us (says he) The Scriptures are more sure, because
less subject to be counterfeited or wrested either by the Devil or our own
fancy; But here (it seems) he has forgotten himself, for this same Apostle
has told us that the Scripture can be wrested. But who, says that the
teachings of the Spirit of truth can be so? None but Patroclus; And so the
comparison holds, that which can be wrested is less sure then that which cannot
be wrested. He adds, the Apostle has his eye upon his Country men; And so have
I upon mine, who pretend so much to the Scriptures, and yet wrest them grossly
to their own damnation.

Page, 46. comes to prove, that by these words ( more sure word of Prophecy)
are meant the Scriptures; after he has told us that albeit immediate Revelation
were meant or understood by the more sure word of Prophecy, it would be no
advantage to us, because it is recommended to us: As that whereby we may come
to the genuine interpretation of the Scriptures, and so not the Principal rule,
but a means to explain the Principal Rule, and for this he brings no proof, but
we must take his word, and then he will make us Quid libet ex quo libet.

First, He says, by these words a more sure word of Prophecy, is understood
the Scriptures, because any phrase of the like import is always taken for the
Scriptures, as Luke 16, 29. Ephesians: 2. 20. Matt. 7. 12. And yet he confesses in a
Parenthesis, the words Logos Propheticos, are not to be sound in all the
Scripture besides, but by the words Law and Prophets are meant the Scriptures;
Ergo, by the more sure word of Prophecy are meant the Scriptures: This is a
non seqitur, with a witness.

The rest of his arguments such as, if our Adversarys were not affronted, and
impudently bold, such as would adventure upon any thing, etc. and the like; Are
not worthy of any answer: But seeing he would explain one Scripture by another,
I will help him to one more sit, John 1. 4, 5. Where it is said, In Him was
Life, and the Life was the Light of men, and the Light shines in the darkness,
and the darkness comprehended it not. How like this is to the more sure word of
Prophecy, which shines as a Light in a dark place; But the life of CHRIST,
the light in men, is a sear Crow to Presbyterian Priests, they cannot abide it
One reasonless reason he gives us, is, because men are commended for searching
the Scriptures; But I would be obliged to him if he would form a Syllogism upon
the medium, and draw his conclusion from it.

In page 48 he tells us, that Luther, Calvin, etc. Understand it so. Is this
fare dealing Patroclus? Do thou agree with Luther, or even with Calvin in all
things? If thou say yea, I Will prove that contrary, and yet their Testimony must
oblige us; Then he computes us among Ancient Heretics, but he would not be
satisfied if I should compute him and his brethren among Mahumitans for
beliving a Stoical Fate. Lastly, He leaves us to graple with William Penn's
Rejoinder, page, 334, who, he says, yields to him what we deny.

To satisfy the Reader, I shall set down some of William Penns words; He
says, John Faldo acknowledges, That the writings of the Prophets are not
more true in themselves than any other Revelation of the mind of GOD, but more
certain with respect to the Jews, who bad a greater esteem for, and testimony
of the writings of the Prophets to be of GOD, and not a delusion, then of
Peter's Revelation; So that we here have (says William Penn) from John Faldo
himself; The scripture is not set above the Spirit as the more sure word, the
thing promoted of old by our enemies, and which we only oppose: For I doubt not
but the Scriptures were more lure to the Jews then CHRIST Himself, else they
would never have thought to find Eternal life in them, whilst they neglected,
yea persecuted him; Which, whether it was their perfection or imperfection, so
to do, I leave with the judgment of my serious Reader, which I likewayes do
whether Patroclus be a fair adversary or any honest man.

He comes next to Luke 16. 31. If they ^ear not Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they be persuaded tho one rose from the dead.

First, Let the Reader observe that this is a Parable, and that the
Presbyterians believe that any such apparitions are but Devils assuming the
body, or the shape of the dead: And therefore any thing may be more certain to
them then such a Testimony, and we read of none such but that of Samuel to
S^ul. Secondly, This Scripture brings no comparison betwixt the Scripture and
the Spirit, and whereas he says, let the Quakers prove that every man has
such a spirit as the Quakers allege, this shall come in its own place.

Next he proves the Scriptures to be the Primary Rule, because otherwise
Abraham might have said, the Spirit of GOD directs every man immediately; If
they hear not him they will hear none else: If Abraham said so (it seems
Patroclus would have been displeased; But a greater then Abraham said so, even
the LORD JESUS John, 14. 26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom
the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, whose teaching
are preferable to all the writings in the world, seeing he taught them what
they wrote, and their being dictated by him, gives them all their excellency.

He says R: Barkclay saying, The Scriptures were a written Rule to the Jews
only, is nothing to the purpose, but he should not have belyed him, for he
says, they were a more principal Rule to the Jews; But never that they were a
principal Rule to the Jews. He passes by what he said upon the Scripture, Viz.
Page, 40. This Parable was used by Christ to the Jews, to show them their
Hypocrisy; who albeit they deceitfully pretended to reverence and sol^ low
Moses and the Prophets; Yet they did not really hear them, else they would have
acknowledged him, of what Moses and the Prophets did so clearly write, since he
did as great and convincing Mitacles before them, as if they had the Testimony
of one Risen from the Dead.

In like manner the Presbyterians now, albeit they pretend so much to reverence
the writings of the Apostles, yet they will not really hear them, else they
would not fight, swear, nor exact a forced mantainance, even from these who are
not of the communion of their Church.

His Third argument is, Certainly (says he) the voice of one of the Glorified
Spirits coming from Heaven, where they behold the Face of GOD, is no less to be
accounted immediate Revelation, then the voice of the high Priest unto the
people, etc. But he should have proved that GOD took his method to reveal his
mind unto his people, which he never did: But the High Priest was a Tipe of
Christ, and a Mediator betwixt GOD and the Jews: So that to deny this to be
immediate, because it was first spoken to the High Priest, is to deny the words
of Christ to be immediate to his people, because he says, he had heard and
received them of the Father; or that the light of the Sun is not immediate,
because it is conveyed to us through the Air. Only let him tell me, whether the
supreme Magistrate who is at present troubled with the clamours of the two
kinds of Clergymen in Scotland, can go and inquire of the LORD, and have as
certain an answer, which of the two Church Government are Jure Divino, as the
Jews many times had, and then he says something? For the Jews had the
Scriptures, Moses and the Prophets as well as we, and yet were many times
necessitat to go and enquire of the LORD, which evidently proves they had a
higher rule then Moses Law.

In page 50, he gives an argument like the rest, Viz. Gods way of Revealing
himself to us, is as immediate as it was to the Jews, because we have those that
were inspired by GOD, speaking to us tho Dead. Hence he concludes, that the
Scriptures are as immediate to us as the voice of Moses, or the High Priest, or
the Prophets was to the Jews.

This Argument is singular for deceit and solly; for First, where did any
Quaker deny the Scriptutes to be the Primary Rule upon the account of their not
being immediately revealed we acknowledege that they were immediately revealed to
the Prophets and Apostles, and recorded by them, but this does not let them
above the Spirit which did reveal them, and so his gross lie and his argument
are both answered; and yet he might have considered that the promise of Christ
is more full to his people then it was to the Jews; As he may read, Matt: 10:
19, 20. It shall be given you the same hour what ye shall speak, for it is not
ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you.

His fourth argument from 2 Then. 3. 15. Is, That which is able to make such an
one as Timothy, called the man of GOD, wise through faith unto Salvation, must
be a sufficient Rule, etc. But the Scriptures are able to do so, etc. Therefore
they are a sufficient Rule.

Answer, This argument militates nothing against us, for the Question is not,
whether the Scriptures be a Rule, but whether they be the Primary Rule, which
this Argument touches not, and Faith is added here as a principal ingredient,
which themselves acknowledge to be a work of the Spirit, this Faith has a
rule; as also that faith whereby a man believes the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures, let him tell me with the next, what is the Rule of this Faith?

He tells next, The scriptures are Causa exemplaris, and therefore the Primary
Rule, they call them causa formalis, Causa materialis, causa exemplaris; And
the word make would seem to make them causa efficiens, so that according to
them, they are, To Pan, and the Spirit Verse Nihil.

From the Scriptures being Causa exemplaris, he says, I evidently infer that
they are the adequat and Primary Rule, because if there were some things to be
believed and practiced not contained in Scripture: Or if they were subject to
another Test, etc. They could not in truth be called able to make the man of
GOD wise unto Salvation: This I have answered before, if he understand the
Essentials and fundamentals of the Christian Religion; It is confessed, they do
contain them, but there are many things occur in our Christian course (as he
words it) which the Scriptures do not determine. Such as whether it was
Christian or Antichristian course for the Presbyterians to come up to
Bothwel-Bridge to fight against the King. And Secondly, Whether the late
assembly ought to have united with their Brethren of the Episcopal persuasion,
till they had undergone Penance for their Apostasy upon the Stool of
Repentance. The First brought much trouble upon the Nation, and the Second is
feared to be of no better consequence, except our Author bring us clear
Scripture to determine the case, to the satisfaction of all parties.

He says little Justice. Truth, or fare dealing is to be expected from us, But
far less from him so long as he trusts more to Aristotle's Elenobis in frameing
deceitful Sophisms, then to the Testimony of the Spirit of Christ; the reason
he gives for this great calumny is, because R. B. accuses his brother John
Brown for perverting the Scriptute. 2 Timothy: 3. 16. Now it is evident that the
16, Ver: has no such word in it, and that the 17 Verse says only, That the man
of GOD may be perfect; So the difference here is very obvious, which R. B. has
largely handled in the same 41 page, and our Author takes no notice of it, but
most deceitfully insinuates that he makes the scriptures Tautologies, because
he cannot evite the distinction there made by R. B. To which place (never
touched by our Author) I refer my Reader.

Lastly, (says he) For we love rather to plead by weight of Arguments then by
multitude of Arguments. Answer, If this had been true, thou had spared a dale
of Paper and pains.

We evine (says he) That the Scriptures are a complete adequate and Primary
Rule of Faith and Manners, by the Testimony of our Adversaries themselves.

Answer, If this be true, it is manifest that allhe has said on that Subject,
is superfluous: Against whom did the Man write? Omerciless Adversary This is
like the Papists in Q: Marys time: Tho you recant and be received into the
Church, yet you must burn! But let us hear what he faith?

His Proofs are these, First, R: Barkclay's Vindication, page 36. The chief
Doctrines of Christianity are contained in Scripture, And we may find the whole
Doctrine of the Christian Faith in tho Scriptures: And George Keith says, That
the Scriptures are a full enough declaration of all Doctrines and Principles,
etc.

Both these I have cleared before granting all that they said; And yet have
proven that many things may and do occurr, which the Scriptures do not clearly
determine.

The other Branch that they are the Primary Rule, Our Adversaries themselves
(says he) at unawates grant. Very well Patroelus, it is a fine trick of a
Soldier to take his Enemies napping and vanquish by stratagem, but it seems
there is some difficulty in it.

He cites R: Barkclays 2d. Theses, saying, That the Spirit is not to be
subjected to the Scriptures as a more noble Rule; Therefore (says he) The
Spirit is to be subjected to the Scriptures, tho not as a more noble Rule.

Answer first, He should have said, These Divine Revelations, for they are the
words of the These; But we have often acknowledged that all Doctrines of Men,
how holy soever, or how much soever they pretend to the Spirit, are to be tried
by the Scriptures, and if they be contrary to them are to be rejected; But this
proves nothing of their being the Primary Rule to us, more then to Enoch who
was a Man of GOD, and had true Faith, and walked with GOD before there was a
line of Scripture in the World.

Again, (he says) Our Adversaries grant that the Scriptures proceeded from
GOD, and therefore are infalible, and more sure than infalible is impossible.
This is a strange Argument. The Scriptures are infallible because they
proceeded from GOD, or were inspired by the Spirit of GOD; And shall the
Inspiration of the Spirit be fallible, or a more uncertain Rule then that which
it dictated? These words sound harshly But I expect when Patreclus comes to be
serious in cold Blood, he will grant, That if there be more or less in the Case
of Infallibility, he will grant the more to the Spirit which dictated the
Scriptures, and from which they derive all their Infallibility, Certainty, and
Excellency.

Here I desire the Reader may observe, that his Arguments and the Scriptures
cited by him, tend only to set up Moses Law to be the Primary Rule of Faith and
Life; And not one word of the Scriptures of the New Testament, so that he
contends for Judaism rather then Christianity. For Christ said, It has been
said of Old, an Eye for an Eye, etc: But I say unto you resist not evil, etc:
So that the Jewish Law is not in all things to be a Rule for Christians;
Otherwise Patroclus may ofter Sacrifice as well as take Tithes.

In page 54. 55, and 56. He ranteth and roareth against R: B: as a Jesuit,
because (he alleges) he has taken an Argument of Bellarmines to prove the
Scriptures not to be an Adequate Rule, but what a silly kind of Reasoning this
is, (tho true) may easily appear. Bellarmine says, there is one GOD, so do I,
therefore I am a Jesuit. The Jesuits say, That Dominion is founded upon
Grace; And so do the Presby^erians, Therefore the Preshyterians are Jesuits.

Then he comes to vindicate John Brown's simile of killing a Man; And at last
gives us, the Law, the Judge, and the Witnesses: The Scriptures are (says he)
the Rule whereby to make the Examen, the en^^ghined ^^solence the Judge, the
Spirit of Adoption; or a ^ilial Disposition, etc: Together the renewed Spirit
of the Believer himself the Witnesses.

But first, I must ask him, whether it be the Man himself, or the Judge that
needs this Spiritual Wisdom, and Christian prudence to apply the Rule?

Secondly, Whether the Judge be a Person distinct form the person judged, for
(to use his own Simile) If the Man ^^ yet be his own Judge, he is not like to
suffer.

Thirdly, What he means by the Ex: Position he gives us of the Spirit of
Adoption; As if he thinks it nothing else but a Filial Disposition, inclining
the believer to come to GOD, as his Words imply.

Behold Reader, what a Judgment is here to be expected; Where the Man himself
dislected into so many Parts, is the Applyer of the Rule, the Judge and the
Witnesses. And yet in page 57 He confesses, That for the infallible Assurance
of the Person himself, the thing stands in need of, or requires an inward
Judge, and inward Witnesses; Which I hope must be things distinct from the
Person himself to whom they are to give infallible certainty.

As for his pretending, That it belongs not properly to a Rule of Faith to
tell a Man whether he has true Faith or not, is not to the purpose; For an
adequate Rule of Faith must put me beyond doubting what I am to believe, and
what not; Otherwise it is no adequate Rule. And to conclude, I would advise
him to be sparing in calling Men Antichristian: For I know no people, except
the Papists to whom the definition of Antichrist given by the Apostles, is more
agreeable then to the Presbyterians. That is, He exalts himself above all
that is called God, or the civil Magistrates, who are called Gods in Scripture,
Goodman says, they may kill wicked Princes as monsters, and oruel beasts.

Knox History Fol: 78. If neither the Magistrate nor the people do their office
in deposing or killing the King, then the Minister must Ex-communicat such a
King. Goodman, page 110. Any private Man may do it against the greatest Prince:
A private Man, having some special motion, may kill a Tyrant!

If these Doctrines be not more like Antichrist, than the Doctrine he
accuserh, let the Reader judge.

In Page 57 he comes to another Argument of R. B's, There are many things that
the Scripture cannot determine. To which I: B: Answers, That General Rules are
enough, leaving the rest to Christian prudence, and Wisdom! If this be not
flatly to contradict the Scriptures concerning the chief Instances cited by R:
B: Let the Reader judge after he has read and considered the following
Scriptures.

Romans 8: 16. The Spirit it self bears Witness with our spirits, that we are
the Children of GOD.

1 John 4. 13. Hereby do we know that we dwell in Him, and He in us, because He
has given us of his Spirit, And Verse. 5. 6. And it is the Spirit that bears
Witness, because the Spirit is Truth.

To these Scriptures cited by R: B: He has not answered one Word: Bu^ all his
Answers are Quibles. As first, If we need Revelation for Spiritual Actions, we
need them also for Natural Actions. Poor Man! Are we contending for a Rule for
Eating and Drinking (as he talks) If he be sick, let him consult the Physician,
what and when he shall Eat: But if he mean the Fasts appointed by the
Presbyterian Clergy, his Brethren of the EPISCOPAL Persuasion have need to
consult an higher Oracle, And when he is hungry and thirsty, his stomach can
teach him. Nevertholess, Whether we eat or drink, we are to do it to the Glory
of GOD.

His second Answer is ridiculous, alleging that a system of Mathematics or
Military Discipline is a sufficient Rule, tho the Books comprehended not the
Names of all Mathematicians and Soldiers that ever shall exist But the
Question is, Whether a system of these Arts can put a Man beyond doubting in
every Emergent that may occurr in these Arts when practiced? And not whether
their Names be there or not. As whether he is to take upon him to be General of
an Army, as R: B: tells his Adversary, page 45 of his Vindication. The Question
is, how James and Peter Knew they should take upon them to Rule? But in case
these systems fail to satisfy a Man at a strait (which I hope any experienced
Soldier will confess and the daily new Inventions do fully evince) What then
is the Soldier to recurr to? Is it not to that by which the first Man wrote
the System, That is, his Reason; And see if that can help him when his Book
cannot: Yea, have there not been good Soldiers who could neither Read nor
Write? Yes, General Lesly, who did more for the Presbyterian Interest then
Patroelus and Achilles both can do. And will a Mathematician receive a
Mathematical Proposition set down in a System hand over head, without
satisfying his Reason? These are poor similes, and rather hurtful then helpful
to his Cause; If by these he minds to prove, That humane prudence can assure a
man that he is a Child of God. I am apt to suspect by his Book that he has
never trodden this narrow Path himself; Else he would have spoken other
Language. Next he comes to answer for his Brethren the Remonstrants and Public
Resolutioners, comparing then (indeed) to Paul and Barnabas: But he has forgot
to tell us which of them was in the right, and to decide the Contraversie by
plain Scripture to the stopping the mouths of the other Party, but I doubt this
would have puzzled his prudence. As for his Instance of Paul and Barnabas, their
contention was not for matters of Faith or Doctrine as Beza testifies, and the
Scripture says no where that they did not meet again; But our Assembly Men
never reconciled to this day.

But knowing this will not do, he gives a better Answer, Saying, The
Corruptions of Men are only to be charged with this.

Ah! Lamentable, The whole General Assembly of the Church of Scotland corrupt
men: What guides then had such poor Laics as I? Put all this says nothing,
except he decide the Contraversy by plain Scripture; Which when he has done, I
shall say, It Is pity he was not present at the Assembly.

Next he falls upon some other Arguments, which he tells us are scraped out of
Bellarmine, and therefore deserve no Answer. Which Answer, whether true or
false I know not, having never read Bellarmines Works: But I find this is a
fair shift to win off, and an Hebergeon proof against any Dart.

He spends his whole page 60. on Reflections, First on James Naylor; he might
have remembered Major Weir. But De mortuis nill, etc: I disdain to scrape in
that Dunghill.

Next he compares us to the Papists, saying, As the Papists to cover the rest
of their Abominations, have invented a greater and more dangerous than them
all, that is, Their Churches Infallibility: So this Spirit of the Quakers,
knowing that upon trial he will be found to be a Counterfeit, has taken the
Counsel given by Alcibiades to Pericles, that is, To study how he may secure
himself with the hazard of a Trial. And here he cites William Penn's Rejoinder,
Part. 1. Chap. 5. about the Man of Philippi.

I beseech the Reader to peruse the place cited by him, that he may see him
past all shame, or care of being reputed an honest Man. For First he says, W.
Penn uses it as an Argument to prove, The Scriptures cannot be a Rule of Faith
and Life; whereas in the same Page, W. Penn has owned them for a Rule of Faith
and Life, tho not the Rule by way of Excellency, nor, as Patroclus says, the
Primary Rule.

Secondly, He makes no Argument of it, but an Instance, as he does that of
Ananias and Saphira, That the Scriptures could not be a Rule to Peter nor Paul
in these cases; as he does that also of flying or standing in the time of
Persecution; and asks what do Professors mean, when they advise People to
seek the Lord in this o^ the other Case? Why do they not go seek the Scriptures
rather? and much more, which for brevity lomit.

To evite all which, he makes a Nonsensical Argument, and denies the Antecedent
when he had none. And then falls a Railing for a whole Page together, a part
whereof I have set down above.

For Answer to which: First, The Quakers own no other Spirit but the Comforter,
whom Christ promised to send to Reprove the World for Sin (for they never
refused to subject the Spirits and Doctrines of Men to the Scriptures) and
therefore if he have called the Spirit of Truth a Counterfier, the just God
will Rebuke him for his Blasphemy. And this poor Man, who can pretend to no
more Infallibility than the Pharisees of old, (who had the Scriptures as well
as he, and yet were found guilty of Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost) may be
afraid he be found in the same Case with them. But I wish he may find
Repentance.

Secondly, The Presbyterians may be no less fitly compared with the Papists:
For their Doctrines being tried by the Scriptures, they being Interpreters
themselves, it is a mere sham to speak of a Trial: For whatever Interpretation
does not agree with the Analogy of Faith, is to be rejected; Now the Analogy
of Faith is of their own composing, so that Faith and Trial and all is but Man's
work, and in fine a very cheat.

But next he must give us the most deadly blow of all; Saying, We are beyond
the reach of a Conviction; But the Reader may excuse him a little, being now
among his Brethren, the Grecian Hero's, Alcibiades and Pericles. But who told
him this, that the Quakers were beyond the reach of a Conviction? Sure not the
Scriptures; For there is no such Sentence in them all; Nor the Spirit, for he
cannot endure Divine Inspiration, the Capital Enemy of the Presbyterian
Priesthood: Who then? Imagination: A thing the Presbyterians call Faith; The
very counterfeit he has been talking of just now.

Next he tells us, That Prophesies of future Events may well be brought to the
Scripture Test: Then I beseech him tell me, what Scripture Test could Noah his
Prophefie of the Flood have been brought to; Or George Wisharts Prophecy of
the Cardinals being Killed in such a place, and not in another.

In the close, he says, Paul was Divinely inspired, and the Actions were
conform to Scripture, consonant, and warranted by the Promise of Christ, andC:
But it seems he has forgotten what he said in page 39. Christ and his Apostles
proved their Doctrines by the Scriptures, who were Immediately inspired as well
as Paul; But any thing will serve after such a fatal blow as he has lately
given.

Page 61. He says, The ground of their Arguments, with which they stand and
fall is this, The Scriptures are not the Fountain it self, but a Declaration of
the Fountain: Therefore they are not to be accounted the principal Original of
all Truth and Knowledge, nor vet the adequat Primary Rule of Faith and Manners.

For Answer, Let the Reader observe, That this is but a These; And that our
Adversaries themselves grant the first part of it Reason therein adduced: But
the Argument to prove the second part, he has never mentioned, as being too
hot for his fingers, Which is this following. Apol: page 44.

That which is not the Rule of my faith in believing the Scriptures themselves,
is not the Adequat Primary Rule of Faith and Manners.

But the Scriptures are not nor can be the Rule of that Paith by which I
believe them, etc: Therefore, etc: This he has taken no nottice of: But gives
us a long Citation out of R: B: his Vindication, page 37. And then tells us the
Coherence will be made out Ad Calendas Graecas; As if it were the Custom when
Men publish Theses to set down in the Body of them, all the Arguments to prove
them. But seeing he will have a Coherence, let him take it thus. The Scriptures
are not the Fountain, but a Declaration of the Founta in, and when the streams
fail, men use to recurr to the Fountain; Therefore when the Scriptures cannot
resolve the doubts which ordinarily arise among Christians, They ought to recurr
to the Fountain. That this has been the practice of the Saints in all ages is
manifest from the Scripture, I shall instance one or two with diverse before
cited. That Divid was a Man of GOD, and Knew the Scriptures; I hope mine
Adversary will not deny, and that he had Abiathar the Priest with him, to help
him to the right sense of them (if need were) when he was at Keilab; Yet he was
necessitate to recurr to the Fountain, and enquire of the Lord: Will Saul come
down? And will the Man of Keilab ver me up unto him, 1 Samuel: 23 9, 10, 11, 12
And again at Zigl^g when the people were like to stone him; Did he not then
enquire of the LORD, 1 Samuel* 30. 8 And I would willingly know what the
Presbyterians means by seeking the LORD in theit straits, except it be to ask
his Counsel when all other means fail them: Hence all his boast evanisheth

Next he challenges his Adversary, as confounding the principal Rule and
Original Ground, together calling it Nonesense, ridiculous, and nothing to the
purpose; But he should have remembered that in page 46. He has cited Ephesians: 2.
20. To prove the Scripture to be the Foundation, and all along calls them the
Principal Rule: If this be sense, so the other.

Sanum Reprensor debet habere Caput. In page 64. He comes to beg the Question
in terminis, and tells us positively, The Scriptures are the Primary Rule, And
Concludes, Thus we understand the Primarie Rule, and while he does not so, ho
but mistaketh the Question. This indeed is imperious Logic, and more becoming
a Grecian Hero then a Presbyterion Priest; But he must Know that the word
Primary is out of doors. As it signifies First, And before he give it another
signification, he will need to alter all the Lexicons I have yet seen, For
there was a Rule of Faith before there was a Book in the World; And therefore
the Scriptures cannot be the Primary Rule.

Next he comes to his Acyrologie, to let us know he has studied Rhetoric:
Saying, to call a Person of Rule, is a great Inductive of Confusion, But to
call GOD and Christ the habits of Grace (as the does in page 38) is a far more
improper speech.

Then he cites R. B's words in answer to J: Brown, but not fully, and draws
his consequences from them; the words are these. For I was never so absurd, as
to call GOD simply considered, or the Spirit of GOD ( in obstracto) (but as
imprinting Truths to be believed and obeyed in men's hearts, not contrary, but
according to Scripture, for he cannot contradict himself the Rule of
Christians.

From hence he deduceth two Conclusions, First, that the Quakers Grand
principle, that Immediate objective Revelations are the primary Rule of their
faith, falls to the ground; And that these Imprinted truths are but
secondary. But who sees not deceit and malice in this consequence? Certainly
he must fear his cause, when he takes such weak Pillars to underprop it: For
any man of candor may see that R: B: intends only to prove that truths
Imprinted, and not the Imprinter to be the Rule, And he consesseth it to be one
Acylogie, or improper speech. And to conclude the Ruin of his Adversaries
cause from one improper speech, is either great folly or great malice, so that
his Antecedent being tightly understood according to the Authors sense, his
consequence together will all he has deduced from it, is a mere Non-sequitur.

His other Consequence depending upon the first falls with it: Only he has
been assert that these Revelations are self evident, and that to assert
otherwise were impious, And (a little after) to judge that the GOD of Truth
may prove the liar; and deceive us! Well then Patroclus, it seems there are
yet such Revelations by thine own consession, as are self evident, which we may
take notice of in due time.

He proceeds, saying, There is very good reason to wonder why any Revelation
should be more primarie then the Scriptures, both being given by the same
spirit, seeing the primariness is not the immediateness, but the thief binding
power, and the prerogative to be the Touchstone of all doctrines? But who
denies this prerogative to the Scriptures, of being a Rule to try all
Doctrines of Men how holy so ever? Have not his Adversaries granted all this
times? And what then, I hope to believe this proposition is an Act of Faith no
where mentioned in Scripture, neither is it self evident, and therefore needs
a Rule: Yea more, the scriptures of the New Testament make mention of a Rule
only three times, to wit. 2 Cor. 10. 15, 16. Gal. 6. 16. and Phil. 3. 16. And
if Patroclus with all his prudence and wisdom comparing Scripture with
Scripture, can twist and twine a sense out of these Scriptures to prove his
matter, he may boast of it.

Next, he cites 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. in these words, they are able to make the man
of GOD wise unto salvation. But whether there be such words there, let the
Reader judge; Then he plainly shows us what he intends, and it is the book in
the determination of which we ought finally and surely to rest, etc.

If this be true, then certainly the Tennor of the New Covenant is made void,
and they who lived under the Law had a rea. dier access unto GOD, and to know
His Mind then they who live under the Gospel.

And yet the difference is evident, for as the Law was an outward Rule written
by Moses, the outward Leader of outward Israel; so CHRIST the SpiritualLeader
of Spiritual Israel writteth His Spiritual Law in the heart.

I shall add one argument thus, That which was a Rule to the Faith-makers at
Westminster in composing their form of Faith, and imposing it upon the Nations,
may serve to be a Rule to the present Presbyterian Churehes.

But their thinking it in their consciences to be truth, was their Rule. Ergo,
etc.

The Major I hope they will not deny, and the Minor is proven by the Oath taken
by every Member at his entrance, which was as follows,

Die Jovis 6: of July 1643.
I A: B: do seriously and solemnlie protest in the presence of Almighty GOD,
That (in this Assembly whereof I am a Member) I will not maintain any thing in
matters of Doctrine, but what I think in my conscience to be Truth, Or in point
of Discipline, but what I shall conecive to conduce most to the Glory of GOD,
and to the Good and Peace of the Church.

Hence it is evident, That their Conscience was their Rule; But how it was
instructed to discern Truth from Error, whether by the Divine Spirit or by
Humane Prudence and Wisdom, let Patroclus choose, And to help him in his
Election, he may consult his Brother, the Author of Melius Inquirendum: who a
little after he has told him, that his ultimate Rule is a monster, Tells him
also, That nothing can possibly interpose between the Authority of GOD and
the conscience, and that its dictates are uncontrollable.

Next, he tells us, That all men have not Divine immediate objective
Revelations by which they may examine and diseern good from evil: But the
Scripture says not, that men are condemned for want of Light, But because
Light i^ come into the World, but Men love dar^ness rather than light. And
also, that the Grace of GOD which brings Salvation has appeared to all men.

He closes up this Number, accusing R: B: for confounding the principal Rule,
and the principal Leader; but these are his Ac^rologian mistakes, and not his
Adversaries confusion: For any man not maliciously biased, may see that he
intends no more, but that the Truths Revealed or Imprinted by the Spirit are
the Rule, and the Spirit Revealing is the Leader; as he explains himself in the
beginning of page 39: saying, that Commands as they are Imprinted upon the
Soul, that is the Law written in the heart by the Spirit, is more primarie and
principally the Rule than the Scriptures, some things written and received
only from another. This he has maliciously passed by, together with the
Question following, which he could not answer, so that his confidence or
impudence and metaphisi^al formalities return upon his own head.

In page 67: He comes to the interpreter of Scripture, where he intertains us
with a dish of Rhetoric, like that of hi^ Brother Mackquair, the Arch-scold,
saying, The Quakers well knowing, That if GOD speaking in the holy Scriptures
be admited judge of the present debates between us and them, or if the Holy
scripture be not ^steemed false, ambiguous, and nonsenfical; then their cause
is lost.

What more malicious and wicked falsehood could the Father of Lies have devised
against a poor innocent People, who from their Hearts abhore any such thought,
concerning the Scriptures, as to esteem them false, ambiguous and nonsensical:
Or what end could this ^nic^ed Liar propose to himself in asserting such a
gross untruth? Except it be to raise their Beloved Refo^me^s the Rabble, to
stone us! as two of our Friends lately at Glasgow, had almost been stoned to
Death by them.

But, he says, The Quakers well knowing, etc. If this were true. we were as
great Hypocrites as the Faith-makers at Westminster: Who in chap: 23: numb: 4:
of their Confession, say, Infidelity or Difference of Religion does not make
void the Magistrates just and legal Authority; nor free the People from their
due Obedience to him; While in the mean time they were actually in arms against
their Lawful King, a Pious as well as Protestant Prince. Now the Faith-makers
cite Scripture for the first, and the whole party can cite Scripture for the
second: So let the Reader Judge who it is that tenders the Scripture ^alse,
ambiguous, or nonesensical. Wherefore he should have said, If the Spirit of
GOD, which dictated the Scriptures, be the only true Interpreter of Scripture,
then certainly the Good old Cause is utterly lost.

As for his phrase, GOD speaking in the Scriptures, and a little after, The
Spirit of GOD speaking in the Scriptures; It is an Acyrologie which will need a
Commentary: For that GOD spoke the Scriptures to the Prophets and Apostles who
wrote them, and that he speaks them now to his Servants in their Hearts at
times to their great comfort, is confessed; But that he speaks in the Scripture
is a phrase hard to be understood, and in effect, a mere sham to amuse his
Reader. As for example, When Patro^lus stepeth up into his Pulpit, and reads
a sentence of Scripture, which may be somewhat obscure, As this my Body, He
begines to give us the Interpretation of the Popish Doctors, then of the
Lutherian, and lastly of the Calvinist Doctors; Which last he asserts to be the
genuine sense of the Text.

Now I would willingly know, whethe^ it be GOD or Man that speaks here; The
First, he would be afraid of as Enthusiastiok. And if the Second, What becomes
of his Phrase, GOD speaking in the Scriptures? So the Reader may see, That it
is a mere humane device to keep up a sordid Trade (for by this Trade they have
their Living, as the Silver Smiths had) of making Merchandise of Souls for
filthy Luere sake.

But let the Reader know, That we fully own the Spirit of GOD, which gave
forth the Scriptures to be his own Interpreter, neither do we deny the use of
Lawful Means, such as Reading, Meditation, Prayer, and waiting to know the Mind
of the LORD in the Seriptures, as many of our Friends have published to the
World. So that all which this malicious Man has said in six pages following,
falls to the ground, being built upon no one solid Argument.

But I shall take notice of some of them; And First, He cites George Keith,
Saying, We may well reject all their Interpretations of Scripture; seeing they
pretend not to the Spirit that gave them forth, but declare themselves Enemies
to it.

To this he Answers, Behold Reader, The grossest of Popish shifts to defend
the grossest of Popish Doctrine. Answer, If this be true, then Patroclus is a
great Liar; For in page 32. he says, The Papists have gone too low, resolving
their Faith ultimatly in Men; The Quakers on the other hand attempting to go
too high, have contracted a Vertigo: And in that foregoing page, places
themselves in the middle. So that by his own confession he must be nearer a kin
to the Papists then we. And in good earnest, any who are acquainted well with
their Principles and Practices, will find the Difference nothing but Pretense.
For as the Popish Doctors are the Makers and Rulers of the Popish Faith; so the
Presbyterian Doctors are the Makers and Rulers of the Presbyterian Faith, and
no less angry persecuters of all Dissenters then the Papists. Only (Blessed be
the LORD) they have not such power.

As for his saying, We charge all the Reformed Churches as Enemies to the
Spirit of GOD, because they try all Doctrines and Practices by the Scriptures.

This contains two Lies; First, That we condemn all the Resormed Churches; For
R: B: has cited severals of them who are of his Judgment, and more may be
cited in its place. And Secondly, The Reasou is a gross Lie; For we always
owned, That all Doctrines and Practices of Men were to be tried by the
Scriptures.

Next he says, Hence we find, That the spirit of the Quakers is Diametrically
opposite is the scriptures, and therefore the spirit of lies and delusion:
Whence I pray thee Patroelus? Because we reject private Presbyterion
Interpretations; Which are but Man's wit and work: This Consequence will be made
out (as thou say) ad Kalendas Graecas. When in a vapouring humor he gives
a Latin phrase, and makes us Ghosts and Hobgoblins; But he has not yet
fallen upon the right spell to conjureus, except it be his cutting our Juglar
Veins, which he yet wants power, tho not will to do.

His next os any weight is, That from our denying their Interpretations; It
follows, That our Saviovr labored invain, when he proved the Resurrection of
the Dead from the scriptures: But he might have considered, that he was GOD as
well as Man who spoke there, and that his Word was sufficient.

Secondly, That this Scripture was an Argument ad bominem to the Sadducees who
believed Moses Law better then Christ.

Thirdly, The Consequence will be very gross, That because Christ who had the
Spirit above measure, proved an Article of Faith by Scripture; Therefore every
Presbyterian Priest pedant may by his own natural and acquired parts, without
the Spirit interpret Scripture. But there is at present too great contraversie
which seems to bring a fiery brand in the tail of it, like to destroy all that
is profitable or beautysul in the Nation (as it has once already done) and to
hazard the lives and estates of many well meaning men and good Patriots; That
is, whether there be any difference betwixt the office of a Bishop and a
Presbyter in the Church? Now if our Author can decide this contraversie by
Scripture to the silence of the Malignants, as our Savior did the Saddusees,
he will do better service to his Native Country, then by all his weak and
deceitful wranglings against the poor Quakers, who are not compeating with him
for the Chair.

But his next consequence is very odd; Yea says he, if this Doctrine be true:
A man does not sin if he worship the Grocodale; lbis, Dog, or Cat, with the old
Egyptians: Yea, a man may believe or do whatsoever comes in his Brain, etc.

First,' This Doctrine that the Spirit of GOD is the only true interpreter of
Scripture can bring no such consequence along with it; For GOD never taught a
man to commit Idolatry, and to say that a general prohibation is not binding
upon a man because his name is not in it, is rediculous, and no man that I
know, ever thought it. But Secondly, If his consequence be true, then no
Idolater sinned before Moses Law was written; Yea (according to our Author) the
Egyptians he speaks of did not sin: For if they had, no inward Law, sure they
had no outward Law; And ( borresco referens!) the old World sinned not to
deserve the Flood, because they had no written Law, nor any Presbyterian Priest
to interperate scripture. Next he says we deny all Commentaries and
expofitions of scripture; He should have added which are merely man's work
without the Spirit of Christ, if he will not be accounted a liar.

Then he charge R: B: for laying that the Holy Ghost is not a distinct Person
of the Trinity.

I shall set down R: B's: own words that the Reader may see how fairly he deals
with R: B: Thus, I desire to know of him in what Scripture he finds these
words, that the Spirit is a diltinct Person of the Trinity; For I freely
acknowledge according to the Scripture, that the Spirit of GOD proceed eth from
the Father and the Son, and is GOD: And then asks him whether any has reason
to think he truly makes the Scripture the Rule of his Faith (notwithstanding
his pretense) when he either will not, or cannot find words in it to express
the chief Articles of his Creed And now whether R: B: has not fully confessed
the the Mystrie, and only denied words of man's invention, let the Reader judge.

Next he challenges him for taking the words, 1 John 2. 27. At the first
sound, and without any explication, but he has no leisure to give us any
explication, nor to disprove what he said from the words; But concludes thus,
So that what ever they say, or can say to liberate their doctrine from this
most weighty, but just charge they shall only twist contradictions the faster.

This is a great blow from a Grecian Gallant, but has not the weight of a
Fear there: For we own the scripture for a Rule, and the best outward Rule in
the World, and yet disown the Presbyterian expositions, and Commentaries on
them, so long as they deny the assistance of the Holy Spirit in the work. And
whereas he challenges us for not writing Commentaries; The World is so
overloaded with Commentaries of Man's making, each almost contradicting another
upon the same text; that we think it best to let Patroclus abound in his own
sense, till GOD reveal that also unto him, Phil. 3. 15.

After this for about a page, he does nothing but rail and rove at randum, as
if Patroelus like he had the Trojans in chase, and were upon execution; And to
sum up his Victory, he concludes us Bapists, because forsooth, we deny the
Scriptures to be the principal Rule of Faith and (...), and the chief Judge of
contraversies.

Answer: First, He has need here of some of his Metaphisical formalities to
distinguish betwixt the Rule or Law, and the Judge, But this we may expect
next: The Reason he gives is, because our Arguments (as he alleges) conclude
with theirs, and instanceth that of Revel: 22: 18: compared with Deuteronomy: 4: 2:
but has brought nothing to disprove the inference; Only telling us, to this
purpose may Bellarmine answer, and the rest of the Jesuits: But the difference
lies here, the Papists would thereby set up the Roman Church and unwritten
Traditions to be the primary rule; But we the Teachings of the Spirit of
CHRIST: so that according to patroclus own words, in page 32, we differ as far
as Heaven and Earth; And he has chosen a middle place for himself and his
Brethren, in which of the Limbos he may tell us next: And let this suffice to
answer all his Rovings to the end of the Chapter.

Chapter II. of Immediate Revelation.
HE begins this Chapter with an h^dgpodg of railing lies, nonsense and
contradictions; such as a man pretending to sense and Learning may be ashamed
of, if his desperate malice had not blinded him; Whereby he seeks to bespatter
and blaken the Quakers, so as so render them the object of the Magistrates
severity, Or expose them to the rage of his beloved Reformers, the Rabble. For,
First, he says, they have rejected the guidance of the Spirit of GOD, adding
his wonted phrase, speaking in the Scriptures. But if I shall ask him, Does GOD
now-a-dayes speak at all to his Church? He would readily answer me, No: And
within four pages, he labors to prove, that GOD has spoke his last words to
his Church; Which is also clear from their Confession of Faith, chap: 1: so
that as is said before, this phrase is a mere cheat.

Secondly, he says, We have most impiously and self-deceiving lie given up our
selves to the guidance of some Thing, which they call the Spirit of GOD, as we
have heard. Here he falsely insinuates, That we give up our selves to the
guidance of some Thing, which is not the Spirit of GOD, which is a gross
untruth: For GOD knows, and our Consciences bear us witness, that we own no
other Spirit but the same, which Christ promised to His followers, John 14. 16.
I shall pray the Father, and be shall give you another Comforter, that be may
abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot
receive; because it sees Him not, neither knows Him; But ye know him, for he
dwells with you, and shall be in ^on; And Verse. 26. But the Comforter which
is the Holy Ghost, Whom the Father will send in my Name, He shall teach you all
things; And 15 Ch: 26. 8. and 16. 17, 18. The Comforter who will reprove the
World of sin, etc.

This is that Spirit of Truth, To whose Guidance we have given, and do give up
our selves; And if he mean any other thing, he is a wicked Slanderer and
Callumniator.

Next he adds, And again in contradiction to this, the Soul of CHRIST Extended
and Dilated

This is a part of George Keiths Book, called, The way cast up; To which book
he promises an Answer: But the Man is able, and can answer for himself against
all the Presbyterian Priests in Scotland.

Then he says, But most frequently, they call it the Light within, or simply,
the Spirit. And it not this Scripture Language. GOD who commanded Light to
shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts: And was not this the Apostles
Message, that GOD is Light, And how frequently is the Holy Ghost in scripture
called simply the Spirit without any addition?

But he adds to which Spirit GOD himself speaking in the Scriptures must (...),
obey the same. This blasphemous Gibberish, being the invention of his own brain
deserves no answer; But may well be added to the Presbyterian Eloquence at the
next impression. But I pass by the rest of his railing, and come to his defense
of his Brother John Browns Argument, which is this; If since the Apostles fell
a sleep, and the Cannon of the Scripture was closed; All that have pretended to
immediate Revelation as a Primary Rule, have been led by a Spirit of error,
then it is not the way of CHRIST.

But the former is true, etc. Ergo, etc.

To which R: B: has answered, and our Author accepts his answer, and changes
the argument thus.

If since the Apostles, whose names are mentioned in Scripture fell a sleep,
and John wrote the Revelation, all that pretended to this Kind of Revelation
have been led by a spirit of error; Then this is not the wayof Christ: But the
former is true. Ergo, etc.

And now he thinks there can be no exception against his argument, but that
it will certainly do his business, yet is he like to be mistaken.

For first his argument seems to insinuate that before the Apostles fell a
sleep, immediate Revelation was the Primary Rule, and if it was so, it
continues to be so yet, by his own former Concessions: For GOD has not changed
his Rule; so that if he makes his argument to speak to the purpose, he must say
thus, all who pretended to this kind of Revelation, as well before as since the
Apostles fell a sleep were led by a Spirit of error, which I think he would be
loath to affirm.

Secondly, He will gain very little tho I grant his argument in terminis, for I
have as little kindness, for pretenders as he has or can have; and do readily
grant that all who pretend to this kind of Revelations and have them not, are
led by a Spirit of error, as well as that all Presbyterians who pretend to the
Scriptures for their Rule, and do not frame their Faith and manners according
to them, are Hipocrites, and are led by a spirit of error* So that except his
Argument say, all who have been led really and truly by the Spirit of Truth
(of whom Christ promised that he should teach them all things, and lead into
all truth) were led by a Spirit of error: He does but ^eat the air, and fight
with his own shadow; For we have had pretenders amongstus whom we have denied
and rejected. And what he brings concerning the corruptions of men, we deny
not: For as men of Corrupt minds may pretend to the Scriptures, so they may
pretend to the Spirit, but the LORD has always hitherto given his Church a
spirit of discerning, whereby such pretenders have been detected, rejected, and
denied.

And did not Zede^iah the Son of Chenaanah pretend to the Spirit, with as much
confidence as Mieajah, 1 King: 22. 24. When he smote Micajah, and said, Which
way went the Spirit of the LORD from me to speak unto thee? Will it follow from
hence, That Micajah was led by a spirit of error, because Zedekiah pretended
to the same spirit? Or that the Presbyterians are led by a spirit of error;
Because the Lutherians, Anabaptists, Independants, and Arminians, pretend to
the same Rule with them? So as the Scriptures may be wrested to the
condemnation of the Wresters; Our Author must confess that he needs a Guide to
tell him when he goes astray.

And whereas he cites some called Quakers, who have erred (whether truly or
falsely I know not) I will bring him ten for one among the Presbyterians: Yea
and the greatest part of the Presbyterian Ministry of Scotland about the year
1661, foully deserted the good old cause, and yet no less pretend to the
Scriptures for their Rule then they had formerly done.

He falls next to prove, that there is no Consanguinity betwixt the Jesuits
argument to Jo: Menzies, and this of J: B: But let the Reader consider whether
both Arguments terminate in the same thing; For the Jesuits presses J: M: to
produce his Grounds and Principles; And our Author in page 78* says his
Argument is demonstrative, except his Adversary can produce any Instance to the
contrary; And if this be no Consanguinity, let the Reader judge. And whereas he
turns over the Jesuits Argument, he might well have expected that the
Jesuit would and might have said so of the Presbyterians in Scotland, who have
fallen into palpable errors, and have felt heavy Judgments; Notwithstanding
of all their pretenses to the Scriptures for their Rule: For their work of
Deformation (falsely by them called Reformation) began with the Sword, raged
with the Pestilence, and sickned with the famine; And was at last utterly
destroyed By (...) of their own Brood. O: C:

But the Man will so far exceed J: M: That he tells us; How easy had it been
to have adduced whole Vollumns; whereas I believe J: M: was much abler to deall
with his Antagonist, then our Frothie Au. hoc with all his Grecian sophistry.

A little after he takes all the Christian World upon his side. Yea,
Christian, and Antichristian, Papists, Protestants and Greeks, (tho in his
Epistle to the Reader, he calls the Lutherians their capital Enemies) certainly
Patroclus has made a notable Multer against the Quakers, if all were true, But
(I pray him) whence come all these divisions, if ye be all of one mind? I
wonder how a Man in his Wit^s could talk at this rate.

Next after a piece of Froathie Triumph, he says, I answer directly to the
Jesuit and the Quaker his Patron; If we may Believe the ablest and fiercest of
our Adversaries; Such as Bellarmine, Contaren, Salmeron, the chief of the
Doctrine which we hold in opposition to Popery, are most agreeable to the true
sense of Scripture.

Answer, If I had thought so, as he alleges upon these Doctors; To wit, That
the true sense of the (...) had been upon the Presbyterian side, in their
Contraversie with us, I should never have opposed them; For sure I am, GOD
cannot contradict Himself. And I would willingly learn from Patroelus, upon
what ground they could burn Protestants, when they believed the true sense of
the scriptures to be on their side: Neither can I believe the Papists are so
gross, as to believe the first and practice the second: For I suppose the
greatest difference betwixt the Presbyterians and Papists, and all their other
Opposers; is about the true sense of the Scripture: And therefore he raveth,
when he calls R. B: the Jesuits patron; For I am certain that he neither
believed you nor the Jesuits to have the true sense of the Scriptures; And so
his direct Answer comes to a direct nothing to the purpose.

To R: B^* Third Answer, Viz: That George Wishart and John Huss had Immediate
Revelation, etc: He replyeth, That R: B: grants, They did not pretend to them
as the ground of their Faith and Obedience in all Matters of Faith, Worship,
and Doctrine. But certainly they did it in some Matters, for none of them could
pretend to an outward call to preach the Protestant Doctrine and Worship; And
yet they both preached it, and I believe upon a better Ground than a
Presbyterian Call. But however, our Author does not deny that these Men had
Immediate Revelation; And consequently his serious Truth absurdly affirmed by
James Durbame; Viz: That Christ has spoke his last words to his Church, is a
fabulous untruth.

Next, he falls again upon James Naylor; And because R: B: says, He repented
again, our Author draws a Noble Consequence from it, thus, Which Answer is an
evident Confirmation of what we plead for, To wit, That the Quakers spirit is
ready to give them the cheat and deceive them; For I believe J: N: acted but
according to his Light, etc. This is just as much as to say, he that sins
against the Law of GOD and repents, he evidently confirms that the Law of
GOD has given him the cheat and deceived him, Absit Blasphemia.

And further, About the beginning of the Covenant, your Ministers had sworn
Canonical Obedience to their Ordinaries; Then they swore the Extirpation of
them and their Office. And about twenty years after, swore again Canonical
Obedience; In all which Three contrary Oaths, they pretended the Scripture for
their Rule. Was it therefore the Scripture which gave them the cheat and
deceived them? No surely. So James Nayler sinned against his Light; and the Law
of GOD in his heart, and Repented and confessed, he had sinned against his
Light, and condemned himself under his hand, (tho this malicious man insinuates
the contrary) which I doubt he can say of few of his Brethren, who perjured
themselves in taking the Covenant.

From what has been said, he draws three Consequences, first, his serious
truth before mentioned, to wit, That CHRIST has spoken his last words to his
Church; And to help his Brother out of this Quagmire, he adds, That is put a
close to these writtings which were to be a Rule to the whole Church; being
ashamed to deny, that there were immediate Divine Revelations after the
Writting of the Revelation, being so much testified to in Church History: And
themselves having called Samuel Rutherfoord a great Seer, much upon his Masters
secreets. But how will he deal with his Brother Jurieu, who in his account of
the Shepherdess of Daphine, comes very near to assure us of an age at hand,
Wherein we shall have Men divinely inspired, v^a, and able to work Miracles;
And in his Book upon the Revelation, tells us, That the first Reformation begun
by Luther; (which he calls the Harvest) was carried on by the Ministry of Men;
But the second which is yet to come, he calls the Vintage, and says, It will
be by the Inspiration of GOD; And in his Characters of the Kingdom of CHRIST,
he gives for one of them, That there shall be a plentiful pouring out of the
Spirit, whereof (he says) That which the Apostles received at Jerusalem was
but a Type.

I could instance many others, some who have had it, and others who have
foretold of it; But this being a Modern Writer, a Calvinist, and a Sufferer,
well esteemed of by all protestants, I thought might suffice to show, that all
the Calvinists believe not this serious Truth, as he call it.

His two following Consequences deduced from his Argument formerly answered and
Refuted, are of no force; For (blessed be the LORD) we can instance Thousands
who neither have fallen into palpable Errors, nor open Blasphemy; Nor have
marks of GOD's heavy Judgments, but have lived and died in Favor with GOD and
Good Men, tho persecuted by the Presbyterians and Independents their Brethren;
By whose unjust Judgment some of them have been put to cruel death.

His third Consequence being a mere windy bauble, deserves no answer.

His second Argument is, Moses and the Prophets, CHRIST and the Apostles, and
all the Holy Men that were Inspired by GOD t^ Compile a Rule of Faith and Life,
etc Could by infallible Evidence and infallible Proofs, even to the Conviction
and self Condemnation of the greatest Opposers, demonstrat that they were sent
of GOD, But nothing of this kind Quakers can do; yea they are so far from it;
that they can bring no more Evidence or Credentialls for their Rule of Faith or
pretended Revelation, then the most wicked Enthusiasts: As for example John of
Layden, and his Followers, etc.

To this Argument he sers down R. B's. Answer, but slily omitteth what
follows, which is, And therefore most weak is his Reasoning in page 461, That
such Revelations cannot be more sure then the Scriptures, which are the
Objective Revelations of the Apostles written down, since the certainty of
these Writtings depends upon the certainty of these Revelations by which they
were written: And if any case that Maxim of the Schools hold, it must in this;
Propter quod unum quodque est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale. And this may
serve to answer his talk of a chief binding power, and prerogative to be the
Touchstone of all Doctrines: For if they be so, it is because they were
Divinely inspired; And therefore Divine Inspirations must be much more so. But
let us consider his Argument.

First, He says, The Prophets and Apostles, (for Christ wrote no Scripture)
could by infallible Evidence and proofs, even to the conviction and self
condemnation of the greatest Opposets demonstrate, that they were sent of GOD;
but whence came it then that their greatest Opposers did not receive their
Testimony? Why did they persecur them even to death? As their Successors the
Presb^terians and their Brethren the Independents have done to some of us? Was
it not because they were not convinced that they were sent of GOD? Or was it
because they maliciously hardened their hearts, and would not believe it? The
same is the case with our Author, and his Brethren at this day. But perhaps he
expects miracles for Proofs and Evidences; And in this follows the
footstepts of his predecestors the Papists, who dealth so by the first
Reformers: And the same Answer the first Reformers gave to the Papists may
serve him: For as they said, They needed not Miracles because they preached not
a New Gospel: So we pretend not Revelations of New Things, But a New Revelation
of the Good old things: And again what can he pretend to that we want? He has
produced nothing: Only in page 81, He says on the other hand. It is beyond
denial, that we have the Scriptures: And is it not as true that we have them?
But the Question is, Who has the true sense of them? The Papists say, They are
the only true Infallible Proponders: J: B: and our Author say, Christian
prudence and Wisdom, comparing the Text with the Text; And we say, The Holy
Spirit, who gave them forth, is the only Right Interpreter. Et ad buc sub
judice lis est.

But he falls upon R: Barkclay, for saying, That others pretending to be led by
the Scriptures as their Rule, as much as J: B: have been deceived. To which he
answers, If the Scriptures, through the corruption of men may be wrested and
abused to the patrocinic of errors and corrupt practices; Then although men
clearly understand and firmly believe them, and square their Life exactly
according to them: Yet they are no more able to be a Rule to them, then these
Revelations can be which Jobn of Leyden held.

This he says is the first proposition into which R: B's. Argument resolves;
And the second is no better then this, Viz: He that will not admit of such
Revelations which cannot be distinguished from these that led their followers
into the most blasphemous opinions and most wicked practices immaginable; He
who will not admit of them for his Principal Rule, but prefers unto them the
Scriptures, etc: Provideth an Argument for Atheists and Scepticks.

Answer, Could the Devil himself in his most cunning subtle transformings.
have more deceitfully and dissingenuously represented this sober and discreet
Answer of R: B: But it seems the man is past all shame: For first, He insinuats
that R: B: says, That men firmly believing and clearly understanding the
Scriptures, and squaring their practice exactly conform to them, may err as did
John of Leyden. Secondly, That he ownes the Revelations which John of Leyden
pretended to to be a Rule. And thirdly, That he denies the Scriptures to be a
Rule. All which three are gross and notorious Lies, unworthy of a man of any
Candor or Honesty.

His second Proposition is drawn from these words of R: B: And indeed this is a
fine Argument he has produced for Scepticks and Atheists, for it renders all
Faith, even that of the Patriarchs uncertain: For since their ground and
warrant for writing the Scripture was in his own account, Inward, Immediate, and
extraordinary Revelation: And if such be, as he affirms, uncertain, then the
Truth of the Scriptures which depends upon such, must necessarly be uncertain.
Now the man certainly knew that R: B: was pleading for none other Revelation,
but Divine, Inward, and Immediate Revelations: But being straightened by this
Answer, he betakes himself to the covers of Deceit, and the refuge of Lies for
his Reply instead of the Revelation of the Spirit of GOD (which he knew his
Adversary meant) he puts in the Revelations of Jobn of Leyden; Which impudent
treachery is obvious to Reader at first view.

Hence he might conclude, That because Micajah wrought no Miracles to prove his
prophecy more then the Priests of Achab did, therefore he was not to be
believed: And because Jobn Huss, George Wishart, and Samuel Rutherfoord,
wrought to Miracles; Therefore they were no more to be trusted then Jobn of
Leyden; For Miracles only excepted, I know no proofs he can lay claim to, but
we can do the same.

But the best is, That in page 80, he would father these Deductions upon his
Adversary; Saying, And now Reader, speak thy mind in good earnest; Think
thou that this man was in his Wit, or to be numbered among Rationals, when he
made these Deductions, etc. Truly he is very weak Reader, That sees not this
man's affronted deceit; And seeing the Deductions are entirely his own and none
of R: B's: He must (by his own Confession) be numbered among Brutes: And whereas
he says, That J: B: never called the Revelations of the Prophets uncertain; He
should have told what has made Divine Revelation uncertain now, which he
cannot; Or have proven that it is altogether ceased, which he dare not
undertake, tho it be an Article of his Faith. And thus by denying the certainty
of Divine Revelations (for R: B: pleads for none else) let the Reader judge if
lie have not labored to confirm his Brothers Atgument for Atheists and
Seepticks.

In page 81. He thinks to put an end to the contraversie by some positions,
whereof the first is to this purpose; We cannot know whether they have any
Revelation at all, They may be lyeing unto us: For any thing we know, we have
only their naked words for it; whereas on the other hand, it is beyond denial
that we have the Scriptures.

This had been very suitable language for their predecestors, The Jews when
they stoned the Proto-Martyr Stephen, Acts 7. 56. When he said, Behold I see
the Heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing on the Right Hand of GOD; And
for Joash the King, when he caused Zachariah to be stoned to Death, and for
Achab to Mieajab, and many other of the Prophets who wrought no Miracles to
prove their Mission; But Christ's sheep bear his voice, and know it from the
voice of a stranger, whom they will not follow; Tho ravenous Wolves in Sheeps
clothing, neither can not will believe it to be his voice: And whereas he
says, it is beyond denial that we have the Scriptures; Is it not beyond
denial, that we have them also? Or do any who profess Christianity want them?
Or what Advantage have they by them, which others have not; Except it be to
make a sordid Tarde of selling their Interpretations of them. So that we dare
attempt the Retortion very easily, thus the Lutherians, Independants, Baptists,
Socinians, and Arminians, etc: had the Scriptures as well as the Presbyterians
have them; So that the Controversy is only, Who have the true sense of them,
each party pretending to it. And now I ask him, what infallible Signs,
Evidences, and Proofs can he give, to the conviction and self condemnation of
the greatest Opposers (as he words it) to demonstrate that the Presbyterians
and none else have the true sense of the Scriptures? Which till he do, the
retortion stands good.

But to take his words as they lie, I can compare them to nothing better then
to the words of the Pharisees, Joh: 9. 29. We know that GOD spoke by Moses, as
for this fellow, we know not from whence be is.

His second is, It being given, that they have Revelations of some kind; From
whence are they? From Heaven? Their own fancy, or from hell?

Answer, We plead for no Revelations, but such as are Divine; And therefore, as
his Question is blasphemous, so it is no less impertinent then to say; It being
given that Patroelus is a Man, from whence is he? Whether the son of a Man, or
a horse, or of a mad Dog? But he proves they are not from Heaven, because they
are common to all men; Yet, Bonum quo communius co melius, Christ has
enlightened every man coming into the World, and GOD is just, He never punished
a man for breach of a Law, which he never made known to him.

Thirdly he says, If they have Divine Revelations, we know not for what end
they are given; Whether to be a principal Rule or not, whether by their own
corruptions they do not wrest and misunderstand them; Or if they walk according
to them? Nothing of which can be said of the Scriptures.

Answer first, For what end they are given, Job: 14. 26. To teach you all
things. And 16. 13. He will guide you into all Truth: And that they are the
principal Rule, is sufficiently proved before. The second part is an impudent
self contradiction, where he says, That wresting or misunderstanding, through
corruption cannot be said of the Scriptures: Whereas he has frequently covered
himself before, with saying, in the very foregoing page next save one, That the
Scriptures, through man's corruption are subject to abuse, never man denied;
Thus goes he backward and foreward. And Thirdly, He says, They know not if we
walk according to them: But we well know, that they walk not according to the
Scriptures; And it is strange with what impudency the man can obtrude such
sayings upon the World. He would insinuate in page 79. That they squared their
practice exactly according to the Scriptures, and here he would have us walk
according to Divine Revelation: Whereas they have told the World in their
Larger Catechism; That no man is able to keep GOD's Commands by any Grace
received in this Life. Then he gives us the reason of his Ignorance thus; For
we can hear nothing nor see nothing, etc: Who can help his spiritual deasness
and blindness? None but the Spiritual Physician of Souls whom he is rejecting.

In page 82. He comes to the Judge of contraversy; where he labors to prove
two things, Viz: That the Spirit of God cannot be a Judge of Contraversy; And
that the Scriptures are apt to be a Judge of Contraversy; Which he dares not to
say absolutely, but for removal of differences about things contained in them.

The Reason he gives is, Because two different parties may both of them adduce
Revelations to prove contradictory assertions; And that the one of them cannot
evince his Revelations to be from GOD, more then the other. This is the
substance of what he says against the Spirit, and for the Scriptures he says
thus: Now, this Argument can in no ways be retorted on the Scriptures; For tho
there has been, through the corruption of men, wresting of Scripture in any
Contraversy; And that even among these who assert the Scripture to be the
Principal Rule of Faith and Manners; Yet, who can say, That this is through
default of the Scriptures; seeing our Adversarys cannot deny, but that they
speak both sense and Truth, etc: And a little after, so that there shall follow
a mutual agreement betwixt the two dissenting parties, etc.

First, Let the Reader observe his self* contradiction, Saying, The Scriptures
may be wrested by the corruption of men; And yet in page 81. He says, Nothing
of this can be said of the Scriptures.

Secondly, That be confesses (because he cannot deny it) that there have been
(and yet are) wresting of Scriptures, and many Contraversies even among such as
assert the Scriptures to be the principal Rule of Faith and Manners; And
therefore it is evident, that his conclusion falls, Viz: so that there shall
follow a mutual agreement betwixt the two dissenting parties; For this
agreement has neither followed, nor is like to follow by all his endeavors.

And Thirdly, The Scriptures can never give a sentence, being but a Law; And
every Law needs a Judge to determine. But the matter is in plain terms, we must
admit the General Assembly to be Judge, which will determine and convince,
neither by the Spirit, nor by Scripture, nor by Reason; But by Force and Fury,
Ares, halters, Fire and Sword.

Fourthly, If this had been true, all the difference among Protestants would
have come to a mutual agreement before now, or else he must say, They are all
corrupt men, except the Presbyterians.

As for what he faith of the Ranters (who learned from you to make GOD Author
of all their wicked actions) their fruits make them manifest, as your fruits do
you, notwithstanding of both your Pretenses.

In page 83. He says, We have heard their Retortions, Let us now hear their
direct Answer; That their fruits declare them to have the Spirit of GOD; For
which forsooth, they bring Scripture Proof from Matthew, 7. 15. 16. Where
fruits are made the Test for trying whether one be a true or false prophet.
Thus he, And then falls a railing with great bitterness, lies and false
accusations, which is always his last Refuge when he is straightened. But let the
Reader observe, First, That he mocks at Scripture proof (tho he dare not deny
it) adding a Forsooth to it, as if none had right to the Scripture but
Presbyterian Priests.

Secondly, That for Fruits, he enumerats four gross and abominable Untruths,
wherewith he charge us. To wit, That we deny the Holy Trinity, the Person of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, The Resurrection of the Body, and that we assert the
Souls of Men, yea, and devils too, to be GOD Almighty; Of all which he says,
he will prove the Quakers to be undenyably guilty, before he end his Treatise.

This needs no Answer, But to say. The Lord rebuke this lying spirit which has
gone forth in the mouth of this lying false Accuser: For the LORD GOD whom we
serve, knows our Innocence in this matter; and will in his due time vindicat
his people from these malicious Callumniators.

But Thirdly, The Man might have considered that these are points of Faith and
not of Works, and that our Savior spoke here of Works, and not Faith only. The
most wicked Man in the Nation may believe all the Westminster Creed as well as
Patroclus does, and yet receive the Sentence in verse 23. of the same Chapter,
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. And therefore, tho he should add another
Forsooth to it, I will betake me to the Fruits mentioned in Scripture, and then
let the World (which he says is not ignorant) judge between them and us.
Galat: 5. 20. Where these are reckoned for Fruits of the Flesh, Variance,
Emulations Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Envyings, Murders. etc. Which whither
they have been peculiar to that Tribe, let the Nation judge. On the other hand
the Fruits of the Spirit are Love, Peace, Joy, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Faith, Meekness, Temperance, etc. And whether the people, in derision called
Quakers, be found in the Exercise of such Fruits, let such as are acguainted
with their conversations, bear Witness for or against them. And I may say
without reflection, if to devour and destroy, be the fruits of Abbadon and
Apollyon, These are the only Spirits, the Presbyterian Fruits can lay claim to;
which to enumerat, were to writ a history, but the late Advocat George
Maekenzie has given an Epitome of them, to which I refer the Reader:

In page 84. He charge R. B. with three lies; Citing his Vindication; But how
groundlessly, will be evident to any who will be at the pains to examine R.
B's. words, to which for brevity I refer the Reader. Only this, the first is as
really John Browns, as his two Hypothetick propositions are his own, in page
79. To which R B. answers, what a horrible lie is this? The Second is no lie,
For in chap: 3 Number: 2. Of the Westminerr Confession we have these words. Although
GOD knows whatsoever may or can come to pass upon all supposed Conditions, yet
he has not decreed anything, because be foresaw it as future, or as, that it
would come to pass upon such conditions.

And in the very next words, they add By the Decree of GOD for the
Manifestation of His Glory, some men and Angels are predestined unto
everlasting Life, and others fore ordained unto everlasting death. Let him
interpret this with the next, for if it bear not all that R. B. says, it is no
better then the Answers of the Delphick Oracle. So that which he calls a
palpable and horrid Lie, will be found to be a manifest Truth to any that can
read the Confesfion above cited.

His third is that I. B. makes a preaching to the devil, to deny which, is
impudence with a Witness: And as for railing in pulpit and print, it is too
well known to the Nation to seek to cover it. Whereof Brown and Mackquare are
two famons instances, neither is our Author a Novice in that ignoble art,
wherein lest he should come short of his Brethren, he gives us a short
parralel between the old Libertine Anabaptists, and the new, who are known by
the name of Quakers,

This is an old blast from a new horn, a work already done by George Meldrum,
when he was Preacher at Aberdeen, and fully answered by George Keith without
any reply, To which I might remit my Reader, but because it is not yet printed
I shall touch at some of them, and it is to be suspected not without cause,
that the hand of Joab is in all this.

His first is, That these men said, The Word of GOD was a certain heavenly
thing distinct from the Scriptures: Adding, the same is the downright Doctrine
of the Quakers.

Answer, What was their Doctrine I know not, for I see little ground to believe
their Adversaries did not belie them more then that our Adversaries do not
belie us now: which they are not ashamed to do in the face of the Sun, but our
Doctrine is well known to be, That Christ is the Word of GOD, according to the
Scriptures and that the Scriptures, are the words of GOD.

His second is about immediate Revelation, But our Doctrine on this head is
sufficient. ly cleared in the foregoing Treatise.

His third is, That the express words and phrases of the Scripture is to be
adhered to without any exposition, interpretation, or deduction: That is a
gross Callumny may be seen in page 67. of his own Book, where he accuses
George Keith of popery for rejecting their interpretations without the Spirtt;
And it is manifest we have always contended that the Spirit was the only true
Interpreter of hard Scriptures, where they were heard to be understood, and
that the express Words were to be adhered to, where plain.

His Fourth is, that we assert, that nothing recorded in the old Testament is
binding and incumbent to us, but as it is ratified by CHRIST in the new, and
has precept or authority from it: For which he cites R: B's: vindication,
page 178. Number: 5. And to show the Reader his base ingenuity; I shall transcribe
R: B's words, which are these: He seeks maliciously to infer that I deny all
authority of the Old Testament, which is a horid callumny: But since there are
many things therein, which himself will acknowledge, are not binding upon us
now; What shall be the Rule whereby we shall judge what we are now tied to, and
what not: etc.

If this be to deny the obligation of the Old Testament, or to say it is
abrogat, let the Reader judge: But it seems our Author thinks the Ninth
Commandment to be abrogated, else he would not so confidently bear false
witness against his Neighbor.

His fifth inslance of Original sin, he refers to his third Chapter, and so
shall I.

His sixth is, That Christ made no satisfaction for sins, and compared them who
taught the contrary to the Seribes and Pharisees to assert which of the people
called Quakers is gross and detestable injustice, forgerie and malice: But to
cover this, he adds another no less false as to us, that it is damnable and
dangerous Doctrine to assert that we are justified by the Righteousness of
Christ, etc. Which he promises to prove in his fifth Chapter, but will never
be able to prove any thing like these two calumnies against us, as I hope shall
be seen in its place.

His Seventh is, that they asserted the possibility of fulfilling the Law: If
he had said that we assert a possibility of keeping the Commandments of GOD
(not of our selves, but) through the Grace of GOD. We own this charge, and
think it no error, but a sound and great Truth. As for the word Law we are not
under the Law but under Grace; And here according to his custom, he inserts a
gross lie upon R. B: saying, for the denial of which R: B: promised continually
to rail upon all the Reformed. It seems the man has dreamed this: For I am
certain he can never tell where or to whom he promised any such thing; What he
undertakes in his fourth Chapter, we shall see how he proves it.

His eight instance is, that they denied the perseverance of the Saints.

In this, he also misrepresents us, for we have always asserted, that there is
a state of Confirmation in Grace, attainable by all, and attained by in any,
which cannot be fallen from: And that some have made shipwreck of Faith and a
good conscience cannot be denied.

His Ninth instance is, their denving of the Resurrection of the same body, and
referts to the fifth Chapter of his book: But whatever the Apostle Paul says
in I Corinth: 15. We do willingly believe and acknowledge, and if this Man has
any thing more revealed unto him, concerning the Resurrection, then what Paul
tells us, he will do well to publish it.

His Tenth is, that they deny the Sacred Trinity, and the Divinity of Christ,
which he also deceitfully charge upon us, referring to his 4th Chapter,
wherein I hope his deceit shall be detected. The Just GOD who searches our
hearts, and knows the contrary will certainly reward this false accuser,
according to his work, except he repent.

His Eleventh instance is, That they asserted. The Ministers of the Gospel
ought not to be tied to the explaining of the scriptures, that all in the
Church ought to speak by turns, etc. And that the Ministers ought to have no
certain Stepend.

This instance has three accusations; To the first, we say, If any man speak
let him speak as the Oracles of GOD, and according to the Grace given him, so
let him Minister: Not that we are against the explaining of scripture by a
Minister, as he is led thereto by the Spirit of Christ, But that in his
Preaching he should be tied thereto only, we see no reason for it, for either
this tie upon him is by Divine or Humane authority: If by Divine authority, let
our author produce it, and it shall be no more disputed; And if by human
authority (as indeed the whole Presbyterian Ministry is) Then this tie is not
binding upon any true Gospel Minister; But he may teach, exhort, admonish as
GOD gives him utterance, not contrary, but according to the Scriptures,
without taking a Text, and telling his own dark imaginations from it.

His Second accusation is, that all in the Church ought to speak by turns, This
is another gross lie, for we never said that all in the Church ought to speak,
but we are not ashamed with Paul to say, 1 Corinthians: 14. 13. For ye may all
Prophecy one by one, (yet not all in the Church) for as the same Apostle
says, No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.

His Third accusation is, That the Ministers ought not to have certain Stipend:
It is strange that this malicious adversary can represent in its true and
genuin colors, but twines and twists like a crooked Serpent, to fasten some
reproach upon innocent men. Can there be a more certain Stepend then the free
benevolence of true Christians to a true Christian Minister; Or do any of our
Ministers complain of wanr, or come to beg of the Presbyterians? but he should
have said we were against a forced mantainance by Horning, poinding,
Imprisonment, Adjudication of Lands, by which tools ye exact Temporals from
such as will have none of these things ye call Spirituals: And herein we have
many Martyrs, and good Protestants for us, as ye cannot but know; although this
degenerate and self seeking generation have forsaken their paths, and have
followed the way of Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness.

His twelfth Instance is, They denied that a Christian ought to be a Magistrate
or in any case make War, to take or administer Oaths; Or trouble any man, upon
the account of his Religion, Or to prohibit any kind of Religion.

Here are five bold accusations again; whether they were doctrines of these
Anabaptists, I know not, nor am I concerned: I think it is very unlike that
such fighters as they were said to be, would deny all Wars to be Lawful.

But to the first I Answer, It is a horrid and shameless Lie; And for instance,
some of us have been Magistrates partieularly Gavine Lawrie in the Province of
East New-Jarsey in America, to the great satisfaction of (...) the Inhabitants:
In this place a certain Presbiterian Preacher came to him, and complained of
his Hearers, That contrary to their Contract made with him, they refused to pay
him for Preaching: Whereupon both parties being heard, He decerned, that during
the time contained in the Contract, they should pay him; Which was a great
disapointment to the Brethren. As for the unlawfulness of Oaths and Wars under
the Gospel. We own it, and have abundantly proven it in many Treatises, yet
unanswered: And as for Liberty of Conscience, it wont to be the great cry of
the Presbiterians, when they were under persecution themselves; But being now
the Church triumphant in Scotland, they may perhaps change their tune: But for
this he may Brother, the Author of Melius Inquirendum. And if it be the duty of
the Magistrate any kind of Religion to prohibit, then sure Reformation of
Religion does not belong to the Commonality, as John Knox says; Yea, if this
had been only the Office of the Magistrate, Presbytrie had never reigned in
Britan. But to take these accusations in the Complex, and compare them with
these of Julian the Apostat, against the Primitive Christians; And Reader will
find a greater agreement then betwixt us and the Anabaptists. Philip
Melanchton, in his Chronicon Carionis page 278. Scripsit and ipse libros contra
Christianos, etc: Thus Englished, He also wrote Books against the Christians,
or the doctrine of the Church; In which Books, He chiefly debateth the
forbiding of Revenges: He says, They take away Magistracy, Judicial
Sentences, Punishments, Lawful Wars, And infinitely confirm Robberies: And
Lastly, That this Doctrine fights with common sense, and takes away the
Nerves of humane Society. Behold Reader the Doctrine of our Author.

His thirteenth and last Instance is, concerning the Sacraments (so called)
wherein I think the man has not been well in his Wits, when he ranked us with
Anahaptists: But because these things are to be handled elsewhere, I shall here
wave them.

Now Reader, I desire thou may consider, That there is not one of the thirteen,
wherein he has not either grossly belyed or deceitfully misrepresented us; And
in some things, these Anabaptists, as in his twelsth Instance (for which he
has cited no Book) he alleges they denied the Lawfulness of all Wars;
Whereas Sleidans Commentaries lib: 5. Mieneer incited the Boors of Germany to
undertake the Holy War (as he called it) against the Princes; Telling them,
That he was commanded of GOD to cut off all wicked persons and Princes. And how
well this agrees with the Presbyterian practices and Doctrines, is but too
nottour. Read the Hynd let loose, and Zions Plea, Fol: 262. Strick the Basilick
Vein. Nothing but this will cute the Pleurisee of our State.

And to say, That they were for Liberty of Cons^ience, is no less inconsistent
with their Practices, for they labored to propagate their Religion by the
Sword; And so did our Presbiterians: Yea, and put themselves under a necessity
so to do by a solemn Oath? Only the difference betwixt Muneer and the
Presbiterians was this.

Ille crueem seeleris pre^ium tulit hi diadema. There was another Doctrine
common to them, both Anabaptists and Presbiterians, Viz: all is Durs; Which
Text they expounded thus; That all the wealth of the World belonged properly
to the Saints, and whatsoever other men possessed was but by usurpation:
Agreeable to this was the practice of our Presbiterians, who after they had got
possession of the Kings Revenue, the Bishops Rents, the Papists Estates, and
these they called Malignants, and were squeezing the Nation with insupportable
Cesses and Excise: They at last devised a trick how the Israelite might robe
the Egyptian, by forcing every man, who was not as Zealous as the servency of
the times required, To lend them his money upon the public Faith (commonly
called the Blind Bonds) which Faith certainly will never justify them, For the
wicked borrweth and paveth not again. Yet in all this the Judgment of GOD was
visible, for the most part of them who got the spoil of their Native Country,
lest their Heirs in a worse condition then they might have done, if they had
never meddled.

By all this it is evident, That the Man's malice has blindfolded him, and that
all his Lies and Perversions cannot help his bad cause: But their enmity and
hatred to Truth drives them on, tho they might remember, that he who hates his
Brother is a murderer, and no murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him. Had
it not been as easy for him to have said, The Lollards taught several
Doctrines which the Quakers hold, and which we have neglected, tho we desire to
be accounted their Successors. Such as,

First, It is not lawful to Fight for the Faith. Secondly, That Tiths ought
not to be paid to Ecclesiastical Persons. Thirdly, That every faithful Man and
Woman is a Priest. Fourthly, That in no case it is lawful to Swear. Fifthly,
That true Christians receive the Body of Christ every day etc. All these we
should have acknowledged, tho this backsliding and degenerat Tribe have denied
them.
Next, we come to his third Argument, against Divine immediate Revelation; viz,
If the Spirit or the Light within every Man, were the Supreme and Principal
Rule, then these who persecuted to Death the Apostles and Saints of God, did
not Sin in so doing; but I am sure the latter is false: Ergo the former: To
prove the Consequence of the Major, he cites Paul and John 16. 2. alleging,
That Paul walked according to his Light, and that his Light taught him, that
according to all he had for Light, he ought to do many things against the
Professors and Servants of Jesus Christ.

Answer, Let the Reader observe, First, His constant disingenuity, whereof he
has been so often found guilty: For he should have said, If the Teachings of
the Spirit of Christ and His Light, wherewith He has enlightened every Man, be
the principal Rule, etc. Which would have urged upon Blasphemy, if the rest of
his Argument had been added to it: Which notwithstanding is the true state of
the Controversy. Secondly, Observe how blind the Man is, for he has fallen in
the Ditch he dug for us; Paul (says he) according to all that he had for
Light, Ought to do many things against the Servants of Jesus, etc. But Paul had
the Scriptures (and was learned in the knowledge of them) for Light: Ergo,
according to our Author, Paul according to the Light of the Scriptures ought to
persecute the Saints.

Thirdly, By this Argument the Old World, yea all who lived before Moses wrote,
had no Sin, because no Scripture, and the Light of Christ, and Teachings of the
Spirit, was no sufficient Rule to them: All the Mahumitans and Pagans at this
day have no Rule, therefore no Sin. These are the wild Consequences of this
Argument.

Fourthly, His instancing Paul is very impertinent; For Paul had the
Scriptures, and was one of them who thought they had Eternal Life in the
Scriptures, and no doubt he thought them a Rule for his persecuting the Saints:
For he said he had lived blemlesly according to the Low: And therefore it could
be no other thing but the Light of Christ, and the teachings of his Spirit,
which brought Paul to a better Understanding. And whereas he says in his next
Argument, That Paul never counteracted, his Light, was always of the same
Judgment, and therefore never had a true Light till the day of his Conversion,
This clearly contradicts the Scriptures, and the experience of all Ages: John
12 Chap. 36. While ye have Light believe in the Light, that ye may be the
children of the Light: Hence it is clear, Men have Light before Conversion, or
becoming Children of Light. And again he said John 3. 19. The condemnation of
the World was not for want of Light, but for Loving darkness more then Light:
Every Servant received a Talent, and it was said From him that had not shall be
taken away even that which he has. All which intimats, that it is not want of
Light, but not believing in nor taking heed to the Light that causes Men to
err. And Prove: 1. 23. Turn ye at my Reproof, behold I will pouer out my Spirit
upon you, etc. 24. I have called and ye refused, and I have stretched out my
hand; and no man regarded. verse 25. Ye have set at naught all my Counsels and
would none of my reproofs, 30 They would none of my Counsel they despised all
my reproves; therefore they shall eat the fruits of their own ways.

Hence it is manifest, That CHRIST the Light the Wisdom of GOD, calls,
reproves, stretches out his hand, oflers his Councils even to such as reject
him, and do not regard him, and therefore are at last rejected by him.

And lastly, The Experiences of all Ages shows that it is a Law engraven or
imprinted on the Souls of all men not to do that to another, which we would not
should be done to our selves. This the Heathens taught before Christ preached
it; And therefore persecution cannot be but esteemed a sin against Light, and
tho Paul by the prejudice of his Education, and a blind Zeal for upholding of
that Law or form of Worship which was to be abolished did ignorantly and
inconsideratly ruo on to persccute the Saints: Yet it can no more be said that
he acted according to all he had for Light, then it can be said that the
Presbyterians acted according to the Scripture in the that Murder of the Arch
Bishop.

And tho this may serve to answer the two following Arguments. Yet what seems
to have weight in them, I shall take notice of.

His Fourth Argument is, Divine Light is always consonant to it self. But the
Light within one Man is quite contradictory and opposite to that within
another, as the many and great Contraversies in all ages do but too well make
out.

This is easily answered, and no less easily retorted; For who dare deny but
the Scriptures is always cousonant to it self; And yet how many and great are
the Contraversiies among these who profess it to be their only Rule. Was the
Command of GOD to Saul Dubious, to destroy Amaleck? No, But Saul disobeyed it.
The like is the example of Jonah. Is not the Counsel of GOD always consonant
to it self, yet men reject it. And for his Argument from the pertinacy of
Heathens and Heretics. I am ready to think nothing of it, when I consider the
madness of mine own Country men, who would rather choose to he hanged then pray
for their Lavvful King, in obedience to a plain Scriptute precept.

All the Conntraversies in the World, as well as all the Wars are the product
of men's lusts, and neither is the Scripture nor the Light culpable, but carnal
corrupt minds of Men; Especially the Clergy: (See 1 Corinthians: 3. and 3.

His Fifth Argument is a singular one, The substance whereof is, There are many
in the World (whereof I am one says he) who by all the Light they have
attained to, and after an impartial search, firmlie believe, without so much as
one thought from the Light with; in to the contrary, that Quakerism is the
pathway to utter destruction: It must therefore be so, if the Doctrine that
every man must follow his Light, be true.

This Argument is sufficiently Answered before, only his Instance of himself is
strange, I would therefore ask him will, lingly, Had he never any check for all
the Lies, Slanders, Perversions, and deceitful Insinuations published in his
Book? If he say nay, I must say, Certainly the man is in a very desperate
condition, and to be pittyed: But I doubt not the day shall come in which the
Light, now by him so much despised, will speak to him in a Language that shall
not be very pleasing to him, and which all his deceitful Quibles cannot
silence, I wish it may be in Merey. His Ipse dixi has no force with me, He
firmly believes, That all the other Professions of Christianity except his own,
are the path way to utter destruction: It is therefore true? Because, dumb idol
Shep berd has said so, whose right Eye is utterly darkened, and whose right
Hand is clean dried up: If the light in him be darkness how great is that
darkness?

His Sixth Argument is, If GOD suffered the most part of men in the time of the
Old Testament to walk in their own ways, then all and every one bath not
sufficient Grace and Light, whereby they may come to Salvation; But the former
Is true. Ergo the latter for proof of his Minor, he cites Acts 14. 16. And
tells us that the Evidence of the Consequence strangly straitneth Bellarmine.

But it does not straiten ns, for we know that the Spirit of the LORD strove
with the Old World, and he Called and they refused. He Gave his Counsel, but
they rejected it; therefore he suffered them to walk in their own ways, Rom:
1. 10. For the wrath of GOD is rovealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, etc: 19. Because that which may be known of GOD is
manifest in them, for GOD has showed it unte them. And verse 21. Because when
they knew GOD they glorified him not as GOD, etc: So in verse 26 he says, for
this cause GOD gave them up to vile affections: So that GOD is just who
requires no more of man then he gives him. And certninly some of these
Gentiles, whom this Author and his brethren will have reprobats, and to have
had, no Light nor Knowledge of GOD, seem to have had more true Religion then
many Presbyterians have at this day. For which, read Morney du Please (a
Protestant Writter) his Book, called Of the trueness of the Christian Religion,
and Augustine de Civitate Dei: I could cite many Autho^s, but William Penn and
George Keith have done it abundantly already. Only Du Please clearly proves
from their Books, That they believed on GOD, Father, Son, and Spirit; The
Creation of all things by him, the fall of Man, the immortality of the Soul,
and futur rewards and punishments; Yea many things concerning the coming of
Christ. Was not Balaam one of the Gentiles? Were Job and his friends
Israelites, had they the Scriptures? I shall only cite two sayings of Seneca;
The first in his 74 Epistle at the end, Nulla sine DEO, etc: Thus Englished*
There is no good Mind without GOD: There are Divine Seeds sown in the bodies of
Men, which if a good Husbandman receives, then comes forth Fruits like to
their Original, and arise like unto those of which they were born; But if an
evil husbandman, then like barren and watrish ground, it kills the seed and
makes filth in stead of Corn. And Epistle 41. GOD is nigh unto thee, He is
with thee, He is in thee, The Holy Ghost sits within us, an Observer and
Keeper of all our Good and evil Actions, and as he is dealt with by us, so
dealleth he with us.

Who told Seneca these things if he had no light? But Epictetus, his Motto Bear
and forbear is an Evangelick precept, which I never yet knew a Presbyterian who
had learned it: Neither needed our Authorto have gone so far back as the Old
Testament: For GOD has now suffered the Presbyterians, for many years to walk
in their own ways; For tho there was a good beginning among them many years
ago; How soon they betook themselves to the arm of flesh, GOD left them to
their own ways, as Samuel Rutherford says, God turned his back upon them, and
never since looked over his shoulder unto them.

This may serve to answer his seventh argument drawn from Ephesians: 2. 12. Where
the Gentiles are said to be or have been without Christ, Aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, etc. Therefore they had not sufficient Grace and
Light; This again impeacheth the justice of GOD, to condemn men for breaking a
Law which they never had contrary to that Scripture, where there is no Law,
there is no transgression: And if he bad but considered the 3, 4 and 5 Verse of
the same Chapter, he would have found that Paul places himself, and the Jews
in the same condition with the Gentiles; And the only difference was, that the
Jews had the outward Law, which was added because of transgreffion, and yet
could not make the come^s thereunto perfect.

His Eight argument is from Amos 3. 2. You have I known of all the Families of
the Earth And Psalm 149. 19. 20. He shows his word unto Jacob his Statutes,
and Judgments unto Israel, etc.

From h^nce he inferts that they who have not the S^riptures, never had a Light
sufficient to guide them to Salvation; But he is somewhat crafty in his
expresion, saying These to whom GOD did not give his word, which I fully grant;
But if hereby he understands the Scriptures, it is great impudence to assert
it, for then it will follow, that Abel Enoch, Noa^h, Abraham, Job, etc. Had
never a light sufficient to guide them to Salvation.

Then he raileth a little, and is very angry at such as say, The Light shined
in the darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not. He may, if he please,
rail at me next, for telling him that the world was never condemned for want os
Light, but for loving darkness more then Light. A little after he rants tho
without reason, saying, Now I say, who but a Quaker will from this infer, that
all Nations in all ages had the knowledge of the word Statutes and Judgments
of GOD, who but a Presbyterian will deny that GOD may be known without the
Scriptures? And that the word of GOD is GOD, and was known before there was a
Book in the World: As for the Statutes and Judgments given to Israel, they
were peculiar to that Nation as his elder Brother R: Baxter has confessed
above, and GOD is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation be that fears
him, and works Righteousness is accepted of him. Acts 10. 34. And Doctor
Barron against Turnbul, page 56. Says, Potuit DEUS olim imo etiam bodis potest
sine Scriptura, Ecclesiam suam Colligere and tueri. That is, GOD could of old,
^ea can at this day gather and defend his Church without Scripture.

The next Scripture he mets with, is that of Jude Verse. 15. That some men have
not the Spirit.

This R: Barkelay has answered in Quakerism confirmed, citing the words of our
Savior; Viz. From him that has not shall be taken away even that which he
has; Intimating thereby that men may be said in one sense to have, and in an
other not to have the Spirit. To this our Author replyeth, that although these
wicked servants had gifts and abused them, yet no such thing can be said here,
because they are said to be twice dead, etc. And senswal; But if it be lawful
to look to the context which in the end of this page he is very unwilling to
allow unto us? he will find by the examples there adduced, that even they had
something too; For in Verse. 5 and 6 he compares them to the children of Israel,
who were brought out of Aeg^pt, and on their way to the Land of Rest, yet were
destroyed for unbelief, and then the Angels (says he) who keep not their first
Estate. Where it is manifest they had a first Estate, To which they might have
kept, that they were Twice dead, proves that they were once Living: And their
being sensual, says no more but that all such as reject the Counsel of the
LORD, and despise his reproofs, do ( as in the 18 Verse) walk after their
ungodly lusts, and become sensual more and more; Are not all men by nature
sensual? And yet Christ has enlightened every man coming into the World, is it
not said, the Spirit of the LORD departed from Saul, and an evil Spirit from
GOD came upon him; Yet at sometimes he was enforced to cry out, thou art more
Righteous then 1, 0 my Son David.

But the Spirit of GOD has given us special symptoms, whereby we may know and
discern these men, viz. The malicious cruelty of Cain, the insatiable avarice
of Ballaam, the sedicious practices of Korah, and the speaking evil of
Dignities; The first three speak for themselves, and for the Fourth, take this
instance of the Hind let loose, where the Author speaking of King Charles the
Second, says, Notwithstanding of all his numerous brood of Bastard brats,
begotten in adulter^ and I^^^st; Yet he died a Child's l^ss poultron, and had
the unlamented burial of an Ass, and none to succed him but he who Murdered
him. Horresco referens, etc.

Next he says, The knowledge of some things are absolutely necessary to
Salvation; But all men have not this knowledge; therefore all men have not
sufficient light to guide them unto Eternal life.

This is a mere Non sequitur, such another as to say, some men shut their eyes
and will not see: Ergo, the Sunshineth not. I have told him before that the
World is not condemned for want of light, but for loving darkness, and I
acknowledge where the Scriptures are to be had; The knowledge of them is
indispensibly necessary, but where that cannot be had, I say with Doctor
Barron, GOD could of old, yea can at this day gather and defend his Church
without Scripture: And I think our Author dar not say that the Spirit of Christ
which taught the Apostles to write Scripture, cannot teach men now all things
necessary to Salvation: Or if he say, that he has limited himself, that he
will not; I shall expect his proof of it by the next, for I believe no such
thing as yet.

His Ninthly is no argument, but a new war undertaken against the Light of
Christ; He begins with his usual forth, saying, will overthrow another
principil of the Quakers, upon which the whole fabric of Quakerism is builded;
He had said in his first argument, that the whole fabric of Quakerism was
overthrown: This then must be superfluous, but the man forgets himself
sometimes and must be pardoned.

He begins according to his custom with three gross lies; Is It, that we aslert
that man in his fallen estate cannot do any thing that is as to the substance
of the action good, for an unregenerate man may, plow which is good as to the
substance of the action, and yet the Plowing of the wicked is sin.

Secondly, He accuses us as Socinians, whereas he himself is the Soeinian, in
that he acknowledges that fallen man by nature can know that there is a GOD
who is to be Loved, Feared, and Adored; page 99. And that we ought to do unto
another as we would he should do unto us, page 110. This is to say, nature
fallen and corrupted can teach us to love GOD, and and our Neighbor which is
the sum of the Law, and the Prophets, against which Socinian Doctrine R: B:
has bestowed more then a whole page of his apology

His Third lie is, that the whole World perceives clearly, that there is no
light common to all mankind, except some small Relicts of that once bright
shinning of GOD, like the dim sparkles of an extinguished Lantron; And herein
lies the stress of the contraversie. We on the other hand assert, that when man
had by his fall brought himself and his posterity into a miserable condition,
GOD had mercy on him, and entered into a new Covenant with him, in the seed of
the Woman, CHRIST JESUS: Upon better terms then the former Covenant, and that
Christ the Light did of New Enlighten him, or to use his own words; Light the
Candle of that extinguished Lantron, whereby he might see and know the things
of GGD, and be saved from out of that miserable estate whereinto he had brought
himself his fall, and that this is most consonant to Scripture and sound
reason, will appear by the Sequal.

First, The Covenant of works was made with Adam in his integrity, and the
Covenant of Grace was made with man in his fallen estate, and confirmed to
Abraham and David, and all the Law, and ratified by by the Death of Christ
under the Gospel. Now the question here is, whether the Covenant of Grace left
mankind in the same condition it found him; That is to the dim sparkles of an
extinguished Lantron, which (our Author says) are never able to show the
wandering traveler in the dark night his way homeward, or whether Christ the
Mediator of this Covenant the Light, which enlightneth every man coming into
the World, did give unto man light and grace sufficient for fullfilling the
Terms of this New Covenant? For to deny, this were to impeach the justice of
GOD: For the Adam had sufficient Light, Grace, and Power, to fulfill the First
Covenant, I hope our Author will not deny; And to assert, that his Posterity
had not Light nor Grace sufficient to fulfill the Terms of the Second Covenant,
were no less then to say, that men were nothing bettered by the Covenant of
Grace, but were left to seek their way with their extinguished Lanthron; And
that the Old World was drowned, and they damned for want of Light, or Knowledge
of the Will of GOD, which is absurd as well as contrary to the Scriptures: For
the Spirit of GOD strove with them, and told Ca^in, that if he did well, he
should be accepted, and if he did evil, sin lay at the door; Which saying
presupposes that Cain knew the God and the evil. Did not Christ preach to the
Old World in the days of Noah, I Pet: 3. 19. And if this be true, that fallen
man had no Law nor Light, but an extinguished Lanthorn, by what Law could the
men of Sodom and Gomorah be condemned? I know nothing he can say to this, but
that direful Doctrine of Reprobation, which yet will not serve his turn.

Secondly That this Light wherewith Christ has enlightened every man, is
supernatural and sufficient, is so largely proved by Samuel Fisher, William
Penn, George Keith, and To: Barkclay, and all the Objections answered, is
nottour to any who has been at pains to read their Writings, so that it might
suffice to direct my Reader thereto; Yet shall I take notice of what seems to
have any weight.

In the first he comes above board, and calls it Reason; And then (for I wave
his railing and reflections) Reason is Natural, and Man is Rational, That Man
excrising his Reason and contemplating the Works of Creation and Providence,
cannot but conclude that they are the Product of an Infinite and Omnipotent
Creator, who is to be Loved, Feared, and adored, which thoughts as to the
substance of the Action are certainly good. And what says all thy to the
purpose? Are not the prayers and plowing of the wicked as good as the substance
of the Action, and yet sin?

But the Question is, Whether man had no other Principle in him, whereby he
could discern these things, but his natural and corrupt Reason, which was the
thing incumbent upon him to prove, and which he has wholly omitted; Seeing the
Apostle says, The natural man cannot discern the Things of GOD.

His Second Argument is, Whatever is in man, and common to all Mankind is
Natural, but some sparks of the Knowledge of a Deity, and some good Thoughts
as the desire of self-preservation are in man, and common to all Mankind: Ergo,
cand.

The Major is false, otherwise it would follow, That the Grace of GOD which
brings to Salvation (which is in Man) and has appeared to all Men, must be
Natural, and the Life of Christ, the Light of Men must be Natural, both which
are absurd.

His Third is much to the same purpose, That which is originally born with
every Man, and up to more and more maturity. is undoubtedly natural, but some
remainders of the Knowledge of God are originally, that is in the Principle or
Inclination, born with Man, and grows up to more and more maturity, according
to the growth of him in whom they are, Ergo, etc. They are Natural.

Certainly if this Argument hold, and Man that lives long and grows up to a
great hight, must acquire a great Knowledge of God, which is ridiculous: And
Seneea had more Knowledge than this Author, as before cited, who said, There
were Divine Seeds sown in Man, which grew according to the entertainment they
melt with: And whether this of Seneea be more consonant to our Savior's
Parable of the Sower and the Seed, than our Author's Argument, let the Reader
judge. The Seed was sown by Christ in all Grounds; the Seed gtew. Ergo
(according to our Author) it was Natural; And the Talents were given to the
profitable and unprofitable Servants, and they grew as they were improved;
Ergo, they were Natural.

His Fourth Argument is, That which is common to Devils, is not supernatural;
But to know and believe that there is a God, which is of it self a good
thought, is common to Devils, Ergo, etc.

When our Author gives us a learned Treatise of Nature of Angels, of their
Fall, and what they Lost, and what they Retained; And tells us whence he
learned it, and then proves, that Men and the Devils in their nature, in their
Fall and since their Fall, are in all things alike, he may have an Answer: For
my part, I seek not to be wise above what is revealed; I know that Men and
Angels Fell, and that Man was Redeemed by Christ, and not Devils; And that he
purchased for Man Grace, whereby he might attain to Faith, Repentance, and New
Ohedience; which are the Terms of the Second Covenant. I know also the Devils
believe that there is a God, and that this their belief of His immutable
Justice, is no small patt of their present as well as future Torment; where by
they know that they shall be eternally tormented in Hell. And if ever our
Author come there, (which God forbid) he will find this to be a part of his
Nature, as he would insinuate in his next Argument, where he says, That which
will accompany the Wicked to Hell, cannot be called Grace, Divine, or any thing
supernatural: He should have said, that which suffers in Hell: For certainly
all that is natural to Man must suffer in Hell, but that which causes Man to
suffer in Hell can be no part of his Nature: Hence Causin in his Holy Court
Tom. 3. Page 433. The Darkness of Hell is apprehended as most intolerable
Evil, and that with just cause: Notwithstanding I affirm the grearest Torment
of the Damned, and hight of their notable Calamities, is Light, I say, Light of
Science and Knowledge, etc.

His Sixth Argument is, That Men have naturally some Relics of the Image of
God, and can do some things contained in the Law of God, we must firmly
conclude from that express Text, Romans 2. 14. The Gentiles who have not the Law,
do by Nature the things contained in the Law.

First, He proceeds upon his former deceitful Insinuations, as if we denied
that fallen Man, or Man in the Fall could do any Action good, as to the
substance, (as he says now) he can do some things contained in the Law of God;
whereas the Devil could confess Christ before Men, as in Luke 4. 34. I know
thee who thou art, the Holy One of God.

This is a mere Quibble: For the Question is, Whether Man by Nature as Fallen
and corrupted, can do any thing that is acceptable to God? which he should have
proven, or else been silent. And as to that Scripture he cites, it makes
nothing for, but against him: For clearing of which, I shall ask him this
Question-Whether the Actions done by these Gentiles (who not having the Law,
did by Nature the things contained in the Law, which show the work of the Law
written in their Hearts) were acceptable to God, or not? If he say, not: He
contradicts the Apostle, Verse. 26. Therefore if Uncircumcision keep the
Righteousness of the Law, shall not his Vncircumsion he counted for
Circumcision? And Verse. 27. And shall not Uncircumcision which is by nature, if
it fulfill the Law, judge thee who by the Letter and Circumeision, do
transgress the Law? And Act. 10. 34, 35. Of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons, but in every Nation, he that fearth him, and works
Righteousness, is accepted of him, If he say, these Actions done by the
strength of fallen and corrupted Nature were acceptable to God; then it
follows, that Man by Nature in the Fall, can please God, and so have no need of
a S viour. I shall here add a Saying of J. Humfrey, with the Approbation
foresaid of R. Baxter, in his Book of Election and Redemption, Page 29. 30. It
is agreeable to that Righteousness of God, which is revealed in the Gospel, and
to common Reason, that when Christ died to Redeem the World from the Law of
Works, because through the weakness of the Flesh, it was impossible for us to
perform the same; The new Terms which he has procured for us in the remedying
Law, should be so adopted to our fallen Estate, as to be made no less possible
for us, or within our power now, than the Covenant of Nature was to Adam in the
state of Innocence. There is no Interpretation of Scripture must be admitted
against universal Reason and the Goodness of God. Now to say, that the Just and
Merciful GOD would require fallen Man to walk without Light, to act without
Power, is contrary to the Goodness of GOD and universal Reason, and to the
Tenor of the new and remedving Covenant.

In page 104, He says, Men by nature have the knowledge of Politics and the
prudent management of Worldly affairs; Therefore men may be said to have the
Law written in their Hearts without a New Govenant dispensation; Because the
second table of the Law which is a Rule for Politics, is the Law of GOD as
well as the first.

This can import nothing less then this, That because he had natural and
corrupt reason, he had nothing more; Or that he that has his senses has not
Reason: For Nimrod had Politics and so had Moses, but Nimrod had not such a
foundation for his Politics; And why? Because Moses Government was a
Theoeracie; Nimrods an humane Monarchy; And therefore Moses needed the immediate
Teachings of GOD for his Politics; Nimrod only Reason; Tho he had more, if he
had regarded it. And yet the second Table of the Law is more like Penal
Statutes then Politic Laws. And whereas he says, That Jo: Brown has proven
by many demonstrations, that the writing of the Law in the Heart cannot at all
be taken in this place, for any part of the New Covenant; He might have been so
kind to his Reader, as to have given one of these many demonstrations, before
he had so railed at and gloryed over his Adversary: Especially, considering
that John Browns Books are so rare to be seen, and seldom or never objected to
us by any man of sense.

His next is in answer to R: B's: saying, If Romans 2. 14. Be understood of
corrupt nature, It would contradict that of 1 Cor: 2. 14. Where it is said, The
Natural Man cannot know the things of GOD.

To which he Replies, That Mr. Brown, as he calls him, has utterly denied this
contradiction to follow upon their exposition of this place; But has neither
given us the Exposition, nor the Harmony of the places; This might pass in the
Pulpit, but it is shameful in Print, he had better waved it as he has done
many more: But if the Reader will be at the pains to look Beza's Notes, he will
find that he expressly says on 1 Cor: 2. 14. The Natural man is he that has no
further Light of Unstanding then that which he has brought with him, even from
his Mo^bers womb, As Jude defines it, Verse 19. And upon the word, Spiritual
Man, he has noted, That is by Virtue of the Holy Ghost. Now let the Reader
compare what our Author has said in the foregoing page upon Rom: 2. 14. And
what Beza says upon 1 Cor: 2. 14. And see whether our Anthors answer be
sufficient to take away the contradiction: Yet we must get Foam and Froath not
a little, the usual product of troubled waters: Nevertheless, it is manifest,
this one note of Beza's, overturns all he has said for his extinguished
Lanthorn.

In page 105. After a citation of R: B's words concerning the fall of man, he
says, It willl be counted a complete Contradiction to say, that fallen man
has no Relicts of the Image of GOD, and yet has a Seed of Righteousness,
seeing that Righteousness is one of the chief parts of the Image of GOD. But
wherein lies the Contradiction here? In saying, he who has the Seed, has not
the Fruit? Or in saying, that the Seed tho sown in all kinds of Grounds, needs
an influence from Heaven before it can bring forth Fruit? And (to use his own
similitude) till the Candle of his extinguishrd Lanthorn be of new lighted
again, it can do us no good, nor afford us any Light but smoke and stink: But
the absurdities are his own in contradicting the Westminster Catechism; Which
to the Question, What is original sin? Answers, It is the want of Original
Righteousness, and the corruption of our whole nature, etc. Now let the Reader
compare this Answer with our Authors Doctrine; Who says, That fallen man has
so much Original Righteousness, as to Know, Love, Fear, and Adore the Infinite
and Omnipotent GOD, and to do to others as he would be done by, which our
Savior says are the two great commandments, And then consider how consonant
he is to his Principles. But all these absurdities, and many more they are
forced to run into for defense of that Abyss of abominations; their darling
Doctrine of Absolute Reprobation.

After this being conscious to himself, he has said nothing to purpose, he
flyoth to the covers of deceit, and refuge of Lies; Saying, There is a Mystery
latent under this Doctrine, which we must here discover; The Quakers have no
other Christ then this that was left in Adam, and remains in man in his
fallen condition, to which they give many great Names, as Light, Life, measure
of GOD, GOD Himself, and most frequently the Seed. Then he cites some broken
Passages out of Books, which whether true or false I am indifferent; For they
are chiefly out of two Books of George Keiths yet unanswered; And if our Author
please to enter the lists with him, I shall be willing to be a Spectator; Till
then it is currish manners to snarle at his heels, while he dare not set his
face to it. But I pray thee Patroclus, should I set my self to pick out
sentences out of Presbyterian Books; What a Hodge podge of Nonesense and
Blasphemy could I make up together? Think thou they did well who have
presently published that Pamphlet of the Presbyterian Eloquence? But that
Consequence thou drawest from these thy assertions, is such a horrid and
detestable Lie, as needs no other Answer, But the LORD rebuke that lying
spirit, that is gone forth, and entered the mouths of the Presbyterian Clergy.
He who searches our Hearts knows that we are falsely accused, And that we
own no other Christ but Jesus the Son of the living GOD, and the Virgin Mary.
And I hope all Men of Candor and Ingenuity will acknowledge that we should know
what we believe better then this malicious Railer does; So I hope they will
hereafter give no credit to him nor his Brethren, thus misrepresenting us, as
about the end of page 107 He says, We believe, or at least would persuade
others to believe that Christ has a Personal Union with every son and daughter
of Adam! O! impudent Slanderer, the poison of Asps is under his tongue.

Next he calls it Blasphemy to say, That the seed needs a new Visitation to
raise it up: But has not told us where the Blasphemy lies.

In page 108, To clear his Brother John Brown of the absurdity of asletting
that the Devils and all unregenerate men are in a certain respect Spiritual,
and the Apostle and all Regenerate men are in a certain respect carnal; He
gives us a very ready solution of it thus* Whatever is a Spirit may be called
Spiritual, and whatever is a body may be called Corporal, and so the Devil is a
spirit, and unregenerate men have souls: Therefore they are spiritual, and the
Apostle had flesh, therefore he was Carnal. To prove this futher, he says John
Brown has given 15 arguments; Whereof our Author could not bestow one upon us,
but if they be no better then the last we got he has done well to be frugall
of his paper, and think it enough to vaper a little, and tell us all these are
but fictions, hobgoblins fit only to fright children.

His seventh argument is, If fallen man retain no knowledge of GOD, no
principles of common honesty and morality, then there is no difference betwixt
a Man and a bruit, neither can it be told in what the Wisdom of the wise
Gentiles consisted, of whom the Apostle speaks. 1 Cor. 2. Who notwithstanding
could not perceive the things of GOD, until they were again revealed, but the
latter is fall in both its parts, therefore the First.

Answer, this argument serves only to make a muster, the substance whereof
has been handled before, for it is grounded upon the false supposition that
Mankind received no benefit by the second Covenant, but was left in that
miserable condition brought upon him by the fall, which is contrary to the
scope of the whole Scripture, and our Author has been so wary as to contradict
it himself in his very arguments; Saying, who not withstanding could not
perceive the things of GOD, until they were again revealed, whereas he has
said before, That man by nature could know and understand the first and second
Table of the Law; Yea know GOD to be Infinite, Omnipotent, and that he should
be loved, feared and Adored, and that we should love our Neighbor as our self,
which is nothing more then to do to others as we would be done by; What need
then of a new Revelation, seeing this is the Law and the Prophets. He cites 1
Cor: 2. In all which Chapter I can find nothing but what contradicts him to his
Teeth, and Beza's note at the end of it is, We are endued with the Spirit of
Christ, who opens unto us these secrets which by all other means are
unsearchable. (Mark) and also all truth whatsoever. Now if all Truth whatsoever
be unsearchable without the Spirit of Christ, as Beza says they are, what is
become of our Authors dark Lantern, whereby, as by the light of corrupt nature
he will have men to know that great truth, the foundation of all Truth, Viz.
That there is an Infinite and Omnipotent GOD, who is to be Loved, Feared and
Adored. Add to this, That no man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom
the Son shall Reveal him; And then let the Reader consider whether Beza and the
Scriptures are better to be believed then our Author his dark Lantern. As to
the Wisdom of the Wise Gentiles, there is a Wisdom whereby GOD is known; and a
Wisdom whereby GOD is not known; So says the Scripture, The World through
Wisdom knew not GOD, and that some men were brutish in their knowledge, and as
Jude says, what they knew naturally as bruit in these things, they corrupt
themselves; This is Man's natural Wisdom: But Job who was one of the wise
Gentiles, tells us that the Inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding:
Aristotle also, Another of the wise Gentiles, tells us in his Ethics Lib: 10,
Chap: 4. 7. They that did these things did them not as men, but as having
something Divine, or of GOD in them; And Dindvmus said to Alexander the Great:
If thou will hearken to my words, thou shall possess of my goods, who have GOD
to my friend, and whose inspiration I enjoy within me. I have instanced
Aristotle to him already, next let him hear Plato, whom he also names; Phaed:
The Light and Spirit of GOD, says he, are as Wings to the Soul, or as that
which raises up the Soul into a sensible Communion with GOD above the World,
which the mind of man is ready to be mire it self with.

It could add many more, but these may suffice to show, that the wise Gentiles
derived their Knowledge of GOD from an higher principle then our Authors dark
Lantern; I shall only add one; to wit, Philo the Jew, Leg: Alleg: Lib: 1. How
should the Soul of man know GOD, if he did not inspire her, and take hold of
her by his Divine Power.

In page 110 he says the defect of the Wisdom of the Heathens was in this,
that they could not perceive Christ, but he should have remembered the last
words of Plato whom he names, related by Marcilius Ficinus, who wrote his
life, being asked by some that visited him, how long men should attend to his
writings? He answered, till that more Holy and Divine Person should appear to
visit the World, whom all men ought to follow; And that Elogue of Virgil (which
seems to have at first cracked him) is a plain intimation of their knowledge of
the coming of Christ, and that they did not receive him when he came is not to
be attributed to their want of Light, any more then the Phariseer, who had the
Law and the Prophets; For we see that many of the Gentiles were more ready to
receive the Gospel, then these learned Rabbis who thought they had Eternal
Life in the Scriptures. As for the difference between a Man and a bruit, it is
reason which GOD gave for the Government, and preservation of the outward man,
for which see Poiret.

In page 111. He tells us a Hen has skill in Arithmetic; If this be true,
certainly the Presbyterian hens must be wiser then ours, for our women who look
after the poultry, assure me that our Hens have no such skill, but that a
cunning man like out Author, may steall half her Eggs from her, and never be
quarrelled. If he read Le Grands Natural History, he may get better Instances;
But this is rediculous.

His eight Argument is from Rom: 1. 19. 20. Because that which may be known of
GOD, is manifest in them, for GOD has showed it unto them. From hence he
concludes, that there is some Relics of the Divine Image or Natural Knowledge
left in Man: And to say, that the true Knowledge of GOD and Divine Things, is
not Natural Man, but the Fruits of Christ's purchase to Mankind, after the Fall,
in and by the Covenant of Grace; This he calls pure Paganism. And to prove all
this, he only cries, Who would dare to say or affirm, that what was common to
the Heathens, Yea, and Devils also was as really saving, and the Fruit of
Christ's purchase, as that which is proper to the Godly.

Answer, I verily believe, the Devils have more knowledge then he, how they
came by it, I am not concerned, he may ask them when he has occasion; But I
know none ever asserted it to be saving, except it be his Brother John Brown,
when he printed his Preaching to them. But Mankind was not left in the same
condition; For Christ was preached to them immediately after the fall; And to
deny that they received Grace, were to contradict the Scriptures, For that the*
Seed sown in the stoney ground, and in the Good Ground was the same, none but a
Presbyterian will deny. And that the Tallent given to the unfaithful servant,
was as true Money as the rest, I think all will confess; Or else how could he
have been condemned for not improving it. So that if he condemn us here, he
must condemn the Scriptures with us; Which also says, That GOD wills all men
to be saved: But here they tells us, That GOD has a revealed Will to save
them, and yet a secret will to damn them. O impudent and pervetle Generation /
Who dare accuse the Righteous GOD of Truth with bypocrisie, The wise Gentiles
whom they reject, would have abhored such doctrine. Moteover, it is very absurd
to say from this Scripture, Romans 1. 19. That man had the Knowledge of GOD by
Nature: For First, The Apostle says, It was manifest in them, not in the
Creatures without them (tho that was also an Adminacle to help their Knowledge)
but their Knowledge was inward, and all that might be known, therefore not any
imperfect Knowledge. And Secondly, GOD has showed it unto them; That is, GOD
has manifested or revealed to man in himself that which may be known of GOD;
For the words Showed and Manifested, are the same in the Greek, and very
consonant to that other saying of the same Apostle; The things of GOD can no
man know but by the Spirit of GOD.

In the rest of page 112. and 113. He takes the Liberty to scold, rail, and
lie at random; All which I pass by except this: And yet (says he) this Natural
Light is to the Quakers their God, their Christ, their Grace, and whatsoever
else is necessary to Sal vation. To prove this, he gives us an heap of
Citations, which it seems he has gathered from his Brethren Hicks and Faldo,
the known Forgers. I shall show his disingenuity in the first of these of
Citations, by setting down William Penn's words, whereby the Reader may know
whose footsteeps our Author has followed.

Christian Quaker, page 116 If then the Life of the Word be the Light of Men,
unless the Life of the Word he Natural, the Light of it must be supernatural,
Divine and Infinite, as becomes the Life of the Word to be; And this checks the
dull ignorance or base deceit of Thomas Hicks who either could not or would not
understand George Whitehead, when he said (the Light must be Divine, because
the Life from whence it comes is so, and the Effect is always of the same
nature with the cause) in any other sense then this; That because (says T:
Hicks, GOD is the cause of Beasts and Trees, therefore they are God. Which
strange Construction of George Whitehead's words, bewtays either great
stupidity or disingenuity, I would ask the very angry man, Is there no effect
of Power beside that of Nature? Did the Father of T: H: beget a Beast or a Man
when he begat him? Surely unless he has abandoned all understanding, me thinks,
he that makes in his Book so notable a distinction betwixt Reason and Railing,
by using so little of the one, and so much of the other, should put put one
betwixt a Natural and Potential Effect, I mean such an Effect as proceeds from
Nature, and one that comes from mere Power. The Divine Life can naturally
produce nothing that is not as Divine as it self; But its Power had made all
that is not of its self, as well inanimate as animate Beeings.

I have set down William Penn's words at length, That the Reader may see, how
little Conscience these men make of traducing honest Men; And that our Author
cares not to join with Anabaptists, Independents (whom he accounts Heretics)
Yea, to take Hell rather then to want some Lie to allege against the Quakers,
wherefore I shall trouble you no more with his Citations, being fully Answered
by others, but shall proceed to see what more he has to say.

In the end of page 115 he falls a railing and clamouring dispetatly, Telling
us, that by this dim light, Men have enough ado to perceive that there is a
Supreme Being, what then is become of his late great assertions; That this dim
light of Nature, Reason, Conscience, extinguished Lantern, etc. Could teach men
that there was one GOD, that he was Infinite, Omnipotent, to be Loved, Feared,
and Adored, and to do others as they would be done by, which is the substance
of the Law and the Prophets; This is confusion and contradiction with a
Witness, yet he glories in the end, and heaps togeher lies in Hypocrsie, which
deserve no answer.

In page 116, He would insinuat, that we depress the light as much as formerly
we had exalted it, because when some pretending to it have erred, we say, their
Doctrines are to be subjected to the Judgment of the Church, This he calls
Popery, and at last worse, Viz. A subjecting of Christ and GOD to another, as
capable of deceiving and being deceived.

Bur I would know from this windy man whether if he or any Presbyterian should
teach any Doctrine contrary to the Covenant and Confession of Faith, and
pretend Scripture for it, I say, whether he would be liable to the Judgment of
the General Assembly, and whether it were the man's pretenses, or the
Scriptures, which the Assembly takes upon the^ to judge even so we neither take
upon us to judge Christ, nor his Light, which can neither deceive nor be
deceived; But the deceit and follv of such pretenders as our Author and his
Brethren who pretend to the Scriptures, and neither understand them, not walk
according to them.

In the next place, after a little of his accustomed froath, be says, he will
propose and enervat those of their Arguments which seem to be most strong, etc.
And begins with George Keith, citing, Truth defended, page 87, but is page 85.
A Divine Law in all men, is an inward immediate dictate, but there is a Divine
Law in all men, ergo, etc. To this he answers by denying the Minor, which I
cannot but admire, seeing George Keith has so abundantly proven it in the same
page, yet never noticed by our Author: But he thinks he has guarded himself
sufficiently in his Preface to the Reader, by forbidding them to touch or
handle such unclean things, as George Keiths books; But all this deceit will
not cover him, for George Keith tells him, First, that he has proven this by
many arguments in his book of Immediate Revelation. Secondly the Americans (whom
his Adversary names) transgress the Divine Law, therefore they have a Divine
Law: For where there is no Law there is no transgression. And thirdly, he cited
Bishop Sanderson, saying, the Law in the hearts of all men, is as really the
word of GOD as that Printed in our Bibles; But Patroclus reads not this, and
therefore makes short work with it, and glories as if he had Vanquished
Euforbis, by whose Dart Patroclus fell.

The next he attempts is R: B's: Vindication page 39; But this is no Argument
as he would falsely insinuate, but written to stop the Mouth of a windy man, J:
Brown, charging him with Blasphemy.

But he proceeds page 118. That which we sin in not obeying is sufficient to
Salvation, but in not obeying the Light within, we sin; Therefore it is
sufficient to Salvation. Answer, First, he has neither told us where, not by
whom this Argument is used, and may be his own for any thing I know; But
Secondly, he seems to confess that they sin who do not obey the Light; And
Thirdly, his answer is very nonsensical, to wit, it is sin to disobey the
Lawful commands of Parents, which commands are not sufficient to Salvation; But
what made that disobedience to Parents to be sin; If the Law of GOD had not
commanded obedience to them? Every sin is a transgression of the Law of GOD,
and therefore every sin presupposes a Divine Law, and here I must tell him
that his brother the author of Melius Inquirendum tells him page 303. All that
conscience dictats as a Counlelour, all that Conscience determines as a judge,
is in the name of the Supreme and Soveraion JEHOVAH, adding there is one
Lawgiyer who is able to Save and to destroy, and a little after Conscience has
in its Commission to dictate before the fact, as well as to reflect upon the
fact, it teaches what we ought to do as well as examine whether we have done
well or not, By these it appears this man was of the mind, that that there was
a Divine Law in all men, call it by what name he will.

Next he comes to John 1. 9. That was the true light, which enlighteneth every
man coming into the World, where he gives two glosses of it; J; Browns, First,
that Light may be taken for the Light of reason; This is nonsense, as if man
could be a man without reason; It is every man not every bruit he enlightneth,
and till we understand more, we believe it is reason makes the difference, so
the gloss must run thus, he enlighteneth every reasonable creature with the
light of Reason, The Second gloss is, that by every man, is not to be
understood every individual, but only every one which savingly enlightened;
Upon this R: B: says he is puzzled with this Scripture, for he knows not what
way to take it, Whereupon our airy Author insults, saying, He inferrs penury
from abundance; But, says he, I remembered they were Enemies to Logic; But
less stoath might have sufficed; For I am sure, if he had not been puzzled he
would never have given two such contrary Exposicions, The first making the
Light merely natural, yet Universal. The second Gloss, making it saving and
supernatural, but special and not Universal; Which evidently shows that Jo:
Brown and our Author who would defend him are both in Babel. And therefore it
being a matter of Consequence to know, whether the Life of Christ which is the
Light of Men, the Light where with every Man is enlightened be Natural or
Supernatural, Universal or Special, Saving or Damning; It concerns our
Advetlary to consult the General Assembly, which of the two Glosses may be best
to hold by, seeing both cannot stand. In the rest of this page he does nothing
but undervalue his Adversary, whether Justly let the Reader Judge.

His next Combat is with John 1. 5. The darkness comprehended it: He says,
That by darkness is meant mon in his natural Estate, in which Estate he can
comprehend what is Natural: Whence he inferis that man in this estate is void
of all Spiritual and Supernatural Light, Which Inference is void of all Sense
and Reason, for the very words before it are, The Lightsined in the darkness.
That is according to our Author Man in his Natural Estate, who could comprehend
natural things, but could not comprehend the Light; Therefore (according to our
Author his own Confession) The Light must be Supernatural, or else the darkness
would have comprehended it. After a little vapor he says, Although the Light
Christ be supernatural, yet the little Beams and Sparks of Reason and
Conscience are Natural. But who ever denied this? The thing he was to prove as
well as assert; Was, That the Life of Christ which is the Light of Men, and the
Light which Men are commanded to believe in, is Natural: Which he may either do
or be silent for ever. Next he rails a while, and concluds with an abominable
Lie, Viz: That we assert, That the dim and dark Light of Nature is GOD himself:
This he has learned from the Father of Lies the Prince of Darkness, and to him
it will return, and he with it, except he repent.

The next Argument he deals with, is R: B's page 19. 20. of his Vindication; I
shall entreat the Reader to look the place, and compare it with our Authors
bungling upon it; R: B: proves by Rom: 8. 9. 14. 1 John 2. 27. John 6. 45.
John 14. 16. 17. That the Promises of the Spirit to teach, lead and guide, were
common to all Believers and not particular to the Apostles: To which our Author
replys, he should have given some other thing for proof then bare Assertions;
For so he calls all the Scripture proofs he has brought, but meddles not with
one word of them: But our Adversary will not serve us so, he will give us
Questions for all, and ask us, Why may not Immediate Objective Revelation be
promised to the Apostles in these places, and yet not to all Believers? Answer,
Because GOD had promised before to pour out his Spirit upon all flesh; And Paul
tells us after, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. As
for the Scriptures he cites, they nothing touch us, for we never denied the use
of Means in the leadings of the same Spirit, as R: B: has shown at large in
the place last cited.

But in stead of a solid Answer to R: B's Argument, he boldly beggs the
Question; Saying, Whatever the Qnakers say we cannot help it; Certain it is,
that no man of sound Judgment will deny, that when one reads the Scriptures,
and has his mind Illuminated by the Spirit; he has that promise fulfilled to
him of which we now speak. Very well Patroclus, This is more like a a Pope then
a Prevbyter; But the man has told us he cannot help it.

The next Argument he assaults, R: B's Apology page 38. That which all
Professors of Christianity of whatsoever kind, are forced ultimatly to recurr
unto, when pressed to the last; That for because of which all other foundations
are recommended and accounted worthy to be believed, and without which they are
granted to be of no weight at all, must needs be the only, most true, certain,
and unmovable foundation of all Christian Faith; But Inward, Immedist
Objective Revelation by the Spirit, is That, etc: Ergo, etc.

To this he offers two Answers: The first by a Simile thus, A man just now
possessing a piece of Land formerly enjoyed by his Ancestors, by virtue of a
Right granted to them by a Prince deceased many ages ago, spoke mouth to mouth
with that Prince dead ages out of mind; Thus that into which the present
Possessor of such piece of Land, when pressed to the last recurreth unto, and
for which other Grounds or Charters are commended or valide; Must of necessity
be the most immovable ground of and warrant for such a piece of Land his
possess^ion of it: But the Grant or Donation of such or such a Prince given
many ages ago. First, By word of mouth, tho again committed to writtings; Is
that which the present Possesser being pressed to the last, recurreth to. Ergo,
The present Possessor had discourse immediate mouth to mouth with a Prince in
many ages back e're the present P^ssessor was born.

This he, And then as if he had done some notable feat he falls a roaring,
insulting and mocking his adversary, saying, These must be admirable fellows,
etc. Their strongest argument serve only to prove the Authors to be in a
Paroxism of folly, moving langhter in a very Heraclitus.

But it seems our Author has been in a Paroxism of madness and blasphemy, for
his Simile can conclude nothing less then this, Viz. That Christ is dead, the
Spirit of Christ i^ dead, ages out of mind, that no man hears his voice now,
nor can recur to him to be satisfied of his doubts, that he has broken all his
promises to his Church, of being with them to the end of the World, of sending
the Comforter to teach them and lead them into all truth, and that great
promise he that is with you shall be in you; Many more are the promises in the
Old Testament, as in Jeremiah, Joel, and that in Isaiah 54. 13. All thy
Children shall be taught of the LORD, Testified unto, as fulfilled in 1 John 2.
20, 27. If the Preaching and Printing such gross blasphemy as these, which
naturally, and unavoidably flow from this simile, be fit to move laughter, and
not rather terror and astonishment in the Author, let the Reader judge.

I shall here add two Arguments fit for this place.

First, Christ's Sheep hear his voice.

But the Presbyterian Clergy hear not his voice.

Ergo, They are not of his Sheep.

Secondly, Where there is no Vision, there the people perish.

But among the Presbyterian Clergy, there is no vision.

Ergo, Their people perish.

But blessed be the LORD we know and believe according to the Scriptures, That
Christ our Prince is dead ages out of mind, but lives and Reigns for ever,
and that he is Faithful and True, and that he is always present with his
Church, that he stands at the door of their heart and knocks; if any open
to him, he enters; and that he dwells in them and walks in them, and is
to them a GOD, and they to him a people, and that if any be otherwise minded
he will even reveal this also unto them Phil: 3. 15. So let our Author glory in
his Chartor, which we have as well as he, but be war to blasphem the Spirit of
Christ, lest the end thereof be no laughter, but weeping and gnashing of teeth.

His Second answer is, By distinguishing immediate objective Revelation,
granting it was Immediate and ohjective in respect of the Apostles and
Prophets, but not in respect of the present prosessors of Christianity.

Answer, First, he here makes the ground and foundation of See his page 33.
the Faith of the prophets and Apostles one thing, and that of the present
professors of Christianity another thing which is absurd. Secondly be excludes
all Christians from Immediate Objective Revelation, except Prophets and
Apos^les, and therefore among them the seventy Disciples, and Luke who wrote
two books of the New Testament, and many others mentioned in the Acts of the
Apostles; But Thirdly, The foundation of Faith, as well as the Rule of Faith
has still been the same in all ages of the Church, as he has formerly
confessed, and therefore if immedia^ objective R^v^lation was so to the
Prophers and Apostles (as he grants) it must also be the same to the present
professors of Christianity, and this shall suffice for his Membrum negatum.

In page 124. He falls upon the last argument he deals with calling it the
chief of his Apostolik Arguments (tho I find no such argument in all R: B's
apology, which he sets down thus; Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and some others,
had Immediate objective Revelation, therefore the whole Church had it. He and
his Brother John Brown deny the consequence, but has he not hereby cut his own
throat, by givving way to Tradition, as the Rule of that Church says, for sure
they had no Scripture, and therefore had no other foundation for their Faith,
nor Rule for their life but Tradition; And so having pleaded before, that what
was their Rule must be ours, he must confess that in default of Scripture and
Revelation, there remains nothing for them but Tradition, which must continue
to be our Rule also; For this the Papists owe him thanks.

A little after, he confesses there was more of GOD in these dark times of the
Old World, then there is now, Viz. In respect of Immediate Revelation.

But I would know the Reason of this, Seeing the Promises are greater, even to
pour out his Spirit upon all flesh; Is his hand shortened or his Ear heavy? Or
is he dead, (as our Author insinuats) or has he lest off to care for his
Church? No, But our iniquities have separated him from us, and our unbelief.

But to do his Business fully, he adds, How will the prove that ever Abel had
Immediate Objective Revelations? I Answer, GOD has always communicated as much
of himself to the Righteous as to the wicked, but wicked Crin had Immediate
Objective Revelations, Ergo, Righteous Abell had them.

Then he tells us that the third, fourth, and fifth Proposision of the second
These falls to the ground; But upon what ground he says so, let the candid
Reader Judge.

He concluds this Chapter with a piece of his first Dream of the Trojan War,
and citing Virgil, he tells us, like the Irojan War, its couplings being cut,
the whole Faorick of Quakerism tumbleth down about the Ears of its Authors and
Builders. It Is a pity the poor man should have read this Poets and others on
the History of Irov; For the Reader may see how he extravages upon that
Subject, it has quite spoiled him. But he has been a little mistaken here,
for Patroclus did not live to see the Trojan Tower fall; And if he will stretch
the Allegory a little further, he may remember that the Posterity of the
Trojans, brought the Posterity of the Greeks under their subjection, and made
them Tributaries, which may happen to be the face of this Author and his
Brethren. But sure I am, this Language is more like a Gallant bowling over his
Cups in a Tavern. then a lober Christian writing for the satisfaction of a
Dissenter.

Chapter III. Of Original Sin.
IN this Chapter he begins with his old clamor of Pelagianism; But now
deservedly, we shall see anon. And first, I shall cite the Westminster
Confession, Chap: 6. Numb: 2, By this sin, they fell from their Original
Righteousness, and Communion with GOD, and so became dead in sin, and wholly
defilled in all the faculties and parts of Soul and Body. And Numb: 4. From
this original corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed, disabled, and made
opposite to all Good, and wholly inclined to all evil, do proceed all actual
Transgressions, To both these willingly assent, But how this agrees with the
dark Lantern doctrine of our Author (who for twenty eight pages together in the
foregoing Chapter, has labored with all the force he has, to prove that
fallen man retained such a pottion of the Image of GOD (which he calls
Righteousness) as there. by to know one Infinite, Omnipotent GOD, who is to be
Loved, Feared, and Adored, and that men should Love their Neighbor as
themselves, which is no more then to do to others as they would be done by) let
the Reader Judge. And expect his Brethren will take notice of him not only for
calumniating us, but for giving the Lie to the Westminster Confession.

And here I must take notice of a word he has inserted into some of his
Arguments, maliciously insinuating, That we said, A wicked man could do no
Action that was good upon the matter, or as to the substance of that Action:
This is no word of ours, but foisted in by him to render us the more odious.
For we know a wicked man may feed the hungry, or cloth the naked; And as I
told him before, The devil confessed Christ before Men to be the Holy One of
GOD; Which as to the substance of the Action, was better then some of our
Presbvterian Solemnities; Whereof one was their solemn Fast and Humiliation for
the Prevalency of EPISCOPACIE, appointed for all the Ministers of the Nation
immediately after their late Re-Establishment; By which act they resolved to
murder the Consciences of their Brethren of the EPISCOPAL Persuasion, who
esteem EPISCOPACIE a Right and Lawful Church Government; And after this, for
some other pretense to have turned them out of their Livings, which is their
Lives; Many of them being so poor, as they cannot subsist without them; Which
they had certainly done, if their beloved Beformers the Babble, had been as
obedient in the North as they were in the West.

Now we read of a desperate Millanoise, who having forced his Adversary for fear
of his Life to blasphem and abjure GOD; immediately killed him, calling it a
noble revenge to murder both Soul and Body at once. Let out Author make the
Application, and for bear his malicious Fastings, and black mouthed Calumnies
for the future.

Moreover the gross Doctrines of Pelagius were, First, That man had no loss by
Adam, and so were as apt from their birth to serve GOD as Adam was before the
Fall. Secondly, That men have no absolute need of Grace, of Love, and the Gift
of the Holy Spirit: Only it did facilitat, or make the work the easier, but Man
by his nature could do good without Grace. Thirdly, He affirmed all the Grace
was at best Objective, such as the Outward Preaching of the Gospel, etc. But he
denied any Subjective Grace, or any Grace that moved or inclined the Will
immediately unto GOD. All which we renounce, And therefore let out Author and
his Brethren be for ever hereafter silent of that false and unjust Calumny of
Pelagianism.

Having thus cleared the Truth of the false Accusation of Pelagianism, I find
nothing more of weight in this Chapter, but his endeavors to prove that
Infants are condemned for Adams sin, upon which he acknowledges their Doctrine
of Reprobation depends, I shall offer him the thoughts and arguments of some
Protestants upon this subject, and then take notice of his argumentations.

And First, the learned Jeremy Taylour in his book called Unum necessarium,
denies this Presbyterian Doctrine, and reason thus; Either Adam was condemned
eternally, and is now suffering in hell for that transgression, or he was
pardoned, and is now a Glorified Saint: the first he says, no Christian will
allege Adam being a Tipe of Christ, and also that GOD entered into a new
Covenant with him: So that he was not condemned for that sin; And if the second
be true, that is, that he was pardoned, and is now a glorified Saint; How then
can these men be so wickedly audacious as to charge the Infinitely Just and
Merciful GOD with such cruelty and injustice as the wickedest of men would be
ashamed of? To wit, to pardon the Malefactor (yea put him in a better condition
then he was before) for his transgression, and yet to punish his Posterity
(innocent Infants) who had no being till five Thousand years after, who never
had accession, nor so much as a consent to that sin, and yet upon this wrong
and wicked notion of the Deity depends their doctrine of Reprobation.

Secondly, There is no remission without repen^ance (says the former Author)
and alleges he never yet met with the man, that could say he had Repented for
Adams sin, and I doubt if our Author will say it either, for Repentance is
either to be understood, Penitentiam agere, to do penance, or resipiscere, to
grow wise again, or to do so no more. let our Author choose which of the two he
will, and tell us with the next whether he has repented for Adams sin.

Thirdly, It is the Soul that sins or is guilty of sin which (according to
themselves) we have not from Adam but from GOD by new creation, who made never
any thing impure, and therefore I will expect something next from this learned
man concerning the Soul, Quid and unde, for I acknowledge they are little
enough cleared yet by the Learned, tho I think our Country man Barron is
inferior to none I have yet seen; But if our author be for preexistance, will
more easily give us a reason for our inclinations to evil.

The next I shall cite is the sorenamed John Humphery with R: Baxters
approbation, who asserts page 26 of Eelection and Redemption, that a discharge
of mankind from damnation for Adams sin only is a fruit of Christ's death
immediate and Universal.

Again in page 28, of the Covenant he asserts that Infants being Baptized are
saved, And adds if they be not Baptized we are yet to look on them as such who
have not broken this new Law, or never resuled and rejected their remedy and so
long as by the Redemption of Christ they are delivered over with all the World
from the Covenant of works to the New Law to be judged, I will not be the man
that shall condemn one Infant to Hell, or unto torments; And here I must tell
our Author that its strange to see him contend so much for the Scripture to be
his Rule, and yet be so dogmatical in a matter so lubricous, when he can
produce no plain Scripture for it, nor a consequence without excessive
straining, and whereas he objecteth some Protestants, and some Fathers, I had
rather with one Athanasius believe the Divinity of Christ, and wonder that the
whole world was become Arrian, then follow the multitude in such a gross error
as that was and is.

In the next place I shall consider where the strength of his Arguments ly,
rather then follow his rambling, for I perceive he makes the greatest noise and
clamor when he has least to say, and boasts greatly when he has done
nothing.

The whole strength of this Chapter lies in two Hypotheses, First, that If
Adam had not sinned, he should have been Immortal. Secondly, that as the
Righteousness of Christ is imputed to man for Justification; So Adams sin is
imputed to man for Condemnation. And to prove these two Doctrines upon which
much of the Presbyterian Religion depends, he should have proceeded heartily,
and given us Scripture proofs obvious to every well disposed intelect, whereas
he has brought no Scripture which any plain man like me can think to relate to
such a matter.

First, He calls R: B: tidiculous, for enquiring if his Adversary would
assert every thing that Augustine said. But he should have confessed, that
Augustine erred in this very Matter, in saying, That all Infants dying without
Baptism were demned, And then have told us, That he who erred in one thing
might have erred in the other, But this (tho true) would have wronged his Cause.

His first Argument he draws from Began. 2. 17. For in the day thou eatest thou
shall surely die: Hence he arguds, Infants dies Ergo, they are guilty of
Original sin. This Consequence is very gross, for if bodily death had been
hereby threatened; Then Adam could not have lived one day after the commission
of that sin, whereas he lived some hundreds of years after it: And the
Westminster Confession is wiser then to make it a part of Adams punishment in
all the first five Paragraphs of it, till they join actual sin with it,
calling it only a death in sin, and a defilement or corruption of our whole
nature. But he pleads death is an evil, and no evil could have befallen t^an if
he had not sinned; This he answers himself confessing, That to the Scints,
where the sting of death is taken away, it is no evil: Therefore, if Adam had
not sinned, death had been no evil to him.

But I must ask him a Question, seeing it is consessed by all, that Eternal
death is a punishment of sin, from which the Saints are freed? How comes it
that the Saints are not freed from bodily death also? Seeing, according to our
Author Bodily death is no less a punishment of sin then Eternal Death is. If he
say, That all Mankind were to die because of Adams sin, although all Mankind were
not to be condemned for it (which yet is nothing but his own assertion) How
came it that Enoch and Ellas dyed not, but were translated? And that Paul
says, We shall, not all die, but we shall all be changed, etc. All which seems
to bear that the Earth should not have been Etetnal, nor Adam have lived
Eternally on it, although he had not sinned: Which being the grand Pillar, upon
which he builds his Doctrines of Original sin and Reprobation, he should have
proven by plain Scripture or sound Reason, which he has not done to the
satisfaction of any Reader, yea he has scarce attempted it except by a Rapsody
of railling words: But he had an easier way to have proven both, and more
consonant to his own Principles, By telling us, That it was foreordained from
Eternity, that Adam should sin, and that all Mankind should die, and that the
far greater part of them should be reprobates, and be damned eternally: For the
Westminster Catechism says, GOD for his own Glory, has foreordained
whatsoever comes to pass; But all these things comes to pass; Ergo, GOD for his
own Glory has foreordained them.

His next is Rom: 6. 23. The wages of sin is death. Where, says he, Death
without exception of any kind of death, is called the wages of sin.

If the Apostle had meant more kinds of Deaths then one, it is like he would
have said, deaths in the plural number; But the Apostle intends here no other
kind of death then the same kind of Life he mentions in the same sentence,
which is Eternal; The words are, For the wages of sin is death, But the Gift of
GOD is Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our LORD. Now to cause the first
speak of bodily death, and the last of Eternal Life, is so strained an
Interpretation, as might nauseat a Reader. He would mock R: B: for saying The
whole Creation suffered a decay for Adams sin, But it seems he has forgotten,
that GOD cursed the Earth for man's sake, and yet the Earth was not guilty of
Man's sin; But says he, The body shall after the resurrection live as well as
the Soul, and therefore bodily death is a punishment of sin. This is pretty
singular, for it is acknowledged by all, that the body is a mere Instrument to
the Soul; And at this rate, our Anthors Pen is guilty of all the Lies and
blasmphemies in his book, and Patroclus Swordguilty of the blood of all the
Trojans he killed; But proves nothing that bodily death was here meant by the
Apostle, yea he confesses that bodily death is not a punishment to believers,
^eing the sting thereof is removed by Christ.

Now are we come to his second Argnment I spoke of, To wit, That as we are
justified by the Righteousness imputed to us, So infants are damned by the sin
of Adam imputed to them. So that it the first be false in the Presb^terian
sense the last is also false.

I shall first tell him what J: Humphrey says of it, Treatise of
Justification, page 21.

As for what they add usually (says he) in the definition that Christ's
Righteousness is imputed to us, and made ours by Faith as an Instrument; I must
confess they are notions, which as they never came into the head of Saint
Augustine, nor were received (I suppose) into the Church till within a Centurie
or two of years since, so do I question, whether a Centurie or two more, may
not wear them qui^e away again. Again, page 25. If the Righteousness of Christ
be imputed to us (as if it were ours in its self) it must be the Righteousness
of his active or passive Obedience or both; If his active Obedience be imputed
to us, then we must be look upon in him as such who have committed no sin, nor
omitted any Duty; And then what need will there be of Christ's Death, How shall
Christ die for our sins, if we be looked upon in Christ as having none at all?
If Christ's passive Obedience be imputed, then must we be look^ upon as such,
who in Christ have suffered and satisfied the Law, and born the full curse of
it; And then how shall there be ^oom for any Pardon? The Man who pays his full
debt by himself or Surity, can in no sense be forgiven by his Creditor. If
Christ's active and passive Obedience both are imputed, then must GOD he made to
deal with Man according to the Covenant of works in the business of
Justification, when nothing is more aparent in Scripture, then that by Grace we
are Justified, and by Grace saved.

A little after he says, There was no need to bring in this notion of Christ's
imputed Righteousness into the Church, But that our Protestants mistake
themselves, and forget that we are justified and saved by the Covenant of
Grace, and not by the Law of Moses or Covenant of our Creation; And in the
foregoing page, he says, I would fain know whether any of the Disciples,
James, John, or Paul himself, whether Clemens, Roman, or Alexanderin, Justine
Martyr, Cyprian, Ambross, Augustine or any of the Fathers, Whether Gounsels or
School men, whether John Huss or Wickliff, or any Father or Holy writer
(without resting on some bare incoherent scraps of sentences) did ever
understand or receive the full notion of Faiths instrumentality, and the
imputation of a passive Righteousness before Luther? And if not, whether it be
possible it should be of any such moment as is made of it by most Prot^stants*
I have set down these that the Reader may see we are not alone in this matter,
but that as good Protestants as the Presbyterians, yea and some of themselves
(to wit, Baxte^) are of the same mind with us; And yet in page 134, he is so
confident of this his new notion unknown (as this man saith^) to the Apostles,
Fathers, Counsels, and first Protestants that he asser^eth either Adams sin to
be such as by it all have sinned and by it death without exception is brought
upon all mankind, or else that the Spirit of God speaks nonsense in this
Text. Certainly the Apostles were plain men, and had more plain simple and less
intricat thoughts of the Christian Doctrines then our Schoolmen have devised,
and I believe few of them would have understood their terms of Art now in
vogue, and if the Appostles, or rather the Spirit of GOD had intended any such
Doctrine as necessary to our Salvation; It would not have needed Hathenish
Philosophy and Logic to have strained a consequence from the Text, which
prehaps the writer never intended; and our School men's seeking to cause the
Doctrine of Christ quadrate with Heathenish Philosophy has beeh the ba^e of
Christianity, tho is he now made no less then absolutely necessary to the being
of a Minister; And yet for all, this man is so confident, let the Reader, but
look to the 16 Verse of the Chapter, where the comparison is made, and he will
see that condemnation Eternal death is meant, and not bodily Death. His other
Argument, that Death Reigned from Adam to Moses, can prove nothing for bodily
Death has Reigned from Adam to Patroclus; and what than? Ergo, Infants are
condemned for Adams sin, for none can die but sinners, this is boldly to beg
the question and no more.

His great Argument in page 135 is, That sin which is descrived to us by the
Apostle, that he says, brought Death upon all men, that men sinned by it, and
were made sinners, even they who could not as yet actually sin, that they all
became guilty of Death and Condemnation, That sin by imputation is the sin of
the whole nature included in Adam, and rendereth the whole nature obnoxious to
death and condemnation; But the first sin of Adam is thus described to us by
the Apostle, etc. Ergo, that sin is the sin of nature.

Answer, The Major contains many great lies in it, and the Minor is a gross
untruth which he and all the Presbyterians in the World can never proves from
the words of the Apostles rightly understood, the indeed they have a saculty of
causing the Scripture speak contraries, as we have seen and heard at Aberdeen,
upon the Text, Holiness becomes thy house, O LORD, etc. I shall therefore
insert one sentence more of J: H: There are some apt to conceive only that Adam
being the root of Mankind, Humane nature it self sinned in him, and so when we
come to exist his guilt is derived upon our persons as virtually and seminally
in him, no otherwise then Levi is said to have paid tithes to Melchisedeck in
the Loins of Abraham. I should (says he) incline to this explanation, but that
I see not then why all the sins of Adam besides, and of all out Progenitors,
should not be ours also upon the same account,as much as that first
transgression.

He rails at R: B: for denying the Major of this argument, and telling, John
Brown how he had abused the Scriptures, soisting in words of his own to deceive
the simple Reader; I desire the Reader may be at the pains to see R: B's
vi^dication and then judge betwixt him and his adversary.

In page 136 he reproacheth R: B: for saying, show me the place of Scripture
that says Infants are guilty of Adams sins But it would have wronged the cause
to tell why R: B: said so, which was because J: Brown had challenged him for
adding an interpretation, tho he told him it was so, and therefore he says, I
am content there be neither addition nor so much as consequences made use of,
adding let him show me the place of Scripture that says Infants are guilty of
Adams sin? and now I entreat the Reader to compare the Books, and see what
candor, integrity, or honesty is among such adversaries, or what Justice we can
expect from men of such foreheads, as can raise a calumny on such a foundation,
which themselves gave first ground for. He talks abundantly about the
Salvation of Infants but to no purpose, forging Blasphemous consequences, and
Fathering them upon R: B: while they are his own if they be Blasphemies, For he
never said, that Infants are not saved by Christ only, and has sufficiently
cleared himself in his Vindication from this, but repeated callumny.

To R: B's saying, Infants are under no Law, he answers in three instances,
that Children are forefaulted and deprived of their Fathers Estate for their
Fathers faults; 2, That the Children of Sodom, etc. And of ^^re* and of Achan,
etc. Were punished for their Fathers sins; But its strange with what confidence
he can repeat these tales which R: B: has so fully answered, and it is
manifest they suffered not for Adams sin (if they were at all punished for sin)
it must needs be the sin of their immediate Parents: And in the very words of
Austustine, cited by himself in page 141) he says, shall they sin that are
under no command, That is, under no Law. He would abuse R: B: as saying,
Augustine did not think Infants guilty of original sins; Whereas he only cites
Augustine to prove they are under no Law, which the words plainly impott.

His Third is a very rare one, Thus, If in any point of Religion and Faith, the
admirable depth of the Judgment and secret Counsel of GOD be to be seen,
certainly it is to be observed here, etc. I would fain learn from this Author,
what worse the Faith and Christian Religion would have been, tho this
contraversy of Infants being condemned for Adams sin (while Adam himself was
pardoned) had never been started in the

Church by such capricious Clergiemen as our Author? Or does he believe that
the belief of this Doctrine is absolutely necessary to Salvation? Certainly if
it be so, the number will be few, and somewhat more few then Shepherd makes
them in his Sincere Convert. But he says, The depth of the secret Counsel of
GOD is to be seen and observed here: If seen and observed here, then it is no
secret, and if it be secret, it is no where seen nor observed: But the
Presbyterians to know the secret Counsel of GOD, and yet deny the Revelation of
his Spirit; This is unaccountable Doctrine, But he sends us to Paul's
Sanctuary, Who ^rt thou, etc: If he had added the rest of the Doctrine he
asserts, To wit, Who dare deny, That GOD condemns innocent Infants, for that
sin he has pardoned to the Transgressour, he had come off fairly.

But he answers Paul's Question, saying, we answer therefore, First, That Adam
was a publict person, standing and falling in the room of his Posterity, in
whose name and behalf the Covenant of works was made with him, as their
Representative; So that his first sin was not personal, but the sin of the
whole Nature.

I wonder whence our Author has gathered all this Stuff, for in all the
Scriptures is no such Doctrine to be found, And he denis any other Means of
Knows ledge* And therefore upon good ground l^r^p^at it, as R: B: has done.
But he should have proved, that the Nature of the Covenant of works was on this
wise; That although Adam died by the breach of it, yet he should be pardoned, yea,
and put in a better Condition then he was before the fall; But his innocent
Posterity, even Infants, who never had accession to that sin, not had a being
for some thousands of years after the same, should be condemned Eternally to
hell fire for that first sin: And till he prove this he says nothing to the
Contraversy.

But he labors to prove, That Adam seized to be a publict person after the
fall; Because he died in the day he did eat, and so became dead in Law, What
strained Consequences are these? Did not Adam live again the same day? And was
he not a publict person in the Second Covenant made with him the same day? Or
was there any other Man then on the Earth to make a Covenant with? Or was not
the Remissiion of that sin through the promised seed Jesus Christ, of as large
an extent as the sin was? That as Adam the Transgresiour was not condemned
eternally for that sin, So neither was any of his Posterity condemned for that
sin only: Which I have showed before to be the mind of as good Protestants as
our Author.

To prove that for Adams one sin only, all Mankind are condemned, he gives us
a Philosophiek Axiom, Bonum ex integrd eausa, malum ex quolibet defectu: And
cites Isaiah, 53. 31. But he should have told us in what verse of this Chapter
it is said, That Christ suffered for Adams sin, For I find not such thing in
it; But our sins, our Transgressions, out Iniquities: We all as sheep have gone
astray; We have turned every one to his own way; and the LORD has laid on him
the Iniquities of us all; And therefore he will do well with the next, to give
us Scripture, for proving this lunscriptural Dogma, of the damnation of Infants
for Adams sin; Or else acknowledge that the belief of it is not necessary to
Salvation; And certainly if it necessary, the Scriptures will be sufficient to
prove it; Tho our Author be pleased to call our saying so an Antiscriptural
dottage: His words concerning Augustine I have told him before, were cited by
R: B: to prove that Infants are under no Law; Which he ^^veth, and deceitfully
insinuates, that R: B: cited these words to make Augustine say, That Infants
are not guilty of Adams sin; Which he never intended further then the words
bear; To wit, That they are under no Law; Yet our Author defends Augustine in
condemning Infants; And again cannot choose but condemn Augustine for saying,
That Infants dying without Baptism are condemned; So he owneth Augustine when
he pleases him, and rejects him when he dilpleaseth him. In the end of page
141, He gloryeth a little upon his false Insinuation, which only manifests his
deceit and folly, as is his ordinary Custom.

In page 142, He returns to prove that Infants are under a Law, which he
acknowledges cannot be found in Scripture in so many words, but may be
gathered (by a Presbyterian Commentator) from the 13 and 14 verses of Romans 5.
For until the Law sin was in the world, but sin is not imputed where there is
no Law; Nevertheless Death reigned from Adam to Moses: even over them who had
not sinned after the similitud^ of Adams transgression, who is the figure of
him that was to come. Now let the unbyassed Reader judge whether any word h^^^
c^^ infer that insants are under a L^w, or are condemned for Adams sin? To
prove this, he says, Infants die, and the death here mentioned is a bodily
death, and Death is a punishment of sin, and referrs ^^ to his former Section
already answered, But R: B: says it may rather signify that which Paul calls a
body of Death, and is often called Death and Old Adam, and flesh, and the Law
in the members, b^ which co^ruption os man's nature; Man kind is made obnoxious
to fall under the temptations of Satan, and is naturally in clined to evil, as
R B: has described a^ large in his Vind: page 57, which he sliely, or rather
deceitfully passes by, and then crycth out, a Pelagion exposition, as if R: B:
had said that men sinned only by imitation, then which he could hardly have
devised a greater lie, and I entreat the Reader to see the page now cited, and
consider what faith these men can deserve, And as to the comparison betwixt
Adam and Christ in R: B: his Apology, and again in his Vind: page 58. he says
they are not to be regared, because they are to be accounted among the grossest
Sooinian^ who make the the Death and suflerings of Christian occasion or
example only, etc. But not at all the procuring cause of Salvation. This needs
no other answer but this, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
Brother, and I hope we should know our own Faith better then this li^ing Priest.

His next to prove Infants guilty of Adams sin is, Ephesians: 2, 3. The words a^e,
Among whom we all also had our conversation in times past in the lusts of our
flesh, sulfilling the d^fires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature
the Children of wrath as well as others.

Who is he that reads this verse and sees not, that it mentions actual sins?
And that by nature is understood that corrupted nature which has brought forth
these forenamed transgressions; But that any word here can intimate that
Infants are condemned for Adams sin is a wild consequence; He says, if the
Apostle had meant otherwise he would have excepted Infants, But he might as
well have said he meant no such thing as the damnation of Infants; because he
has no where afserted i^; But to prove that by nature is meant original sin,
he cites some Scriptures but so impertinently, as a man might think he
dreamed, Gal: 2. 5, and 4. 8. 1 Cor. 15 44, 46, etc. Which the Reader may see
and consider his citation of Calvin, he might have spared his pains, and if R:
B pasled by them, it was because they were not worth his while, and so his
conclusion resolves in Wind.

Next he gives us a whole page of Augustine and some others against the
Pelagians, and what then? Will he own all that these men have written, but he
tells us of fourteen Bishops, and therefore I must ask him whether these
fourteen Bishops were L^mbs of Antichrist as our Bishops use to be called? Or
if a Bishop can be a good Christian?

His next is, Psalm 51. 5. I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother
Conceive me. Says he R: B: denies the inference which yet is clear from
Nehemiah 9: But has not been so honest as to tell the verse, and I can find no
such thing there except in the 2 verse, whether it is said they Confessed their
sins, and the iniquities of their Fathers, and so throughout the whole Chapter,
but no mention of Adams transgression. What he says of the Marriage duty is
most impertinent, except he can say that David's Parents had no sin, except it
were the marriage duty, which I think no ^resbyterian will assert: But he
thinks he has done a brave late in asking, when his adversary reads of
actual sin, because R: B: asks him in what Scripture be reads of Original
sin, but he may find if he will, that he shall receive according to the deeds
done in the Body, whether good or evil. And 1 John 3. 8. He that commits sin
is of the Devil, and John 8: 34. He that commits sin is the servant of sin,
and many more. Let him bring as plain Scripture that Infants are condemned for
Adams sin, and he has done this busmess.

In page 146, He oflers us several pregnant arguments (as he words it) to
demonstrate his Doctrine, as first Infants are deprived of the Image of GOD,
therefore they are guilty of Adams sin, he proves his consequence, because to
be deprived of the Image of GOD is a punishment equal with, if not greater then
the torments of hell.

But our Author has mistaken all his measures here; For if it be a punishment
to be deprived of that which a man never had, then it is a punishment for
Patroclus to want the Bishopric of St. Andrews (so called) that it was a
punishment to Adam who once had it, I deny not, but he cannot prove that
Infants had it, and so cannot be deprived of it*

His next is, None go to Heaven ex^ept those th^^ were guiltyp^rsons,
therefore* Infants who have* never committed actual sin are guilty before GOD*
None are saved but sinners* which was Christ's ^r^and to the Earth, etc. And
such like trash of John Browns, fully answered by R: B: page 60 and 61. He at
last resolves all into a Question, How infants if not guilty to come to Heaven
without the death and meri^s of Christ? What he intends by this Qu^stion is
hard to be understood, its much if he knows what he ^ayes, for we never said
nor believed that any person, Infants* or Old man came to Heaven without the
Death and Merits of Christ; So that his Question if it have any sense at all,
must be, what need have Infants of Christ if they he not sinners* nor guilty of
Adams sin? This is ^nswer^d by R: B: page 61, They have ^e^d of Christ who died
for them, as a Savior to deliver them from the seed of sin* and corruption in
them, which is called ^a^th* and the Old man* that they may ^u^ off this* ^^d
sing the song of the Re^eemed, as John Brown words it: But how by what means he
does this he has o^ toll^us, and I desire not to be (...) above what is
revealed. ^^s answe^ (...) B's* Question, how elect infants come to besaved,
whom he accounts guil^y of (...)* Is, by the imputed Righteousness of Christ*
But then, what becomes of the (...) mentality of Faith, without which they deny
imputation, let him help this same ^nswer with the next.

His next is, These who in the sight of GOD are dogs, are guilty persons to be
excluded from Heaven, and therefore to be cast into hell* but whole Nations
without exception are ^uen* therefore Infants being a part of these Nations,
deserve to be excluded from Heaven and ^ent unto hell. To ^rove his Minor he
brings* Matt. ^^, 26. It is ^^ meet to take the Childrens bread and ^ast it
to dogs; but it seems he hat^ forgoten to look unto the 28 Verse. O* Woman!
Great is the Faith, etc. And ^^ they be dogs, who have Faith, yea and great
faith; I must ask him who are Children? And i^ such who have great Faith
deserve to be excluded from heaven, and sent to hell? He might have considered
that many of the Gentiles who formerly wallowed in the lusts of the Flesh, and
were dogs came afterward to be washed from their polutions, and that Publicans
and sinners entered the Kingdom of Heaven when such professing S^rib^s and
Pharisees as our Author were shut out* The other place he cites 1 Cor* ^* 14.
For the unbelieving husband is Sanctified b^ the wife, and the unbelieving*
wife is Sanctified by the Husband, else were your Children unclean, but now are
they holy. I^ this be any thing to the purpose, it is against our Author,
seeing it relates, to the uncleanness and holiness of the immediate Parents,
and can never be thought to intend Adams sin, but any thing may serve to make a
Muster.

His next is ^en* 1^* 14. The man Child that is Vncircum^ised* shall be cut
off. Hence he says that Mr. Brown infers that Children may be in some sense
apabl^ of breach of Covenant, and therefore under a Law desiring his adversary
to chaw his Cude upon it; First, I observe how timorously they propose this
argument with a may ^e, and in some sense; But it is strange how men pretending
to sense could propone in it, for whose sin was it i^ the Child was
un-Circumcised? Could it Circumcise it self or could it desire another to do
it? Or did ever the Just and Merciful GOD require such an impossibility of an
Infant of ^ight days old? It was therefore the Father and not the Child who
was oblidged by this Covenant, and who sinned in case of Non*performance* So
that R: B: needed not trouble himself with such nonsensical stuff.

His fourth pregnant Argument is, John 3. None ^an enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven except they be born again: Upon this he argues, the New Birth is a Gift
of GOD, which he may withhold from whom he will; And therefore without
prejudice to his Justice, may exclude whosoever has it not from the Kingdom of
Heaven; But none are excluded from it but guilty persons, which I believe none
will deny. Therefore Infants may well be accounted guilty persons. I answer in
short, when he tells us h^w his Elect Infants are born again, he may take the
same wa^ with the rest; For I have told him before* I pretend not to be wise
above what is revealed; But his Doctrine of Imputation will not serve his turn
here.

Lastly, He comes to answer that of Ezekiel: 18. 20. For which he brings no
answer; But tells us Mr. Brown has cleared this Text; Why then did he meddle
with it? But he says it contradicts the second Commandment. Answer, No such
matter, for the second Commandment says, Visiting the sins of the Fathers upon
the Children* etc: Which is generally expounded of Temporary punishments, and
relates to the immediate Parents; But Ezekiel says, The Soul that sinn^th it
shall die, which is meaned of Eternal punishments.

And now to conclude, I must ask this great Pretender to a knowledge of the
secret Counsel of GOD, and the state of Infants after death; Whether they shall
continue Infants, and be such every way at the Resurection and to all Eternity,
as they are the time of their decease? And I shall expect his answer with the
next.

Chapter IV. Of GOD.
HE begins this Chapter with three malicious and false Accusations, according
to his custom, saying in this Chapter, I shall prove the Quakers guilty of
three things, each of which is enough to Un-Christian the Maintainer thereof;
But I hope not the Denyer thereof.

His three things are,

First, That they deny the Holy Trinity with Arrius and Sahellius.

Secondly, That their Doctrine makes GOD the author of sin.

Thirdly, That they bold the Soul of Man to be GOD.

All which three we positively deny our selves to be guilty of, and I hope all
sober and unprejudiced Men will acknowledge, that we know what we believe
better then this our deceitful and malicious Enemy does: And therefore this
whole Chapter needs no other Answer, But the LORD rebuke this lying spirit
that is gone forth into the mouths of these lying Prop^ets, Who take pleasure
to defam^ and bespatter innocent Men, thereby to lay them open to the fury of
their bigoted Admires, and blind folded followers: But the just GOD who
searches our Hearts knows our Innocence, and will in due time rip off these
covers of deceit, and take away this refuge of Lies, wherewith these Men cover
themselves, that they may hurt the Innocent.

To begin with the first, R: B: in his Apology, George Keith in his Book of
The Way cast up. have so fully vindicated us from the Arrians and Sabellian
herefies, that I wonder with what face this Author can accuse us; And it is
evident to all single hearted Men who read our Writings, that it is the Words
only we oppose; To wit, words invented by the deformers of Christianity, the
Clergy, who by their heathenish philosophy (by a new name called School
Divinity) have invented and brought into the Church these heathenish and
unscriptural terms which we reject. Nevertheless, this perverse and malicious
Author, like an Advocat pleading at a Bar, Bawls, Cries, Rants, and Tears, and
will perf^^ and nef^s have us guilty of Arrianism.

And first he sets down that Arrian herefie to be, That the Son is separated
from, or divided from the Eternal and Ineffable Substance of GOD the Father.

Now I charge him and all the Presbyterians in the World to produce on sentence
in our Writings, bearing this Doctine, which I am sure they cannot. Moreover
Philip Melanchton in Chron: Carionis. page 264. Says, That Arrius denied the
Divinity of Christ, and That the Son was Coeternal with the Father that he was
a Creature ex non existentibus, That is ex nibile* All which we detest and
abhor.

But to stop his mouth for ever, I tell him we own the Nicen Creed, which I
shall here insert so far as concerns this Contraversy.

I believe in one LORD JESUS CHRIST the only begotten Son of GOD, born of the
Father before all Ages; GOD of God, Light of light, True GOD of true God,
Begotten not made, Consubstantial with the Father, by whom all things were
made, who for us Men, and for our Salvation came down from Heaven, and was
Incarnat of the Holy Ghost, and the Virgin Mary, and became Man, was also
crucified for us, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was buried and arose again the
third day, according to the Scriptures, he ascended to Heaven, sits at the
Right Hand of the Father, and is to come again with Glory to judge the Quick
and the Dead, of whose Kingdom there shall be no end.

And now what can our most malicious Adversaties require more of us for I hope
it is evident to all Men, that it is the words of Man's Wisdom invented, that we
oppose and not the Mystery it self.

And here by the way I must tell him, that this Counsel has been no friend to
Presbytry; For we read of no Presbyters there, but such as were Legates sent by
Bishops, who for age or sickness could not come; As also that they appointed
two Metrapolitan Bishops, one in Rome and another in Alexandria, See Chron:
Carionts, page 205.

The rest of his Tatle is only about the Translation of Hebr: 1. 3. For which
he cites a number of Lexioons, I have none of them by me, but one Serevellius
who in his Lexieon Graco Latinum translats it Persona, and in his Lexcon Latino
Gr^cum translats it Substantia: But Hi^rom, Erasmus and Melanchton translats it
Substantia: And so if George Keith have said any thing which offends our
Author, in this or any other point, he may deall with his Books when he has a
mind, and I do not Question his ability to answer for himself.

I cannot omit one notable proof he gives to prove his salsehoods; Thus, It is
most evident from their perpetual bellish roillings at the Doctrine of the Holy
Trinity, calling it an abominable and stinking Doctrine, as they that heard
them told me, etc.

Now Reader consider, what can be expected from such an Adversary, whose malice
blinds him that he cannot see his own folly? Perhaps as great a Liar as himself
told him a Tale, and he will print and publish it to the World, to defame an
Honest and Innocent Body of People; This is Hicks and Faldo downright.

As for the Word Persona, it is not to be found in the Nicen Creed, and not
only Augustine, but Jerome, and Laurentius Valla, find fault with it, as no fit
word to express the Mystery: But a late Writter who calls himself a Protestant
Minister, poirc^ e^gh: rationales de DEO, etc. disputes at large against the
word Persona, to whom I refert our Author.

That it is an unscriptural word, he confesses, and then why may we not seek
plain Scripture for it, as well as his Brother Jo: Brown, in page 175, says,
It is considerable, that no where in Scripture we find it affirmed expresiv,
that Christ died for all Men. why then is all this trouble made. But it seems
Presbyterians may do many things, which are not allowable to others, seeing
they would fain be accounted Dictators over all Consciences in Brittan. But I
hope what is said will suffice to clear us of Arrianism to any prejudiced
Reader: And therefore I shall proceed to his second Calumny.

Which is, that according to the Quakers doctrine, GOD is Author of sin.

We have heard of some Witches, who after they were condemned, have impeached
many Innocent Persons: So our Author being unable to clear his Brethren of that
guilt charged justly on them by R: B: and fully proven, would have the Quakers
as guilty as they, Solatium est miseris multos habere pares, But two Blacks
make not a White.

His Argument is, GOD is the Author of every Substance.

But according to the Quakers, sin is a substance, Ergo, etc.

He proves his Minor thus, Grace is a Substance, therefore sin is a substance.

He says R: B: denies the Consequence, which he thus proves.

Sin can hear feel and perceive as well as Grace and Light, it may feel and
perceive the things of Satan as well as Light. And Grace feels or perceives the
Things of GOD, and may be in the Heart of a real Godly person, Therefore it is
a Substance. Thus our Auther.

Answer, The Scripture is cleat, That the Life of the Son of GOD is the light
of men, and that this is a substance I think he will not dare to deny, and he
has seemed to grant that there was a substantial life in Adam before the fall,
which he says was extinguished by the fall; Hence came the darkness, the
Death, the Polution, the Corruption, the lust, the flesh, or Body of Death, and
all sin as the West-minster Confession teaches. Now to compare these together,
and to say the light enlighteneth, therefore the darkness enlighteneth, the
life of Christ in man feels and perceives, therefore Death, Polution and
Corruption does feell and perceive, is a most wild consequence, and if he
intend to make the seed of the Serpent every way equal to the seed of the
Woman, its but the path way to Manichism, and indeed he has manifested his
favor to the Serpents seed very much, by contending so warmly for its Kingdom
in his Chapter of perfection. But it will not do, for no Man can deny, that he
has had the Counsels, Prohibitions, Approbations and Reproofs of the Light and
Grace of GOD, either before or after the doing of the Good or evil act, which
speak forth a living and substantial Principle; Whereas the other is a mere
defect, privation, weakness, corruption, and a want; And has more of the
nature of an accident (tho I dare not call it one) That is, which may be
present or absent without destroying its Subject; For Adam had no sin, and was
better without it then with it; And so will our Author if ever he have the good
Luck to be delivered from it (tho contrary to his Faith) And Christ the best

Man that ever, was never had it, as he says, The Prince of this World comes
and has nothing in me; But his mightiest argument is the last, which he builds
upon his own weak judgment thus: For I judge this to be the reason why the
Quakers judge that this is the reason (it seems the man has lost both lense
and reason) that there being grace in the bearts of wicked men, while in their
wickedness proves it to be a substance; Viz. Because it can be where its
contrary is, and strive, and wrestle with it, which is as evident concerning
sin in the heart of a Godlv man.

Answer, If Patroclus had lived till Aristotle's time, surely he had learned his
Logicks better, but he had the ill hap to meet with Hector before Aristotle was
born; And for as great enemies as we are to Logic in our Authors esteem and
account. I must tell him this judgment and reason of his has lost his cause:
For Aristotle says (with other Logicians) Substantiae contrarium est nihil,
and Substantia Substantiae non contrariatur; So that if the light be a
substance, its contrary is nothing: And this may give a Specimen of this windy
man's learning. as we have many of his honesty; All this is but George Meldrums
Dicats to the Students at Aberdeen, put in a new dress, and fully answered in
Quakerism Confirmed, Sect: 4.

He is very angry with George Keith for saying, The Devil may be called sin by
a metonomie, but he might have remembered that Paul calls sin a body of Death,
the Old man, the flesh, and Old Adam, all which are figurative speeches; Yet he
calls George Keith a rediculous Babbler, he is not the first babbler who has
reproached him, and this is all the fair dealing we can expect.

He also compleans that GergeKeith says, that to query a thing will not
conclude, that the Questionist does positively affirm or deny what is queried,
which the Author will find true in the query, I have proposed to him in the end
of the last Chapter, where I neither deny nor affirm the thing queried. In
conclusion, he will have George Keith, and the Querists, to say, that the Devil
is Original sin, whether he will or not, I shall set down the Querie.

What is Original sin? Whether it be not the devil: For does not Original
signify the beginning?

Now he bath spent two whole pages of his book full of abusive language upon
this query, still affirming that the Querists affirmed hereby the devil to be
Originael sin, which he can never prove from the Query; For why may not an
Unscriptural word (as Original sin is) be examined, as to its meaning, without
affirming or denying any thing concerning it? That the devil was and is the
Original of all sin, I think our Author will not deny: But to say, that GOD
made so, is his blasphemous insinuation, and none of ours, and therefore his
conclusion is his own.

But how affrontedly impudent this poor man is, and how his malice has blinded
him, is evident here, where he spends two whole pages of his Book, asserting
that to query a thing is to affirm it, and for denying this, he calls his
Adversaries pitiful, purposeless; wranglers, and their discourse nonsensical
niceties, and calls George Keith a fool, a knave, and what not, while in page
208 of his book he betakes himself to the refuge for defense of his Brother J:
B: saying, he only enquireth, and a little after faith, the contrary of which,
for any thing I can learn he supposes; So that according to this Author, a
Quakers Query is an assertion, and a Presbyterian Query is a flat denial, at
lest a supposing the contraty; But these Priests are Holy men, and Holy men
like Holy write must be read backward, but he knows he is accountable to none
but his Biethren in Prima instantia, for his Doctine, as was answered by them
to King James the sixth, when he accused Blackie for preaching at Andrews, Chat
all Bings were the devils bairns; Who are not like to censure him for traducing
the Quakers.

His third Calumny is, That we hold the Soul of man to be GOD; To prove this,
he cites two Authors, Hubberthorn and George Fox; These books I never saw,
only I find that William Penn has been assaulted with the latter, by our
Authors beloved Anabaptist Hicks, and has so fully answered it, that our
Author might have taken notice of it if he had minded to be ingenuous, he may
find it in Counterfit Christian, page 68, 69, 70, and 71. But admit all he
alleges were true (as it is a most hateful lie) that these two men had
believed and written so. Was there either honesty or fair dealing in our Author
to charge this on a whole body of People, who had publicly denied any such
Doctrine to be intended by the Writers, or owned by them as William Pen has
done in the place before cited, If upon the Presbyterian Eloquence should
accuse the whole Body of the Presbyterians, of the Blaspemies and Absurdities
there in charged on particular persons, Who would be readier to blame me then
this Author? who upon Hicks and Faldos Testimonies has published (it is like)
these Citations, Or should I cite here some Presbyterian Authors, Saying, This
Discipline is no small part of the Gospel, it is the substance of it: And this
Discipline is the Gospel of the Kingdom of GOD: And this Discipline is the
Eternal Counsel of GOD. The Authors I will not name, except he put me to it,
because I am not of the mind that any soher Presbyterian will own such
Doctrines: But lexpect no such fair Dealling from our Author, who cannot but
know himself to be a false accuser, if he but seriously read, and considered
the Books he has cited in his pamphlet.

Therefore to satisfy all men, who may have occasion to see this, I do hereby
for my self, and in the name of my Friends declate, That we believe the
Rational Soul of Man which joined with the Body, constitutes him a Man, and
distinguishes him from beasts, to be a (...) Creature ereated by GOD, and that
it is neither GOD, nor any part of GOD. And this I hope will satisfy all
unprojudiced Readers, and demonstrate the malice and deceit of this our surious
Adversary. And with this one Declaration of our faith in this Article, all his
Cant for eight pages together falls to the ground; Which being chiefly stuffed
with Macquairs Rhetoric deserves no other answer but, to tell him, I am not so
well skilled in the art of Scolding as he.

I shall here only entreat the Reader to take notice of what he says
concerning R: B: in the end of page 172, and the beginning of the next, and to
compare this with R: B's Vindieation page 190 and 191; That he may see what
cause he has to boast of his Anaboptist Auxilary, and to call R: B:
ridicusous. He is pleased to call William penn a Saducee, a Papist, and a
Pagan, but leaves the probation of it till he write next. As for the words
Spiraculum Vitarum, be tells us of three or four Lexieo graphers, upon whose
skill of the Language his faith depends; But William Penn tells him of Rabbi
N^bmunni, Hiskuni and P: Fagius; And as I told him before, R: Barkelay told him
of Athanasius and Gallus Alexandrinus; whose Authority is as good as his
Lexico-graphers, if not better; And therefore we must expect better proofs next.

His last Citation in page 176, is nothing to his purpose, except that any
thing which he thinks can blaken the Quakers, is pertinent enough. But I must
ask him here, does he allow of Henry Forsides Answer, To wit, Being asked, For
what end Christ wept over Jerusalem? He Answered; As he was humane he mourned,
and his Godhead deareed them to bell: If thou owe this answer, thou and he
are the Blasphemers, in asserting a will in Christ as Man, contrary to the Will
of GOD, for no Man mouths for what he desires, and delights in; But certainly
Christ as Man, delighted in fulfiling the Decrees of GOD.

But the words he carps at are, The Eternal tendered over them. This he calls a
subjecting that most pure and impassible Being, to the weakest Frailties of
Mankind; Poor Man! Does not the Scripture say, That it repented the Lord that
he had made Man, and is grieved him at his Heart, Gen: 6. 6. And Ephesians: 4. 30.
Grieve not the Good Spirit of GOD.

Chapter V. Of CHRIST and His Benefits.
OUR Author begins this Chapter with his ordinary Ingenuity, as he ended the
last, Saying, The Quakers in words ordinarily acknowledge, that Christ is GOD
and Man. Yea Patroclus, and in Write too, if thou could learn to write the
Truth; But says he, They maintain a Spiritual and Heavenly Nature in Christ,
which they call the Heavenly Man, which did exist before the Incarnation of
Christ, and assert that on the Flesh and Blood of this Man, the Church in all
ages did feed. Then he gives us a bundle of Citations out of George Keiths
Book. The way east up, But never one of the Scripture Arguments which he
brings to prove these assertions: Which she weth evidently that they have
been too hot for his Fingers: This is not like the Champion Patroclus; And he
might have considered that George Keith was a Philosopher, and therefore might
have allowed us one Casuist, and have discussed him before they had charged his
Doctrines upon* us: But he tells us, it is a clear Consequence of this
Doctrine, that Christ has three Natures* and adds, To this they Answer,
Quak: Confession page 33. That it will no more follow from their Doctrine, that
Christ has three Natures, then it will follow from ours, who assert that
Christ assumed into Union with the Divine Nature, a Body and a Soul.

But with no better Candor has he cited this place, then his Brother Hicks
and Faldo used to; I shall therefore set down the words. But if they argue that
at least Christ has three Natures in himself; We say, their own Principle will
conclude that as much as ours, For the Godhead is one Nature; The Nature of
the Soul is a second; And the Nature of the Body is the third. And our
Adversaries themselves teach, That as GOD is three Persons in one Nature, So
Christ is three Natures in one Person.

Who sees not here that our Author has disingenuously skipt over the strength
of the answer, to wit, the latter part of it, which is an argume nt, ad
hominem, and that themselves are owners of that which they would make an
absurdity in others* But if he have leisure he may read the Cantabridgian
Philosopher, H: More concerning the Astral bodies of men: For which I find him
not censured by any, as making men to be Monsters, and so you may allow George
Keith some latitude in such Metaphisical stuff, however he is of Age, and can
answer for himself.

His next is in page 179, where he charge us with quite anihilating and
destroying the Divinity of Christ, for which he cites a book of one
Christopher Aitkinson in the time of Oliver Cromwell; But I ask him, has he
this book? Or has he taken it upon trust? Or found it folding up wares in some
Grossers Shop? For my part I never saw this book, nor know I if there be such a
book Extant in this World, but he has had two sufficient answers, the first,
that G: Aitkinson was not a Quaker, the Second, if he deny Christ to be a man
we (...) him who do say, that Christ is both GOD and Man. And here let the
Reader observe, that J: Brown thought this a good answer to R: B: as is to be
seen, Vind: page 67: But our Author will hear no such thing, and affirms in
page 181; That this confession serves only to prove us guilty of the most
wicked Hypocrisy, lieing and self-contradiction to put a cheat upon the World,
and cover our abominations, to prove this heap of gross and unworthy calumnies,
he betakes himself to George Keiths book again, and the places before cited,
quite ommitting (as before) all the arguments used by George Keith, and never
offering us one argument to prove his false accusations of Hypocrisy, lieing
and false accusation, but proceeds like a scolding Kailwife, reeling and
roaring like a drunken man, foaming out his own shame; But he says, these
Doctrines of George Keiths destroy all the arguments for proving the Divinity
of Christ, of which he mentions one; By him all things were Created. But was
the power of the Logos lessened by taking that Flesh of the Virgin? And was he
not as able to have Created the World after his Incarnation and Assumption of
that Body, as he was from Eternity? And then what did his being the Heavenly
Man, the first born of every Creature hinder the Logos from Creating the World,
and all things therein? As for his Vbiquity, George Keith has abundantly
cleared himself in the Book before cited, to which I referr him, and shall now
come to his Dilemma, which is this.

If all things were created by Christ as Man, Then either the Manhood of Christ
is Created or not? If Created, then it is Created by it self, then which there
is nothing more absurd, if Uncreated, then there is an uncreated Man, and a Man
that is Coeternal with GOD.

Answer, The fallacy of this Dilemm^ lies in the first supposition, and is
obvious to a very mean understanding; To wit, If all things were Created as
Man, This was never asserted by George Keith, as his own words cited by this
impudent Author will easily prove, page 93; The Word made Flesh Created all
things. Now except he will say, that he was weakened or disabled by assuming a
Body, he can make nothing of his Delemma, for he was still and is, and will be
for ever the same Eternal and Omnipotent GOD as well as Man. If he ask who made
that Heavenly Body? I answer The same GOD Almighty who made the Body which he
took of the Virgin, and so his Consequence of an Vnereated Man, Coeternal with
GOD is a mere fancy, For George Keith calls the Heavenly Man, the First Born
of every Creature, as the Apostle also does, and never asserted that he was
Man from all Eternity.

I need not trouble further abont G: K: they having promised a full answer to
the Book, and I think he will hardly refuse to enter the Lists with this
Grecian Here; But I shall give a citation to chaw his Cude upon, (as he words
it) and so leave this matter, Melan: (bron: Car: page 274, cites Socrates
Scholastious for three Cannons of the Counsel of Syrinum, The second of which
is,

Si quis cum Jacob, non filium, tanquam hominem Colluctatum esse dixerit, sed
no^ gonitum Deum, a^t Patrem Deum, Anathemasit.

After his Dilemma, and a little railing, Telling we are worse then Arrians or
Socinians, and such like stuff, not worthy to be transcribed; He at last falls
upon the Light, calling it a mere chymerical None-entity; Seeing there is
nothing more contradictory then that either the Soul or the Body of a Man can
he every where, or from Eternity.

That it was from Eternity, is his false Alledgiance, and none of our
Assertions* And for its Vbiquity, he may see Quak eonfirmed, in the place
before cited; That the Seed and Life is in Him in the fullness, as in the
fountain or spring, but in us, as the streams; in Him as the Head, in us as the
members; And as the Light is principally in the Body of the Sun, yet diffuseth
it self through the whole world; Even so the Light of Christ the Sun of
Righteousness. As for his Relicts of the Image of GOD in Adam that quenched
spunk of his Extinguished Lantern, he might have left it alone for any
Advantage he made by it last.

In the beginning of page 83. He takes a very singular fit of Railling and
Lying, He says, in favors of this Spiritual Antichrist or Antichristlan
Figment, which they account for their Christ; They decry, vilif^e, and do what
they can to overthrow whatever ought to be dear and precious to a Christian
(for what will they not deny, seeing they deny the Godhead of Christ) They
therefore with open mouth blasphem and deny Jesus Christ as a Person without
them, etc.

What will this Man stick to assert, who after so many accounts of our Faith in
this matter, can with an hardened face, and (I may say) a seared Conscience
assert such gross untruths; For which I wish the LORD may grant him Repentance.
But as the Poet says, -- Nam quis innocens arit, quis tristiore liberabitur
nota, si eriminare sufficit? I hope the World has learned by a long
Experience, that a Clergy Man is not always to be trusted (I had almost said
seldom) when he turns accuser of the Brethren.

But to a muse or rather abule his Reader, he gives us a bundle of Citations,
upon the Authority of his Friend Mr. Hieks, (as he calls him) so sully answered
in the very places cired by him, and our Doctrine sully cleared in this matter;
That if the man had not been past all shame, he would not have dared to revive
the Dottages of that defated Forger: Who durst not again attempt to answer for
himself. But this Authors impudence must be more then ordinary, who has
throughout his whole Pamphlet been crying out against us, as one both with
Anabaptists and Soceniaus, whom in page 89* he calls wicked and abominable; And
yet in this place he takes them for his fellow Soldiers against the Quakers:
This is certainly as bad, as to receive the Mallignants into the Army: Yet
common to the Chieff Priests, Seribes and Pharisees in former times.

But what is the matter he intends by all these Citations, Namely, They deny
(says he) Jesus Christ as a Person without them, distinct from Christ in them.
For cleating of this matter to all unbyassed persons, I shall state the matter
thus;

That Christ is with and in his Saints is a Doctrine, so fully testi fied to in
the Scriptures, that no Christian will deny it, Matthew: 28. 20. And lo, I am
with you always, even to the end of the World. Which Beza says is meant, of
the manner of the presence of the Spirit, etc: But is absent from us in Body.
In which Body, we acknowledge him, a Person without the Saints, and distinct
from them; As William Penn has told thee, tho thou had the Candor to conceal
it, But that Christ the LORD from Heaven, the Quickening Spirit is one in the
Saints, and another distinct Person without them, we deny; And such as affirm
it make two Christ's. See John 14. 20, 23. and 15. 4. 5. and 17. 23. Rom: 8. 10.
2 Cor: 13. 5. Gak 1. 16. Cok 1. 27. Revel: 3. 20.

But in the end of these Citations, He must have a second hit at H: Forside. Is
this to tell us again, That Christ as man has a will contrary to the will of
his Godhead? No, But for saying that the word Humane is no Scripture Language,
but says our Author, the thing imported is found in Scripture. He might have
minded that the word Humanus may be derived from Humus the Earth, as well as
from Homo: And that the Body of Christ now in Heaven is an Earthly Body, is a
very gross Notion.

Again page 84. He returns to Hicks and Faldo, but cites us no page, running
at random: And truly Patroclus, this is an easy way of writting Books, if to
publish all the Lies and Forgeries devised, and maliciously vented against the
Quakers be an honest Employment, thou might have had another Book of that kind
written before we noticed this.

I shall only take notice of one of the grossest of them, he names Edward
Billings, but cites neither book nor page, to which George Whitehead in the
Appendix before cited by our Author, says, it is gross and blasphemous to say,
that the Mystery of iniquity lies in the Blood of Christ.

Now Reader, consider this Man's honesty, who but he that would be accounted
such himself, could adventure his reputation upon such Authority as this? Or
would spread such impudent calumnies and forgeries after they had been proven
so fully to be such? certainly it must be a bad cause that need such Pillars to
underprop it; But I entreat thee Patroelus for the future, speak Truth and
shame the Devil.

In page 185, he transcribes a deal of Faldo's stuff, alleging we render the
Passion, Death, and Resurrection of our LORD JESUS at Jerusalem, altogether
vain and idle actions, and that we call the Body that our LORD took off the
Virgin only a Garment, and that it is no constituent part of CHRIST. A heap of
gross and unparaleled lies. To prove all which he cites William Pen his
Rejoinder, part 2, Chap. 9. Saying thus, Whereas it is said that it was
revealed to Simon, that he should not die till he should see the LORDS Christ,
is to be understood of a Spiritual sight, or of seeing the Christ within.

Certainly, This must be a man of no Credit, nor one that values a good name,
tho he begin his Book with it: For if he can produce in that Book or Chapter
such an expression of William Penns, he shall surely cause Print a new Copy
and insert it; for I assure my Reader, there is no such thing, so that
henceforth our Author deserves better to be called Simon then Patroelus; Yea,
he out does Faldo, for Faldo accuses William Penn only for saying, that the
Body of Jesus was not the whole entire Christ, Which Faldo laboring to prove,
and sometimes deny, (that any man having the use of his Reason, might have been
ashamed of) he fully bemires himself, and yet our Authors citation is more
odious.

He comes now to another false charge, saying, as these men deny CHRIST
Himself; So they deny consequently all the benefits purchased by him. The
Father of lies could scaroely have been more audacious, tho perhaps more
cunning then to have Printed himself a lier; The First is proven to be ae^lie
already, let us hear what he says for the Second. For this he returns to his
trade of forging citations, and gives William Penns Sandy Foundation shaken
26. Thus, Unless we become doers of that Law which Christ came not to destroy,
but as our example to fulfill, we can never be justified before GOD; nor let any
fancy that Christ so fulfilled it for them, as to exclude their Obedience from
being requisite to their acceptance, but only as their pattern, etc.

This Threadbare citation has been many a time cast in our teeth, and tossed
over and over to no purpose: For William Penn has so fully cleared himself of
it, that no honest man would have charged him or us with it, as my Reader may
see in Reason against Railing, page 78, and Counterfeit Christian detected from
page 22 to page 78, which were too tedious to insert here, but has brought an
indelible brand of infamy upon Thomas Hicks, whereof (it seems) our Author
covets a share.

In page 186, He contemns at the old rate of forgery and falsely accusing us,
first of Socinianism, and then of Popery, saying, R: B: denies not that his
Doctrine of Justification is all one with that of the Council of (...); He
cites for proof of his Calumny Apol: page p37, 139, and Vind: Sect: 8, N: 9.
Where, faith he, He accuses Luther, and the Body of the Primitive Protestants,
as great Deprivers of the doctrine of Justification, and doers of as great hurt
by this their Doctrine, as ever they did good, by what they pulleddown of
Babylon.

A grosser lie, nor a greater forgerie was never Printed in this Age; What
shall men do when they deal with such audacious slanderes? But Patroelus tell
me seriously, did thou think that any who Read thy book, would be at pains to
compare it with the places cited? If they did, how could thou think to escape
the black Character of an infamous forger? Does not R: B: in both places cited,
dispute largely against the Papists? And in his Vindication does he not
challenge J: Brown for Patronizing the Papists? But thy Forgerie is more then
manifest in the latter part of thy charge; Wherein thou says, he accuses the
Protestants, as doers of as great hurt by this their Doctrine as ever they did
good by what they pulled down of Babylon.

R: B's Words are these; For in this, as in most other things He [ Luther] is
more to be commended for what he pulled down of Babylon, then for what he Built
of his own.

Let the Reader from this one citation Judge of our Authors Candor, and whether
this perversion be not wilful as well as malicious.

In the next place, he gives us a whole page and some more of Hicks and
Faldo's stuff so fully answered, and the Perversion thereof so fully detected;
by William Penn, that the Authors themselves durst never attempt their
Vindication; But it seems our Author thinks these of his own stamp will believe
him implicitly, and the Books he has forbidden; them to read, and so thinks
himself secure, but he being manifested to be a Forger as above; I hope the
Reader will be at the pains to read William Penns Book against Hicks and Faldo,
where he will find all these Citations fully handled, which were superfluous to
transcribe here.

In the end of page 187. He says, with the like facility I could show, That
the Doctrine of the Quakers is in every point contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ.

Truly it is easy for a man who loves to make Lies, and makes no Conscience of
so doing, to vent and Print them: But what is now sweet in his mouth, may prove
bitter in his belly. But he proceeds, saying, I shall content my self with one
great Instance, Viz: The Resurrection of the Body, concerning which the Quakers
are downtight Saducees.

This is another like the rest, And to return a lie upon him, I shall first
say, We believe, according to the Scriptures, a Resurrection of the Dead, of
the Just and unjust; So that this unjust Adversary here charge us very
falsely; For we can justly say, If in this Life only we have hope in Christ, we
are of all men most miserable. Nor were we ever charged with denying the
Resurrection, but only of that same body Niomerical Concerning which we
willingly assent to what the Apostle has said, 1 Cor. 15 from verse 35. to the
end. And 2. Cor. 5. 1. 2, 3. Which Beza ^nterprets of the Resurrection: And if
our Author will be wiser then the Spirit of GOD, I must leave him there, and
remit him to cultivate his Reason better, by conversing with some of the Modern
Philosophers; As Henry More and others, and particularly Kenelm Digby, in his
Observations upon Religio Medici, page 343. I shall offer him only two
Sentences of his, First, All sublunary Matter, being in a continual Flux, and
in bodies which have internal Principles of Heat and Motion, which continually
transpireth out to make room for the fresh Supplies of new Aliement; So that in
process of time all is so changed, that the body of the Young Man is not the
same body of the Old Man, and so one body sins and another suffers.

Secondly; That which gives the numerical individuation to a body, is the
substantial Form, as long as that remains the same, tho the matter be in a
continual flux and motion, yet the thing is still the same. It is evident that
Samenes, This-nes, and That-nes belongs not to matter by it self, but only as
it is distinguished and individuated by the Form.

The rest of his Work to the end of this Chapter, being nothing but the foul
Vomit of two malicious Forgeries already answered, deserves no answer.

Chapter VI. Of Perfection.
HERE he begins with insolent and insulting Language, and then (with more
then his usual Candor) sets down R: B's. eight These; But lest I should have
mistaken him, he returns to his Priestine State and Old Principles; Saying, and
afterward he says, That there may be a State in this Life, in which a Man
cannot sin, it is so natural to him to do Righteousness.

Tho I be wearied with such Perversions and Paultry stuff; I am enforced to
transcribe R: B's. Words to evince yet once more his dissigenuity. Apol: page
170. Lastly tho I affirm that after a Man has arrived to such a condition, in
which a man may not sin, he yet may sin: I will nevertheless not deny, but
there may be a State attainable in this Life, in which to do Righteousness may
become so natural to the regenerate Soul, that in the stability of this
Condition they cannot sin; Others may perhaps speak more certainly of this
State, as having arrived to it* For me, I shall speak modestly, as
acknowledging my self not to have arrived at it; Yet (observe*) dare not deny
it, for that it s^m^ to be so positively asserted by the Apostle, 1 John 3. 9.
He that is born of GOD sineth not, neither can he, because the Seed of GOD
remains in him.

Now let the Reader Judge whether to assert be one thing, and not dare to deny
be another thing; And the Reason our Author gives is, It is so natural to him
to do Righteousness, Whereas R: B's: Reason, why he dare not deny it, is
because the Apostle seems so positively to assert it: But this is not the first
we have met with.

The next we get is another piece of Hicks (one of his wicked abominable
Anabaptists (as he words it) which I intend no more to concern with.

But he tells us R: B: has given away the Cause; Vind* Sect. 9. Saying, That
he pleads for no more then Mr. Brown says, Numb: 6. To wit* That by
Penfection in this Life, is understood a change in the whole Man, So that he
yeildeth Impartial Obedience to all the Commands of GOD, tho in a small degree.
Thus our Author.

Certainly it is strange what the man could promise to himself by such base and
unworthy dissimulations? For R: B: cites John Browns words, page 328. 329. In
regeneration, the whole man is changed, so that he is now born a new Creature,
sanctified wholly, in Mind, Heart, Spirit, Affection, Conscience, Memory, and
Body, tho but in a small measure or degree, yielding Impartial Obedience
(through the Grace of GOD) unto all GODS Precepts waving none.

These are the Words cited by R. B. and miserably mancked by our Author, who
has skipped over the most matterial parts of his Brothers words, that he may
have the more room; but this is a very mean subterfuge, and will not long cover
him: For, says he, R. B. enquireth, how this Doctrine is reconciled with that
of daily breaking the Commands in thought, Word, and deed? In answer to which
question* (says he) It is enough to enquire, How he evineeth them to be
contradictory? Observe Reader, That according to this Man, (for I will not
think that his brethren will own him) to be changed in the whole Man, to be
born a new Creature, to be wholly sanctified in the mind, heart, Spirit,
Affections, Conscience, Memory and Body, etc. And to break the Commands daily
in thought, word, and Deed; are no ways contrary, and need no Reconciliation.
Behold this Man's Sanctification! And let him tell me with the next, what
difference there is betwixt his Holiness or Sanctification, and other Men's
wickedness where malice is wanting.

As for that he adds, That the Law of the Lord requires a perfection of
degrees as well as as parts; He might have known that we are to be judged by
the Gospel and not by the Law.

Next he says, And whereas he enquireth; If to break Gods Commands daily in
Thought, Word, and Deed, be the way to grow in Grace? To put off the Old Man
and put on the New? This he calls a malicious calumny, But who gave the
occasion for it! Did not ^ B. bring this for a proof, that Men sin daily in
thought, Word and deed, viz. That Christians are exborted to grow in Grace. To
put off the Old Man which is corrupt, to put on the nor Man; to mortify their
Members: And now I leave it to the Reader to judge, whether R. B's question
were pertinent, and neither malicious nor calumnious: Yet our Candid Author
must add something that he may still be like himself; Asking, Where did any of
the Reformed teach, that to endeavor to break Gods Commands to grow in Grace,
as this Man insinuates they do? First he has added the Word (Endeavor) and
then he has fathered the import of l. B's argument upon R. B's question. Is
this honesty? To tell his Adversary, His Light teaches him a faoulty of Lying,
while himself is both the Lyet and the Forger.

He goes no to give us I. B's second Proof. thus, This perfection renders
Gospel Commands useless: R. B. Answers by a Simile, Asking Are the Laws useless
if Men obey them? He answers. He that is above the Breach of the Law, has no
more use of the Law, or need of it, to learn any thing from it, in order to his
Obedience thereof. Is not this a poor Subterfuge: How shall a Man obey the Law,
if he know it not. Or how obey it if he take not heed to order his Conversation
according to it? And is then the Law useless him? But he might have remembered,
that R. B. asserted a possibility of sinning, and only modestly said, he durst
not deny a further State, because the Apostle seemed positively to assert it.
But the Apostle says, Against such there is no Law, he may tell us next who
these are?

But to sum up this Paragraph he will not only fasten a contradiction upon R.
B. but also Blasphemy, saying, But that he ^hay further contradict himself and
his Brethren, He says in his Apology, that all have need to repent and pray
for forgiveness: For (says our Author) If some be equal with God, above the
breach of the Commands, want a body of death, the most that they have to do is
to give Thanks, and not to pray or repent.

Is not this a profound as well as fair Disputant? Did his Adversary ever say,
That any were equal with GOD? No: And therefore the Blasphemy is his own, for
which he has need to repent; And so had the best Saints, for that all have
sinned, and whosoever has sinned need to repent and pray for Forgiveness; And
if he will consult the Scriptures he may see that after the Intimation of
Pardon, the Saints have mourned, and prayed for Forgiveness. See 2 Samuel 12. 13.
Compated with Psalm. 51. 14. But his Malice blinds him in this and many more
things.

He comes now to John Browns next proof; Viz: This doctrine tends to foment
pride and Security, and takes away diligent Watchfulness, Holy fear,
Humility, etc. To which R. B. answers, But where Freedom from Sin is, where can
pride and Security have place? or Diligence and Humility be wanting? But with
him to sin is the way not to be proud and secure, but to be watchful and
humble For answer he sends to Romans 3. 27. Where is boasting then? It is
excluded, By? what Law of Works? Nay, But by the Law of Faith. But prithee
Patroclus, what says this for thee? Are we boasting in our own strength, or in
the strength of the Grace of God? Or do we depend upon the Law of Works? No,
But on the Law of Faith, which purifieth the heart and works by Love. If to
exalt the Grace of God as sufficient be to boast in thy Sense, thou have
Liberty to abound in thy own sense, wherein no good Christian will own thee.

But he gives us another citation of R B's in these words, That according to
our Doctrine, denying the perfection of degrees in this Life, the wicked
Villains do less make useless God commands then others, because they afford
more matter to exercise Repentance and Prayer for forgiveness of God.

Will, thou never deal honestly, Did R. B. once mention a perfection of degrees
But to I. B's, argument, That the keeping the Commands of God, takes away the
exercise of Repentance, Prayer; etc. He returns thus, If this his Argument hold
true to prove, that Men must sin all their Lifetime, and break the Commands
every day, in thought, word and deed, then the greatest sinners and most
prefligate Villains, do less make useless Gods Commands then others, because
they afford more matter to exercise Repentance and Prayer for Forgiveness of
sins. For answer, he sends to Rom: 3. 8. Let us do evil that good way come.
Which saying tho it was falsely and slanderously said of the Apostle; Yet is
truly said of him and and his Brother I. Brown, who have thus asserted it in
terminis: By saying, That the Keeping of Gods Commands renders the Ordinances
of Christ useless.

His very next Words are a gross Lie, saying, And here he promises always to
cry down the Ordinances of Christ Jesus. (...) Words are these, As for such
Ordinances ^s must be made useful by dayily breaking God's Commands in shought,
Word and Deed, I resolve never to cry but always to cry down. And here let the
Reader take notice of his Blasphemy, who asset^s the Ordinances of Christ Jesus
to be such. As for his ^^llowing Question, it is Nonsense: F^^ he, R. B. never
said that any Ordinance taught it; but that he and his Brother have taught
here, That this is the use of their Ordinances (but not of the Ordinances of
Christ) is obvious to every Reader.

(...) the next place we have another of J. B's Proofs* That then no^e that are
regenera^ could Sic at all, but would be beyond, the possibility of it: For
which the cites* John 3. 9. and Expounds it of a trade and custom of finning
from Malice, like the De^^^ and the Wioked his Children And (...) prove, that
Regeneration adteth of no Degrees, but is one instan taneous Act.

To the First, to wit, J. Brown's Argument; I say it is a wild Conscequence, to
conclude from a posse non peccare, to a non posse peccare: And yet Calvin in
his Instit. cireth Augustine, saying, Ade fuisse libertatem posse non peccare,
nostram vero multo majorem non posse peccare. And still our Author takes R. B's
modest Expression, I dare not deny, for a full Assertion.

As for his Exposition of 1 John 3. 9. of a Trade and Custom of Malice, like
the Devil; It is a mee^ Dream, there being no shadow for it in the Context.

His Doctrine of being Regenerat in an instant, contradicts his Brother John
Brown, Numb 18. who says, It may be begin, where some Members may yet the to be
mortified: But according to J. B. elsewhere, the Man is wholly sanctified in
Mind, Heart, Spirit, Affections, Conscience, Memory and Body. Behold Reader,
how these our Adversaries reel and stagger like drunken Men!

I shall therefore here give him the Sense of Augustine, set down by J. Brown,
and approven by R. Baxter in his Paper of Perfection. page 13. He tells us that
Augustine in his Book, lays some two or three of these Texts together. To wit,
Solomon, Paul, James, John, and offers us this Solution: That which is born of
GOD sin^eth not, which is as much as to say, there is that which is born of GOD
in the true Christian, and that which is not born of him. Where is then the
full and complete Regeneration at one Instant? The two Scriptures Phil: 1. 8.
and Ga^ 5. ^. He makes very short work with; Telling us the Philippians were
Saints in Christ Jesus when this Epistle was written. Ergo, they were wholly
sanctisied, in Mind, Heart, Spirit, etc: As J: Brown says the Regenerate Man
is; And yet breaks the Commands of GOD daily, in Thought, Word, and Deed: To
the other place, he says, It says as little for him, from it he would infer
the Saints falling away, which is false (says he) but I hope he will not deny,
that Paul was in part regenerate, when he said, Lest when I have preached the
Gospel to others, I my self should be a east away.

He spends page 195, proving Regeneration to be accomplished at one instant,
not by Scripture, for that fails him here; Only he instanceth two, Saying, I
would sain Know, If the thief on the Cross, and the J^^^^ were not him again?
(...) from a Particular to an Universal (...) J^mes* and John, saw Christ
Trans^^gu^ed therefore all men did so Rnoch and (...) were translated,
Therefore all the Saints are so. What he speaks of Children in Christ, R. B.
grants that they are under a possibility of sinning, and a capa^^^ thereunto;
but modestly again Tin page 120 says, dare no^ affirm* But that there man be
some (...) sin? (...)*

He proceeds, alleging from 1 John 2. 12. That thee to whom, the Apostle wrote
were perfectly (...) of GOD, but that Scripture says no such thing, only that
their sins were forg^^^n, which according to himself is the first Act of
Justification, and proceedath Sanctification of the whole man (as (...) words
it) in mind, hear, etc. And so not perfect Regeneration. But does this prove
that these Children did break daily the Commands of GOD in thought, word, and
deed? That they were perfectly born of GOD the proves, because (says he) They
had the seed of GOD, or Unction abiding in them.

But the Seed before it come to perfection or ^obring forth froit, in requites
a time, and I hope our: Author will not deny, that the young man mentioned here
by the Apostle who had overcome the Evil one, were more perfectly and fully
Regenerated then the Children, tho the Children were perfect as to their
measure; So that it follows not that any of them did break the commands of GOD
daily in thought, word and deed (which only is the matter in debate) no more
then it follows, that how soon the seed is in the Womb, it is as perfectly a
man, as when it comes to the use of reason.

But seeing he here talks of the Seed of GOD and of the Unction, I desire he
may inform us by the next, what he intends by these words? Whether a Substonce
or an accident, or only the dim spunks of his extinguished Lantern?

His next work is is to prove us Pelagians, and remits his Reader to his second
Chapter, which I also do. When R: B: tells J: B: that the Fathers he cites
thought that men might be free from sin by Grace; Our Author calls it mancking
and clipping, and says Is it not added in the very following words immediately
that none attained that measure of Holiness in this life, that he could live
any long time without Sin, and that this perfection was not full and absolur,
but which might increass, and was mixed with evil deeds, so was a perfection of
parts only not of degrees, Here these Fathers say, any long time without sin,
and therefore I must ask our Author of what extant this long time is? I am sure
one day is a very short time, and no ways deserves the word long to be added,
and yet if they grant it is but one day; The West minister Divines have done with
it for ever.

I hope our Author will not accuse Augustine of Pelagianism, and therefore I
must let him see that Augnstine says as much as R: B: Also John Humphry
perfection, page 7, says Augustine in his second Book, Chap: 15. De Peo: mer:
and rem: and de Spiritu and Litera, has the luck to treat industriously on
this matter. Alia est Question utrum esse possit Homo in hae vita sine pectato;
Alia utrum sit? It is one question whether a man can be in this life without
sin, and another whether he be so? For the former Question he destinguisheth of
what is possible by Grace, and what is possible by our own strength, to hold
that any man by his free will only without Grace is able to keep all GOD's
Commandments and be without sin, is that Grand Pelagian Doctrine, against which
he sets his face, and de^astes it* But that it is possible to attain this by
Grace, or the special assistance of GOD's Spirit, he thinks it best it seems to
grant; He thinks it not fit nor safe to say, any (nor all) of GOD's
Commandments are impossible Besides, Where GOD Vouchsafs his Grace the work
(he pleads) is to be ascribed unto him, to whom nothing is impossible, And I
hope this (being all we plead for) will forever aquite us of Pelagianism, and
come pesce all the slanderous tongues of our ignorant and malicious Adversaries.

As for his Orosms; The first is a modest saying, like that of R: B: before
mentioned, but the second is a heedless expression; The man that can be without
sin is Christ, from which it would follow, that Adam was Christ, who could have
been without sin, and once was without it; And I hope there are are some now
who are clansed from all their Polutions, washed and purged from all their
sins, according to the Scriptures, yet are not Christ's: But because R: B: says
it is not his work to meddle with what is said against the Pelagians, and
Socinians, he will: herefore conclude him a Pelagian, and Socinian. What
triffling is* this? Beeause our. Author will not defend Mahumentism, and
Judaism, therefore he is a Jew and a Mahumetan, Is this as good consequence?
And yet in such does our Author delight. But the best is, that he says,
Nothing that R: B. can say, can be of weight against us; And why so Patroclus?
Are* Presbyterians Infallible, or in accountable? Or when (came they by this
privilege? I thought they had been subject to mistakes as much as other men;
And here he turns to the Fathers again* But the Fathers of the three first
Centuries only are reputed. Orthodox by Presbyterian^^, And it is clear they
fall in with Papists there, and have as much need of a Purgatory as they.

His Next is to answer this Viz. That this Doctrine is against the Wisdom of
GOD. Our Author answers, Saying, he only insinuates that there are means
given to the people of GOD, whereby they may be free from all sin, if they use
them well, Adding that he mumbleth* as one in a confused haste, but our Authors
have is much greater* For R: B: has write a whole page and more upon this
Argument* and our Author does not take notice of six lines of it.

But (...) insinuates this, That the only wife GOD, A being to gather to
Himself a peculiar People, Holy and Righteous; And for that Effect sent His Son
into the World to save them from their sins, and has given them his H^ly
Spirit to sanctify them throughout, and to cleanse them from all sin (as the
Scripture testify). Now to say that he cannot compass that end, is to derogate
from the Wisdom of GOD. But he answers, This ^^ with great facility denied; for
we say (says our Author) that it is the Will of GOD, that perfect freedom from
sin be a property of the Church triumphant only. Sat pro imperio, He might have
left this to the Pope. Now for proof of this hold assertion, he says, It is
enough to challenge him, to give any example of one thus freed from sin in the
World, except Jesus Christ, who never had it but by Imputation.

Thus the Man who tells us, Affirmenti incumbit probatio, but he confesses
Infants have no sin but by Imputation. And I would fain know when Enoch and
Elijah were punged? Whether in the World before their Translation, or in the
Empereal Heaven, into which they either entered with their sins, or were freed
from sin in the World: And if so, he may tell us with the next, how long they
were so freed before their Translation, for I can assure him they had no need
of Purgatory.

To R: B's* alleging from J: ^'s* words, That he confessed there was some
material service performed to the devil; He answers, This objection militats
as much against the Apostle, Saying, Rom: 7. That with his flesh he served the
law of sin. For answer to which, I remitt him to the 17 and 20 verses of the
same Chapter; Neither has he yet proven that Paul speaks here of his present
State, as the second verse of the next Chapter does evince. That this Instance
will overdo, he is mistaken* upon his begging the Question, that the best and
most gracious Action of the Saints are tainted with sin, which we must take his
word for.

His next is, That it is the Will of GOD, that his People be under a warefare
so long as they are here. To which R: B: answers, But is it the Will GOD, that
they he always overcome: After this he adds his own words in stead of his
Adversaries, according to his Juggling Custom: But let us heat his Answer, He
says, They are (...) always overcome* What? Is not daily while they are in
this Life always? If to break the Commands of GOD daily, in thought, word and
deed, as long as they live, be not always, he may tell us the difference next.
But, says he, They always overcome at the end of the Wars. I must expect a
Paraphrase upon this Text, when this War ends, and whether it be in Time or
Eternity? Or if he will allow the Saints one day to live after their Victory;
For Paul seems to intimate that he had fought the Good Fight, and had finished
before his dissolution.

To R: B's: affirming that this Doctrine is injurious to the Sacrifice of
Christ: After his brothers Evasion he gives us his Answer in two parts. First,
If (says he) he were a mind to make a difference betwixt HEAVEN and Earth, he
had not made a Question about full Victory in this Life. Then it seems he
thinks the Victory must only be after this Life, and in Purgatory; For no
unclean thing can enter the Kingdom: Let his brethren judge of this Doctrine;
For as the Tree falls so it lies.

His second Answer is, How profane a heart must he have, that accounts all the
seize of a Child of GOD in this Life (...) nothing, For ^^^withstanding
of them all, he will still have the Sacrifire of Christ to ^e useless, except a
Man in this Life become as sinless as an Angel: Thus he

But what a profane heart must he have who will not part with his sins and
pollutions one day in all his Lifetime, although Christ came to save him from them
and not in them? And that the Sacrifice of Christ was sufficient to purge him
from the stain as well as the guilt, I think he will not deny: And that Christ
requires not impossibilities, but gives strenghth to obey these Precepts. Be
^^ Holy, Be ye Perfect, I think every Christian will acknowledge, and so the
fault lies still in his profane heart, which chooses his pollutions, and will
not part with them.

How R. B. has answered his Brothers eight Chapter. He refers to his Reader,
and so do I. In the next place he most dissingenuously represents R. B. as
saying, That there is no difference betwixt him that sins through malice,
and him that sins through infirmity; And asks, is there no difference,
that the one repents and the other not?

All this stuff is largely answered by R. B. page 123. But what does h^ intend
by Repentance* The word must either be taken for p^^nitentiam ag^re, to do
penance* (according to the Papists) Or for (...)* That is to grow wise again;
Or to do no more so; In the first sense I think out Author will not take it;
And in the second sense, Its quite another thing, then to break the Commands of
GOD daily in thought, word, and deed* For he who truly repents becomes a
hater of sin, and a doer of Righteousness.

^o R. B* argument, That their doctrine makes the Ministry useless, he gives
three Answers of ^* B's sufficiently replied to by R. B: But let us hear them,
First* Upon this very head the necessity of a Ministry appears. Upon what
heed* To tell us that GOD's Commands are impossible, and that it is ^olly to
attempt the keeping of them. For no man since the fall, by any Grace received
in this Life, ^^ able to keep them, But does daily Break them in thought* word,
and deed* His second Answer is, That it cannot be proved, that this Vltimat end
of the Ministry mentioned Ephesians. ^ 13. is attained here. This Answer confirms
R. B's Argument, For according to their own Opinion. (...) est (...) quod
nunqu^m obtinere potest (...) That is, In vain is that mea^ which can (...)
allain its end. His third Of a perfe^^on of Parts and Degrees, is frivolo^^ For
R. B. never denied a growth i^ Holiness.

For his putting of a cleansing from sin til the other Life. He says nothing
for it, bu^ his own bare assertion; And it is obvious to any Reader, that the
Apostle to the Ephesians 4. and 5. Chapters, is speaking of the Conversations
of the Saints in this Life, Which I desire my Reader to consider, where he will
find this Subtersuge of our Author, sully manifested to be naught.

In his next, he is no less dissing^^uous, He (R. B.) says, it will not follow
from ^oll. 4. 12, 13. and 1 These: 3. 12. That it is impossible that Men should
he (...) from Sin, here by the Great of GOD. Whereas he has first rebuked I.
B. for commenting upon these Texts, which he tells him are in themselves as
plain as can be And yet tho I. B's Commentary were admitted, His Doctrine,
would not follow. Hence the Reader may see this Man's pith^ as he words it) and
how hard shift he makes to escape at any door, how unworthy soever: But that
the two Texts stand firm against him is evident for if to increase and abound
^^ Love, to abound in Holiness, and to stand perfect and complete in all the
Will of GOD, can consist with the breaking the Commands of GOD daily in
thought, word, and deed, I confess I know nothing of such Commentaries, not
shall ever desire to learn such Contradictions.

To R. B's Question. How these can be said to have renouneed the works of
darkness, who have ^eed to be washed from dark desilements. He answers, let
him read the 12, and 13, of Z^^ariach and there he may find that there two are
consistent. But Patr^clut I can find no such thing there, I find mexi^^ of a
Fountain opened for sin and uneleaness, but there is no word of daily here, I
find also a refining as silver is refined, and trying as gold is tried, but not
every day, for after that he says They shall call on my Name and I will heat
them, But GOD hears not finners) I will say it is my people, and they shall
say, The LORD is my GOD, And if this be to be sinning daily, and Washing daily,
let the Reader judge. And yet this is all that concerns his ma^^^^ in these two
Chapters.

He ands this paragraph with a gross lie, saying, For we know the Quakers and
Jesuits have an (...) ha^^ against all Pi^^^ ^^a^ts, ^et in a special manner
their hate burns against the Presbyterians; knowing that these are fa^^ thest
off from the (...) of Rome. This Patroclus is indeed Am^^^m Testimonium. And I
assure thee few Protestants here away believe it. Thousands of Protestants know
that we love and honor them, and will trust more to our plain honest
Simplicity, then to the (...) of a Presbyterian priest; It seems our Author
conver^eth with few Men who dare avow their Sentiments of Presbytry, or loves
best to heat Sy^^phants; For in this Country there is little difference
thought to be (...) a (...) and a Jesui^ed Presbyterian Priest, except a few
Princip^^, Creeds, and Confessions; Both being acted in their practices by the
(...) p^oud, (...), imperious, and perfecting Spirit. As for the (...) so
called among the Presbyterians, we love them, and also the persons of the
Clergit, ^ut we (...) that the people should be so hood wi^ked and led (...) by
this Covetous and Ambitious Generation, who see^ themselves, and (...) there the
Glory of God, not the (...) of the people: We have no mal^, knowing that he who
hates his Brother is a Murderer, and no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in
him.

To the Examples of Enoch and Noah being called perfect; He says, R: B:
confesses they once bad sin: Therefore, how came they at another time to be
free of it altogether; The answer is easy, 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our
sins, He is Faithful and Just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. As for the word Perfection its having diverse
significations, It may be so: But I am sure it can never be truly predicated
of him who breaks the Commands of GOD daily, in Thought, Word, and Deed.

He comes next to vindicate their Arguments, for the Devils Kingdom, or Sinning
Term of Life: The first whereof is. 1 John 2. 3. (misunderstood by them) If we
say we have no sin, etc: Answer first, I say with Augustine upon the Galatians:
Aliud est non peccare, aliud non habere percatum. Secondly, The following words
of the Apostle are, If we confess our sins, He is Faithful and Just to forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; And he that is
cleansed from sin, is the same that was before said to have sin; Now it is said
in the 7th. verse, The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin;
Here cleanses is in the present Tense: Now to be defiled with sin, and
cleansed from all sin at the same time, seems a contradiction, and therefore
must be admitted to be two several times; Let our Author solve this by a fair
Commentaty with the next.

To his Answer, That it follows no more that the Apostle John was at that time
defiled with sin, then that the Apostle James was a Curser, when he said of the
tongue, herewith curse we men; Our Author Replies, There is no Parity; And why?
Is it because they are both in the plural Number and present Time? No, But
says he, James speaks of gross outbreakings, and John simply of the nature
of sin.

Very good, I see our Author can distinguish betwixt morial and venial sins; Of
which, sure lying must be one (in his Judgment) or else he had been unsainted
long since. But knowing this would not do, he tells us, the Apostle John even
in his best Frame, had sinful actions, and cites Revel: 19. 10, 11. and 22. 8,
9. The first place is, That he falls down at his feet to worship him. And the
second is, That he fell down to worship before the feet of the Angel. Which
second place cannot be understood of worshipping the Angel, but of Worshipping
GOD before the feet of the Angel. But admit they both meant so, our Author must
acknowledge this to have been one of his venial sins, if a sin at all; For it
was but a mistaking the Angel, who in Chapter 18. 1. Is said to have great
Power, and the Earth was enlightened with his Glory; I say it was but a taking
this Angel to have been Christ: And therefore he may see the LORD did not
permit the Apostle to commit the sinful action upon that mistake, but stopped
him; And he reads not that John offered to worship the Angel after he knew him
to be his fellow servant. And so these two Texts he boasts of, can do hm no
service.

To the rest in this Paragraph he gives no Answer, but It Is false; And again,
we know, etc: without any Reason, but his imperious assertion, which deserves
to be neglected.

Next he endeavors to prove from Ecclesiastes 7. 20. That Men sin daily, etc.
Which place he little urges, only tells us, He has considered the Hebrew, and
has found it the Indicative Mood; So says our Author, Ergo, verum; But he
must excuse me, to think Jerome and Junius, Tremellius as good Linguists as he,
and yet have translated it in the Potential Mood, and may not sin.

His next is Rom: 7. 17. From which Texts he says J: B. has proved, That the
Apostle was in Carnal State in respect of sinning at that time: But he has not
been so just as to tell us how he proved it, least his Arguments should have
been sound like these, he cites page 200. But I wonder how a Man of Sense can
assert it, if he but read the next Chapter throughout; The second verse whereof
clears this matter, where the Apostle says, The Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus, had made him free from the law of sin and death; And many times
after witnesses a better Condition; As that he had sought the good fight, etc:
Nothing could separate him from the Love of GOD, etc: And Phil: 4. 13. I can do
all things through Christ that strengthens me. His Objection of the Apostle
John is already answered. That of Peter proves no more then that a Man may sin,
which is not denied. He comes at last to his great Argument.

If we find no Instances in Scripture of such persons as were so perfect, as
that they did not sin, then to imagine such a Perfection is but a groundless
fancy and dream: But the former is true. Ergo, etc.

For answer let the Reader observe, first that our Author finding his Brothers
Argument fully refuted by R: B: has not attempted the Vindieation of it; But
he says, the Argument was proponed three different ways, the first, of which
he chooses to answer unto.

Answer, Either this Argument which he answers unto, was to the purpose or
not? If it was to the purpose it was right to answer it; Seeing our Author
calls them not three arguments, but one proponed three different ways, any of
which his Adversary might lawfully choose; If it was not to the purpose (as was
the greatest part of his book) then he might have spared it; But because R: B:
took not our Authors argument to task (which perhaps was not there) he says,
he must confess he skipt over that which did cut this point of Quakerism in the
Jugular Vein.

This is a Rhodomontado expression, more like Don: Quixot then a sober man
writing about Religion, tho very ordinary with our Author; But let us see what
cause there is for all this froath.

First then, I deny his Minor, for I can find him many recorded in Scripture,
of whom there is no failing recorded; to wit, Enoh, Melchizedeck, Elias, John
the Baptist, and many of the Prophets, and let him prove by Scripture that
these men did sin; For Athanasius in his fourth Oration against the Arrians,
says, That many were born holy, and free from all sin, and particularly Elias,
and John Baptist.

Secondly, I ask him whether the sins of the Saints were recorded in Scripture
for our imitation, which he seems here to insinuate, for we say not that we
ought not to walk according to the Scripture, But that the sins of the Saints
are recorded, that we may shun them, not that we should follow them; neither is
there want of precep's and examples in abundance for us without them.

But before I leave this matter I shall give one argument yet, If there be any
who need no Repentance, then certainly there be some who do not break GOD's
Commands daily in thought, word and deed, but the first is true, Ergo, etc. The
Minor is proved by Luke 15. 7.

Chapter VII. Of Waiting in silence; And of the Sacraments.
OUR Author Denominates his seventh Chapter of silent Worship, which is a word
of his own Coining, and none of ours, and then falls to a vindication of his
brother J: B's Calumnies; The first whereof is. John Brown asserts, that R: B:
would have them understand, that Christ's Spiritual Resurrection was never till
now.

R: B: answers, I speak only with reference to the time sin^e the Apostacy,
and not to the primitive times before.

Our Author says, first, any may judge by his eleventh proposition, etc. Or by
this Chapter annexed thereto.

I am truly willing that any be judge that* is not biased, as most part of
the Clergy are; And therefore I inteat the Reader to see R. B's Apology, page
247, where he will find this calumny more clearly obviated. His second answer
is, he is unhappy in removing this calumny, for the Apostacy was working in
the Apostles time. But he is more unhappy in over turning one of the two chir^
grounds of the Protestant Religion assigned to the Jesuit by J: M: To wit, the
Father in the first three Centuries.

But shows ignorance here as well as malice, for if there was no true Spiritual
worshp in the Church after the Apostasy began to work; Then according to our
Author, there was no Spiritual Worship in the Church till the Reformation; The
contrary of which R: B: asserteth; Yea even in the darkest times of Popery he
cites Bernard, Bonaventur, Taulerus, and Thomas a K^mpis, and also commends
the first Reformers for denying the Popish abominable superstition and
Idolatry of the Mass, the Adoration of Saints and Angels, the Veneration of
the Relics, the Visitation of Sepulchers.

Yet nevertheless, Our Author in his third and fourth answer compares us to
Muncer, John of Lyden, Arrius, Pelagius, and what not; And it is much he has
not called us Papists too: But let the Reader judge whether he has mended J:
B's matter, and not rather added lie to lie, and calumny to calumny.

The second Calumny he defends is, That we acknowledge no motion, nor inward
breathing of the Spirit, but what is extraordinary, and merely Enthusiastic;
As also, That we abstract from all means. Which Calumny our Author says, he
has above evinced to be a Truth* in his first and second Chapters: How truly
the Reader must Judge.

But he gives us a second Instance, R: B: denies that Studied Sermons are
means appointed of GOD, (for what he adds are his own words, and not R: B's)
but behold the Argument; Studied Sermons are denied, Ergo, all means are
denied; Be ashamed.

His third is, That the Quakers spiritual life is nothing but Nature, Thus he
says, he proved, Chapter 2d. That all their Grace and Light, is nothing but
the small remainders of the once bright shining Image of GOD in Man. To which I
also refer the Reader. And withal, I must desire the Reader to take notice of
our Authors little Tricks, in his Parallel betwixt us and the Anabaptists, he
referrs to what follows of his Book; And in the end of his Book he referrs to
what is past, thinking (it is like) his own implicit Hearers will take it on
trust; But I expect thou will trace him better, which if thou do, thou will
soon find what he is for all his vain boast.

The fourth Calumny he denies, and says his Adversary only enquireth it. If
this be a sufficient Answer, let him consult his own Book, page 167. 168. and
169. Where he will needs have a Query to import a full affirmation of the thing
queried, and so proves himself signally dissingenious, and also leaves his
brother in the mire.

The fifth Calumny, he says, depends upon the Contraversy about Perfection,
and so shifts it.

The sixth Calumny, he insists on is, That there is no setting about Prayer, or
other Duties, without a previous motion of the Spirit.

The Nicery is in the word Previous, and therefore I shall referr him to the
fifth Section of Quakerism confirmed, where that matter is fully handled, and
all his Quibles Answered; Which Book I perceive the Man has read, and so might
either been silent, or brought us some new thing, which he has not yet done.

The seventh Calumny is, That Gospel Worship puts away all external actions;
And upon this Calumny, his brother ^: B: had charged a Contradiction upon R: B:
Yet our Author bestows no more answer upon both. But, He needs not grudge at
this for their practice helps us to expone their Words; If this be fair
dealing, let the Reader Judge.

He tells us next, That J: B: compares us to the Old Pithonicks, And as if his
brother had not been slanderous enough, he adds, I always compared them in
such fitts to the Cumaena Sybilli, as she is descrived by Virgil 6. Aenead: And
John Brown (passim) That we are acted by the Devll, possessed by him at his
pleasure To all which I shall again with R: B: modestly reply, That of all men
the Presbyterians might have for born this, had they but remembered the
Stuartown sickness.

But our Author gives us a mighty difference thus, These at Stuartown after
these outlettings of the Spirit upon them, cleaved to the Scriptures as the
only Rule, and were endeared to the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and his Word and
Sacraments; We mean, says he, Water Baptism and the Communion of the Lord*
Body in Bread and Wine, etc: Which says he, were commanded by Christ to be
used until his coming to Judgment: Which are contemned and vilified by the
Quakers. And for all this, we must trust our Authors word; But how comes it
then that our present Presbyterians, who are found in all these things now have
no such Outlettings of the Spirit? Yea, why are they found the chief Opposers
and blasphemers of such Outlettings of the Spirit? If they were good then, I
think they should be expected and waited for now? But this would savor of
Enthusiasm, and therefore cannot be endured.

But I must tell our Author the true Reason, why these Outlettings of the
Spirit ceased among them; To wit, Because they foresook that Power which
reached them at first, and betook themselves to Men, who in stead of the Gospel
of peace, preached up Wars, Seditions, Tumults, Scrife, and Contention; And in
stead of Prayers, Tears, preached up Swords and Spears, in stead of Suffering,
fighting, and contending with the Civil Magistrate; Which was never the way of
CHRIST not Christians. As for Water Baptism, and Bread, and Wine, it is no good
Argument that they cleaved to them, which are called Meats and Drinks, and
Diverse Baptisms, and Carnal Ordinances, while they wanted that Righteousness,
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, wherein the Kingdom of GOD stands.

But our Author returns to his old trade of citations, and gives us an English
Minister and Paget for his Authors, which books I never saw, and may be as
great liars as himself* Who may the next time be cited as a famous Author, but
admit all these were truths (as they are not) What then? If our Author will
but invite me with the next I will give him undeniable Instances of
Presbyterian Priests that have far out done all these Instances of his, in
abominable wickedness, not mentioned in the Presbyterian Eloquence, but this is
a pitiful way of Reasoning.

He cannot omit Virgil and Latinus, to show us that he reads the Heathen Poets,
it seems, as carefully as the Bible; Otherwise he had never inserted such a
foolish tale, as the Heathen Lying upon Sheeps Skins; And maliciously adds,
which if the Quakers do, or not, I am uncertain. This one Sentence in the end
renders all the rest uncertain and rediculous: But it is Observable in our
Adversaries, that when a Scottish Priest has a lie to vent he goes to England
for it, and in England they fetch it from Scotland, Holland, or some
forraignplace at a distance, to cover deceit and malice.

And now at last, we are come to silent waiting upon the LORD, or turning
inward our minds to hear what the LORD will speak in us; As David says, I will
hear what the LORD will speak in me, etc.

This our Author says, is impossible to a man, except he be sleeping or in an
extacie; But gives no proof, but ipse dixit; As for Ecstasies I know them not,
but sleeping men have their minds sometimes very busse, and even our Author
himself, I doubt, is not quite free from dreams.

And because he cites Virgil here, I think he who so much delights in Heathen
Poets might have been at the pains to read some Christian Poets As Boetus de
Consol: Phil: 3: lib: metrum: 1^: where he will find this matter clearly held
forth; And even Beza commends silence, tho not that turning in of the mind,
which that other speaks of. But whereas he says, the Soul must act upon some
object; He shows how ignorant he is of true self-denial, as one of his
Transmarine Divines, says, purae negationes sui, etc. These pure acts of
self-denial are, that a man cease from his own works, his own willing and
running, and from his thoughts and imginations, which are only evil
continually, and are as clouds and obstacles, which hinder of that Divine
inward peace giving light in the bottom of the Soul; These Clouds therefore
being removed, the light immediately shines upon the denial of self, neither
(says he) can there be a vacuum here, but these are Heresies as well as
Mysteries to our Presbyterian Clergy, who Preach, Pray, and Praise in their
own willings, and by their own strength, without waiting for Divine assistance,
or the influence of the Spirit of Christ, without which they affirm a man may
be a sufficient Minister.

But says he, R. B. says, the Old Man, the Man of sin that is corrupted, must
dye, and be crucified; And again, says he, albeit in one sense they are said
to die: Yet they more truly live, Gal: 2. 20.

Upon this our Author quibles, saying, that in stead of relinquishing all
thoughts, he now only defends the living of ^arnal thoughts, but this he
calls a cheat: For says he, there is a time to be presupposed in which the
Spirit is not moving, etc. And what then? Must Patroclus Preach? Yea, although
Christ has said, Without me ye can do nothing; Yea, Calvine says on the
Fourth Commandmant, The Sabbath is a resting from our own works, that GOD may
Work in us. As for a time betwixt, which seems to be the only thing he quibles
upon, I have told before, and now again, that how soon the Clouds are dissipat
by a true self-denial; The Sun of Righteousness immediately appears, and there
is no vacuum. As to what he talks of the Apostle, I hope when he was dead,
and Christ lived in him, our Author will not be so gross as to say, that he
acted without Christ as to Spiritual things, tho the faculties of his Soul were
as vived and active as our Authors now are.

What he says in page 214 on this subject, only shows his ignorance in these
things, or want of experience, or that he thinks GOD to be at a distance, and
to require a time to come to man to work upon him after he has denied self.

His next Quible is concerning appointed times, for meeting together to wait
upon the LORD. Alleging that we should have a previous motion to every
Meeting, otherwise (says he They limit the Spirit. But might not our Author
have allowed us the use of this Interpreter of Scripture in such External
cases as appointing Meetings. to wit, His Christian Prudence and Wisdom; For I
hope our Author will not say, that Meeting together is an Act of Worship, and
therefore I refer him to Quakerism confirmed, for a full Answer to his Quibles,
which if he had been just, he had taken notice of here.

In his Vindication of Calvine about Sabbath Day, he does him very little
kindness, telling the World he contradicts himself twenty seven years after
he had wrote his Institutions: I wish he had done so with his doctrine of
Reprobation also. But we have many famous Protestants for us in that matter, as
well as Calvine, As Dr. Barnes, William Tindal, and almost all Christians.

He charge R. B. with a contradiction for saying, That Peter and Paul had a
Natural Man, in which the devil might work, and a Spiritual Man which might
resist. This he says contradicts his dectrine of Perfection, or at lest his
Exposition of Rom: 7.

For the strst, R. B. always asserted a Natural and Spiritual Man, as may be
seen in all his Writtings.

And for the Second, It is one thing to say, the Devil may work, and the Spirit
resist, and another to say, the Devil does work and overcome; The first may be
said of Paul in his best state; The second is our Adversarys doctrine which we
deny: And thus his alleged Contradiction is a meet false Insinuation.

In the next place, he accuses R. B. of Railing; He should have said R.
Maequair, and used his own phrase. Quis tulerit Graccbos, etc. But he calls
them Priests, (says he understand of Baal) Thus he has helped R. B. For
conscius ipse sibi de se putat omnia dici.

To defend his Brother, saying, That Watching is not a turning inward, but a
looking outward. To which R. B. replyeth: Then a man shut up in a dungeon could
not watch spiritually: He answers, That by looking outwardly, they understand
minding GOD, and our distance from him, and the like: This is Nonsense, as if
by looking outward a man could see GOD.

His bauble about Thaulerus is nothing but a malicious Insinuation of our being
Papists, which none that knows us will believe: Thomas a Kempis was a Papist,
yet his Book of the Imitation of Christ is more spiritual, than any
Presbyterian Book I ever yet saw, And if he will call me a Papist for saying
so, I cannot help it, but I am sure it is false; And if Popery should prevail
in the Nation (which GOD forbid) it would soon appear whether they or we were
the truest Protestants.

To conclude this matter, It is evident, That our Author is against all
Spiritual Worship, Mental prayer, Quietness of mind, etc. As opposite to that
sordid Trade of Preaching for hire, and divining for money: And if Michael
Molmos (of whom all Protestants, that I have seen mention him, writ favorably)
had appeared Glasgow Scotalnd, when he appeared at Rome, and Naples in Italy,
It is manifest our Presbyterian Clergy would have accused him as fiercely
here, as the Jesuits did there, Which among other things may show that they
are not mistaken who call them Cousin-Germans.

Section Second, Of BAPTISM.
HERE our Author very wisely passes by a great part of the Contraversie; To
wit, whether Sprinkling of Infants, (the only Baptism now in being in the
Presbyterian Church) be either the Baptism of John or of CHRIST? Both which we
deny; And this our Author should first have proved before he had accused: For
admit another man be wrong in his Religion, he can never be obliged to change
until his Adversary prove his to be right. Neither is it just to desire him to
come from his own, (tho wrong) to yours, except you can prove yours to be
right: But for this he must consult his good Friend Hicks the Anabaptist, whose
weapons he has often borrowed in this conflict.

Secondly, The Westminster Confession, chap. 27. number. 4. says, Neither of the
Sacraments may be dispensed by any, but by a Minister of the Word lawfully
ordained.

Now we deny that any of the Presbyterian Priesthood are such, and therefore
(tho these sings were to continue) they may not dispense them. These our
Author knewwell enough, but skips over them.

But it is observable, That the Scriptures cited in the Confession to prove
this Article, do all of them point to an inward Call, one is Hebrews 5. 4, and
no man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of GOD as was
Aaron: I hope this was not to derive his Call from an Apostate Idolatrous
Church, as that of Rome, from which our Presbyterian Priests are not ashamed to
derive theirs.

Thirdly, The Presbyterians acknowledge that these signs are not absolutely
necessary to Salvation, and in the time of their last Reign, limited Baptism to
Preaching days, and refused to the Children of Ignorant or Scandalous Parents,
by which means many Infants dyed without it, Tho they say that the contempt of
it is damnable: And since the late Revolution, I read of one of them who said,
It was but the Relicts of Popish Superstition to be curious for Baptising of
Children; And that he knew a good and godly Minister who lived to a great Age,
and was never Baptized. What then needs all this clamor against us.

The first thing he takes notice of, is, the many divisions and disputes among
Christians about these Signs, which he fasly calls one of R. Bs. Apologetical
Arguments, whereas it is nothing but a part of his Introduction, as any that
reads his Apology may see: And in his Vindication, he tells his Adversary page
162. he has not used it as an Argument at all; And in his Apology tells them,
how much it would contribute to Peace, that they would lay aside such Heathnish
and Barbarous words as these: Nevertheless our Author will have him a Heathen
for this advice to procure unity; but it is too manifest that tho Salamanders
we have to do with are Peace-haters.

Next, he falls upon the word Sacrament, which he must confess is not a
Scripture expression, and from this draws a foolish consequence, to wit,
Ergo, the thing is not in them; he should have said, Ergo, its a Humane
invention, introduced by the Apostasy. and therefore to be laid aside by the
Reformation, but he is not so ingenuous, but he says, the word Trinity is not
to be found in Scripture; but the thing imported by the word is, Why may not
then the Scripture words be used, and both these words laid aside? Except our
Clergy think they can word better than the Spirit of GOD. But our Author who
is so well acquaint with the Latin Poets, cannot be so ignorant of their
Historians as not to know the true and most common signification of Sacrament
to be a

Military Oath; And therefore I think there is no presbyterian ceremony that I
know which so well deserves the name of a Sacrament as the Solemn League and
Covenant.

His next business is to deal with Ephesians. 4. 5. from Which R. B. proves there
is but one Baptism, to which J. Brown answers, the Scripture no where says,
that there is but one only Baptism. To which R. B. replyeth, it will as well
prove that there is one only Baptism, as that there is One only GOD: But our
Author very heartily quites the matter, and betakes himself to Faith; And
because there are (says he) more kinds of Faiths than one, the Text must be so
expounded concerning Baptism: But let me have the one Faith and the one Baptism
mentioned here, and our Author may take all the rest to himself, for there is a
false Faith which I covet not.

But in page 219: he asserteth, That the Baptism of the Holy Ghost is ceased;
And in page 224: he boldly asserts, That John's Baptism is Christ's whole true
Baptism, but says nothing to prove it.

From which Doctrine it follows, That whosoever is Baptized with water is
Baptized with the Holy Ghost. Secondly, That as many as are baptized with water
have put on CHRIST. And Thirdly, That the Apostle Paul erred grievously in Acts
19: when he said, unto what then were ye baptized, seeing they had received
John's Baptism before: But the man is so confused all through this Section, that
he knows not what he asserts, for in the same page 219: he again asserts, That
John's Baptism was no Figure of the New Testament Baptism; this he asserts
without any proof, yet fearing it may not pass, he adds, Otherwise if the Sign
be opposed to the thing signified, we may understand the Baptism of the Holy
Ghost, and Fire, spoken of Matthew: 3: of Sanctification and Mortification.

What a hodg-podg is this! Schition like to fight and flee, or to change shapes
like a Proteus; And first tells us Dogmatically, it is no Figure; And then, if
it be as a sign opposed to thing signified, etc. That Sanctification as well
Mortification is a part of the one Baptism, is not denied.

To R: Bs. saying, it is alye, That he would have none to be Baptized in the
Spirit, but such as are endued with these Extraordinary Gifts: To this I say,
he answers; But do they not still boast of their Revelations, and Inspirations,
comparing themselves to the Apostles, calling themselves perfect, etc. A heap
of gross untruths; And yet this is the best return we, meet with, to mend one
lie by making two or three more.

In page 220: contrary to that of Ephesians: 4: 5: from which R: B: infers, if
Water Baptism be to continue, there should be two Baptisms. J: B: answers, it
might be as well said, that there were two Circumcisions under the Old
Testament, etc. Upon which our Author says, he grants his consequence, and
challenges his Adversary of Levity for such an Argument: Here he begins with a
lie, for R: B: says, if he can answer no better then by smyling at it, we must
pity the Levity of his Spirit. Now let the Reader judge, if the Argument was
the ground of the challenge; or his laughing at that which he could not answer.
But R: B: answers, What then? As long as the outward continued there were
two; to wit, the outward and inward, that of the Flesh and that of the heart;
and let him stretch the simile as far as he can, it will help him nothing, for
the Apostle says, Romans 2. 28. That it is not Circumcision which is outward in
the flesh, because it was a Figure, and all Figures were to cease, even so of
the other: That is not CHRIST'S Baptism which is outward, to the putting away
the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience, I Pet. 3. 21.

But he comes again to Faith, saying, he may as well conclude from this place,
that there is but one Faith, as that there is but one Baptism. And yet faith
our Author, there are diverse kinds of Faith mentioned in the Scripture, as the
Doctrine of Faith, Galat. 1. 23. The profession of Faith, 1 Timothy 1. 19. The
Faith of Miracles, or the like; This is (if learned at all) so learned, that I
freely acknowledge I cannot understand it, to wit, that the profession of Faith
is one Faith, the Doctrine of Faith another, The Faith of Miracles a third
Faith, And the One Faith a fourth Faith, in which none of the other Three are
concerned: This will require four several and different definitions, which when
our Author gives us, we may judge of the truth of his assertion, till then he
must excuse me to think he deserves a smyle, no less then R. B. did from his
Brother J. B. and will find he has begged the Question as well as his Brother
did For I perceive he builds upon his own mistake, That no man who has this
one Faith can miscarry. But I tell him, some have made shipwreck of Faith, and
of a good Conscience. And this is the Scripture testimony: So albeit some might
work Miracles, and thereafter become wicked; yet this faith nothing against
their having true Faith at that time: And if, he faith, every one who has true
faith, does not work miracles; The answer is easy, such a great measure of
Faith is not required for Salvation, yet difference in the measure makes no
difference in the kind. Neither does it follow, that Baptism with Water is
included in this one Baptism; For the Apostle Peter plainly
contra-distinguisheth them, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

So Robert Barclays Argument (which Patroclus (minding his old Friend Achilles)
mocks at, stands in full force; Which because he has so minchingly set down, I
will set down at large, and expect a more solid answer next, the Argument is
this, seeing such as were baptized with water, were not therefore baptized with
the Baptism of CHRIST, therefore water Baptism cannot be the Baptism of CHRIST.

But he comes to his old trade again, accusing R. B. of Socinianism, and a
little after must be at Circumcision again, alleging that what ever can be
said against Water Baptism from I Pet. 3. 21. Will militate as much against
Circumcision under the Law.

But it is manifest, that the Law was a Figurative, Typical and
Shadowy-Dispension, which stood in mears and drinks, and diverse Baptisms and
Carnal Ordinances imposed on them until the time of Reformation: But that the
Gospel was such a dispensation, I think our Author will not dare assert; And
therefore the difference is very evident, that although Circumcision was to
continue among the rest Carnal Ordinances until the time of Reformation; Yet
the Gospel being a spiritual dispensation, in which Carnal Ordinances, Types
and Shadows were to cease after the Substance was come, see Col. 2. from 16. to
the end; so John's Baptism was to cease among the rest of the shadows, seeing
John was sent only to the Jews to prepare the way of the LORD.

His next assault is nothing but wind and froth, wherein he challenges R. B.
for denying John Browns Expositions of Gal. 3. 27. and Col. 2. 12. Which J. B.
says, may be understood of putting on CHRIST by profession, tho not in Truth
and Reality; For which Eposition says R. B. I shall expect his proof next
time, if he has any. And now let the Reader judge, if our Author have any
ground for his boasting: And whether he who has undertaken the defense of John
Brown was concerned to have proven this spurious interpretation of his Brother
to be the meaning of the Apostle: For Robert Barkclay was no further concerned
then to deny it, as I think any sincere Christian will do: And therefore it is
manifest, that the seared Consciences are his own and his Brothers; who dare
adventure to cheat the World, by putting a senso upon the Apostles words, which
was never intended by him.

In the next place he referrs us to J. Brown, which is a fair Go-by, but
subjoyns (more like a Pope than a Presbyter, if they be distinguishable) very
imperiously. Next, I say (faith he) that John's Baptism, as being instituted by
CHRIST, and comprehending the thing signified, is not only Baptism with Water,
but CHRIST'S whole true Baptism, and so this quibling is groundless. And why?
Because our Author says so. But lest he should quarrel, let us consider what
he has said, First, then, faith he, John's Baptism, as being instituted by
CHRIST, etc. Answer, That all the Baptisms, and Carnal Ordinances of the Law
were instituted by CHRIST is not denied; But that John's Baptism was instituted
by Christ after he took Flesh of the Virgin Mary, is denied, and the Scriptures
proves the contrary, Acts 19. 4. Next he faith, and comprehending the thing
signified: Very well, I hope our Author will no more quarrel with the Papists
about opus operatum: For if Water Baptism ( John's baptism) comprehend the thing
signified, then it is the Laver of Regeneration, consers Grace, and is
absolutely necessary to Salvation* But the Papists will hardly accept of him,
for, conveniet nulli qui secum dissidet ipsi. He has said in page 219. that
John could only administer the sign. And in his other page, he asserts, That
John's Baptism comprehends the thing signified: this language will need a gloss.

He comes now to the words of John, He must increase, but I must decrease: This
our Author and his Brother will have to be understood of their persons And
after some of his ordinary vanity, tells his meaning thus, I answer therefore,
that the meaning of the place is, That the Person of Christ was to grow more
and more in honor and glory, so that within a little the Fame and Repute of
John was to be Eclipsed through the Brightness and Splendour of Christ. To this
(I think) his own phrase may be added, spectatum admisst risum teneatis, etc.
For where did the Jews call John a Devil? Did not they receive him ak a
Prophet? Or did they call him a Glutton, and a Drumkard? Or did they cracified
him, or seek his life; If Herod had let him alone? All which show that they
honored the person of John more than the Person of CHRIST: But it is evident
that John's Ministration was to decrease, as being only to prepare the way to
CHRIST'S Ministration, whose Ministry then eclipsed the Ministry of John, as it
has done ever since: And therefore if he be not yet pleased, he must give usa
more sound exposition next.

In the end of page 224. he undertakes to prove, that the Baptism of John was
no Legal Rite; His first Argument is, All the Legal Rites, such as held forth
CHRIST and his Benesites by way of Type to the whole Church, which each Member
was to practice, were either institut by Moses, or before him, therefore this
could not be a Legal Rite, which was commanded directly at the coming of the
Missiah, and at his very appearance, preaching to the World, When there could
be no use of Legal Rites, but such, which were withing a little to be abolished.

Answer, First, I deny that any Rite was institute by Moses, but as a Servant
he published the Institution of these Rites to the People, and Recorded them,
and these before him in his Writings; so that if GOD had seen it meet He could
have added new Rites by any other of His servants, as He did this of Baptism by
John, who was as great as Moses.

And secondly, This Rite which was commanded directly at the coming CHRIST,
when there could be no use of Legal Rites, but these which were within a little
time to be abolished, ought now (as it is long since) to be abolished. These
are his own words.

His second Argument is, All the Legal Rites are abrogate in the New
Testament, but no where is Baptism abrogate, etc. Otherwise, says he, show me
the place of Scripture; but note 1 Pet. 3. 21. Is not this a fair Adversary? If
Hector had been advised by Patroclus what Arms to use, he might readily have
escaped his hand. But Patroclus must take this Scripture in the first place,
for the Repeal or Abrogation of John's Baptism; And lest he should grumble, I
shall add Acts 19. 2, 3, 4. and Heb. 9. 10. with John 3. 30.

His third Argument is Matthew. 11. 12. All the Prophets, and the Law prophesied
until John: And What then? Was not John one of the Prophets? Yes, and that a
great One, yet the least in the kingdom of Heaven is greater than be; Which
evidently proves he was no Gospel Prophet: As for his certainty of taking the
particle Until, exclusively by the collation of places, I tell him, I have
found him trip so often, I shall not take his word.

His fourth Argument is to prove John was no Legal Minister, because prophesied
of before he came, which no Legal Thing, Person, or Rite was. But here he runs
too fast, the Kings of Israel were prophesied of by Balaam; And Judah's
Soveraignity was prophesied of by Jacob, and 1 Samuel 15. 28. But if John was a
Gospel Minister, how then was the least in the Kingdom of Heaven greater than
he?

In page 126. he comes to 1 Cor. 1. 17. Where Paul says, CHRIST sent me not to
Baptize, to this John Brown answers, If Paul had not been put to Baptize, why
would he have done it? R. B. Answers, I think it needless for me to answer
the absurdity he would here fix upon the Apostlo; it suffices me, and I hope
will other good Christians, that the Apostle says positively, he was not sent
to Baptize; This our Author quarrels at, and in the end says, he knows that
we expone Paul's words, [That he was not sent to Baptize] for the less principal
part of his Errand, and cites Hos. 6. 6. Matthew. 9. Ierem. 2. 23.

The first two are the same, to wit, I desired Mercy and not Sacrifice, and are
explained by the context, and the knowledge of GOD more then Burnt-Offerings;
And that of Ierem. 2. 23. I am not polluted, I have not gone after Baalim, is
not at all to the purpose; Except he will say, that the Jews were unjustly
accused, which I think he will be afraid to assert. That all the Corinthians
were Baptized with Water, he does not prove; And it was known to be deferred by
many of the Primitive Christains until their old Age: And although Paul reproved
the tenacious sticking to Jewish Rites, yet some of them were continued even to
Tertullians time.

Secondly, He says, That paul does not say, that his Fellow Apostles were not
sent to Baptize, but himself alone; But says he not, That he was not inferior
to any of them, but that he had labored more, etc.

Thirdly, That still he did administrat this Sacrament to the Gentiles, upon
their embracing Christianity, which (says he) Mr. Brown has showed.

Our Author might have borrowed this from J. B. and given us a hint of it; For
where J. B. has any thing of worth (in his esteem) we are sure to get it, and
very little else. To take Not, for the not principal part, would make work. R.
B. has shown by 1 Cor. 2. 5. which our Author is it at leisure to concern
with, and therefore his reasonless Reasons are rejected.

In page 227. he comes to Matthew. 28. 19. Where he says, R. B. Denies that
while CHRIST was with the Apostles they baptized with CHRIST'S Warrant. And
says, he will wait his Adversaries proof of it. To this our Author, he has
done it already from John. 3. 26. and 4. 3. of which places the Quaker durst
not take notice.

That this is false, is evident, because R. B. rejects it as a sufficient
proof; and the second citation (which should have been John 4. 2.) shows that
the report brought to John in the former citation was a mistake, and therefore
the first citation is to no purpose: The second is, Tho JESUS himself baptized
not, but his Disciples; Does this say any thing more for their having a Warrant
to Baptize, then to fulfill all the Levital Law, which was not yet abrogate,
nor nailed to His Cross? Did not He command some that were healled to go to the
Priests, and offer according to the law of Moses? But also John's Baptism was
not then ceased; John was alive, and some who had been John's Disciples were
become CHRIST'S Disciples, and so were continuing to Baptize; And we must expect
an account of the warrant he pleads for from CHRIST, as a Gospel Ordinance.

But R. B. says, What if it were all granted? Did not the Apostles prepare and
eat the Passover with CHRIST'S Warrant and Authority, is it therefore to
continue?

He answers, There is no parity; first, Because the eating of the Passover was
not imposed upon the Gentiles, as accessory consequent of their embracing
Christianity. Which he says, Baptism was. This he had no leisure to prove,
because he could not: For I hope he will confess that Constantine the Great had
Embraced Christianity, when he sat as a Member of the Council of Nice; and yet
was not baptized for diverse years after: Neither can he be ignorant of many
Gentiles who were not Baptized for many years after their embracing the
Christian Faith, and that even after Superstition began to creep in.

Secondly, He says, The Passover was an old Legal custom, whereas Baptism was
in its very use. Well then according to our Author it was the nearer its fall,
who tells us in page 225. There could be no use of Legal rites then, but such
as were within a little to be abolished.

Page 228. he cites R. B. saying, That tho it be joined with Discipline, as
Circumcision was with it among the Jews; it will no more follow, that Baptism
is to be continued then Circumcision. He answers, that the Baptism spoken of,
to wit, Matthew. 28. 19. is to continue he thinks, Robert Barkclay will not deny:
But the Question is whither this be Water Baptism, to prove the continuance
whereof he brings this Scripture, which seeing it is not to be continued,
cannot be here intended.

Next, where they object the constant practice of the Apostles: This R. B.
says, The practice and testimony of the Apostle Paul declares to be false;
this says he, we have proved above to be false; but the Reader must be judge,
to whom I leave it.

Next, he proves, that abstinance from blood and things strangled were abrogate
by 1 Cor: 10. Where I will be oblidged to him to show me one word of either the
two. Next he gives us two whole Epistles, Galat: and Timothy, without citing
either Chapter or Verse, because he could not: But that these two continued in
the Church even in Tertullians time; I have told him above: So that his
Abrogation has not been intelligible to the Primitive Christians.

His second Argument is but a Repetition of what he has said before, That
Baptism was always upon condition of their embracing CHRIST, which is false as
I have showed before. He says, There is another ground given for Water
Baptism, then Condiscention to the Jews; But he should have told by whom; For
except himself, I yet know no other.

Thirdly, He says, Either the Apostles unrepealed Practice was not sufficient
to walk by, or else this was abrogate afterward; But says he, The last is
false, and the first is absurd.

Answer, The first I have already shown from Scripture, and the last is no
absurdity; Except it be so to the Presbyterian Priests, who pretend to be the
Apostles Successors, and yet are not found in their unrepealled Practices,
Viz: To heal the Sick, to teach all Nations, and to Preach the Gospel freely;
Which last, our Adversaries are so far from doing, that some of them have not
been ashamed to Print and publish to the World, Nos non gratis accepimus, ergo
neque gratis dare tenemur.

Next he promises us two Scriptures for one, where the Word Baptism is taken
for Baptism with the Holy Ghost. We shall expect his Catalogue with the next;
And yet he may give us ten for Circumcision in the Flesh, for one of
Circumcision in the Heart; Tho the first be abrogate and the latter continues.

Page 230. He gives us an Argument thus, To baptize with the Spirit is not in
all the Scripture applied to Men; Therefore it is not safe without very solid
Reasons to expone it so here. This I Confess, is modest, and therefore I shall
modestly answer him, I never looked upon Men as more then Instruments, neither
in this nor in Teaching under the New Covenant: Christ is the principal Teacher
as well as the principal Baptiser of His People, without whom they can do
nothing. And therefore, I justly reject all such Ministers as profess that they
can teach or baptize without the Immediate Assistance of our Lord Jesus Christ.

His next is an Old Quible renewed thus, All that they understand by this
Spiritual Baptism, is sufficiently expressed in the Context. This has been
often proposed and as often denied, and the contrary proved; And therefore
deserves no answer upon his bare Assertion: See Truths Defense, Page 129. where
this is fully discussed: For the greatest part of his work has been to bring
up old Stuff in a new Dress, knowing it will pass with such as have pinned
their Faith on the Sleeves of such Teachers, especially having secured them in
his Epistle to the Reader, with a Touch not, Taste not, Handle not (lest ye be
informed and find out the cheat.

His next Paragraph being against, the Socinians, I am not concerned with it.

His last has nothing to the purpose, but one Perversion; Where he R: B:
insinuates, That Peter commanded expressly the Gentiles to be Circumcised,
which (says he) he builds upon Galat: 2. 12. Now R: Barkclay says only, he
constrained the Gentiles, And cites verse 14. Where it is said, Why compellest
thou the Gentiles, etc: After this Perversion, he concludes with a Lie, where I
leave him, and proceed. Adding only this one Argument.

That Rite or Ceremony which was institute in the time of the Law, and also
practiced; That is before our LORD JESUS CHRIST began to preach the Gospel;
Must needs be a Legal Rite; But Baptism with Water, or John's Baptism was such;
Ergo, It was a Legal Rite.

Section Third, Of the SUPPER, etc.
HE begins with a Lie, great Saying, We deny the LORDS Supper: Whereas we
affirm, That except a Man eat his Flesh and drink his Blood, he has no Life in
him.

After he has past by a whole page of R. B's. Vindication, He comes at last to
J. B's. Preaching to the Devil, and denies it to be his, but only an Inference
from our Doctrine; But the Truth is, That upon R. B's. saying, The Gospel is to
be preached to every Creature under Heaven, which is Scripture Language, Isay,
If upon this Text, John Brown make a preaching to the Devil, who is to blame?
Whence it is a apparent, that his Simile about Murder, is Nonesense.

Next he comes to the Priest near Lawder, who prayed to the devil; This R. B.
does not assert for a truth, but only tells he heard it, and so is no
Calumniator. But if I should say, I have heard and read many as gross things of
some of you, I should neither Lie nor Calumniat: See the Presbyterian Eloquence.

In the next Paragraph he has nothing, but accuses R. B. for neglecting the
Reason his Adversary gave for his denial, and then exclaims. But why should I
take notice, etc: Now should not our Author rather have enforced this Reason?
If it had been worth his while he had not skipt over it. But when he perceives
it will not do, it is enough for him to say, John Brown has done wonders, why
should I take notice, etc.

Next he comes to Matthew: 14. 19. Which R: B: says (according to our Author)
will as much prove a Sacrament, as the places of the Gospel, and the Epistle to
the Corinthians ordinarily brought can do it.

Here Reader thou have another instance of his deceit, for clearing whereof I
shall set down R. Bs. words, he asks, What signifies CHRIST'S blessing of the
Bread, breaking, giving it to his Disciples, desiring them to eat? Answer,
Christ blessed the Bread, break it, and gave it to his Disciples to eat, and
they to others, where themselves confess no such Sacrament or Mystery, as they
would have here is reduceable, see Matt. 14. 19. Mark 6. 41. Now let the Reader
judge of this man's ingenuity.

But, says he, R. B. never inferred any thing of this kind from simple
blessing, but from other things considered with blessing; such as this is my
Body, this is my Blood; And the unrepealled command and Institution, 1 Cor. 11.
and the like.

What Foppery is this? Does he think to infer the real Presence from these
words, this is my Body? Or will his mere assertion satisfy, that 1 Cor. 11.
was a command for continuance of of that Sign? For to call it the institution
is nonesense, being institute before Paul was a Christian: but to use his own
words, he has done as well as he can, and is to be excused, if he would but
cease to boast.

That which follows is no better, where he cites R. B. saying, he says
indeed, that the institution of the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11. was a permission, etc.

When will this man learn to deal honestly? upon R. B's. saying, That 1 Cor:
11. Will not prove the necessity of its being now performed, J: B: says, That
then it was an act of will worship and superstition. R: B: Answers, What is
done by permission for a time, is not Will Worship and Superstition, etc: Now
it concerned our Author to prove that there was no Institution of this Rite
before this Epistle to the Corinthians; And in that case he had delivered his
Brother, and made it an act of Will Worship. For his saying, That R: B:
grants there was a Command for this Practice, is nothing to his purpose, for
he did not say, this was it, but another before it; And so this was no
Will Worship to the Corinthians, nor any proof for its continuance.

The next is about washing the Disciples feet, and his express Command, that
they should wash every one another feet. To which he answers, John Brown
has showed disparity; And that R: B: says mere nothing, but calls him a
Pope. This every Man that will be at the pains to read the place, will find to
be a gross untruth, but this is ordinary.

His next in page 234. Where he cites Acts 20. 7. to prove that the
circumstances are not to be observed: The words (it seems) are, when the
Disciples came together to break Bread, Paul preached unto them, and therefore
say our Adversaries, This was a Sacramental Eating, and no circumstance to be
observed. A singular Consequence and well worthy our Author; May he always
dispute thus against us; And 1 Cor: 11. 18, 20. I desire he may tell us next
what relation it has to his matter.

In the next place he begins with Acts 2. 42. And complains that R: B: denies
this to be meant of the LORDS Supper. But herein he accuses Beza who in his
notes upon this place, says, The Jews used thinn Loaves, and therefore they
did rather break them then cut them. So by breaking of Bread they understand
that living together, and the Banquets which they used to keep. The Reader may
see what trouble it is to trace him to no purpose.

But he comes again to Acts 20. 7. And says R: B: slighteth his Adversaries
Reason; Which is another gross Lie, as the Reader may see, Vind: page 172. But
why does he not bring some thing to help his Brother? and not tell us he has
done all; When all Intelligent and Unbyassed Men judge he has done more hurt
then Good to his own Cause; And yet this Section is nothing but a mere Elogie
upon J: B's: Book.

In Answer to Numb: 20. Says our Author, R: B: brings nothing but mere
Assertions, false Suppositions, such as that the Corinthians were
supperstitious, in that they at all practiced this Duty of the LORDS Supper.

I acknowledge he must be sharper sighted then I, who can see these words in R:
B's: Vindication, upon Numb: 20. or any where else. But being near the close,
he begins to Dream again, and may perhaps be Simon next, because he was
Patroclus last, and sure he is more like the first, for Lying and Deceit is the
best part of his work.

To R: B's: Saying, That 1 Cor: 11. 26. Is to be understood of Christ's Inward
and Spiritual Coming, Apol: page 341, and his Vind: page 173, He gives no
Answer; But it is needless at all to impugn this distinction, its own
groundlesness sufficiently does it.

This is like a mighty Man, and well worthy a Groecian Hero.

And now he is come to his ultimus conatus, which (he must excuse me to tell
him) is of all his Book the most ridiculous. For to conclude from the
Abrogation of Rites, Signs, and Ceremonies, That preaching the Gospel was also
abrogate. To prove this, he says, it will as well follow from Col: 2. 20. That
preaching the Gospel is abrogate, as from verse 16. and Rom: 14. 17. That the
LORDS Supper is abrogate. I shall therefore set down the Words, and leave it to
the Judgment of the Reader, Rom: 14. 17. For the Kingdom of GOD is not meat
and drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Col: 2. 16.
Let no Man therefore judge you in meat or in drink or in respect of an Holy
Day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath Days.

I shall now add his Citation for abrogating of preaching, Col: 2. 20.
Wherefore if ye be dead with CHRIST from the Rudiments of the World, why as tho
living in the World are ye subject unto Ordinances? Touch not, Taste not, etc.

Now if the LORDs Supper as used by you, be not Meat and Drink, I know nothing
what Bread and Wine are. But what a Commentary will this 20. verse need to
cause it intend preaching of the Gospel? I remember the Presbyterian Dialect
was wont to run thus; To hear Sermon, was called a Haunting of the Ordinances;
And to abstain, was called a dishaunting of the Ordinances: And therefore it
seems he understands the word Ordinances in the 20. verse for Preaching. He
must show us, what relation Preaching has to the following words, Touch not,
Taste not, etc. And clear his Inference before ^^ boast so confidently.

Postscript.
I Intended here to have Summed up his Extravagancies, and represented them to
his Brethren: But when I considered what Justice R: B: met with, in the like
Case, I resolved to forbear.

I shall give one only Instance, whereby the Reader may have a taste of the
Malice and Injustice of our Adversaries.

Robert Barkclays Vindication, page 195, George Keiths Position, which John
Brown and Robert Macquair, two eminent Presbyterian Preachers in the Index at
the end of John Browns Book, affirm to be one of the abominable heads of
Quakerism. Is,

That the Man CHRIST JESUS is the Mediator, The Apostle his assertion (1 Timothy:
25.) Is,

That there is one Mediator between GOD and Man, The Man CHRIST JESUS.

We desire [addeth he] the Sense and Censure of the Presbyterian Ministry upon
this: Or otherwise we hope they cannot in reason be offended, if justly
reputed Accusers of the Spirit of GOD, that taught the Apostles to speak, and
thence be condemned as signal Calumniators and Heretics.

Thus R. B. But in stead of any censure, or so much as a confession of this
horrid abomination. Behold our Author Patroclus appears on the stage, sometimes
like a Petulant and wanton Gallant, with a lascivious Fable in his mouth; And
anon he is quite transformed into a right Hypo centaur* and breaths nothing
but Blood, Terror and Desolation, pulling down Castles, overturning Fabrics,
and cutting Juglar Veins: Yet never forgets to extol his brother I. B. And now
and then to give us Paneygrick upon the mighty Acts performed by his Exorbitant
Blatant Ribaldry, which is indeed all the Justice we can expect from that
Generation.

His Appendix I am not concerned with, being (as he says) written against one
Parker, whom he calls an Enthusiastic Armenian; This name to some of his
Hearers may serve for Gospel to conjure the devil, but I will English it for
them: It signifies a man inspired of GOD, who believes the Doctrines of James
Arminius. I know no Men in this Nation who are under that denomination: But if
I could find one truly such, I would prefer his Conversation to all the
Presbyterians in the World, that deny the Inspiration of the Almighty, and tell
us that Christ spoke his last words to his Church 1600 years ago: If he be
alive, he will casily answer for himself, if not, I hope his Brethren will
vindicat him.

To conclude the Presbyterian Doctrine is, That the Decrees of GOD are Eternal
Purpose, according to the Counsel of His own Will, whereby for His own Glory he
has foreor dained whatsoever comes to pass. According to which Doctrine, it is
manifest, that all the Actions, Words, and Thoughts of Men are necessary, and
that it is impossible for them to do, think, or speak any otherwise then they
do.

And therefore I hope Patroclus and his Brethren cannot in Reason be offended
at me, for any thing I have written in this Treatise, seeing, according to their
own Doctrine, I was under an invincible necessity to write this, and no
otherwise; Nor was it possible for me to forbear one Letter thereof. And GOD
open their eyes to see the Tendency of these wicked Principles, and their Black
and Bloody Practices which flow from them; that they may find Repentance and
Mercy in the Day of the LORD JESUS.

THE END.
Account of the most Matterial Errors in Printing, that any ways mar the
sense; Hoping the Candid Reader will pass by, and excuse smaller Literal
faults, or wrong printing: Considering our continued difficulty in Printing,
through the unjust malice of our Adversaries, lest their slanders and our
Innocence should be manifested.
Page 1: Line 13: for aucupunt Read sucupant. page 3: line 1: for Clericus Read
Clericum. page 4. line 21: for His read This. p: 5 l: 22 for Isr. It is. p: 7
l: 14 for from himself read By himself. ib. l: 19 for Auxibare r. Auxiliarie.
l. 28. for is then read is there. p. 9: l: 2. for attendance read a tendancy.
ib. l: 16: for departed read have departed. l. 23. for thy read they. l. 25 for
have as read as have. l: 29 for casts read cast. p: 10 l: 15 for ambilton read
the ambition. ib. read avarice. p. 13 l 23 for proxmoity read proximity. lb. l.
24 for passions read patrons. p. 15 l: 4 for Hicks I represen^ read Hicks
represent. ib: l. 18 for this read his. p. 23 l. 2 for for read or. p. 27 l., 5
for or his read he or his. p. 30 l. 23 for added read had added. p. 33 l. 17
for in these read placed in the^e. p. 35 l. 18 for word read words p: 35 l. 19
for an read any p. 39 l. 2 for this the read this is the ib. l 12 for cannot
read can. p. 40 l. 8 f^r ^he good read to the good p. 42 l. 5 for velefiers
read vilifiers. p. 47 l. 8 read but once, nor any outward ^^^^ble voice. ib. l
9 for (...) read fourthly ^. 10 for sixthly read fifthly p. 48 l 6 for (...)
read art. p. 5^ l. 27 for C^apter read Chapter II. p. 67 l. ^^ for proves that
read proves ^nd^^^ p. 73 l. 22 for boastings read (...) p. 8^ l. 22 for
m^^cinpyc^osis read Met^mp^ycn^sis. p. 86 22 for comes read he comes. p. 89 l
18 for any read (...). 11 for said so ^^^d h^d said so. ib. l. 28 for the read
^is. p. 9^ l. 4 for wh^t read whom. p 103 l. 23 for then read them. p. 1. 2 l.
17 for Acyrogie read Acyrologie. p. 116 l. 18 for then the Scriptures read then
the samethings. p. 118 l. 23 for this my read this is my. p. 121 l. 12 for when
read then* p. 122 l. 7 for too read A. p. 128 l. 24 for it read is. p. 129 l. 4
for must do obey read must obey. p. 132 l. 28 for Defomation read Deformation.
p. 139. l. 4 for if any read if in any. p. 154 l. 9 for hard Scriptures read
Scriptures. ib. l. 10 for were heard read were hard. p. 157 l. 18 for in any
read many. p. 159 l. 19 for represent read represent nothing* p. 162 l. 28 for
Miencer read Muncer. p. 163 l. 18 for Hi read Hic. p. 166 l. 5 for urged read
verged. p. 193 l. 21 for to Salvation read Salvation. p. 207 l. 20 for it could
read I could. p. 209 l. 14 for natural man read natural to Man. p. 217 l. 24
for which savingly read is savingly. p. 223. l. 23 for is dead read is not
dead. p. 225 l. 8 for Apostolic read Apologetick. p. 226 l. 24 for War read
Tower. p. 233 l. ^ for will more read he will more. p. 246 l. 12 for Aust^stine
read Augustine. p. 250 l. 27 for regated read regarded. p. 252 l. 23 for
whither read where. p. 254 l. 12 for guilty to come read guilty. p. 256 l. 26
for propone in it read propone it. p. 268 l. ^ for di^ats read dictats. p. 269
l. 10 for Man read the Devil. p. 271 l. 2 for upon the Presbyterian Eloquence
read upon the credit of the Presbyterian Eloquence. p. 273 l. 15 for owe read
ownest. p. 275 l. 20 for used to read used to do. p. 278 l. 21 for created as
man read Created by CHRIST as Man. p. 286 l. 22 for contemns read continues. p.
289 l. 13 for niomerical read numerical. p. 295 l. 11 for to grow read is the
way to grow. p. 302 l. 19 for proceeds read preceedeth. p. 306 l. 4 for this
as read this ^. ib. l. 16 for their read here. p: 30^ l. 26 for will GOD read
Will of GOD. p: ^09 l: 20 for were a mind read were not a mind. p: ^ 13 l: 12
for dark read daily. ib. l: 15 for there two read these two. p. 322 l. 19 for
but shew^ read but he shows. p: 324 l. 1 for thus read this: p. 329 l: 13 for
hinder of that read hinder that. p: 338 l. 24: for but read nix^. p. 339 l. 25
for Schitian read Schithian. p. 340 l. 4 for to thing read to the thing. ib. l.
5 for as well read as well as. p. 346 l. 19 for because our read because
forsooth our. p. 350 l. 5 for coming CHRIST read coming of CHRIST. p. 354 l. 2
for it at leisure read not at leisure. p. 355 l. 20 for as accessory read as a
necessary. p. 361 l. 5 for where he read where he says. p. 362 l. 3 for lie
great read great lie. p. 364 l. 12 for reducable read deduceable. p. 373 l. 10
for Paneygrick read Panegyric. ib. l. 20 for Gospel read a Spell. p. 374 l. 11
for Eternal purpose read his Eternal Purpose.


