A DISCOURSE OF SEAPORTS; Principally of the Port and Haven of Dover: Written
by Sir Walter Rawleigh, and Addressed to Queen Elizabeth.

With useful Remarks, etc. on that Subject, by Command of his late Majesty K.
Charles the Second.

Never before made Public.

LONDON: Printed for and Sold by John Nutt, near Stationers' Hall. 1700.

Price 6d.

To the Right Honorable THE Earl of Rumney, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports,
etc.
My Lord,
THe Publisher of this Discourse has no other motive of his Address to your
Lordship, than that the Design may receive Protection from some Powerful Hand,
by which being Sheltered in its Infancy from the blasts of Malevolence (which
will blow from more corners than one) it may have leave to strike Root and grow
to strength enough to be able to stand alone. The Subject Matter seems to
belong to your Lordship in Propriety as you are Lord Warden of the Cinque
Ports; and the Patronage of so Noble and National a Project could be claimed no
where so rightfully as from your Lordship, who being equally great by Birth,
Power, the Favor of your Prince and the Love of your Country; I could not
withstand the Justice of making this Oblation of my Duty and Good-wishes to
your Lordship, by thus tendering it to your Election to be the Father and
Protector of so Needful and Magnificent a Work, abounding in Public Honor,
Safety and Emolument; whereby you may consign your Name to Posterity, by a
Monument more durable and of greater dignity than the Records and Patents of
your Ancestors or the Statues of Antiquity.

The Manuscript fell casually into my hands during the last Session of
Parliament, which being relished by such Worthy Members of that Honorable Body
as I had an Opportunity to impart it to; I thought I could not do a more
Grateful Office to my Country, than to be the means of its Publication, for
which freedom I ask the Authors pardon, as I do your Lordship's for the
presumption of this Dedication: who am,

Your Lordship's most Humble and Dutiful Servant,

A MEMORIAL OF Sir Walter Raleigh to Q. Elizabeth Touching the Port of Dover.
A Brief Discourse, declaring how Honorable and Profitable to your most
Excellent Majesty, and how Necessary and Commodious for your Realm, the making
of Dover Haven shall be, and in what sort, what least Charges in greatest
Perfection the same may be Accomplished.

THere is no one thing, most renowned Sovereign, of greater necessity to
maintain the Honor and Safety of this your Majesty's Realm, than by all
convenient means to increase Navigation, Shipping and Mariners, these being a
strength in time of War; and in time of Peace, Members most Profitable and
Commodious.

But this can neither be had, increased, nor maintained, if First, sure
Harbors he not provided, as Safe Receptacle to Receive and guard them from
Storms, Enemies, etc.

This has moved that Industrious Nation of the low Countries in Holland,
Zealand and Flanders, where, by Reason of their Sandy Coast, though God has
scarcely in any Place allowed them any good Havens Natural, yet seeing the
Necessity and Commodity of Harbors, they have, without regard of any Charges
or Travel, with Infinite Expenses, made many Havens Artificial, even in such
Places as Nature denied them all the hopes of help; Whereby we see they have
drawn such Intercourse and Traffic both of Foreign Nations for Merchandise,
and also by their Industry for Fishing, that in few Years (almost in our Age)
they have been able to Build a Number of most Sumptuous, Rich, and Beautiful
Cities, furnished the Coast with a great Number of Ships and Mariners, and are
become the most Populous and Rich Nation the Sun did ever shine on; And not
only the Sea Coasts, but also the Inland Countries, by quick vent of their
Commodities, do Participate of the same Benefit and Felicity; And such their
Charges on Havens and Harbors bestowed, do yield them the Fruit of Riches,
Wealth, and Commodity most plentiful throughout their whole Dominion.

But contrary-wise, with us this last Parliament, lamentable Relation has been
made of the great Decay of Mariners and Fishermen, to the Number of many
Hundred Sail upon our Coast of England, even in this Age, and within Memory;
And also of the present Poverty, and Desolate Habitation of many Frontier Towns.

Whereby it plainly appears, That as the Excessive Expense of the Low
Countries bestowed on Havens, has not Impoverished, but the clean contrary,
greatly Enriched them by Incomparable Wealth and Treasure, with Number of Rich,
Fair and Populous Towns; So our Sparing Mind, or rather greedy Getting,
Gaining, and Enriching Land from your Majesty's Havens and Navigable Channels,
has utterly Destroyed and Spoiled many good Havens by Nature left us, and
thereby wrought very Beggary, Misery and Desolation in these your Frontier
Towns.

And if we Search the very cause of the Flourishing State of London, which
almost alone in Quantity, People, and Wealth in this Age or Realm is so
increased, and contrary-wise of the Poverty or rather Beggary and Decay of
Winchelsea, Rye, Rumney, Hide, Dover, and many other Poor Towns, we shall find
the Decay of these Havens, and Preservation of the Thames, the only or chief
Occasion.

Hereby sufficiently appears how Incomparable Jewels Havens, and sure
Harbors are for Gaining, Maintaining and Increasing People, Wealth and
Commodity in any Realm.

And no lesser Strength and Security do they bring in time of War, as well by
the Multitude of Mariners (a most Serviceable People) and Shipping, which they
Breed, as also the Inhabitation of the Frontiers.

But in the whole Circuit of this your Majesty's Famous Island, there is not
any one either in Respect of Security and Defense, or of Traffic or
Intercourse, more convenient, Needful, or rather of Necessity to be Regarded
than this of Dover, Situate on a Promontory next Fronting a Puissant Foreign
King, and in the very straight Passage and Intercourse of almost all the
Shipping of Christendom.

And if that our Renowned King, your Majesty's Father, of Famous Memory, Henry
the 8th in his time, found how Necessary it was to make a Haven at Dover (when
Sandwich, Rey, Camber and others were good Havens, and Cal^is also then in his
Possession) and yet spared not to bestow of his own Treasure, so great a mass
in building of that Pier, which then Secured a Probable mean to perform
the same: How much more is the same now needful, or rather of Necessity (those
good Havens being extremely decayed) no safe Harbor being left in all the
Coast almost between Portsmouth and Yarmouth: Seeing the same also may be
performed without the Expense of your Majesty's Private Treasure, the present
Gift of Parliament considered, and their ready Wills so plainly discovered, to
supply whatsoever charge shall be needful, whenever by your Gracious
Providence they shall see the Realm armed with such a Shield, and endowed with
so great a Jewel.

The Commodities that thereby both to Your Majesty and Realm shall ensue, are.
First, A Place of Refuge and Safeguard to all Merchants, your Majesty's
Subjects, who Passing from London, and all other the East and North Parts of
England to France, Spain, Barbary, the Levant, the Islands or other parts
South, or West of the World, for want of Harbor at Dover, either going forth
or returning, shall be enforced to Ride it out in open Road, to their great
Peril, or in time of War, for want of such Succor, to Throw themselves on the
contrary Coast into the Arms of their Enemies.

For all other Strangers, your Majesty's Friends, that pass the Sea from
Hambrough, Danzick, Lubeck, Embden, Scotland, Denmark or any parts of the Low
Countries, to any parts of the World, South, and South-West, (whereof there are
daily great Numbers) or of Spain, Portugal, France or Italy, bound Northward,
either to London, or any of the Nothern Provinces, both passing and repassing,
they must of necessity Touch, as it were, upon this Promontory, and upon any
change of Wind, or Fear of Enemy, for sure Refuge, will most willingly and
thankfully Embrace so sweet and safe a Sanctuary.

No Promontory, Town or Haven of Christendom, is so placed by Nature and
Situation, both to Gratify Friends and Annoy Enemies as this your Majesty's
Town of Dover.

No Place or Town of Christendom, is so settled to receive and deliver
Intelligence for all Matters and Actions in Europe from time to time.

No Town of all the Low Countries, although by their Industry they have a great
Number, Excessive Populous, Fair and Rich, is by Nature so settled, either to
Allure Intercourse by Sea, or to Train Inhabitants by Land, to make it Great,
Fair, Rich and Populous.

For alluring Intercourse by Sea there is already sufficient said.

By Land, It has better Air and Water, Two chief Elements, than all the Rich
Towns in Holland and Zealand.

For Fire, The Country round about is far better Wooded than theirs, and the
whole Shire wherein it stands, and round about the Town it self the Soil is
so well sorted for Arable and Pasture of all sorts; For Marish and Meadows
sufficiently furnished, as Heart of Man cannot wish or desire it better.

A Quary of Stone at hand sufficient to Build both Town and Haven in most
sufficient, large and Beautiful manner. There wants nothing by Land, Sea or
Air that can be wished, And if those Industrious People of the Low Countries had
in all their Province such a Seat with like Commodities, they would make it a
Spectacle to the World without Respect of Charge whatsoever.

There wants nothing but a Harbor, which when compassed, all other parts of
Peopling, Wealth and Strength will follow of it self.

A Mavelous Number of Poor People both by this Work, till the Haven is made,
and after by the Shipping, Fishing, etc. will be Employed, who now for want of
Work are Whipped, Marked, and Hanged.

The Quick uttering of Commodities, which always follows by Increase of
Intercourse, will cause all the Coast and Shire to be notably Manured and
Peopled, not with Poor; Idle, But Painful, Industrious and Rich Persons, a
great Ornament and Commodity in Peace, and sure defense in War, the same being
the Frontier nearest Coast to a most Dangerous, Puissant, Active and Aspiring
Neighbor.

The increase of Navigation, Fishing and Traffic that hereby will grow, and
the great Wealth and Commodity thereof ariseing will not be contained in one
Shire alone, but poured forth into all parts of the Realm, to the great Relief
of the Poor, and Contentation of all Degrees, Increasing of Arts and
Occupations, a Pattern whereof we may behold even in our next Neighbors the Low
Countries; not Feigned in Imagination, but actually by them put in Execution,
and great shame it were for us, to despair attaining that, which we see others
our Neighbors have Atcheiv'd before us.

As the whole Realm in General, So your Majesty also in Respect of your
Particular Revenue, shall Reap great Profit by Increase of Subsidies, which
always will grow greater, together with the Wealth of the Land, besides the
increase of Customs and such other Revenues as shall be there made of the Soil
there gained from the Seas.

The Shire of Kent being within few Years grown mavelous Industrious in
Tilling and Manuring their Grounds, when they shall see so convenient a Port to
Vend their Superfluous Commodities, will not only increase in Wealth and
People, but also Yield to your Majesty's Coffers for Transportation of their
excise in Wheat, Barley and Beer, great Increase of Reveunes; And all other
Shires taking Example by them, will likewise grow in Labor, Industry, Wealth
and People.

There can be no Pitch, Tar, Masts, Cables, or other Tackle for Shipping, pass
from Danzick, Denmark or other Northern Parts to France, Spain or Italy, but
your Majesty having a strong Hand of Shipping at Dover, may Command for Money
the choice thereof before any King in Christendom in time of Peace; And so time
of War, thereby also Disable Enemies and content Friends; Besides the Infinite
Commodity that may happily grow to the whole Nation in General, and to your
Majesty's Coffers also by a staple, that in time, with good Policy may be
Erected there to serve both South and North Countries with there Mutual
Commodities.

In time of War how Dangerous attempt may be made with small Frigates of Fire,
or other wise, to Endanger your Majesty's Navy where it now lies, with hope
sufficient to escape and Return again before any Shipping can be made out of
the Thames to Rescue or Revenge, the Expertest Soldiers, and Seamen best know:
But this Harbor being made and furnished with good Shipping, as always it will
be, no such attempt will ever be made, the Enemy being assured, however the
Wind Blow, upon any Alarm either from London or Dover, to be surpised, and no
hope left to escape.

Your Majesty having shipping at Dover, may also upon all suddainness, with
lesser Charge, set forth to Scour the Seas of Pirates, whereby your Nuvy of
Merchants will Marvellously increase and Flourish, both in the great Strength
and Wealth of the Realm, and to the great Increase of your Majesty's Customs

In like sort your Fishing Navies may be Maintained and Protected from
Pilfering Pirates, or other Violence of Strangers, and thereby Reap the Benefit
of your Seas, whereby our strength by Sea will Marvellously increase, and great
Number of poor People be Employed as well on Land in Knitting Nets, and making
and mending both Ships and Tackle, as also in getting of Fish, a Food greatly
to Relieve the Poverty of the Realm, and excessively to increase your Majesty's
Revenue, by Custom of such Commodities as shall be brought in abundantly for
exchanging of those our Fish.

The Fishing Navies being by this means both protected and greatly increased,
all Laws for Punishment, and Taxes for Relieving Idle and poor People, will
then Cease; for there shall be no Person for Age or Sickness, almost so
Impotent but shall find hereby some Trade whereby to get their living, as by
Example of the low Countries we may plainly behold.

What greater Honor to your Majesty than like, as you are, (in Right of
Inheritance) Lady of the Narrow Seas, so to be able indeed to Maintain that
Seigniory, and to put the same in Execution at all times, as far forth as your
Highness shall find convenient.

What greater Honor to your Majesty than to be the Founder of so Notable a
Monument, lying in the Eye of almost all the Shipping of Europe, a thing to
which your Majesty's Father Aspired, with the Fxpence of so great a Mass of
his own Treasure.

What greater Honor than to be able in time of Peace or War to Protect
Friends, and Offend Enemies more than any other Prince of Europe.

Seeing then it has pleased God to leave unto this Realm such a Situation for
a Port, and Town as all Christendom has not the like, and Endowed the same
with all Commodities by Land and Sea that can be wished to make the Harbor
Allure Intercourse, and Maintain Inhabitants; And that the same once performed
(in all probable Discourse of Reason) shall bring such increase of Commodity,
not only for Augmentation of your Majesty's particular Revenues, but also of
Welfare and Riches to the whole Realm in General; the same also being a thing
so needful, or rather of necessity, as well for succouring and Protecting
Friends, as Annoying and Offending Enemies both in War and Peace; And that it
has pleased God in his Providence to Reserve the same as an Ornament of your
time, to be now performed by your Majesty, and left as an Honorable Monument
of your happy Reign to all Posterity, Methinks there remains no other
Deliberation in this Case, but how most sufficiently and with greatest
Perfection possible, most speedily, the same may be accomplished

And in Discharge of some part of my bounded Duty to the Advancement of your
Majesty's Service, having not only heard by the Examination of the most ancient
and skilful Mariners and Inhabitants in Dover, the True Estate of all
Alterations there, for these 40 Years passed, But also my self seen and sounded
all the Channells, Shelves and Roads there, and set them down exactly in Plat;
having also conferred the Sundry Opinions of strangers, and also of our own
Nation, for the Repairing or making a New Haven there, and comparing the same
with what my self have seen put in Execution in sundry places of the Low
Countries, for making Havens Artificial, I have in the End Resolved upon one
Form of Plat, which of all others (as well for the use and Commodity, when it
is finished, as for the possibility, or rather for the Facility in making, for
the Probability, or rather assured certainty of continuance, for avoiding great
Waste of Timber, and saving a great Mass of Treasure) I find and Judge of most
perfection. As albeit the Flemish Plat, in former conference of Commissioners,
was adjudged of all others then Offered, the most probable, Yet upon due
consideration, this Plat, I presume, will appear in all Respects more
commodious, more feizable, more assured to continue; of far less cost in
Maintenance, and at least 20000 l, lesser charge in making, as by the Articles
of Explanation, and charges, more evidently may appear. This which I humbly
present to your Majesty's Gracious Consideration, as a matter of great moment
both in Peace and War, for your Highnes's Service, for the great comfort of all
the Navy of your Realm, and a Monument most Honorable, and none of the least
to all posterity of your Majesty's most Gracious, Prosperous and Happy Reign.

The foregoing Discourse was part of a Memorial, drawn up either by Sir Walter
Raleigh or Sir Dudley Diggs, which I found among the Rubbish of old papers
while I had the Honor to serve in the Office of the Ordnance, and was
Searching after Light into the Ancient History and Services of Dover, to which
Curiosity I had diverse motives, viz. I had made several Essays to awaken his
late Majesty King Charles out of the Lethargy he seemed to me to be under,
upon the French King's so loudly Alarming us by the Profuse Expense he had been
at in Fortifying his Coast, making Artificial Ports, and sparing no Coast where
he had the least Prospect of Compassing Harbor and Defense for Shipping, and
Improving his Naval Strength and Projects; which to me appeared as so many
Commets, whose Malevolence was Calculated, and could not fail, one time or
other to fall on us. I had in those days, frequent occasions of Privacy with
the King in his Closet, where I improved every Opportunity to Warm his Jealousy
of the Growing Naval Power of France; And albeit he gave me many a Gracious
Hearing, and seemed to take Pleasure in my Discourse on that Subject, and would
often himself Reason with great Sagacity on Naval Matters; yet I grew at length
convinced, that I Labored in Vain, and had been all the while Blowing a Dead
Coal, as by this short following Account may appear.

In the Year 1682 Waiting one day on the King in his Closet, after some General
Discourse, his Majesty was pleased to tell me that I had often hinted to him
how busy the French King was on his Coast, and what Vast Designs he had
conceived for the Impovement of his Naval Power, which was Visible by his
Fortifying of Dunkirke, in a most expensive manner, and Projecting
Extraordinary Works there, making Peers, Channels, Basins, and every Provision
that Art can Suggest, and Money Compass, to Render that Place easy of Access,
and make it a safe, Capacious and Commodious Harbor for Shipping. I told his
Majesty, that not only at Dunkirk, Breast, and other Places where nature and
Situation had given them some Help and Encouragement to Prosecute their Maritim
Projects; but even every where else upon his Coast, in every Creek, Cove, or
Inlet, where they can make Depth of Water, and give the least Harbor and
Retreat for Shipping, they are, and have been on that Article equally
Industrious; which, as I had often told his Majesty, seemd to me to have a very
Evil Aspect on all the Maritin States of Europe, but more especially his
Majesty. That nothing (humanly speaking) could prevent and defeat the Mighty
Purposes of that Ambitious Monarch, so much as his want of Natural Aid toward
the Increase of his Naval Strength; his Coast not yiedling him one good Port on
all that Frontier which Regards us, which he most Providently weighing, had
from an Harbouriess. Inhospitable Shore, by Art, Industry, and a most Lavish
Expense of Treasure, in a very great Degree, Repaired; Insomuch that there is
hardly 5 Leagues of Distance upon that Line, of their Coast Fronting ours, that
does not yield marks of their Care and Application. Bars, Rocks and Shelves
are removed, and Channels Opened and Deepned, to give safe and easy Entrance to
such small Ports as they have by Nature. And in other Places where Art could be
thought to avail* they have spared no pains or Treasure to compass; Artificial
Havens, Peers and Provisions of Succor for Shipping. They have also Built.
Fortresses; raised Batteries, and Planted Cannon. Innumerable, all along their
Coast, and performed every wise and needful Work toward the attaining their
Ends of becoming Formidable by Sea, and all this against the Grain, and as it
were in Despite of Nature, which yields them little or no Encouragment. While
we on our Coast, where Providence is so bountiful, have been so very little on
our Guard, that though Navigation be the Prime Jewel of the Crown, and is the
Fountain and Foundation of both our Wealth and Safety; and without which we
should be a Contemptible Nation; have not only omitted to Improve the Tenders
which Nature makes us for the Increase and Cultivating of our Naval Power; But
have in this last Age consented to see many of our useful Ports, Run to Decay,
and at length to Ruin, and to become totally lost to the Nation; which a very
little Foresight, and as little charge might have prevented, while the Evil was
Growing; which at a long Run becomes incurable. Among which Ports I instanced
Sandwich, Dover, Rye, Winchelsea, etc. which were reckoned heretofore as so
many Bullworks against our Ambitious Neighbor. The King hereupon Replied, that
he Confessed he laid a little to heart the loss of the Haven of Dover; because
it has fallen to decay mostly in his Reign; had yielded him good Service in the
First Dutch War, and in that which was made by the Parliament with that Nation,
he was well assured that we had a Squadron of Cruizers which sailed out of that
Place, where they Fitted, Cleaned and Victuall'd, which did the Enemy more
Damage than any in the whole Channel beside. That therefore (if he thought
that Haven could be recovered by any Tolerable Charge) he was then more than
ever disposed to engage in such a Work, inasmuch as that he was well assured,
that not only all that I had said was true, but that the French King (to whom
though he had signified already by his Ambassador, That the great Bustle he had
made upon the Coast had given Jealousy and Distaste to the Nation, and was not
very pleafing to him) had nevertheless Engaged very lately in a New Expensive
Work of the same Nature, with those I had mentioned) in the Neighborhood of
Galais, where great Numbers of Men were then actually Employed in Fortifying
the Coast, and making an Harbor, and Basin for Reception of Shipping, etc.
Which being just under his Nose, he said he had so much the more Reason to
Resent it, and which he could not do in a better manner than by attempting the
Recovery of Dover Haven, wherein ifhe Succeeded; as it would give an occasion
of Ease to the Peoples Jealousy, so it would obviate in some Measure the Danger
that Threatened us from so Restless and Projecting a Neighbor. I Replied to his
Majesty, with great Joy, that I thought it would be a most acceptable Instance
to the Nation, of his Care for their safety, and a useful Proof to the
Murmuring People of his Just Dislike and Suspicion of the French King's
Proceedings, and that I was in no doubt whenever his Majesty should appear to
go in earnest, about so Laudable and Needful a Work, that the Parliament would
Frankly Assist him toward the Expense.

His Majesty hereupon Commanded me to make a Journey to Dover to Survey the
Port, and Enable my self by the best means I could, to give him a true State
thereof in order to a Project for the Recovery of that Harbor; which order I
carefully executed, and on my Return waited on his Majesty with my Report,
together with a Plan and State of the present Peer; an History of the Services
that Place had yielded the Crown; how it has fallen to Decay, and how with
least Charge it might be Repaired and Rendered useful again. I told his Majesty
that the bare Customs and Duties he had lost by the decay of that Port, which
for want of Entrance there, as had been Customary (there being no other in many
Leagues together on the Coast) and which were therefore now Smugled and totally
lost) would be by many Degrees more than enough when recovered (and which would
most certainly accrue upon Restoring the Harbor) to Repay the utmost Charge he
could be at for it is Repair and Improvement, which single Encouragement I
thought was Incitement enough to go about so Noble, Useful and Reputable a Work.

I told his Majesty that the Port was at that time become entirely useless, the
Peer within being Filled and Choked up with Sand and Mud, and the Depth of
Water lost; That there was a Bank of Beach at the mouth of the Harbor of many
Thousand Tuns, which Barred up the Entrance. That the Town (which was wont to
abound in Shipping, Seamen, Commerce, People and Plenty of all things) was
become Poor, desolate and Dispeopl'd which was Visible every where, by their
Decayed Buildings and Habitations, where half the Houses at least throughout
the whole Town had Bills on the Doors; All which could be ascribed to no other
Reason than the Decay of their Harbor: touching the true Cause whereof, or the
cure, the Inhabitants (with whom I had frequent Conference) could give me
little or no Light.

In this Audience, I gave his Majesty an Extensive Account of all things
Relating to the Subject about which he had sent me: I presented him with a
Draught of the then State of the Port of Dover, wherein was expressed the
manner of it is Decay, and the present Ruinous Condition in which it was. I
Endeavored also to explain to him how this Damage had come to pass, and by
what means it had grown to that Head, as to have Rendered the Haven now almost
lost to the Public. From the Causes of the Disease, I proceeded to my
Proposals for the Remedy, wherein I had the good Fortune to explain every Point
of my Project, with Evidence enough to oblige his Majesty at that time to say
that he was so well satisfied, that he was Resolved he would not Defer the Work
a Day. That as I had made every thing plain and intelligible to him; So above
all, he was pleased with two most useful and Encourageing Propositions therein
contained, Namely, That whereas in most great Works of that kind, Princes were
Generally Obliged to Prosecute and go through the whole Expense (which for the
most part was very great) before they could Reap the least Profit of their
Design, or be assured of the Success; While this Work on the contrary was so
ordered and contrived by me, That he was sure to Receive a present Profit from
every Sum (be it more or less) which he should at any time think fit to lay
out, and that the Benefit would be presently seen, and Gathered, in Proportion
to the Charge he should be at; which he might Limit or Respite as he pleased,
without Danger of Damage to the Work that should be done, or of losing the
Advantage that should be once gained in case of discontinuing the same.

The Second Point that pleased his Majesty was; That whereas all Artificial
Ports that ever he had heard of (which is most true) were Subject to Choke, and
fill up with Sand or Sullage, and to lose by degrees their Depth of Water,
without great Care and a continual Charge to prevent it; and which was the
Cause for the most part of the decay and loss of such Ports to the Public:
That he perceived I had plainly obviated that Evil, and by a New and very
Demonstrable Invention had evidently Secured the Depth of Water for ever, which
no Neglect could hinder, or toward which any Expense or Annual Charge was
Necessary.

I concluded with this General Incitement to his Majesty, That Multiplicity of
Ports in a Maritim Kingdom, (such as his) was above all things to be wished;
which in times of Peace was a great Means of Encouragement to our Naval
Intercourse, and Coasting Trade, whereby our Capital City, became better
supplied, and at Cheaper Rates, with all things needful; that Seamen were
Proportionably Propagated, Shipping and all the Incident Professions of
Shipwrightry and Navigation increased and improved, etc. That in time of War,
Shelter, and Defense against an Enemy was by that means more at Hand, whereby
our Commerce was better Preserved, our Frontier so much the stronger, and
Cruizers had more dispatch; and were better Spread and Disposed at Sea; because
wheresoever there are Ports Commodiously Situate, and in the Road of our
Commerce, there of course will be Men of War appointed and Entertained in times
of Hostility, where they can Clean, Victual and Refit, whereby great Expedition
(which is the Life of Action) would be obtained, and half the time gained that
was spent in going to Remote Ports, as the Thames, Chatham, Portsmouth, etc.
Where, if the Wind hangs out of the way, Ships lie long on Demorage, become
Fowl by Staying for a Wind, and lose many Occasions of Service, which in Ports
lying upon the Edge of our Channel, as Dover does, can never happen; where you
need no Pylotage, and are no sooner out of the Haven but you are at Sea.

In a Word, I Ended my Discourse to his Majesty, with assuring him that Dover
promised every thing he could hope from such a Port; was Si^uate the nearest of
all others to a Great, Dangerous and Aspiri^g Neighbor, who had given so many
Instances of Wisdom and Foresight in the charge he had been at on that Line of
his Coast which confronts ours, and which whenever his Majesty should Chance to
have a War with that People, would be found to turn every way both Offensively
and Defensively to Mavelous Account.

That Dover stands on a Promontory which Survey's, and might be made to Command
the greatest Thorough-Fare of Navigation in the World, where no ship can pass
unobserved, or escape the danger of being attacked, when there should be cause,
and was of the same use by Sea as a Pass is by Land. And, that there was no
Design his Majesty could Entertain for it is Strength and Improvement, that was
not Compassable by Art, and that did not promise a Plentiful Return of Profit
and Honor, of any the Greatest Sum he could spare to lay out upon it.

I departed at that time from his Majesty full of hopes, that what I had done
and said on this Subject, would have produced the good Effect of some speedy
Resolution; but taking the Liberty some days after to remind him therein, I
found him, to my great Disappointment, much calmer than I had left him, and
received this short Answer, That it was a Noble Project indeed, but that it was
too big for his present Purse, and would Keep Cold. Shortly after I was
Dispatched to my Business in a remote Country, and from that time to this have
neither said nor heard any thing of Dover.

Now the Remark I would make on this Sudden and Surprising Coldness of the
King's, is namely this, That the long Audience I then had of his Majesty,
chanced to be in a certain great Ladies Appartment in White Hall, where I had
no sooner began my Discourse, and produced my Papers, when Mons. Barrillon, the
French Ambassador, came in; who I observed to Listen with great Attention to
what was debated; asking the said Laay very earnestly many Questions about the
Subject Matter of our Conference, who I perceived to Interpret to him every
thing that was said on that occasion, as did the King afterward in my hearing;
Explaining the whole Project, and the Contents of the several Designs;
Expressing his great Approbation of the Report I had made him; whereupon making
Reflection on this Occurrence, I was no longer in doubt touching the cause of
my Disappointment; but that it was not the French Kings Interest, and therefore
not his Pleasure, that we should proceed on this Work, and that so Noble a
Project should thus Die in the Birth, who would have been contented (I make no
Question) to have given ten times the amount of the Cost to defeat so National
an undertaking, which looked with so threatening an aspect on those great
Scheams of Naval Power which he has since put in Execution, and is Prosecuting
to this day; And I think it therefore becomes every hearty English Man to
Conclude that such an Incident as I have here produced, ought to superadd one
new and Solid Argument of Incitement to those that have been urged toward some
solemn deriberation on so promising and Important a Subject; and if our
Forefathers, in those darker times of Queen Eliz. saw a Reason for their
Speculations on this Article, then when their views were narrow, their motives
less, and the means to attain their purpose hardly to be compassed through the
Limited Fonds of Treasure in those days, and the insufficiency of Undertakers
to conceive, design, and Prosecute Works of that sort, so Magnificent; So new
and out of the way of the Worlds Practice; It may therefore be hoped, that now,
when our motives of Danger, etc. are so visible, and so much Stronger; the
means of obtaining so Noble an end every way more within our reach; while we
behold by what Arts and Means, and with what Profusion of Treasure, a
Neighboring Prince pursues his Maritim Projects, and since we have seen and
felt with what Effect he has succeeded in his Aims to Rival us by Sea, and in a
word, while we know he must naturally ever be more than our Match by Land; and
that nothing at this day can insure our safety, but a Demonstrable Superioriry
of Naval Strength. What greater Wisdom and Precaution can we Manifest, or how
can we more laudably publish our Attention to the Public Welfare, than by
Seasonably obviating the Evils that seem to Threaten us by the growing Naval
Power of France, toward which no one step we can make, promises better Fruit
than this proposal of Recovering and Improving the Haven of Dover, which is by
Nature Situate to our wish, and in my Humble Opinion is capable of being made
by Art so useful to our selves and Friends, and so effectual to bridle, prevent
and Annoy our Enemies; that were the Argument duly weighed, I am persuaded we
should think no Sum too great to be so Employed.

FINIS.

