The Right of the Citizens of London to elect Sheriffs in their Common Hall,
proved, from the Custom of our Ancestors, from their Charters, History, Ancient
Acts of Parliament, Judgments and Resolutions of many Learned Judges.
IN Changes and Revolutions that have happened in this Nation, this Prerogative
or Privilege of choosing Sheriffs has had its Alterations: It was originally in
the Freeholders of every County not incorporated, and they chose this great
Officer in their Folkmote, which in the Saxon Language, is the Court of the
Folk or People, which we now call the County Court. My Lord Cook, from good
Authority tells us, That of Ancient Time, L. C. J. Cook. Institut. Part 2. Fol.
558.
such Officers or Ministers as were instituted, either for Preservation of the
Peace of the County, or for Execution of Justice, (because it concerned all the
Subjects of that County, and they had as great Interest in the just and due
Exercise of their several Places) were, by force of the King's Writ, in every
County chosen, in full or open County, by the Freeholders of that County; the
Freeholders, as the Representatives of all the People, chose their Sheriffs:
But in Ancient Cities, which were Counties incorporated, the Election of their
Sheriff was by the Representatives of the Citizens, which were the most
substantial Part of the Citizens, and distinguished by their Liveries, to which
they were called by their several Companies; which Companies were Corporations,
and made Bylaws severally in their several Halls, and together at their
Common Hall, anciently called their Hall-mote, or Hall-court, which was and
still is, Conventus Civium in Aulam Publicam. L.C.J. Cook's Jurisdiction of
Courts, F. 249.
And this Convention or public Meeting in London, was anciently called the
Hall-mote, or the Folk-mote, and is at this Day by Prescription, time out of
mind, the Ancient Folk-mote of London for the choosing of Sheriffs by the
Citizens that are of the Livery. This Right and Privilege of the Citizens of
London, was taken away by Will. 1. called the Conqueror; who finding the People
generally enraged for the loss of their Laws, and had endeavored to recover
them with their Swords, he pardons those that fought for them, and at
Barkhamsteed receives from the chief of them new Oaths of Fidelity; and himself
swears before the Archbishop Lanfranck, and many of the Nobility, to observe
the Ancient Laws of the Realm, established by his noble Predecessors, Kings of
England; and especially those of Edward the Confessor, among which were those
of choosing Sheriffs.

This Right and Custom of choosing Sheriffs was afterward confirmed and
restored to the Citizens of London by the Charter of Hen. 1. who thereby kept
the Crown, tho the younger Brother; and is not only their Right by Grant, but
by Purchase too; for they have paid dearly for it when taken away against Law
and Justice.

King Edward the First had as great need of the Kindness of his Subjects, as
his Progenitor; therefore he courted the People in the same manner: And in the
28th Year of his Reign, granted in Parliament, by the Statute of Articuli super
Chartas to the People, that they should have the Election of Sheriffs in every
County. My Lord Cook in his Exposition of this Statute, says, That though the
Words in this Statute be the King's Grant to his People, that they shall have
the Election of Sheriffs, which are likewise the Words of the Charter of Hen.
1. yet by the word Grant, the People's Right was restored, and they by virtue
thereof chose Sheriffs as before the Norman Invasion, and according to their
ancient Use and Custom.

That the Charter of Hen. 1. and the Custom of choosing Sheriffs in London, gave
no Right to the Citizens of London to choose Sheriffs otherwise than by their
Representatives in Common Hall, is plain from the Words of the Charter of K.
John, which is confirmed by Magna Charta, and many other Statutes; for the
Words of that Charter are, That the Citizens of London, and their Heirs, shall
make Sheriffs among themselves whom they will, and may amove them when they
will; and those whom they make, shall present to the Justices of the Exchequer
of those things which to the said Sheriffwick appertains, whereof they ought to
answer us.

To remove Sheriffs must be by some Court, that must, in behalf of the People,
call the Sheriffs to an Account, and that must be by a Court that by Custom and
Prescription have Cognizance of the Faults and Misdemeanors done by those
great Officers, for which they amove them: and that is the proper Work of a
Court, it cannot be by all the People of the whole County incorporated, but is
the Work of a Hall-mote or Hall-court, entrusted by all the Citizens to choose
for them and the King, honest and able Men for Sheriffs, and to present them to
the Justices of the Exchequer, as they do in their Liveries to this Day, and
have so done time out of mind. For the Right of this Common Hall, or Hall-mote,
to elect Sheriffs, there cannot be a better Proof than the By-Law of the 23
September. 7o and 15o Edw. 4. which if considered, cannot be imagined to be
Bylaws of the Common Council, but of the Common Hall; for the By-Law of 7 Edw.
4. enacts, That the Election of Mayors and Sheriffs shall be only by the
Common Council, the Master and Wardens of every Mystery of the City coming in
their Liveries, and by other honest Men for that purpose specially summoned.
What is hereby enacted more, than that the Master and Wardens of every Mystery
shall elect in their Gowns? If the Common Council were there, it is an Act of
the Commonalty, not of the Common Council, who had nothing to do with the
Matter. But if this were the Act of the Common Hall, called the Commonalty, (as
it plainly appears to be) who have Power to make Bylaws in that Matter; it is
a good By-Law to distinguish the Representatives of the Citizens for choosing
Mayors and Sheriffs from others.

The By-Law of 15 Edw. 4. enacts, That the Masters and Wardens of the Mysteries
of the City, in their Halls, or other Places of the City fit and convenient,
associating to them the honest Men of their Mysteries, being clothed in their
last Livery, shall go together to the Guildhall of the City for the electing of
Mayor, etc. and in their last Livery but one, to the Election of the Sheriffs
of the City, etc. And that no others besides the honest Men of the
Common Council of the City, shall be present at the said Elections. Now I am
very confident, that the Recorder himself will not, under his Hand, publish
this to be an Act of the Common Council; for it is not credible that the
Common Council, who are said to make Laws by Advice of their Recorder, and
others learned in the Law, should make a Law, that no others besides the honest
Men of the Common Council of the City should be present at such Elections, for
that were to repeal the Charters of the City, Magna Charta, and all other Acts
of Parliament for the Confirming, Granting, and Restoring the Liberties and
Privileges of the Citizens, in which they have an Inheritance. For as the Lords
and Commons, in Writs of Summons to Parliament, are called the Common Council
of the Kingdom, and are to advise in Matters of Weight and Difficulty; so is
the Common Hall the extraordinary Common Council of all the Citizens of London.

These two Laws therefore cannot be Acts of Common Council; they must be Acts
of Common Hall, or Hall-Court, which to this Purpose are a Common Council, or a
Council of the Commons, and call themselves in this Act a Common Council, in
the other the Commonalty who were in Council assembled, as the Representatives
of the Commons, to make Bylaws for them, and call themselves sometimes the
Common Council of the City, as they properly are in this Matter; sometimes the
Commonalty, as the Representatives of the People in Parliament are called, and
do call themselves in all Acts of Parliament, the Commons, who are but the
Representatives of the Commons; and are also called, in the Ancient Oaths of
Coronation established by Parliament, the Vulgi, or Common People, tho but
their Representatives.

The Use and Custom of choosing Sheriffs, makes this beyond Contradiction; for
at this very Day the Masters and Wardens of the Mysteries in the City in their
Halls, clothed as aforesaid, go to the Elections of Mayors and Sheriffs, to the
Guildhall, and there do elect, not as Men of the Common Council, but as a
Hall-mote, or Hall-court; and those of the Common Hall, that are not of the
Common Council, meet together as a Hall-mote, or Hall-court, not as a
Common Council.

For the Peace and Quiet of the City, it were to be wished that those Acts of
Common Council (as they are said to be) had never been printed; they have given
just cause to Men to believe, That there are those that against Law and Reason,
against Practice and Custom, would take from the Citizens the Election of
Mayors and Sheriffs, by their Representatives in Common Hall. They have laid a
Foundation, nay they have been scaffolding many Years, by their Acts and
Devices; and have had the confidence to disturb and make void Elections by the
Common Hall, and have taken away the Rights and Liberties of the Common Hall,
on purpose to take Fines, and then to compel the Common Hall to new Elections,
a thing not known to our Ancestors. This is not only levying Money at other
Times, and in other manner than by Act of Parliament, as was done by the late
K. James, and is numbered among the Grievances of the Statute of 1 K. Will. and
Q. Mary, but is raising Money without any color of Law, and yet vindicated in
the vilest manner; for Men are publicly forbid to speak of, or mention this
Grievance, because the King is Beyond Sea; when in truth a greater Service
cannot be to the King, than to prevent these Extravagancies which are against
his Coronation Oath, by which he has promised to govern according to the
Statutes in Parliament agreed on, and the Laws and Customs of England. The late
K. James (as it is declared in the first of K. Will. and Q. Mary) by Ministers
employed by him, did endeavor to subvert the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom, Laws for free Elections: As that of Westminster 1st is endeavored to
be subverted by the Common Council: The Words of the Statute are, For that
Elections ought to be free, The King commands, upon great Forfeiture, That no
great Man, nor other, by Force, Malice or Menaces, shall disturb free
Elections. And my Lord Cook, in his Exposition of that Statute, tells us, there
were two Mischiefs before the making this Statute. 1. Elections were not duly
made. 2. Elections were not freely made: And both these were against the
ancient Maxim of the Law, Fiant Electiones rite and libere, sine interruptione
aliqua: For before this Act, in the irregular Reign of H. 3. the Electors had
neither their free nor their due Elections; for sometimes by Force, sometimes
by Menaces, and sometimes by Malice, the Electors were framed and wrought to
make election of Men unworthy, or not eligible, so as their Election was
neither due nor free. This Act briefly rehearses the old Rule of the Common
Law, (that Elections ought to be free) wherein both the said Points are
included: 1. It must be a due Election; and, 2. It must be a free Election.

This Statute does enact, That no Man, upon grievous Forfeiture, shall disturb
any to make free Elections; and is excellently penned in two respects: First,
For that generally it extends to all Elections, that is to say, to every
Dignity, Office, or Place elective, be it Ecclesiastical or Temporal, of what
Kind or Quality soever. Secondly, The Act is penned in the Name of the King,
viz. The King commands: And therefore the King binds himself not to disturb
any Electors to make free Election, as in the like Case upon a Statute made in
the Reign of the said King; The Act saying, Rex perpendens, etc. the same bound
the King. Now that Electors might make free and due Elections, without
displeasure or fear thereof, by this Act of Parliament, as a sure Defense, the
King commands the same upon grievous Forfeiture. And this Act extends to all
Elections, as well by those that at the making this Act, had Power to make
them, as by those whose Power was raised or created since this Act.

The Disturbers of free Elections, he says, are to be punished with grievous
Fines, and Imprisonment.

Yet how notoriously was this most excellent Law violated by the very
Government of the City of London, at the last Election of Sheriffs? What ill
and dangerous Example was given to the whole Nation by the Magistrates of the
City of London at that Election? What open and public Encouragement to affront
and contemn his Majesty's Laws made to prevent Disorders and Tumults? What
popular Confusion might have happened from those whose Rights and Liberties were
invaded against Law and Justice; by the Sheriffs denying the Question that was
desired to be put, Whether to adhere, or proceed to a new Election, when humbly
entreated. And this was done at a time when his Majesty was out of the Realm,
and in Arms against a Tyrant, and the Common Enemy of Law and Liberty.

The Common Hall are a Court of great Authority, they have a Jurisdiction by
Custom, and have a Prescription and Custom to disfranchise and restore in their
Common Hall or Hall-Court, James Baggs Case, Cook 11 Vol.
if the Party disfranchised have committed a Crime that deserves that
Punishment; if not, the King may command them to restore him: But no such Writ
can be directed to the Common Council, or Mayor and Aldermen, for they cannot
take away, nor restore Men's Liberties and Franchises, it is against Magna Charta.

Every Citizen has a Freehold in the Lands, Liberties and Franchises of his
Corporation; and a Disfranchisement by them is a Disseisin and a Destruction
against Magna Charta, unless it be by the Citizens in Common Hall, who have
that Power by Custom.

If the Mayor of a Corporation shall challenge a Negative Voice by his
Prerogative, and to deceive the People shall cause Entries thereof to be made
in Books for a Record or Memorial thereof, and pretend to have the Opinions of
Men that have been Judges, Attorneys General, or Solicitors General to his
Majesty or his Predecessors, and shall thereby prevent the good Orders and Laws
that may be made to hinder undue and disorderly Elections of Mayor and
Sheriffs, this is a good Cause of Disfranchisement by the Common Hall or
Hall-Court: If the Mayor or any of the Magistrates of the City shall alter the
ancient Oaths of Common Council, Sheriffs, and others, established to prevent
the selling of Judges Places, and other Offices, which they are or ought to be
sworn not to sell, but dispose of freely without Bribe or Reward: It Is a good
Cause of Disfranchisement. If any great Officer of a Corporation shall claim a
Prerogative to make that Man a Sheriff he drinks to, this is an Invasion of the
Rights of the Citizens, against his Duty, and against Law, and a good Cause of
Disfranchisement.

This Hall-Court ought to take care that their Charter be not forfeited; they
ought by their Bylaws to prevent and to punish Encroachments on their
Liberties against Magna Charta, under Color and Pretense of Fines and
Forfeitures: The raising of more than 150000 l. on Pretense of choosing
Sheriffs within 44 Years last past, is an Abuse of the Trust reposed in them by
Kings and Parliaments: It Is a scandalous Imposition against the Right of the
Subject, and against Law and Justice.

What ill Manners is it then modestly to vindicate the Right of the Common Hall
to elect Sheriffs, and to preserve the Rights and Liberties of the Citizens of
London in their Representatives, according to Use and Custom in all times,
since the Charter of Will. I. and Hen. I? Or what Disservice to his Majesty?
Cook in his 2d Instit. tells us, he cannot pass a Resolution of all the Judges
of England, in 34th Hen. 6. on this Occasion.

Upon a Reference by the King's Privy Council to Sir John Fortescue, and Sir
John Priscot, Chief Justices, and to the rest of the Justices, concerning a
Sheriff constituted by the King himself, it is thus in the Council-Book
recorded, 3 Martii, ann. 34. Hen. 6. as follows, in these Words:

Upon a Demand that my Lord Chancellor made to the Chief Judges, and to the
Remnant of the Judges, how that the King's Laws, neither Justice, might not be
executed in Lincolnshire, because there was no Sheriff there, and that the King
by his Letters Patents under his great Seal, had deputed certain Men for to
have be Sheriffs there, what them seemed should be done in this Behalf? so that
the King's Laws and Justice might been executed in that Shire, as executed in
other Shires in England.

The 2 Chief Justices the same Day came unto my Lords of the King's Council in
the Sterred-Chamber, and upon the above said Demand said, that them seemed, and
so it seemed unto the Remnant of the Judges, that the King did an Error, when
that he made another Person Sheriff of Lincolnshire than was chosen, and
presented unto his Highness, after the Effect of the Statute in such Behalf
made.

In the Reign of Richard II. this was a Controversy between the King and the
People, who under the Conduct of the Barons came to London, where it was ended
by the Submission of that unfortunate Prince; and one of the Articles of
Deprivation against him was, that he displaced diverse Sheriffs lawfully
elected, and put in their Places ill Men, thereby subverting the Law, contrary
to his Oath and Honor. The Common Council of London, as Freemen, have sworn to
maintain the Franchises and Liberties of the City, yet they are the very Men
that make Bylaws to take away this Liberty and Franchise, which is a Trust
lodged in the Common Hall by many Kings and Parliaments.

The Power that a Common-Council-man has is as one of the Livery, he cannot
elect unless of the Livery; all that are not so are commanded to withdraw by
the Crier, before the Election, on pain of Imprisonment; yet when he is
elected, he (as is pretended) has a Power in Common Council to disfranchise his
Corporation.

It Is adjudged in Cook's 5th Rep. the Chamberlain of London's Case, that the
Common Council of London cannot make Laws against the Laws and Statutes of the
Realm, and that such Laws made by them are void: But Laws made by them, or
other Assemblies of Men that are not repugnant to Law and Reason, are good:
It Is there resolved, that Laws made by them pro privato lucro are vo^d: It Is
there adjudged, that they may make Laws for good Order and Government; the
Government there intended is the Government by Law established by Parliament,
not a Government by Officers chose by them contrary to Charters and Statutes;
such Laws are made against the Government of the City, and are void.

'Twas resolved by all the Judges in England, in the Case of Dungannon in
Ireland, that only Corporations are capable to take such Inheritances. A
Common Council, it seems, can give what it cannot take, for a Common Council is
no Corporation. Trin. 32 Eliz. In an Action of false Imprisonment in the Common
Pleas, brought by Clarke against Gape, the Defendant justified the
Imprisonment, for that King Edward VI. had incorporated St. Albans by the Name
of Mayor, etc. and granted to them to make Ordinances, and shows that Queen
Elizabeth appointed the Term to be held there, by reason of which they, with
the Consent of the Plaintiff and other Burgesses, assessed every Inhabitant
toward the erecting Courts there, and ordained, that if any refused Payment,
he should be imprisoned; and for that the Plaintiff being a Burgess refused
Payment, he as Mayor justified; and this was adjudged no Plea, for that this
by-Law is against Magna Charta, and the Consent of the Plaintiff could not
alter the Law.

If a Common Council may take away this Liberty and Franchise of choosing
Sheriffs, why may they not take away their Liberty and Franchise of using
Trades in the City? The Law has secured the one as much as the other; and the
doing the latter succeeded very ill with a Mayor and Aldermen of London in the
Reign of Hen. 8. Justice Crook in the first part of his Reports, fol. 33.
says, That Periam Justice said, he had seen a Precedent in the time of K. Hen.
8. where a Citizen of London sued a Citizen of London in the Common Bench, and
the Mayor and Aldermen would have him put the Matter to Compromise, which he
refused; whereupon they did disfranchise him, and he showed this Matter to the
Court, and thereupon they directed their Writ to the Mayor, etc. to restore him
to his Franchise, and they assessed a Fine of an hundred Marks upon every of
them that were Parties to the Disfranchisement, which they paid, as appears
by the Record, and the Citizen was restored to his Franchise.

The Question asked the Judges in the 40th and 41st of Eliz. was, Whether the
ancient and usual Elections of the Mayors, Bailiffs, Provosts, etc. by a
certain select Number of the Principal of the Commonalty, or of the Burgesses,
commonly called the Common Council, or by such other Name, and not in general
by all the Commonalty or Burgesses, nor by so many of them as would come to the
Election, were good in Law? Forasmuch as by the Words of the Charters the
Election shall be indefinitely by the Commonalty, or by the Burgesses, which is
as much as to say, by all the Commonalty, or all the Burgesses, etc.

To which all those learned Judges gave this Answer, That ancient and usual
Elections of Officers of Corporations, by a certain select Number of the
Principal of the Commonalty by Prescription, and not by all the Commonalty in
general, were good Elections, and well warranted by their Charters and Bylaws
also. This Resolution of the Judges justifies the Custom, Usage and Practice of
the Common Hall to a tittle. Had they considered this very Case, and heard
Arguments on both sides, and decided the Matter for the Common Hall against the
Common Council, they could not have adjudged more plainly and fully, for the
manner of electing Sheriffs of London, by the Common Hall.

Acts of Common Council had no Authority to order or regulate Elections, unless
confirmed by Common Hall, before the Prerogatives of Lord Mayors was set on
Horseback, and the Liberties of the City trodden under foot: An Evil as old as
Solomon; for anciently such Bylaws were confirmed by the Common Hall, as
appears in their ancient Books and Memorials in their Guildhall.

In the 18th Edw. II. one John Causton had been chosen Sheriff at the usual
time: he not appearing upon a Proclamation, the Aldermen and Commons were
summoned to be at Guildhall the Michaelmas-Day next following; on which Day
Causton was disfranchised and put out of his Aldermanship: But the Common Hall
did not confine themselves to this only; they made Ordinances in their
Guild Hall concerning the electing Common-Council-men in the several Wards, as
appears by their ancient Books, in the Reigns of Edw. III. and Rich. II.

These ancient Charters, Rights, Customs and Prescriptions of the City of
London have been restored and confirmed to the Citizens of London in all Ages.
The City of London is Cor Regni, therefore its Charters, its ancient Liberties
and Customs were not only granted and sold to them by Kings, but the Purchase
confirmed by many Parliaments: Civitas Londin, habeat omnes libertates suas
antiquas, are the Words of Magna Charta, which my Lord Cook says has been
anciently thus expounded, Let the City of London have their Franchises to which
they are inheritable by lawful Title, by the Gift and Confirmations of Kings,
which they have not abused and forfeited, and which are not repugnant to Law.

The Statute of 14 Edw. III. says, The City of London shall have all their
Franchises. The Statute de Tallagio non concedendo ordains, that all Clerks and
Laymen of England shall have their Laws, Liberties, and free Customs, as
largely and wholly as they have used to have them when they had them best; and
that all Statutes made, and Customs brought in, contrary to them, shall be
frustrate and void for evermore.

The Statute of this present King and the late Queen Mary, restores to the
Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens, all their Rights, Gifts, Charters, Grants,
Liberties, Privileges, Customs, Usages, Constitutions and Prescriptions, and
all to no Purpose: The two Acts of Common Council of the 7th and 15th Edw. 4.
like the two mighty Idols Bell and the Dragon, devour all our Charters, Rights,
Liberties, Customs, etc. and all those Statutes that give and restore them:
Quid juvant Statuta?

Pride and Ambition is the Cause of this Controversy; they contend for
Prerogatives, which makes Men mad, and they catch at Shadows, and beat and
wound themselves with their own Weapons.

I cannot forget that old Exposition of Magna Charta, which says, the Citizens
shall have their Franchises to which they are inheritable; that good old
Gentleman is unmannerly, for we are now told he should have said, If the
Common Council please.

I, for my part, bemoan the Condition of poor Mr. Wills; for notwithstanding
the Advice of some of the Judges, as is pretended, yet if the present Case of
the Common Hall, lately printed, be true, and they be sworn that be not
elected, that poor Gentleman stands in need of the Prayers of his Congregation.
The Consequence of this idle Controversy must be sad and fatal to him, and all
that shall fall under that Calamity. How shall such Men act that are no
Officers? Men not duly elected have no Authority, they are in Danger of Suits,
they can neither be Officers nor Judges: Here are greater Difficulties like to
be than when the 2 Chief Justices, Sir John Fortescue and Sir John Priscott,
were advised with by his then Majesty's Privy Council. The City will bewail
this Confusion and Disorder: This Calamity will be far greater than that of
Lincolnshire, and greater Mischiefs will ensue than are foreseen, which they
must answer for that are the Occasion of these undue Elections. But for that
poor Gentleman, I say, God send him a good Deliverance.

FINIS.

