THE RIGHTS of the CITY Farther unfolded: AND The Manifold Miscarriages of My
Lord Mayor, As well as the Punishments he has rendered himself obnoxious unto,
for his Misbehaviour in relation to the present Election of SHERIFFS, Displayed
and laid Open.
WHILE either unthinking and deluded men, or persons enraged against our
Religion and Civil Rights, persevere in their endeavors to deprive and rob us
of our Birthrights and Privileges, if not by fraud and trick, yet by direct
Violence and open Usurpation; we hope that we shall not only be connived at and
allowed, but justified and applauded, in continuing to Assert and Vindicate
what we enjoy by an entail from our Ancestors, and possess by the Patents and
Charters of our most Renowned and Victorious Princes. Nor have we any thing
more to bewail, than that we are called to conflict with Enemies who have
neither Sense, Truth, nor Generosity; so that without great Conduct, we should
be either obliged to what an ordinary mind esteems a Drudgery, namely, the
daily baffling and exposing them; or else we must spend our pains in alarming
the City concerning our Dangers, and in raising the Inhabitants to Vigilance
against Treachery and Force. But as we shall decline the last, as being
apprehensive that it will be misconstrued by ill men; so they themselves
prevent us in the first, seeing their own Actions render them more base and
ridiculous, than the strongest reason, clothed with the best words, is capable
of making them. And were their Antickness and Legerdemain calculated for any
thing less than the Destruction of our Rights and Properties, we should look
upon them as a Company of Creatures raised up merely for our sport and
diversion.

The Office of a Sheriff of London, is of all other, a Trust of the greatest
weight and importance. For besides their having the power over the posse of
London and Middlesex, and the Right of returning Juries both in Capital and
Civil Causes; not only all Offenders, but all Debtors are committed to their
Custody, and they are the persons who are to answer for them. So that upon
their Fidelity depends both our Lives and Estates, in more ways than is now
convenient to insist upon and deduce. Only the late endeavors to have obtained
the present Sheriffs to have parted with the present Convicted Priests in
Newgate, and the prank of the Warden of the Fleet some years ago, in conspiring
with his Prisoners to run away, and leave their Creditors in the lurch, may
give us some imperfect Idea, and dark Umbrage of it.

Yea the Sherivalty is the first step toward advancement in the Government
over the City; and a miscarriage in the choice of such an Officer, is like a
faileur in the first concoction, not to be afterward remedied. And had not the
Freemen more regarded men's Estates than their Wisdom and Intellectual
capacities in the Election of some former Sheriffs, we should not now have
occasion to complain of a Bench, when near the greatest part can only Vote as
they are prompted, but are not able to man^ge a Debate, nor comprehend the
meanest thing which comes before them. For whereas the Law provides that they
who were to be chosen Sheriffs, should be of the more able, most discreet, and
the fittest for the Government of so great a People; We through supineness and
inadvertency have too too often (...) the White-Staff into the hands of some,
that a man of Understanding would not bestow half an (...) in their
Conversation, if his business and Interest did not indispensably require it.

Nor is any person qualified for being Sheriff of London, that has not both
lived in it for some considerable (...), and past through the inferior
Offices, either by way of Service or Fine, and that accompanied with a strict
and diligent observation of the Duties of those lesser Offices. For as it is
not otherwise possible that a person should know the Customs and Usages of the
City, as he ought to do, that is to be Elected Sheriff, (...) he is not likely
to demean himself acceptably in so high a Station, who has neither learned to
obey as a private Citizen, nor been trained up to Magistracy by an
Apprenticeship in the more servile Employs.

And as it has been already demonstrated, that the Right of Electing Sheriffs
belongs by Charter, Law and Prescription to the Freemen, so our Ancestors have
been in nothing more careful than that all Election should be managed with
Freedom, without either fraud, force or menace. Hence our Parliaments which are
the Epitome of the Wisdom of the Nation as well as the Representatives of the
Kingdom, have not only frequently declared against the Kings and great men's
Letters when made use of to influence Elections, but even all the Acts of the
Parliament of the 38 Hen. 6. were repealed and declared Null by a Parliament of
the 39 of the same King merely because the members were unlawfully Summoned and
unduly Chosen.

Yea one of the most fundamental Statutes which we have in England, namely that
of Westminster, 3 Ed. 1. provides that all Elections shall be free and
undisturbed, and that no man, per poyar des arms, ne per malice, on manaces
disturb de fair frank Election; shall by arms, malice, or force, molest the
freedom of any Election; and this sur la grove forfeiture. And as Cook well
observes, this Statute extends to Elections to every dignity, Office or place
that is Elective; and whosoever disturbeth the Freedom of any such Election, 2
Instit p. 168. 169.
may be punished by grievous fines and imprisonment. Nor have our Ancestors
been more Zealous in punishing any sort of offenders, than those that have
interposed by power or fraud to hinder the free Election of Sheriffs and other
Civil Officers. For besides that the imposing the Sheriffs upon the Cities and
Counties contrary to Right and Custom, Kinghton.
and for ill purposes and intents, was made one of the Articles against Richard
the 2d, for which he was deposed; the Duke of Suffolk was in the 28 Hen. 6.
impeached in Parliament for causing diverse persons to be made Sheriffs in order
to the fulfilling his desires, Rot. Par. 28 Hen. 6. N. 45.
and to enhance to himself Rule in the Realm. And among many other instances
and examples of the punishment of those that have invaded the Franchises and
Privileges of Corporations in obtruding Magistrates and Officers upon them,
contrary to the vote and choice of the Major^ty to whom the making and
performing those respective Elections did belong; we have a most remarkable
Case in the 4th of Richard the 2d, wherein upon the Petition of the Commons in
Parliament assembled to the King, signifying that whereas the Citizens of York
had according to their Franchises and Customs chosen one John Gisburgh to be
their Mayor, Rot. Parlia. 4 R. 2 N. 50.
some of the then present Magistrates in combination with a few Citizens had
put him by, and chosen one Simon Quixlay in his Room; it was thereupon enacted
by the King with the assent of the Lords and Commons that a Commission should
be issued out to inquire into that horrible Fact, and that not only Gisburgh
who was Elected Mayor by the Majority of the Freemen, should be restored to
his Office, but that Quixlay who by usurping the Office of Mayor without due
Election had accroacht to himself. Royal Power, should with twenty four more of
the most notorious Malefactors be taken into custody without Bail or mainprise
till the Commission of Inquiry was returned.

And as the Lord Mayor of London has no Power or Authority either by
Prescription or Charter to impose a Sheriff upon the Citizens; so neither can
the Freemen convey any such Right or Power unto him; Seeing tho they can make
Bylaws in consistency with their Charter, yet they can make no law whereby
both their Charter and diverse Acts of Parliament shall be cancelled and
repealed. And as the bestowing upon the Commons of London a power and Right to
choose their own Sheriffs was in order to the better Preservation and Security
of their Lives, Estates, and Commerce; so to imagine that they would transfer
this Right to the Mayor, is to make them surrender all that is dear unto them,
into the hands of one who may be a knave or a fool, and either from his own
inclination, and in pursuance of his own ends, or being either menaced or
wheedled by others, be influenced to betray and destroy them.

And as my Lord Mayor has no Jurisdiction over the Common Hall, being there
only as a Concivis or fellow Citizen, so it being in their power to impeach and
punish him, precludes all his pretenses of being Judge over all that A^mbly. For
tho the Common Hall be not properly a Court as the Citizens do there meet to
choose Magistrates, P. 462.
yet Manwood says it is a Court to punish the Mayor and Aldermen when they
stand against the duty of their places; which as it plainly declares him to be
no Judge there, nor to have any Judicial Authority over that Convention, so we
may likewise collect from thence that he has no power to adjourn the Hall. For
there is nothing more unreasonable and ridiculous, than for the Common Hall to
have a power to call the Mayor to accoun^ for acting contrary to his Trust and
Oath, and yet at the same time to leave him a power to adjourn or dissol^e the
Assembly when he pleases.

Nay, the acknowledging such a Prerogative to belong to the Mayor, were to put
him into a capacity of presenting not only the Elections of all City Officers,
the choice whereof lies in that Assembly; but even (...) Parliament, unless he
be gratified and humoured in the persons to be Elected.

Yea the sub^ing to such a claim as this, were to vest such a Right in my Lord
Mayor as would threa^en and (...) to destroy the whole Government of the
Kingdom. For it is but t^ have a weak or an ill disposed man in the Chair, and
it is in the power of any great person that will but caress or bribe him, to
shake the Peace of the Nation, and advance what and whom he pleases, by virtue
of this challenged Prerogative, seconded with the many legal Jurisdictions
which appertain unto the M^yor as he bears the Sword.

And to fancy that my Lord can dissolve or adjourn the Hall without the consent
of the Free men, merely because he is trusted to Summon and Convocate the
Assembly, is to betray a great weakness of understanding, and to tell all the
World, that they do labor under some defect in their reasoning Faculties. For
as the convocating the Commons together is sealed in the Mayor neither by
Charter nor Prescription, but merely entrusted with him out of Complement and
Respect; so it is not only certain that they anciently assembled without any
Precept from my Lord Mayor, but that when the issuing out of Precepts for this
purpose came first in use, the emitting them was sometimes referred to my Lord
Mayor and the Aldermen, and at other times to his Lordship and the Sheriffs.
Nay, notwithstanding this care that is devolved upon him of Summoning the
Freemen together, yet in case he should fail in convocating them at due times
and seasons, and for the necessary affairs and occasions of the Corporation,
they may come together of their own accord; and according to Law, Charter, and
their duty, they ought to do so. And as whatsoever his Lordship does in this
way is merely official, so being enjoyed by the Mayor through the mere grant
and concession of the Citizens, they may not only reassume it when they please,
and place it elsewhere, but even in the interim his Lordship can challenge no
more than what in consistency with their own Rights, and merely in subserviency
to Method and Order they have granted and conveyed unto him.

Nor were it more absurd for the Court of King's Bench to dismiss a Jury in the
midst of a Trial without the consent of the Plaintiff and Defendant, than for
any, even upon the supposal that they had some Jurisdiction and Authority in
and over the Common Hall, to dismiss the Freemen before they had transacted
and performed what they met about. And if the Judges in our Westminster-Courts
would not be so silly, as to hope the escaping of Punishment, should they do
such an Illegal, Arbitrary and Pernicious Act as that; so I know not by what
Privilege my Lord Mayor thinks to come off, for assuming both a Power to
Adjourn the Hall, over which he has no Jurisdiction, and to do it when they
were in the midst of their business. And if the Parliament impeached my Lord
Chief Justice Scroggs for dismissing the Grand Jury before they had made their
Presentiments; it is not to be doubted but that a Parliament will call Sir John
Moor the present Lord Mayor to an account, both for disturbing the Freedom of
an Election, and Usurping unto himself the Power of Adjourning the Assembly
without their Consent, before they had perfected the business they were
congregated about, and were legally proceeding in.

But I suppose his Lordship has not well considered what punishments have
overtaken some of his Predecessors, for acting contrary to Law and the Duties
of their place; and therefore besides the recalling to his Memory what befell
Sir Samuel Sterling for denying the Poll, and dissolving the Common Hall; I
shall recount unto him the unhappy and miserable fate of Sir Edward Bromfield,
who was chosen into the Chair on Michaelmas day 1636. This poor and unfortunate
Gentleman, was upon the Opinion and Authority of the Judges concerning the
Legality of the Ship-mony, and upon the assurance of the late Kings Royal Word
to indemnify him, and upon the Warranty of an Act of Common Council to save him
harmless, and that all Suits which should be brought against him, or his
Officers, in the Execution of the Writs for the Levying that money, should be
defended at the City Charge; I say he was by these means prevailed upon to put
the said Writ in Execution, and to levy money by way of Distress upon many of
his fellow Citizens. Now it is worth my Lord Mayors serious consideration how
things at last issued with him, notwithstanding all this precaution in himself,
and assurance of Protection and indemnity from others. For there being an
Action of Trespass and false Imprisonment brought against him in the
King's Bench in Trinity Term, 14 Car. 1638. There was, notwithstanding his
Pleading the Kings Writ, and the Opinion of the Judges, a Judgment given
against him on the 4th. of February, 16 Car. by those very Judges that had
formerly given their Opinion concerning the legality of the Ship Money. Yea,
when he thought to have relieved himself by a Writ of Error in the Exchequer
Chamber, the poor Gentleman after a long and costly Suit, had the former
Judgment affirmed against him, 17 Feb. Car. and that by the unanimous Opinion
of all the Judges, notwithstanding these very men had the 4th of Aug. 11 Car.
declared that the King might according to Law issue forth such a Writ, and levy
money upon it. And when on his being Cast and Condemned in one Action, a Deluge
of Suits flowed in upon him, so that not a Term passed without Process,
Outlawries Executions or Extents against him, he was at last, after long
concealment in his own House, and wandering obscurely for some time up and down
the Country, apprehended and thrown into the King's Bench, where he continued
Prisoner 15 years, and died under Executions against him to the value of above
40000 l. Nor had he in all this time any Succor either from the King or his
Ministers, but Pity, which is a poor relief to the miserable. And as all this
befell him for venturing to Act where the Law would not justify him, so it may
caution others against doing things more palpably Illegal, and which they have
not an Act of Common Council, and the Opinion of all the Judges to support them
in, as he had.

But does the present Lord Mayor think what prejudice he does his Majesty, by
his late Carriage and Behavior? all he did in opposition to his Father, when
he carried a Musket against him, and was Clerk to a Company that fought under
his Enemies Banners, was much more pardonable, than the being so Instrumental
as he is, to make the King lose the love and confidence of five parts in six of
the whole City. Can his Lordship believe that he has done as becomes a Loyal
Person to his Prince, to engage the King in a visible Contest with a Loyal, as
well as a great People, in a point that they will not part with, and which his
Majesty cannot wrest from them, without declining from the course of the Law,
which both his Justice and his Oath oblige him against?

Nor can my Lord be unsentible, unless he hears only on one Ear, how much he
has lessened that Party which they call their own, by the Method, which he
has been pursuing, and his unexpected, as well as unaccountable Carriage in
the late Halls. Alas! though there be some that mortally hate Phanaticks; yet
there are none but distracted men who are fond of parting with their
Privileges and Rights, and or putting their Lives and Fortunes in the power of
him that sits in the Chair. For as they know not what kind of Mayor they may
have the next year; so they would not expose themselves and Children to be r^ed
hereafter, merely for having the pleasure of doing some whom they do not
heartily love, a discourtesie at present.

But if we look a little into matter of Fact, we shall both have a view of some
men's extravagancy, and understand, in subserviency to what mischievous ends all
this is insisted upon, and so violently prosecured. For after some of the
Ministers had met at my Lord Mayors, and obtained a promise from him to drink
to North, as Sheriff, it is observable that the next morning Mr North, and his
Brother the Lord Chief Justice went to Windsor in a Coach with Six Horses. And
tho we dare not undertake to tell what they did there, yet we are well assured
that upon the performance of that promise, they reckoned themselves so secure
of this Gentleman lately come from Turkey for Sheriff, that my Lord Mayor both
contrary to Custom and an Act of Common Council 7 Car. 1. sent for Mr. North,
and made him seal a Bond to hold Sheriff for the year ensuing. And being thus
far dipped, my Lord was pleased in prosecution of this design to issue out
Precepts of a nature and strain perfectly different from the frame and terms of
all former Precepts. Nay, when the proceedings on Midsummer-day were carrying
on in a legal and orderly way, and all things likely to have been issued
peaceably and according to custom, my Lord Mayor was pleased to come attended
with a company of men, whereof many were not Free men, many had Swords, and
diverse were known Papists, to give interruption to the Poll. Nor need we wonder
if after such an action several persons were sworn guilty of a Riot, tho as
some of those deposed against, were at that time out of Town, and others
confined all the day to be at home by reason of their business, so the most
that any were guilty of, was their receiving manifold affronts with Patience,
and not vouchsafing to make a Riot for the service and convenience of our
Ministers, who had gotten all His Majesty's Forces drawn about the City, and
most of them ready upon a Minutes warning for Service and Execution. To this we
may subjoin his Lordships carriage on Friday last, when after a long
uncertainty what to do, he was pleased at last to consent to have the matter
argued by Council; and because the Inns of Court could afford no other, my Lord
p^ched upon Mr. Saunders, and Sir George Jefferies, whereof the one has been
turned out of employment by the City, and censured by Parliament, and both of
them against the Charter, and in Council for the destroying of it. Nay, when
not only Mr. Pollexfen, Mr. Williams, but the Recorder whom the Mayor is bound
to hearken unto, had given it against his Lordships claim and pretense, and
offered to set their Hands to it as Law; yet upon receiving a Letter from a
certain Minister, his Lordship came down and dismissed the Court.

But the whole Mystery is easily unridled; for not only my Lord H. has
declared, That he foresees there will be Hanging, and he is resolved to Hang
last; but Mr. Duncomb and one more told some worthy Citizens that they wondered
why they would take all that pains, seeing they were in no danger, their only
design by obtaining Sheriffs according to their mind, being to Hang 9 or 10
persons (...) are uneasy to some in Power.

Thus we have once more accosted you, and choose to be the briefer, because you
all know whereabout you are; only this I will take the boldness to intimate to
you, That besides the manifold actions which you may have against the Mayor,
you may either Indict him upon the Statute of Westminster, or complain for
breaking his Oath both as a Freeman and a Magistrate.

And whereas Mr. Town Clerk runs up and down thinking himself injured in a
former paper, I shall only tell him, that besides his being in company where
confusion was drunk to the Charter, he instructed the Council against it all he
could to the overthrow thereof. Nay I may add, that for all his late penitence,
it was he that Originally led my Lord Mayor into these mistakes which are like
to prove his overthrow. And if this do not teach him to be silent, I can assure
him that there is that in Articles against him, whenever a Parliament comes,
that will reach farther than the forfeiture of his Place.

London, Printed for J. Johnson. 1682.


