A SERMON Preached at St. Thomas Church in Bristol.

September 3. 1685.

Before the Right Honorable the Lord ARTHUR Somerset, AND THE Society of the
Loyal Young Men and Apprentices of Bristol, at the time of their Anniversary
Feast.

BY RICHARD ROBERTS, M. A. Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Beaufort, and
Vicar of All Saints in Bristol,

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball over against the
Royal Exchange. 1685.

Imprimatur.

Ex Aedib. Lamb. Oct. 23. 1685. Guil. Needham RR. in Christo P. and D. D.
Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris Dom.

TO THE Right Honorable the Lord Arthur Somerset, Second Son to his Grace the
Duke of Beaufort.
My Lord!
I Have often observed, that the more sollicitous some persons appear in
framing Apologies for the Publication of their Discourses, the more obnoxious
they usually render themselves to the Censorious lashes of Captious and
Critical Readers. And therefore instead of stuffing this Epistle with formal
pretenses and excuses, I think it much fitter to take this opportunity of
acquainting the world, that your Lordships great Condescension in vouchsafing
the Loyal Young Men of Bristol the Honor of being their Leader, is not only
acknowledged by them with all the dutiful expressions of an humble gratitude,
but moreover is likely to have a very good influence upon them in order to the
Kings Service.

This perhaps some may think meanly and slightly of, because the persons Listed
under your Lordships Conduct are for the most part in their Minority, and not
very many of them are yet arrived to the age and perfection of Men. But they
who would have them disvalued and disregarded for that reason, proceed upon
very impolitick grounds, and such as have always proved highly prejudicial to
the interests of these Kingdoms. For, if things be duly weighed and considered,
for that very reason because they are Young, the greater countenance and
encouragement ought in Policy to be shown unto them, that so, when the
Revolution of a few years shall fix them in the Stations of their Fathers and
Masters, the impressions now made upon them may show forth themselves in the
happy effects of an active and steady Loyalty. Had this consideration been had,
and the thing rightly managed in the Last Age, according to the natural
consequences of it, it could not but have fared infinitely better than it has
done in This; for indeed the multitude of turbulent and ungovernable Men, which
have now been disturbing the common peace and tranquillity, is a certain
indication of the little care that was then taken of Boys.

Thus much, My Lord, I thought my self in justice obliged to say in Honor of
your Lordships exemplary Condescension. To which, did I imagine it at this time
proper, I might at least attempt to subjoin a larger Panegyric upon your
Lordship, the Illustriousness of your Descent, the extraordinary acuteness of
your Natural Parts, and the many admirable accomplishments which by means of an
excellent Education you have acquired, affording ample matter for it. But
because, notwithstanding the eminent conspicuity of these things in themselves,
yet the representation of them to your Lordship may be adjudged Flattery, I
shall at present forbear the insisting any farther on them, only desiring the
favor of humbly remembering your Lordship, that the best and most ingenuous way
of improving those advantages and endowments, is to make them always
subservient to the Glory of him, who originally gave them unto you. By the
doing this, My Lord, you will take the most effectual method for the advancing
your own Glory, and for the making all the world sensible that you Act like a
Son of the Great Duke and Duchess of Beaufort; and therefore that you may not
fail of endeavoring and obtaining it, shall be ever the Prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordships most obedient and dutiful Servant, Richard Roberts.

A SERMON ON 1 Pet. ii. 17. The latter part. -- Honor the King.
MY design in speaking to these words at this time is, partly to applaud that
excellent Choice, which you the Loyal Young Men of this City made, when even in
the blackest of times you openly bid defiance to every thing that called it
self Seditious or Fanatical, and solemnly Devoted your Lives and Fortunes to
the Royal Interests; and partly to direct your forward Zeal to some apt and
suitable pressions thereof, that so you may not only be reputed, but may in all
instances approve your selves, what the great reason and intent of this
Anniversary Feast oblige you all to be.

In prosecution of which ends, without any farther Introduction, I shall make
it my business to represent unto you,

I. What great Obligations there are lying on all Subjects to Honor the King.
II. What are the most proper and effectual Methods for the expressing that
Honor by; II. How unreasonably some men pretend to Honor him, when their
practices run counter to his Interest concluding all IV. With some seasonable
Improvement of the whole.
1. What great Obligations there are lying on all Subjects to Honor the King.
And those I take to be principally three, viz. 1. The express command of God;
2. The ties of common Gratitude; 3. The dictates of common Prudence.

1. The express command of God. For maugre all the artifices and pretensions,
which the filthy Gnostics of old made use of for the disengaging themselves
from the obligations of Christian subjection; maugre all the fallacious
Arguments and Apologies, which the Modern Gnostics of these latter Ages have
found out for the defense and vindication of their Villainous and Antichristian
Practices, yet if there be any credit to be reposed in the Holy Scriptures,
those Lively Oracles of God, there is no truth more certain and undeniable,
than that Kings, as they are Kings, have a just Right to our profoundest
reverences and respects, and that there is nothing in the whole world
sufficient to annul or cancel the indispensable duty of Honor which is owing
them. Of this our Apostle St. Peter, among the other Sacred Penmen, is a clear
and positive, as well as infallible, Witness. For whereas it was urged in his
time, that all the Proselytes of the Holy Jesus were the Lords Freemen, that he
had delivered them from the slavery of Obedience to Magistrates who had before
Tyrannically insulted over them, and that now they were all become Kings and
Princes themselves, absolute and independent; our Apostle a little before my
Text reflects upon the grosness and carnality of this their error, telling them
indeed that they ought to look upon and value themselves as Free, i. e. as men
delivered by Christ from the Bondage of the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws; but
yet, this notwithstanding, it would be no ways excusable in them, if they made
this Freedom or Deliverance (...); a Cloak or Covering for Sedition or any
other Wickedness. And whereas it is even at this day urged, by some in the
Communion of the Church of Rome on the one hand, that there is no Deference or
Allegiance owing to an Heretical Prince; and by most of the Puritanical
Separatists on the other, that there is none owing to a Papist Prince, it is
remarkable, that Tiber. Claudius, whose Life see in Suetonius.
the King, who Reigned, when the Apostle wrote this Epistle, was an Idolatrous
Heathen, and not only so, but likewise a most extravagantly debauched and
bloody Tyrant. And yet says the Apostle, Honor the King; tho the way of
Worship, which he maintains and defends, be certainly of all others the
most vile and abominable, and tho the whole course of his Actions be very much
beneath the Dignity of a Man, and much more of a Prince; yet since the Great
Lord and Proprietary of all things has thought fit to make him partake of the
Glory of the Divinity, by advancing him into the number of the Ps. lxxxii. 6.
Mortal Gods, you are necessarily bound for the sake of his Eminent Character
to deport your selves with all dutiful respect toward him, lest otherwise by
despising him ye be found despisers of the Almighty Jehova, who has entrusted
the Sovereign Authority and Jurisdiction in his hands. But,

2. Another Obligation, which lies upon all Subjects to Honor the King, is
deduced from the ties of common Gratitude. For unless a King be monstrously
negligent or savage in the exercise of the Supreme Power, unless he totally
addicteth himself to the brutish sensualities of the Flesh, or the more brutish
efforts of violence and raging Cruelty, the fatigues and cares, which he must
necessarily undergo in the Administration of the Government, cannot but deserve
so well at least of the generality of his people, as to derive upon him a very
firm Title to the most humble expressions of thankfulness. But, whaever the
circumstances of Foreign Subjects are, I am sure we of this Nation must be most
horribly ungrateful, and therefore unchristian, if we are defective in rendering
the due acknowledgments of Honor and Praise unto our most Excellent Prince.
For, if we consider him in himself, his unbiassed Justice, his exemplary
Temperance, his resolute Courage, his sagacious Prudence, his never-failing
Veracity, his indefatigable Industry; together with many other Noble and
Godlike Dispositions of Mind: would all exact of us, even if he were not a
Prince, a very extraordinary admiration and esteem. But then, If we consider
him farther as the Man, whom God himself has in a very wounderful manner
delighted to Honor; and that not only in common with other Sovereign Princes,
by making him one of his Deputies or Vicegerents here on Earth, but likewise by
many miraculous Interpositions of Providence, for his safety and deliverance,
by rescuing him from the jaws of many violent Deaths, wherewith the Raging
Waves, Foreign Enemies, and accursed Domestic Traitors, have often threatened
him, we are surely bound, even in submission to the unerring judgment of God,
to conclude him worthy of a great Veneration, who has all his life long
evidently been the peculiar Care of Heaven. And yet this is not all; For, If we
consider him farther in respect unto these his Kingdoms, he cannot be denied to
be a Tender Father and Defender of them, doing what in him lies toward the
advancement of your Reputation Abroad, making the Public Good the Rule and
Square of his Actions at Home, suffering his own Rest and Quiet to be
frequently interrupted for the sake of other men's Security, condescending in
many instances, even beneath the Grandeur of his Royal Station, in order to the
satisfaction of his people, and in a word, so managing his Actions in the
general course of them, as is most likely effectually to render himself one of
the most Glorious of Princes, and us absolutely the most happy People in the
world. And are we not then even in Honor bound to Honor such a Prince? But,

3. If there be any here present, who are not to be prevailed on either by this
or the forementioned Obligation, let them moreover consider that they are
obliged unto the same by the dictates of common Prudence. For, when all is
done, even in respect of this Life, Loyalty is ordinarily the best Policy; and
tho it be true indeed that there are some particular examples to be produced,
of Honest men who have been utterly ruined for their Fidelity to their King,
and of Villans who have raised themselves plentiful Fortunes by their
opposition to him; yet generally speaking, or for the most part, the best and
most likely way of being good and kind to our selves in our Temporal, as well
as Spiritual, concerns, is to be just and faithful unto Caesar. If you look
back to the History of the late times of Anarchy and Confusion, you will there
indeed observe Rebellion for a while very Triumphant and Prosperous; he that
was the least troubled with a bogling Conscience, that could audaciously
attempt the most Saucy and Virulent things against Royal Majesty, put himself
in the fairest way for a public vogue, and for that which is usually
consequent thereunto, the capacity of soon getting a great Estate. But if you
likewise remark the Issues of things, pray what generally became of those
Impudent Hotspurs at a long run? Many of them you will find were undone and
destroyed by others of their own Faction; and tho some others had a long time
the good luck to secure themselves, notwithstanding all the various changes and
vicissitude of affairs, yet Divine Justice has already overtaken the far
greatest part of them, the Persons of some being brought to tragical and
execrable ends, and the Estates of the most being come to naught, their
Families impoverished, and scarce any thing of them remaining behind, besides
their Names, to be detested and abhorred by all succeeding Generations. Nay
farther yet, if we reflect on the Transactions that have occurred within the
compass of these few years, what is it that the Hotheaded Bigots of the
Faction have got by all their multiplied Plots and Conspiracies? Have they
indeed attained the proposed ends of increasing their Wealth, and swelling
their Titles, and of living more happily and joyfully than they did before? It
must be confessed that at one time they grew very rampant and domineering, and
seemed too too likely by their number and noise to bear down all before them.
But when the Measure of their Arbitrary and Seditious Practices was once filled
up, God was then pleased to make even those very Practices the Instruments of
their ruin, and instead of blessing them with the expected success,
miraculously to blast and confound all their devices; so that now they are
become in all their capacities Fatal Examples of the mischiefs arising from
Disloyalty, and we may boldly with the Psalmist say of them and of all
villainous Psalm. lxxiii. 18.
undertakings, O how suddenly do they consume, perish, and come to a fearful
end!

And thus I have endeavored to represent unto you, what great obligations
there are lying on all Subjects to Honor the King. I come now in the second
place to show you, what are the most proper and effectual methods for the Honor
by. And those that I shall at present discourse of, and which are indeed the
chiefest, shall be the three that follow, viz. We are obliged to express our
Honor of the King,

I. By always speaking respectfully of his Person; II. By yielding a due
obedience unto his Laws; III. By endeavoring the promotion of his other just
Interests on all emergent occasions, tho we be not by the letter of any Human
Statute compellible thereunto.
1. By always speaking respectfully of his Person. And this indeed (tho it be
one of the meanest and lowest manifestations of our duty, yet) i^ in it self so
indispensable, as that I know not how we can rightly be denominated so much as
Christians, if we customarily act in contradiction to it. For so infinitely
tender is our Holy Religion of the Reputations of all men, as that it by no
means permits us to speak evil of any, even the most inferior person: nay we
are not only forbid to detract from such an one, by inventing or spreading a
false report, but even by unnecessarily relating an Uncharitable Truth,
concerning him. And how much less then does our Religion permit us to speak
evil of Gods Anointed, whom he has deputed to Reign in his own stead? St. Jude
tells us in the ninth verse of his Epistle, that Michael the Archangel durst
not bring a railing accusation even against the Devil himself: for tho he be
only an accursed Prince of the Air, yet because he is a Prince, a favorable
modesty of speech toward him was adjudged best becoming. And if so, then
surely they have great reason with shame and confusion of Face to reflect upon
themselves; who think it not enough formerly to have been concerned in the most
damnably malicious defamations of their Sovereign Liege Lord, but still
persevere in the making it a part of their Saintship to vilify and traduce
him, sometimes by unjust and unreasonable insinuations, and more often by
groundless forgeries and lies. But (beloved) we have not so learnt Christ, the
Rules of our Profession requiring of us a directly contrary behavior; and
therefore, if we would act agreeably to the Injunctions thereof, it is
necessary for us, in case we ever hear of any Infirmities, wherewith the King
as a man is encompassed (and who alas! Is there that can plead an exemption
from such?) presently to cover them with the Mantle of Piety and Charity,
perfectly abominating any the least resemblance to the inhuman crime of * Ham,
when he delighted to gaze Genesis i. 22.
upon and publish his Fathers nakedness. But this is not all, for we are in
like manner strictly bound to take all convenient opportunities of displaying
the many Admirable accomplishments and endowments, which render the King
deservedly Illustrious, not only forbearing to speak ill, but speaking as well
of him as we may and ought; that his Enemies may be the more ashamed of their
base and unjustifiable Disobedience, and his Friends the more readily excited
to the engaging themselves in. his Services, even tho they were sure of
becoming Sacrifices thereby. But,

2. Besides the speaking respectfully of him, if we would indeed Honor him
aright, we must likewise yield a due obedience unto his Laws, those I mean
which are still in force, and so far as they are in force. For as our Savior
has made the observation of his Laws the Test whereby to distinguish his
Friends from his Enemies ( John xv. 14.
Ye are my friends, says he, if ye do whatsoever I command you:) So the same
may be proportionably said of the observation of the Kings Laws too. But among
the rest there are three sorts of them more especially, which exact a thorough
conformity from all those, who would in good earnest be thought to deserve the
reputable Character of the Kings Friends, viz. 1. Those which concern
Uniformity in Divine Worship; 2. Those which prohibit the Levying of Arms
against the King upon any pretense whatsoever; 3. Those which determine the
payment of Tribute.

As for those which concern Uniformity, uncontrollable experience has all
along demonstrated, how absolutely necessary that is for the support of the
Crown; Recusants of all sorts having ever since the Reformation been the
Instruments of almost infinite disturbances in the State; and it being more
especially observable of our Fanatic Recusants, that notwithstanding all the
noises, which they formerly made concerning their own godliness and their good
meanings, yet (to speak within compass) there was in all probability not one in
five hundred of them, but what evidently enough appeared at least to have
wished well to the success of the late Rebellious Arms. And therefore, if we
would not be thought Confederates with those, who every day undermine the True
Interests of the Crown and the present Government, one of the most effectual
methods is intimately to adhere to the Communion of the Established Church,
than which none can possibly be more Loyal in the world.

And so again as to those Laws which prohibit the Levying of Arms against the
King, although there have been some indeed, who have been impudent enough to
assert, that the so doing is consistent with the Duty of a good Subject,
declaring even when they were in actual Rebellion against their Sovereign, that
they intended nothing else thereby but only to make him a most Glorious Prince,
yet the fallacious absurdity of this Paradox was notoriously interpreted by the
terrible event, the Glory (pretendedly) designed, being not that of a
Triumphant Throne here, but the Glory of dying a Martyred Sacrifice to the
implacable fury of his Enemies. Which kind of Glory, tho I question not but
that in the consequence of it proved infinitely happy to that Ever-Blessed
Saint, yet God forbid that it should ever be made a President of a way to Honor
the King in future Ages! For surely it is a very strange expression of Honor
inhumanly to murder the person Honored; nay to do any thing in the least
measure tending thereunto, must needs be directly repugnant to the duties of
Fidelity and Obedience.

And so lastly as to those Laws which determine the payment of Tribute, it is
plain that thereby a Legal Right unto those sums of money therein specified,
whether they be greater or less, is devolved upon the King; and tho it is to be
feared, that there are too many in the Kingdom, who take all the secret
opportunities of defrauding him thereof, and that notwithstanding still reckon
themselves Mighty Loyallists, yet for my part I must confess that I am not able
to reconcile things so very opposite and contradictory. Our Savior I am sure
manifested his own Loyalty, and commanded us to manifest ours, Mark xii. 17.
by giving unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's: and St. Paul among other
instances of subjection injoyns this as one, Romans xiii. 7.
that we should render Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Custom to whom Custom.
From whence it clearly follows, unless we will deny our Savior and St. Paul to
have been competent Judges of the Obligations of Loyalty, that he that cheateth
the King of his Custom, or any other Dues, is in so doing an evil and a
disobedient Subject, neither truly Loyal, nor Christian. But,

3. It is not sufficient for us, if we would indeed Honor the King aright, to
speak respectfully of him, and to be obedient to his express Laws, it being
likewise required of us to endeavor the promotion of all his other Just
Interests on all emergent occasions, tho we be not by the Letter of any Human
Statute compellible thereunto. For such a defect of knowledge always attends
all Human Legislators, as that it is utterly impossible for them to foresee the
various accidents that contingently arise, and therefore they cannot in many
particular cases explicitly prescribe what is necessary to be done in order to
the Public Good. From whence it comes to pass that in many weighty
transactions, which have a great influence upon the Community, men are left
indeterminately on the one side or the other to act according to the Liberty of
their own Wills; insomuch that it is easily possible for a man to come up to
the Letter of those Established Laws, which usually fall under cognizance, and
yet at the same time to be a very ill and pernicious Member of Society. Thus,
for example, in the Popular Election of Officers to Public Trusts and Employs,
the common Interests of the Kingdom certainly require us only to Vote for
those, who by the soundness of their Principles, and other necessary
qualifications, are well capacitated for the respective Places, for which they
are Candidates. But yet, because it is not possible for the Lawgiver upon all
occasions to determine, what persons are well capacitated, and what not,
therefore the liberty of determining that is thought fit for some Political
reasons to be indulged to the People. Which liberty notwithstanding if any man
so far abuses, as to throw away his Voice upon a Person known to be
Distaffected to the Government, or otherwise unqualified, let him call himself
as good a Churchman or Kings-man as he pleases, yet in this at least he acts
contrarily to the duties of such. And as it is not allowable for any man to
abuse the Liberty granted him to the Kings Disservice in this Case, so neither
is it in any other Parallel Case that does occur. Concerning which point it is
farther to be observed, that tho abuses of this kind are not properly and in
themselves punishable by the Laws of the Land, yet they certainly render us
obnoxious to the Laws of God, he having indefinitely commanded us to do what in
us lies for the advancement of the Kings Honor, and we therefore being
unavoidably obliged thereunto in all manner of Instances, excepting only those
which interfere with some superior Command of God, that clearly appears to be
his Command.

And thus I have dispatched the second General proposed, and come now in the
third place to represent, how unreasonably some men pretend to Honor the King,
when their Practices run counter to his Interests. Such more particularly I
mean,

I. Who only talk for the King and Government, and never act any thing; II. Who
tho they Act sometimes well, yet are often biassed by sinister respects and
considerations to the acting ill; III. And lastly, Who lead debauched and
irregular lives.
1. Who only talk for the King and Government, and never Act any thing. And
these indeed are a dangerous sort of Plausible Hypocrites, who usually do as
much prejudice to the Kings Cause, as his most avowed Enemies. Nay sometimes
they do much more; for, whereas his avowed Enemies are always suspected, and
therefore narrowly watched, and seldom or never trusted in any thing, these
men, before they are well known, too often occasion some degree of confidence
to be reposed in them, and by that means cunningly slip into Public Offices,
answerable to their respective qualities. But when they have so done, then they
begin to show themselves by deceiving the expectations that were conceived of
them; for, instead of being really instrumental in the service of the Crown,
their time is chiefly spent in consulting their own ease and quiet, thinking it
enough to enjoy the Honor, without undergoing any thing of the Burden, of the
Places to which they are called. Sometimes an immoderate desire of Pleasure,
and hatred of business seduce them from their Duty; either their Lusts prevail
upon them to play the Wantons, or the Good-Fellows, or to prosecute some
diverting Sports or Games, and therefore they cannot be at leisure when there
is need of them. Othertimes through Cowardice and exorbitant Fear they quit the
exercise of their Reason and Authority together; if they should engage in such
and such difficult points, they are afraid it may be the worse for them
hereafter, and therefore they are resolved to sleep in a whole Skin, and to
have nothing to do in those matters. Othertimes again a covetous principle
operates within them, and suggesteth great advantages that may accrue, if they
will be but absent at such a time; money perhaps may be gotten abroad, or saved
at home, Relations may be gratified, or obligations may be laid upon some who
may do good turns another way, and therefore they pretend that they have some
private concerns that are not to be dispensed with, and so excuse themselves.
And thus by the prevalence of these and such like temptations, when any
business of real importance is to be done, they constantly slip their Necks out
of the Collar, leaving the King to shift for himself as well as he can, and
preferring their own corrupt affections and sensual interests to the common
Good. And are not such persons then, if they call themselves Loyalists,
Ufurpers of that Honorable Name? Yes certainly; for, if they had any real Title
thereunto, they would at least be so far Masters of themselves, as to control
and overruled those their vicious Appetites, when they arise in opposition to
the necessary Duties of their Station, and the Public advantage. But,

2. Those men likewise unreasonably pretend to Honor the King, as they ought to
do, who, tho they Act sometimes well, yet are often biassed by sinister
respects and considerations to the acting ill. For he that truly and really
honoreth the King, does it uniformly and regularly, as well in one instance as
another; he is not at any time to be induced either with Judas, or the Rebel
Scots to sell his Master for money; but is constantly honest and just unto him,
even tho he were sure of losing, as well as tho he were likely of getting, an
Estate by serving him. If therefore any man comes to bargain with him for the
doing any thing contrary to the Interests of his Prince and Country, he flies
from him as from a Poisonous Serpent; he detesteth the person, who durst
affront him so grossly, as to think him so base and mercenary a Traitor; and he
abominateth the offered reward of unrighteousness with the same kind of Holy
Indignation, as St. Peter did, when in the zeal of his soul he said unto Simon
Magus, Acts viii. 20.
Thy money perish with thee! Which generous disposition is indeed implanted in
the very Habit of his mind; for he is Loyal upon Principles, and for Conscience
sake; not for the hopes of preferment, not by chance or good fortune, not
because it is Fashionable to be so; but because God has positively required it
of him, and has made it one special part of his Unchangeable Law. Whereas now,
if on the other side we review the persons of whom we were speaking, it is
strange to observe into how many Shapes money is able to change them. Sometimes
there are no men so high for Conformity and Subjection as they, and (if you
will believe them) they would not by their good wills leave a Wealthy Fanatic,
and much less a Rebel, in England. Othertimes they Advocate for pity to be
shown to such a man whom they name, for that, tho he has justly incurred the
penalties of Recusancy, or it may be forfeited his life, yet by favor and fair
means he may perhaps be made a Proselyte. And so in many other particulars very
easy to be reckoned up, were it necessary, they clash and interfere with
themselves; the true reason of which is, because their pretended Loyalty is not
bottomed upon the firm Foundation of Religion, but upon things variable and
uncertain, I mean their own advantages. And what praise then is really unto
such persons? Upon what account can the King be really said to be beholden to
them? For though they be supposed sometime to perform Services, if considered
in themselves, signal and Eminent, yet when they perform them for their own
sakes, and not for the sake of the King, as our Savior Matthew. vi. 2.
says in another case, Verily they have their reward. But then moreover, when
they themselves demonstrate by their actions, that the very same principle,
which leads them sometimes to be Serviceable to the Crown, can othertimes lead
them to be Disserviceable to the same, they have no reason to boast that they
deserve to receive Honor from it, when they really show none at all to it. But,

3. And lastly, Those men in like manner unreasonably pretend to Honor the King
in the full sense and meaning of the Text, who lead debauched and irregular
lives. For tho such persons indeed may cheerfully embark themselves in the
Kings Business, and heartily wish well to his Cause, and sometimes in their
several Spheres do brave and acceptable things, yet by their gross and
scandalous Immoralities they certainly countermine themselves, and mightily
increase the number and strength of the Party which they say they hate. For
although it be in it self highly absurd and unreasonable, for any men to
encourage themselves in Disloyalty against their Prince, because there are some
on their Princes side, who are Disloyal to their Maker, especially considering
how obnoxious the Opposite Party is to much more severe Recriminations; yet de
facto we find that the open impieties of some, who call themselves Loyallists,
are frequently made an argument against Loyalty it self, and that that Argument
is usually adjudged very cogent and demonstrative by the common and injudicious
sort of people: and so it comes to pass that the King loses the hearts of many
of his Subjects, who are by these means decoyed out of their Duty and
Allegiance, even to the Associating themselves with his professed Adversaries.
But this is not the only mischief which the vicious and Immoral behavior of
such persons does; for it is moreover sadly observable, that thereby they do
what in them lies, tho inconsiderately perhaps and besides their intentions,
for the bringing down the heavy wrath of God, not only on themselves, but on
their Sovereign too. To which purpose it is remarkable, when Samuel exhorts
the Children of Israel to fear the Lord, and to serve him in Truth with all
their heart (1 Samuel xii. 24.) that one great Motive which he uses with them is
this, that if they still did wickedly, they should be consumed, both they and
their King. The Justice of which threatening, if it be called in question, may
be cleared from hence, that the proper way of taking vengeance upon Kingdoms
for a General and National wickedness, is by inflicting a General and National
punishment, which can never be done, but that the King, who is the Head of the
Body Politic, must needs bear a large share in it, in proportion to the nature
and quality of that which the Body bears. So that from hence it follows, that
every wicked man, as he is a wicked man, is a real Enemy to his Prince, because
as such, he for one contributes to the provoking and incensing God unto the
exercise of his fury, in the destroying both Prince and People by a common
fate. And therefore they, who would in good earnest promote and perpetuate the
Honor of their Prince, are strictly bound, if they will not live religiously
for Gods sake, or their own, yet at least to live so for the sake of their
Prince, whose safety and happiness so much depend upon the piety and virtue of
his People.

And thus I have done with the three General Heads of discourse proposed to be
spoken to. From all which it cannot but appear, that in order to the
Constituting and Making a truly Loyal man a great many things are absolutely
required, and that not every one who Honoreth the King in some few Cases, but
he alone who Honoreth him in all, has a just claim to that Appellation. And if
so, then let me persuade and prevail upon all here present, but especially upon
you who are the Great and Flourishing Hopes of this City, not to content your
selves with a formal and superficial appearance of Loyalty, but constantly to
endeavor in your respective Stations the manifestation of the inward power and
virtue thereof. You have lately given to your selves a Gallant and Excellent
President of so doing; for no more is required of you, but only to continue
Acting consistently and agreeably to what you did the other day, when you so
eagerly courted the opportunity of being in Arms against the Rebels. Do but
still persevere in disvaluing all your other private Interests, when the King's
are at stake, as you then seemed to disvalue your very lives, and you cannot
fail of performing the Whole of this Duty. For your farther encouragement
whereunto you would do well to consider, that you have now the Honor of being
Headed by The Right Honorablethe Lord Arthur Somerset.
a Truly Noble, and Right Honorable Leader, a Leader, whose example, if you
attend to it, may be a Living Sermon of Loyalty; and therefore, seeing you have
voluntarily listed yourselves under so Great a Command, it will be the basest
thing in the world, if hereafter you should disgrace both his Lordship and your
selves by turning Renegadoes or Apostates. But this is not the only bond
wherewith you are obliged; for you may likewise reflect on the Solemnity of
those several Addresses, which together with your selves you have been admitted
to prostrate at the King's feet; and consequently you cannot without a
monstrous vileness and disingenuity violate those Promises, which you have so
sacredly and frequently made. But above all it will be proper for you to
remember, that your Eternal Salvation very much depends upon the discharge of
this Duty of Obedience the right way; and therefore, if you have any regard to
your own well-being hereafter, let this consideration like wise be instrumental
in nourishing and increasing your Fervent Zeal; that so at the last day, when
the Great King of Heaven comes to make a Scrutiny into your Actions, and
inquireth especially ^^w you have behaved your selves toward his Vicegerents
on Earth, you may be found in the number of those, who shall be counted worthy
to Rule, because they have not thought it any ways unworthy of them to Obey,
and may be exalted to those everlasting Thrones of Glory and Happiness, where
all the most transporting satisfactions of infinite Splendour and Triumph are to
be enjoyed. Which God grant even for the merits of his Blessed Son! Amen.

FINIS.

