AN ABRIDGMENT OF Sir Walter Raleigh's HISTORY of the WORLD, In Five BOOKS.

1. From the Creation to Abraham. 2. From Abraham to the Destruction of the
Temple of Solomon. 3.From the Destruction of Jerusalem to Philip of Macedon. 4.
From Philip of Macedon to the Race of Antigonus. 5. From the Establishment of
Alexander until the Conquest of Asia and Macedon by the Romans.
Wherein the particular Chapters and Paragraphs are su^cinctly Abridg'd
according to his own Method, in the larger Volume.

To which is Added, His Premonition to Princes.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Gellisflower, at the Black Spread Eagle in
Westminister-Hall. School.

Times Witness Herald of Antiquity The Light of Truth and Life of Memory


London Printed for Mat: Gillyflower at the Spread Eagle in Westminster Hall.

THE PUBLISHER's Advertisement TO THE READER.
I Need not give any Account of the Excellency of Sir Walter Raleigh's History
of the World, of which this is an Abridgment: The great Knowledge and Learning,
the accurate Skill and Penetration, the sublime Wisdom and Piety, together with
the curious Remarks and Observations which so signally appear in that History,
have sufficiently recommended it to the Judicious part of the World. Yet
notwithstanding these Excellencies, Sir Walter has not been without some
considerable Imperfections in respect to History, which he has shown in his too
frequent and long Digressions, and Observations; and though several of them are
very fine and Ingenious, yet too many of them are wholly Foreign to his
Subject: But his Moral and Religious Reflections, tho sometimes long, are
generally too Excellent to need a Vindication. The abov^-mention'd Faults of
this Great Man, which were the general Faults of the Age in which he lived,
have made many Curious Persons wish for an Epitomy of that large Volume,
wherein his Excellencies might in a great measure be retained, and his Errors
be wholly expunged. This was attempted near Fifty Years since by Alexander
Ross, but with small Skill and Success; for he has injudiciously filled his
Epitomy with the most trifling and trashy parts of the Original, and omitted
too much of what was most material and substantial. For which Reason I have
ventured to Publish this Abridgment, of which I shall give the Reader this
Brief Account.

Above a Year and an half since it was given me by an Ingenious and Judicious
Friend, who knew nothing of the Author; but finding it to be done with singular
Care and Judgment, he desired me to View it and Publish it. Upon Examination, I
found my Friend's Character to be rather short of the Author's Deserts, both as
to his Skill and Accuracy in Extracting the Essence of the Original; so that I
could do no less than expose so choice a Piece to the view of the Public. All
that I have done, besides the Expunging and shortning some Passages, is the
Correcting and Altering of the Style, which in most places was too obsolete:
But in that I have still preserved its first Resemblance to the Original, which
was almost as remarkable for the Style as the Matter; so that the Reader is not
to expect all the Purity of a New Written History, for that would have been too
unlike Sir Walter. Besides, the Reader may here find an Excellent Abridgment of
Sir Walter's Preface, which is a most sublime Piece of Morality and Divinity,
and a most Noble Lesson and Instruction to all Princes and great Persons; being
by many esteemed of more Worth than all his History besides.

Laurence Echard.
Louth in Lincolnshire. October. 25. 1697.
Sir Walter Raleigh's Premonition to PRINCES.
MY own weak Reason convinced me, how unfit a choice I made of my Self, to
undertake a Work of this mixture. For had it been generated in my younger
Years, before any Wound received either by Fortune or Time, yet I might well
have feared that the Darkness of Age and Death would have covered both me and
it, long before its performance: It had better suited with my Disability, to
have confined my Discourse within our renowned Island of Britain, and to have
set together the disjointed Frame of our English Affairs, than in the Evening
of a Tempestuous Life, thus to begin with an History of the World from the
Creation. But the deep piercing Wounds, which while uncured, are ever aching;
with the desire to satisfy those few Friends, tried by the Fire of Adversity
(the former enforcing, the latter persuading) have caused me to make my
Thoughts legible, and my self the Subject of every Man's Opinion, wise or weak.

To the World I present them, to which I am nothing indebted; neither have
others that succeeded me sped much better in the change of Fortune; Prosperity
and Adversity ever tying and untying vulgar Affections. And as Dogs bark at
those they know not, and accompany one another in their Clamours, so is it with
the unthinking Multitude; which led by uncertain Reports, condemn without
hearing, and wound without Offense given; contrary to the Counsel of Syracides.
Ecclesiasticus 11.7.
Against this vanity of Vulgar Opinion, Seneca gives a good Rule; Let us
satisfy our own Consciences, and not trouble our selves about the Censures of
others, be it never so ill, as long as we deserve well.

Touching my self, if in any thing I have preferred the service of my Country,
the general acceptance can yield me now no other profit, than a fair Day does
after Shipwreck; and the contrary, no other harm than as a Tempest in the
Port. I know I lost the love of many, for my Fidelity to Her, whom I must still
honor in the Dust; though farther than the defense of her excellent Person, I
never persecuted any. To labor other satisfaction were the effects of Frenzy,
not of Hope; seeing it is Truth, not Opinion which can travel the World without
a Passport. Equity alone might persuade, if there were not as many Forms of the
Mind, as there are external Figures of Men; and that as every Man has received
a several Picture as to Face, so has he a diverse Picture as to Mind: Every
one a Form by himself; every one a Fancy and Cogitation differing; there being
nothing in which Nature so much triumphs, as in Dissimilitude. From hence it
comes that there is found so great a diversity of Opinions; so strong a
contrariety of Inclinations; so many natural and unnatural, natural, wise and
foolish, manly and childish Affections and Passions in mortal Men. For it is
not the visible fashion or shape of Plants, or reasonable Creatures, that makes
the difference of working in the one, or of Condition in the other, but the
internal Form.

And though God has reserved the reading of men's Thoughts to himself; yet as
the Fruit tells the name of the Tree, so do the outward Works of men (so far as
their Cogitations are acted) give us a Light to guess at the rest. Nay, it were
not hard to express the one by the other very near the Life, did not the Craft
of many, Fear in most, and the Worlds Love in all, teach every Capacity,
according to the compass it has, to qualify and mask over inward Deformities
for a time. Yet no man can long continue masked in a counterfeit Behavior: The
things which are forced for pretenses, having no ground of Truth, cannot long
dissemble their own nature; and the Heart will be seen at the Tongues end.

In this great dissimilitude of reasonable Creatures, the common People are ill
Judges of honest things, and their Wisdom is to be despised, said Eccles. As
for the better sort, every Understanding has a peculiar Judgment, by which it
both censureth others, and valueth it self; and therefore I will not think it
strange, if my worthless Papers be torn by Ratts, since in all Ages Censurers
have not spared to tax the Reverend of the Church with Ambition; the severe to
themselves, with Hypocrisy; lovers of Justice, with Popularity; and Men of the
truest valor with Vainglory: For nothing is so easy as to Reprove and
Censure.

I will not trouble the Reader with repeating the deserved Commendations of
History; yet true it is, that among many other Benefits, for which it has been
honored, it triumphs in this over all Human Knowledge, that it gives Life to
our Understanding, since the World it self has Life even to this day: And it
has triumphed over Time, which nothing else but Eternity has done; for it has
carried our Knowledge over the vast devouring space of many Thousand Years, and
has opened the piercing Eyes of our Mind, that we plainly behold living now, as
if we lived then, that wise Work of the great God, says Hermes. By it (I say)
we live in the very time when it was Created; behold how it was governed, how
covered with Water, and again repeopl'd: How Kings and Kingdoms flourished and
fell, and for what Virtues or Vices God made the one prosperous, and the other
wretched. Neither is it the least of our Debt to History, that it has made us
acquainted with our dead Ancestors, and raised them out of Darkness to teach us
no less wise, than eternal Policy, by comparing former Miseries with our own
ill Deservings. But neither the lively Instructions of Example, the Words of
the wisest, nor Terror of future Torments, have yet so wrought upon our stupid
Minds, as to make us remember, That the infinite Eye, and Wisdom of God does
pierce through all our Pretenses: Nor to make us remember, That the Justice of
God requires no other Accuser than our own Consciences, which by no false
Beauty of our apparent actions, nor all the formality, which we (to gull Men's
Opinions) put on, can be covered from him. Examples of God's Judgments in
particulars upon all Degrees, that have played with his Mercies, would fill
Volumes. For the Sea of Examples has no Bottom; though Marks, set on private
Men, are (when their Bodies are cast into the Earth) written only in their
Memory which lived with them; so that the Persons succeeding, who saw not their
Fall, fear not their own Faults. God's Judgments on the Greatest have been
Recorded to Posterity, either by those happy Hands, which the Holy Ghost
guided, or by others. Now to point as far as the Angels Fall, for Ambition; at
Kings eating Grass with Beasts for Pride and Ingratitude; at Pharaoh's wise
Action when he slew the Infants; at Jesabel's Policy in covering Naboth's
Murder, with many Thousands of the like, were but a Proof, that Example should
be rejected at a distance. For who has not observed what Labor, Practice,
Peril, Bloodshed, and Cruelty the Kings and Princes of the World have
undergone and exercised, taken upon them, and committed, to make themselves,
and their Issues Masters of the World? yet has Babylon, Persia, Macedon, Rome,
or the rest, no Fruit, Flower or Leaf springing upon the face of the Earth:
Nay, their very Roots and Ruins do hardly remain; for all that the Hand of Man
can make, is either over-turned by the Hand of Man, or Consumed by Time.
Politicians say, States have fallen, either by Foreign Force, or Domestic
Negligence and Dissension; or by a third Cause rising from both: Others
observe, That the greatest have sunk under their own weight; others, That
Divine Providence has set a Period ^^ every State before the first Foundation
thereof; as Cratippus objected in Pompey.

But seeing the Books following undertake the Discourse of the first Kings and
Kingdoms, and that a short Preface cannot run very far back to the Ancients; I
will for the present examine what Advantage has been gained by our own Kings
and their Neighbor Princes, who having beheld both in Divine and Humane
Letters, the success of Infidelity, Injustice and Cruelty, have
(notwithstanding) Planted after the same Pattern. Men's Judgments agree not; and
no man's Affection is stirred up alike, with Examples of the like nature; but is
either touched with that which seems to come nearest to his own private
Opinion, or else best fits his Apprehension. But the Judgments of God are
unchangeable; no Time can weary him, or obtain his Blessing to that in one Age,
which he Cursed in another. Those therefore which are Wise, will be able to
discern the bitter Fruits of irreligious Policy, as well in old Examples as
new; for ill Actions have always been attended with ill Success, as will appear
by the following Examples.

We have then no sooner passed over the violence of the Norman Conquest, but we
encounter that remarkable Example of God's Justice upon the Children of Henry
I. who having by Force, Craft, and Cruelty, overreached his Brother Robert D.
of Normandy, Usurped the Crown of England, and disposessed him of his Dukedom,
and barbarously deprived him of his Sight, to make his own Sons Lords of all;
but God cast them all, Male and Female, Nephews and Neeces (Maud excepted) into
the bottom of the Sea.

Edward II. being Murdered, a Torrent of Blood followed in the Royal Race, so
that all the Masculine Princes (few excepted) dyed of the Bloody Flux. And
though Edward III. in his young Years, made his knowledge of that horrible
Fact, no more than suspicious; yet his putting to death his Uncle the Earl of
Kent, made it manifest he was not ignorant of what had past, nor greatly
desirous to have had it otherwise. But this Cruelty, the unsearchable Judgment
of God revenged on his Grandchild; and so it fell out even to the last of the
Line; That in the Second or Third Descent, they were all buried under the Ruins
of those Buildings whose Mortar had been tempered with innocent Blood. For
Richard II. having Murdered his Uncle of Gloucester, was himself Murdered by
Henry IV.

Henry IV. having broken Faith to his Lords, and by Treason obtained the Crown,
Entailed it by Parliament upon his Issue; and by many Treacheries left all
Competitors defenseless, as he supposed, leaving his Son Henry V. full of
Valor and signal Victories; yet was his Grandchild Henry VI. and his Son the
Prince, without Mercy Murdered, and his Crown transferred to the Houses of his
Enemies. It was therefore a true Passage of Caussabon; a Day, an Hour, a
Moment, is enough to overthrow what seems founded in Adamant.

Henry VI. overwhelmed with the Storm of his Grandfathers grievous Crimes,
generally esteemed an innocent Prince, yet refused the Daughter of Armaignac,
of the House of Navarre, to whom he was Allied, and Married a Daughter of
Anjou, and so lost all that he had in France: He also condescended to the
unworthy Death of his Uncle of Gloucester, the main Pillar of the House of
Lancaster. Buckingham and Suffolk contrived the Duke's death, by the Queen's
procurement; but the Fruit was answerable to the Plantation, and they and their
Adherents were destroyed by York; whose Son Edward deprived Henry the Father,
and Edward the Son, of Life and Kingdom, The Politic Lady, the Queen, lived to
see the miserable End of her Husband, Son, and all her Adherents; her self
plundered, and Father beggared to Ransom her.

Edward IV. has his turn to Triumph, when all the Plants of Lancaster, except
the Earl of Richmond, were extirpated; whom he had also bought of the D. of
Britain, but could not keep him. But what stability can Edward's Plantation
promise, when he had seen and approved Prince Edward's Murder, by Gloucester,
Dorset, Hastings, etc. which escaped not the Judgment of God in the same kind?
He instructed Gloucester to Murder Henry VI. and taught him the Art to kill his
own Sons, and to Vsurp the Crown.

Richard III. The greatest Master in Villainy, of all that went before him; who
by necessity of his Tragedy, being to play more Parts in his own Person than
all the rest, yet so well fitted every Man's Humor that joined with him, as if
each had acted his own Interest. Buckingham and Hastings, Enemies to the Queen,
and her Kindred, are easily allured to condescend, that Rivers and Gray (the
King's maternal Uncle, and half Brother) should first be separated from him;
then imprisoned; and for avoiding future Inconveniences, to lose their Heads.
Having brought them to the practice of that common Precept which the Devil has
written on every Post, To depress whom they have injured, and to destroy whom
they have depressed. Then Buckingham has it formed in his Head, That when the
King and his Brother shall be of sufficient Age, they will take severe Revenge
of the Wrong to Rivers and Gray, and therefore of necessity, the King and his
Brother must be made away. Hastings being sounded by Catesby, and found not
fordable, by reason of his Fidelity to his Masters Sons, after an attempt to
kill him, sitting in the Council, the Hangman must get the Tyrant an Appetite
to his Dinner, by striking off his Head; a greater Judgment of God than this
upon Hastings I never observed: For the same Hour, and in the same lawless
manner, by his Advice the Execution of Rivers and Gray was performed.
Buckingham has yet a part to play for Richard, in persuading the Londoners to
Elect him King, and to be rewarded with the Earldom of Hereford: But after much
vexation of Mind, and unfortunate attempts, being betrayed by his trustiest
Servant, he lost his Head at Salisbury, without troubling his Peers. Richard,
after other Murders, and Mischievous Policies, having destroyed his Nephews and
Natural Lords, by the great Outcry of innocent Blood, became an infamous
spectacle of Shame and Dishonor both to his Friends and Foes.

Henry VII. (the Instrument of Gods Justice in cutting off the Cruel King)
Succeeded; a Politic Prince, if ever there was any, who by the Engine of his
Wisdom beat down as many strong Oppositions both before and after he wore the
Crown, as ever any King of England did: For as his Profits held the Reins of
his Affections, so he wayed his Understanding by his Abilities, leaving no more
to hazard, than what cannot be denied in all Human Actions. This King never
endured Mediation in rewarding Servants, and was therein exceeding wise; for
what himself gave, himself received both Thanks and Love: Knowing that the
Affections of Men (purchased no way so ready as by Benefits,) were Trains which
better became Great Kings than Great Subjects. On the contrary, in whatsoever
he grieved his Subjects, he wisely put it off to those that he found fit
Ministers of such Actions. He used not to begin their Processes, whom he hated
or feared by the Execution, as Lewis XI. did: Yet he somewhat followed the
Errors of his Ancestors, as the Head of Stanley, (who set the Crown on his) and
the Death of the young E. of Warwick, Son to George D. of Clarence do show, and
likewise the Success of his Grandchildren of the first Line, etc.

Henry VIII. (the Pattern of a merciless Prince) Succeeded: One who
precipitately advanced many, (but for what Virtue no Man could imagine) and
with change of his Fancy ruined them, no Man knowing for what Offense. To how
many others gave he abundant Flowers from whence to gather Honey, and in the end
of Harvest burnt them in the Hive? How many Wives did he cut off, or cast off,
as his Fancy or Affection changed? How many Princes of the Blood, with many
others of all Degrees, did he Execute? What causeless cruel Wars did he make
upon his own Nephew King James V? What Laws and Wills did he invent to
establish the Kingdom in his own Family, using his sharpest Weapons to cut off
the Branches which sprang from the same Root that himself did? Yet God took
away all his own without increase; though for themselves in their several
Kinds, all Princes of eminent Virtues: And that Blood which King Henry affirmed
that the cold Air of Scotland froze up in the North, God has diffused by the
Sunshine of his Grace; from whence his Majesty now living, (and long may,) is
Descended: Of whom I may say truly, that Malice her self cannot charge him
justly with any of those foul Spots, by which the Consciences of all the
forenamed Princes were defiled; or the Sword of his Justice stained with any
Drops of that innocent Blood which had stained their Hands and Fame. And for
the Crown of England, it may truly be avowed, He received it from the Hand of
God; neither hastening the Time upon any provocation; nor taking Revenge upon
any that sought to put him by it: And refused Assistance of her Enemies, that
wore it long with as great Glory, as ever Princess did. He entered neither by
Breach nor Blood, but by the ordinary Gate, which his own Right had set open;
and was received in at it by an universal Love and Obedience. Thus the Northern
parts of Britany infinitely severed from the South in Affection for a long time
(whereof grew deadly Wars with much Cruelty) were at length happily united. For
which Blessing of God, never to be forgotten, as we are bound to much
Thankfulness; so the Fruit of this Concord makes all petty Grievances to
appear but as a Molehill to a Mountain. And if the uniting of the Red Rose
with the White were the greatest Happiness, next Christian Religion, that ever
the Kingdom received from God to that Day; certainly the Peace between the Two
Lions of Gold and Gules does by many Degrees exceed, both by sparing our Blood
and assuring the Land.

As it pleased God to punish the Usurpation and unnatural Cruelties of our own
Kings; so do we find he dealt with the Sons of Lewis Debonair, Son of
Charlemain. For after Debonair had put out his Nephew Bernard's Eyes, the Son
of Pipin the Eldest of Charlemain, King of Italy and Heir of the Empire, and
after that caused him to die in Prison; there followed such Murder and
Bloodshed, Poisonings, and Civil Wars, till the whole Race of that famous
Emperor was extinguished. Debonair further to secure himself, put his Bastard
Brothers into a Monastery: But God raised up his own Sons to vex, invade,
imprison, and depose him, alleging the former Violences to his Nephew and
Brothers: Yet he did that which few Kings do; he publicly acknowledged and
recanted his Cruelty against Bernard in the Assembly of the States. But Blood
unjustly spilt is not easily expiated by Repentance: And such Medicines to the
Dead, have but dead Rewards. He having also given Aquitain to Pipin his Second
Son, sought after that to cast him out, as indeed he did his Son after him, of
the same Name, at the Persuasion of Judith to raise her Son Charles.

Lothair, his eldest Son, he left King of Italy, and Emperor, against whom his
Nephew Pipin of Aquitain, Lewis of Bavier, and Charles the Bald made War;
between whom was fought the most Bloody Battle that ever was known in France,
in which, the Loss of the Nobility and Men of War encouraged the Sarazens to
invade Italy, the -- to fall upon Almain, and the Danes upon Normandy. After
being invaded by Lewis, and by his own Conscience for rebelling against his
Father, and other Cruelties, he quits the Empire, and dies in a Monastery.

Charles the Bald seizes on Pipin his Nephew, and kills him in a Cloister,
oppresses the Nephews, the Sons of Lothair, and usurps the Empire. His Son
Caroloman rebels, and has his Eyes burnt out by his Father: Lewis of Bavier
and his Son Caroloman are overthrown by Charles; and Lewis dies of Grief, as
Charles does of Poison by Zedekias his Phisician, a Jew: Whose Son also Lewis
le Begne, died of the same Potion, and Charles the Simple succeeded; whose
Natural Brothers Lewis and Charlemain rebelled; The Younger is slain by a wild
Boar, the Elder brake his Neck, as did also the Son of Bavier.

Charles the Gross became Lord of what Debonair's Sons had held in Germany, who
invading Charles the Simple, is forsaken of Nobles, Wife, and Wit, dying a
distracted Beggar.

Charles the Simple held in Wardship by Eudes, Mayor of the Palace, and after
by Robert his Brother; lastly is surprised by the E. of Vermandois, and dyed in
Prison.

Lewis his Son succeeded, and brake his Neck; one of his Sons dies of Poison,
the other in Prison.

Francis I. was one of the worthiest Kings that ever France had, except his
exposing the Protestants of Mirandel and Cabriers to the Fire and Sword; of
which though he repented, and charged his Son to do Justice on the Murderers,
yet was not that unseasonable Care accepted of by God; who cut off his Four
Sons without Issue to succeed. And notwithstanding all their Subtilty and
Breach of Faith, with all their Massacres upon those of the Religion, the Crown
was set on his Head, whom they all endeavored to ruin; and the Protestants are
now in number and strength more than ever.

Spain has found God the same, as Don Pedro of Castile may witness, who as he
became the most merciless of all Heathen or Christian Tyrants, (as the History
of Spain records) so he perished by the Hands of his Younger Brother, who
dispossessed all his Children of their Inheritance.

John D. of Burgoign may parallel this King, if any can; who after a Traiterous
Murder of the D. of Orleance, caused the Chancellor, Constable, diverse Bishops,
Officers of Justice, of the Treasury, Requests, Chamber of Accounts, with
Sixteen Hundred others, suddenly to be slain; which kind of Death eased the
World of himself.

Ferdinand holding Arragon by Usurpation of his Ancestors, added Castile and
Leon, which he held by force of Arms from the Daughter of the last Henry, and
expelled his Niece from the Kingdom of Navarr: He betrayed Ferdinand and
Frederick King of Naples (his Kinsman) to the French, with the Army sent to
their succor. The Politic King, who sold Heaven and his own Honor, to make
his Son the greatest Monarch, saw his Death with his Wives, and her untimely
Birth buried together; the like End he saw of his own Eldest Daughter; his
Second dyed Mad; his Third was cast off by our King Henry VIII. and the Mother
of a Daughter, whose unhappy Zeal shed a Deluge of Innocent Blood, and had all
his Kingdoms possessed by strange Masters.

Charles V. Son to Arch. D. Philip, who had Married Ferdinand's Mad Daughter,
after the Death of many Multitudes of Christian Soldiers and renowned
Captains, in his vain Enterprises upon France, Germany, and other States, while
the Turk took the City of Rhodes; was, in conclusion, chased out of France, and
in some sort out of Germany, being persued by D. Maurice over the Alps, which
he passed by Torch Light, and crept into a Cloister, and became his Son's
Prisoner, who paid him very slowly.

Philip II. his Son, not content to hold Holland and Zealand (wrested by his
Ancestors from Jaqueline their lawful Prince) and to possess many other parts
of the Netherland Provinces in Peace, by persuasion of that mischievous
Cardinal of Granvil and other Tyrants; forgetting the remarkable Services done
to his Father; and the Forty Millions of Florens presented him at his Entrance;
and his solemn Oaths twice taken to maintain their Privileges, which they had
enjoyed under Thirty five Earls, conditional Princes, began to Tyrannize over
them by the Spanish Inquisition and other intolerable Impositions; and lastly,
by Force of Arms sought to make himself, not Monarch only, like the Kings of
England, France, etc. but Turk-like, to overturn all their National Fundamental
Laws, Privileges and Customs. To effect this, he easily obtained a Dispensation
of his Oaths from the Pope, and then divided the Nobility, under the Government
of his base Sister Margaret of Austria, and Cardinal Granvil: Then he employed
that Merciless Spaniard Ferdinand Alvarez D. of Alva, who in six Years cut off
Eighteen Thousand six Hundred Gentlemen and others, by the Hand of the
Hangman. Failing of his purpose by Force, he tries Policy, and sent Don John
of Austria, his Bastard Brother; who upon the Papal advantage, made no scruple
to swear; and having received Six Hundred Thousand Pounds of the Provinces to
ease them of the Garrisons, he suddenly surprised the Citadel of Antwerp,
Namure, etc. yet after so many Thousands slain; Thirty six Millions of Treasure
spent in six Years, he left the Country; and the King spent above One Hundred
Millions, with the Death of Four Hundred Thousand Christians, to lose the
richest Country he had.

Oh by what Plots! by what Oaths, treacherous Practices, Oppressions,
Imprisonments, Tortures, Poysonings; and under what Reasons of State and
Polity, have these Kings pulled the Vengeance of God upon themselves, upon
Theirs, and upon prudent Ministers? and at last have brought these things to
pass for their Enemies Advantage; and found an effect so directly contrary to
all their own Counsels, and Cruelties; that the one could never have hoped for
it, and the other never have succeeded, had no such Opposition been made: God
has said it, and performed it ever; I will destroy the Wisdom of the Wise.

But to what end do we lay before the Eyes of the Living, the Fate and Fortunes
of the Dead, seeing the World is the same it has been, and the Children will
obey their Parents? It is in the present that all the Wits of the World are
exercised; and to enjoy the Times we have, we hold all things lawful; and
either hope to hold them forever, or hope there is nothing after them to be
hoped for. For as we are content to forget our own Experience, and counterfeit
Ignorance of our Knowledge in things that concern our selves; or persuade our
selves, that God has given us Letters Patents to pursue all our irreligious
Affections with a Non obstante; So we neither look behind us what has been, nor
before us what shall be. It is true, the ^uantity we have is of the Body; we
are by it joined to the Earth, we are compounded of the Earth, and inhabit the
Earth. The Heavens are high, afar off, and unexplorable: We have a sense of
corporeal things, but of eternal Grace only by Revelation No wonder then, that
our Thoughts are so Earthly; and a less wonder that the Words of worthless Men
cannot cleanse us; seeing their Instructions and Doctrine, whose Understanding
the Holy Ghost vouchsafed to inhabit, have not performed it. For the Prophet
Isaiah cried out long ago, Lord, who has believed our Reports? And doubtless
as he complained of his time; so are they less believed every day, though
Religion be still Men's Mouths; we profess to know, but by works deny him; which
argues an universal Dissimulation. For Happiness consists in a Divine Life,
not in knowledge of Divine Things, wherein Devils excel us. Contentions about
Religion have bred lamentable effects; and the Discourse thereof has near upon
driven the Practice out of the World. He which obtains Knowledge only by Men's
Disputations of Religion, would judge that Heaven were chiefly to be desired,
but look upon many Disputers Lives, and nothing is found in the Soul but
Hypocrisy. We are all (in effect) become Comedians in Religion; we act in
Voice and Gesture Divine Virtues; but in course of Life we renonnce the part we
play, and Charity, Justice and Truth have their Being but in Terms, as the
Philosophers Materia prima.

That Wisdom which teaches us the Knowledge of God, has great Esteem enough
in that we give it our good Word; but the Wisdom which is altogether exercised
in gathering Riches, by which we purchase Honor in the World, These are the
Marks we Shoot at; the Care whereof is our own in this Life, and the Peril our
own in the future; Though in our greatest Abundance we have but one Man's
Portion, as the Man of the greatest Wisdom and Ability has told us. As for
those which devour the rest, and follow us in fair Weather, they again forsake
us in the first Storm of our Misfortune, and fly away before Sea and Wind,
leaving us to the Malice of our Destinies. Among a Thousand Examples take that
of Mr. Dannet: Charles V. at Vlushing, in his return to Spain, conferring with
Seldius, his Brother Ferdinand's Ambassador, till the dead of Night, when they
sh ^^^ part, called some of his Servants; and when none answered (being either
gone or asleep) himself took the Candle to light down Seldius, notwithstanding
his importunity to the contrary: But at the stairs foot, he desired him to
remember when he was dead, That whom he had known in his time environed with
mighty Armies, he has seen forsaken of his own Domestics.

But you will say Men more regard the Honor done to great Men than the former:
It is true indeed, provided that an inward Love from their Justice and Piety,
accompanying the outward Worship given to their Places and Power; without
which, the applause of the Multitude is as the Out cry of a Herd of Animals,
who without knowledge of any true Cause, please themselves with the Noise they
make. Impious Men in Prosperity have ever been applauded, and the most Virtuous
(if unprosperous) have ever been despised, and Virtue and Fortune are rarely
distinguished. For as Fortune's Man rides the Horse, so Fortune her self rides
the Man; who when he is descended on foot, the Man is taken from his Beast, and
Fortune from the Man; a base Groom beats the one, and bitter Contempt spurns at
the other, with equal liberty.

The Second thing which Men more respect, is raising of Posterity. If these Men
conceive that Souls departed take any Comfort therein, they are Wise in a
foollish thing, as Lactantius speaks. De sal. sap. li. 3. c. 28. For when our
Mortal Spirits are departed, and disposed of by God, they are pleased no more
in in Posterity, than Stones are proud which sleep in the Walls of a King's
Palace; neither have they more Sorrow in their Poverty, than there is Shame in
the Prop of a Beggar's Cottage. The Dead, though Holy, know nothing, no not of
their own Children: For the Souls departed are not Conversant with the Affairs
of the Living, said Augustine, de Cura pro Mort. Job also, of whom we cannot
doubt, tells us, we shall neither understand of our Childrens Honor, or low
Degree. Man walks in a Shadow, disquieting himself in vain; he heapeth up
Riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them. The living, says Eccles. know
they shall die, but the Dead know nothing at all; for who shall show to Man,
what shall be after him under the Sun? And when he considered all his Labors,
and could not tell whether a Fool or a Wise Man should enjoy the Fruit thereof,
himself hated his own Labors. What can other Men hope to know after Death,
When Isaiah confesses, Abraham himself is gnorant of us? Death's dark Night
shall cover us, till he return that has Triumphed over it; when we shall again
receive Organs glorified and Immortal, the Seats of Evangelical Affections; and
the Souls of the Blessed shall be exercised in so great Admiration, as that
they can admit no mixture of less Joy, nor any return of Mortal Affections
toward Friends, Children, etc. Whether we shall retain any particular
Knowledge of them, or in any sort distinguish them; no Man can assure us, and
the Wisest Men doubt. But on the contrary, if a Divine Life retain any of those
Faculties which the Soul exercised in a Mortal Body; we shall not then so
divide the Ioys of Heaven, as to cast any part thereof on the memory of their
Felicities which remain in the World: Whose Estates, be they greater than ever
the World gave, we shall from the difference then known to us, even detest the
Consideration thereof. And whatsoever shall remain of all that is past, the same
will consist in the Charity which we exercised when living; and in the Piety,
Justice, and firm Faith, for which it pleased the infinite Mercy of God to
accept of us and receive us. Shall we then value Honor and Riches at nothing,
and neglect them as unnecessary and vain? certainly no. For that infinite
Wisdom of God, which has distinguished his Angels, the Light and Beauty of
Heavenly Bodies; differenced Beasts and Birds; Created the Eagle and the Fly,
the Cedar and the Shrub; given the fairest tinture to the Ruby, and quickest
Light to the Diamond; has also Ordained Kings, Dukes, Magistrates and Judges
amongst his People. And as Honor is left to Posterity, as an Enfign of the
Vettue and Understanding of their Ancestors; so being Titles with
proportionable Estates, fall under the miserable Succors of other Men's Pity, I
account it Foolishness to condemn such Care: Provided that Worldly Goods be
well gotten, and that we raise not our Building out of other Men's Ruins, which
God accurseth, by Jeremiah and Isaiah, and True Wisdom forbids, Prove. 1.10, to
18, 19.

And if we could afford our selves so much Leisure, as to consider, That he who
has most in the World, has in respect of the World nothing; and he who has the
longest time to live in it, has no Proportion at all therein, comparing it
with the Time past, when we were not, or with the Time to come, in which we
shall abide for ever: I say if our Portion in the World, and our Time in the
World, be thus considered, they differ little from nothing: It is not out of
any Excellency of Understanding, that we so much prize the one, which has (in
Effect) no being; and so much neglect the other, which has no ending; Coveting
the Mortal Things of the World, as if our Souls were there Immortal; and
neglect the things Immortal, as if our selves, after the World, were but Mortal.

Let every Man value his own Wisdom as he pleases, the Rich Man think all Fools
that cannot equal his Abundance; The Revengeful esteen them negligent, which
have not trampled upon their Opposites: The Politician think them Block heads,
that cannot merchandise their Faith Yet when we come within Sight of the Port
o^ Death, to which all Winds drive us; and when, by letting fall the fatal
Anchor, which can never be weighed again, the Navigation of this Life takes
End: Then it is (I say) that our own Cogitations, those sad and severe ones
(formerly thrown off by Health and Felicity) return again, and pay us to the
uttermost for all the pleasing Passages of our Lives past. Then it is we cry
for God's Mercy, when we can no longer exercise Cruelty; then this terrible
Sentence, God will not be mocked, strik^th through our Souls. For if the
righteous shall scarcely be saved, and that God spared not the Angels; where
shall those appear, who having served their Appetites all their Lives, presumed
that the severe Commands of the dreadful God were given in Sport, and that the
last faint Breath is forced to sound Lord have Mercy, without any kin^ of
Satisfaction to Men, or Amendment? Oh how many (says a Reverend Father)
descend to Eternal Torments and Sorrows with this Hope!

It is indeed a Comfort to our Friends to have it said, we died well; for all
desire to die the Death of the Righteous, as Balaam did. But what shall we call
(indeed) a Mocking of God, if that those Men mock him not, that think it enough
for God, to ask him Mercy at Leisure, with the last Remains of a Malicious
Breath? This well-dying Prayer amounts to as much as this, We beseech thee, O
God, that all the Falsehoods, Forswearing, and Treacheries of our Lives past,
may be well pleasing to thee; that thou will for our Sakes, (that have had no
Leisure to do any thing for thine) change thy Nature, (though impossible) and
forget to be a just God; that thou will love Injuries and Oppressions, call
Ambition Wisdom, and Charity Foolishness. For I shall prejudice my Son (which I
am resolved not to do) if I make Restitution, and confess my self to have been
unjust, (which I am too proud to do) if I deliver the Oppressed. These wise
Worldlings have either found, or made them a Leaden God, like that which Lewis
the Eleventh wore in his Cap, and used to kiss it, and ask it Pardon, when he
had caused any to be murdered, promising it should be the last; as when by the
Practice of a Cardinal, and falsified Sacrament, he caused the Earl of
Armagnack to be stabbed at Prayers. Of this Composition are all devout Lovers
of the World, that they fear all that is worthless and frivolous; they fear the
Plots and Practices, yea the very Whisperings of their Opposites; they fear the
Opinions of Men, which beat but upon Shadows: They flatter and forsake the
prosperous or unprosperous, Friends or Kings: Yea, they dive under Water, like
Ducks, at every Peble Stone thrown at them by a powerful Hand. On the contrary,
they show an obstinate and Gigantick Valor against the terrible Judgments of
the All-powerful God; yea, they show themselves Gods against God, and Slaves
toward Men, whose Bodies and Consciences are alike rotten.

Now for the rest, if we examine the Difference between the Rich and Mighty,
whom we call Fortunate, and the Poor and Oppressed, whom we account Wretched;
we shall find the Unhappiness of the one, and the Misery of the other so tied
by God to the very Instant, and so subject to enterchange, (witness the sudden
Downfall of the greatest, and the speedy Rise of the meanest) that the one has
nothing certain whereof to boast, nor the other to lament. For no Man is so
assured of Honor, Riches, Health, or Life, but may be deprived of either, or
all, the very next hour; for what an Evening will bring with it is uncertain;
and none can tell what shall be to morrow, says St. James: To Day he is set
up, to Morrow he shall not be found; for he is turned into Dust, and his
Purpose perishes. And though the Air of Adversity be very obscure, yet therein
we better discern God, than in the shining Light of Worldly Glory, through
whose Clearness no Vanity whatsoever can escape our Sight. And though Adversity
seem ridiculous to the Happy and Fortunate, who delight themselves at others
Misfortunes; though it seem grievous to those which were in it: Yet this is
true, that of all that is past, to the very Instant, what remains is equal to
either. For though we have lived many Years, and in them have rejoiced
(according to Solomon) or have we sorrowed as long; yet looking back, we find
both Joy and Sorrow sailed out of Sight, and Death which has held us in Chase
from the Womb, has put an end to both. Let him therefore, whom Fortune has
served, and Time befriended, take an Account of his Memory, (the only Keeper of
Pleasures past) and truly examine what it has reserved of Beauty, Youth, or
past Delights; or of his dearest Affections, or whatsoever Contentment the
amorous Spring time gave his Thoughts, and he shall find, that all the Art
which his Elder Years had, can draw no other Vapor out of these Dissolutions,
than heavy, secret, and sad Sighs. He shall find nothing remaining, but those
Sorrows which grow up after our fast Springing Youth; overtook it, when it was
at a Stand; and overtopping it utterly, when it began to wither. Looking back
therefore from the Instant of our present Being, And the poor diseased Captive
has as little Sense of all former Miseries and Pains, as the Man so blessed in
common Opinion has of fore-past. Pleasures and Delights. For whatsoever is
cast behind us, is just nothing; and what is to come depends upon deceitful
Hope. Only I must except those few black Swans, who having had the Grace to
value worldly Vanities at no more than their worth, do, by retaining the
comfortable Memory of a well-acted Life, behold Death without Dread, the Grave
without Fear, and embrace both, as necessary Guides to Endless Glory.

For my self, this is my Comfort, and all that I can offer to others, That the
Sorrows of this Life either respect God, when we complain to him against our
selves for our Offenses; and confess, Thou Lord art just in all that has
befallen us: Or respect the World, when we complain to our selves against God,
as doing us wrong either in not giving what we desire; or taking away what we
enjoyed: Forgetting that humble and just Acknowledgment of Job, The Lord has
given, and the Lord has taken. And out of doubt he is either a Fool, or
ungrateful to God, or both, that does not acknowledge, that how mean soever his
Estate be, it is far greater than God owes him: Or how sharp soever his
Affl^ctions be, the same are yet f^r less, than those that are due to him. If
an Heathen called Adversities the Tributes of living; a wise Christian ought to
know them, and bear them as the Tributes of offending. For seeing God, who is
Author of all our Tragedies, has written out and appointed what every Man must
play, using no Partiality to the mightiest Princes; Why should other Men who
are but as the least Worms, complain of Wrongs? Did not the Lord set Darius to
play the part of the greatest Emperor, and the part of the most miserable
Beggar, that begged Water of an Enemy to quench the Drought of Death? Bajazet,
the Grand Seignior of the Turks in the Morning, the same Day became the
Footstool of Tamberlane; both which parts Valerian the Emperor had played,
being taken by Sapores. Bellisarius had performed the part of a most Victorious
Captain, and after became a Blind Beggar; with a Thousand like Examples.
Certainly there is no other Account to be made of this ridiculous World, than
to resolve, That the change of Fortune on this great Theater, is but as the
change of Garments on the lesser: For when every Man wears but his own Skin,
the Players are all alike. If any Man out of Weakness judge otherwise, (for it
is a Point of great Wit, to call the Mind from the Senses) it is by reason of
that unhappy Fancy of ours, which forgeth in Men's Brains all the Miseries to
which he is subject (the Corporal excepted) therein it is that Misfortune and
Adversity effect what they do. For seeing Death is the end of the Play, and
takes from all, whatsoever Fortune or Force takes from any one; It were foolish
Madness in the Shipwreck of Worldly Things, (where all sinks but the Sorrow for
the Loss of them) to sink under Fortune, which (according to Seneca) is of all
other the most miserable Destiny.

Now to the Picture of Time, (which we call History) let my good Intent excuse
my drawing it in so large a Table. The Examples of Divine Providence every
where to be found, (the first Divine Histories being nothing else but a
Continuation of such Examples) have persuaded me to fetch my Beginning from all
Beginnings, the Creation. For these two glorious Actions of the Almighty are so
linked together, that the one necessarily implies the other: Creation
inferring Providence, and Providence presuming Creation; though many seeming
wise have gone about to separate them; Epicurus denies both, yet allows a
Beginning: The Aristotelians grant Providence, but deny all Beginning, whose
verbal Doctrine grounded upon a rotten Ground, was not able to stand against
the Doctrine of Faith, touching the Creation in time, Heb. 1. though natural
Reason might have informed him better. And though Aristotle failed herein, and
taught little other than Terms in the rest, yet many do absolutely subject
themselves to him, as not to endure any other search of Truth. The Law of their
Philosophical Principles does not so bind, but that where Natural Reason is in
Force against them, it ought to stand in all Questions of Nature and Finite
Power, as a Fundamental Law of Human Knowledge. For every Human Proposition
has equal Authority, if Reason make no difference. But where Reason is not
admitted, and Inventions of Ancestors approved without Judgment, Men suffer
themselves to be led after the manner of Beasts.

This Sloth and Dullness has made Ignorance a powerful Tyrant, and has set true
Philosophy, Physic and Divinity on the Pillory, and written over the First,
Contra Principia negantem, over the Second, Virtus specifica, and the Third,
Ecclesia Romana.

But I will never believe that all natural Knowledge was shut up in Aristotle's
Brain, or that the Heathen only invaded Nature, and found out her Strength. We
know that Time and not Reason, Experience and not Art both taught the Causes of
such Effects, as that Sowerness does Co^gulate Milk; but ask the Reason why and
how it does it, and Vulgar Philosophy cannot satisfy you; nor in many Things
of the like Nature, as why Grass is green rather than red. Man hardly discerns
the Things on Earth; his Time is but short to learn, and begins no sooner to
learn than to dye: Whose Memory has but a borrowed Knowledge; understanding
nothing truly, and is ignorant of the Essence of his own Soul; which Aristotle
could never define, but by effects, which all Men know as well as he. Man, I
say, who is an Idiot in the next cause of his own Life, and actions thereof,
will notwithstanding examine the Art of God in Creating the World; and will
disable him from making a World without Matter; and rather ascribe it to Atoms
in the Air, or to Fate, Fortune, Nature, or to two Powers, of which one was
Author of Matter, the other of Form: And lastly, for want of a Workman,
Aristottle brought in that New Doctrine of the Worlds Eternity, contrary to
these Ancients, Hermes, Zoroaster, Musaeus, Orpheus, Linus, Anaximenes,
Anaxagoras, Empedocles, Melissus, Pherecydes, Thales, Cleanthus, Pythagoras,
Plato, and many others; who found in the necessity of invincible Reason, one
Eternal Infinite Being, to be the Parent of the Universe. Whose Opinions, though
uncertain, (says Lactantius) show that they agree upon one Lord, Providence,
whether Nature, Light, Reason, Understanding, Destiny, or Divine Ordination,
which is the same we call God. For as all Rivers in the World, though rising and
running diversely, fall at last in the Ocean: So after all searches made by
Human Capacity, all Man's Reason dissolves it self in the Necessity of this
Infinite Power.

Those who held the Matter of the World Eternal, hardly deserve an Answer, as
giving part of the Work to God, part to Fortune, by which God found this
Matter. And were it Eternal, it either fitted it self to God, or he
accommodated himself to it; both which are foul Absurdities. But suppose this
Chaos or Matter had been too little for the Work, God then Created out of
nothing so much New Matter as was wanting; or if the Matter were too much, he
must annihilate what was supersflous; both which are alike proper to God only:
It could not therefore be caused by a less than an All-sufficient Power; for to
say it was the Cause of it self, were the greatest tism.

Again, if Matter were eternal, of necessity it must be infinite, and so left
no place for infinite Form; but the finite Form proves the Matter finite, and
so not eternal. He who will believe the contrary, eternal Death be his Reward;
for what Reason of Man (not stupify'd by presumption) has doubted, that That
infinite Power (of which we comprehend but the Shadow) can want either Matter
or Form, for as many Worlds as there are Sands in the Sea, if it were his Will,
which is the only limitation of his Works?

Can a finite Man, a Fool and mere Dust, change the Form of Matter made to his
Hand, and infinite Power cannot make a finite World without preexisting Matter?
The universal World has not showed us all his Wisdom and Power, which cannot be
bounded.

But others who hold the Worlds Eternity upon the ground of nothing, nothing is
made, (which is true where the Agent is finite) may consider their Master
Aristotle, confessing, That all the Ancients Decree a kind of Beginning, and
the same infinite; and he farther says, There is no beginning of it; but it is
found the beginning of all things, and embraces and governs all things. If we
compare the universal World, that Infinite it self, we may say of the most
unmeasurable Orbs of Heaven, that they are neither quid, quale, nor quantum;
and therefore to bring Finite out of Infinite is no wonder in God's Power.
Therefore Anaximander, Melissus, and Empedocles, call the World not Universal,
but a part of the Universality and Infinite: Plato calls it a Shadow of God.
God's being a sufficient effectual cause of the World, proves it not Eternal as
he is: For as his Sufficiency is free, so is his Will; no difficulty can
hinder, nor necessity force his Will in choice of Time. Again, though natural
Agents which can work, do it not 'till they are moved, which argues Change in
them; yet it follows not, that because God cannot be moved, therefore he
caused the World from Eternity. For the same action of his Will which intended
the World for ever, from Eternity, did also set down the time to effect it,
'till which time he withheld it. Others answer, That the Pattern of the World
was Eternally with God, which the Platonists call the spiritual World; but the
Material World was not eternal, but shall continue for ever; which Christians
understood of a new Heaven and Earth, yet without new Creation of Matter.

They who deny the World shall have any End, Reason from the Heavens, which are
neither Corrupted, nor have any show of Age. The little Change may argue
Newness, but not Perpeuity: Yet to Answer Conjectures with Conjectures, many of
old held the Torrid Zone not habitable by reason of the Suns Heat; nor the Sea
Navigable under the Equinoctial Line; but now we know the contrary, which
argues that the Suns Heat is decayed: And if little Change did prove
perperuity, then also many Stone-walls, which have stood two or three Thousand
Years, and many things dug out of the Earth, might seem to remain unchanged
ever since the Flood; and Gold probably held Created from the Beginning, etc.
If Elementary Bodies show so little Change, no marvel if Celestial show none.
And seeing inferior Creatures are generated by help of Celestial, and receive
Virtue from the Sun, their general decay argues its decay also.

But if the World were eternal, why not all things in it; especially Man, who
is more Rational, why did he not provide for his Eternity? Again, if there were
no common order of the diverse Natures, how came that Difference, who set the
Earth in the Center, the Sun and Celestial Bodies in their Courses, etc. If
those keep their Course of their own accord, to do good to the inferior Bodies,
they are then eternal Love; yea, so many Gods, etc. And if they be limited to
their Course, there is an efficient Cause which has bounded them.

Now as to Nature: As Aristotle has by the Ambiguity of the Name recommended
Errors, and obscured God's glory in the Creation and Government of the World;
so his best Definition of it is but Nominal; only differencing natural Motion
from artificial, which yet the Academicks explain better, calling it Seminary
strength infused into Matter by the Soul of the World; and why give they the
first place to Providence, the second to Fate, and third to Nature. But be
Nature what it will, it cannot be the Cause of all things, if it has not both
Will and Knowledge, said Lactantius. Nature cannot but work, if Matter be
present; and then also it can but produce the same things, except she have
diverse Matters to work upon, said Ficinus. But Nature could not choose diversity
of Matters without Understanding and Will, Reason and Power; why then is such a
Cause called Nature rather than God?

All Men assign the highest place among all their Gods, to One, by Aristotle's
confession, de Coelo; and Reason teaches us to Acknowledge and Adore the most
Sublime Power. I account it therefore monstrous Impiety to confound God, who
disposes all things according to his own Will, with Nature, which disposes of
nothing but as the Matter wherein it works will permit. Nature existeth not
of her self, but as a Faculty infused into things existing, by the supreamest
Power; who therefore is to be Worshipped for creating such a Nature in all
things, as without understanding what or how it works, yet brings all
things to perfection. If therefore Men will rest upon that ground which all
Antiquity held, That there is a Power infinite and eternal; all things
delivered in Holy Scripture do as easily flow to the Proof of it, as the Waters
to that of a running River. Reason teaching us, That Wisdom or Knowledge goes
before Religion; for God is first to be known, and then to be Worshipped.
Wisdom, said Plato, is the Knowledge of the absolute Good. Faith is not
extorted by Violence, but persuaded by Reason and Example, said Isidore.

To inquire farther into God's Essence, Power, and Skill, is to grow mad with
Reason: What is beyond the reach of true Reason, is no shame to be ignorant of;
neither is our Faith weakened by our being Ignorant how God Created the World,
which Reason persuades he did.

I cannot stand to excuse diverse Passages in the following History, the whole
being exceeding weak; especially the Division of the Books, I being directed to
enlarge the Building after the Foundation was laid.

Generally, as to the Order, I took Counsel from the Argument: After Babel's
Fall, the Assyrians are first, of whose Actions we find but little Recorded,
and more in Fame than Faith: Other Kings Actions are also related by
Digressions, with some other things belonging to those Ages: These Digressions,
the whole Course of our Lives (which is but Digression) may excuse: Yet I am
not wholly ignorant of the Law of History.

The Persian Empire was by Order next to be attended, and the Nations which had
reference thereto; then followed the Grecians and the Romans: Other Nations
which resisted their Beginnings, are not neglected. The weak Phrase shows the
Parent: In Hebrew words, I made use of learned Friends and Expositors; though
in Eleven Years I might have learned any Language at leisure. Many will say, a
Story of my own time would have pleased better: But I say, He which in a Modern
Story shall follow Truth too near the Heels, it may chance to strike out his
Teeth; and no Mistress has led her Followers into greater Miseries. He which
follows her too far off, loses her and himself: He which keeps at a middle
distance, I know not which to call it Temper or Baseness.

I never labored for Men's Opinions, when I might have made the best use of
them; and now my Days are too few Ambitiously or Cowardly to flatter between
the Bed and the Grave, even when Death has me on his Shoulders.

If it be said, I Tax the Living in the Persons of the Dead, I cannot help it,
though Innocent. If any, finding themselves spotted like the Tigers of old times,
shall find fault with me for Painting them over anew; they shall therein
Accuse themselves justly, and me falsely: For I Protest before the Majesty of
GOD, I have no Malice against any Man under the Sun.

I know it is impossible to please all; seeing few or none are so pleased with
themselves, by reason of their subjection to private Passions, but that they
seem diverse Persons in one and the same Day. Seneca said it, and so do I; One
is to me instead of All: Yea (as it has deplorably fallen out) as an Ancient
Philosopher said, One is enough, None is enough. For it was for the service of
that inestimable Prince Henry, the successive Hope, and one of the greatest of
the Christian World, that I undertook this Work: And it pleased him to peruse
part thereof, and to pardon what was amiss. It is now left to the World without
a Master; from which, all that is presented to it, receives both Blows and
Thanks: For we approve and reprehend the same things. And this is the End of
every Judgment, when the Controversy is committed to many: The Charitable will
judge charitably; And against the Malicious, my present Adversity has disarmed
me. I am on the Ground already; and therefore have not far too fall: And for
rising again, as in the Natural Privation there is no recession to Habit; so is
it seldom seen in the Politic Privation. I do therefore forbear to style my
Readers, Gentle, Courteous, and Friendly, so to beg their good Opinions: Or
promise a Second and Third Volume, (which I intended) if the First receive a
good Acceptance. For that which is already done, may be thought enough and too
much: And let us claw the Reader with never so many Courteous Phrases; yet we
shall ever be thought Fools that Write Foolishly.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Chapters, Paragraphs, and Sections, OF THE First Book of
the History of the WORLD.
CHAP. I.
Of the First Ages from the Creation to Abraham. 1. OF the Creation and
Preservation of the World. Page 1. 2. The Worlds Creation acknowledged by
Ancient Philosophers. 2 3. Of the meaning of, In the Beginning. 3 4. Of Heaven
and Earth. ibid. 5. What Moses meant by the word Earth. ibid. 6. God moved on
the Waters, How to be understood. ibid. 7. The Creation of the Light. 4 8. The
Firmament between the Waters. ibid. 9. A Summary of the Creation. 5 10. Nature
is an Operating Power infused by God. ibid. 11. Of Fate or Destiny. ibid. 12.
Of Prescience. 6 13. Of Providence. ibid. 14. Of Predestination. 7 15. Of
Fortune, as it may seem against Reason and Providence. ibid.
CHAP. II.
Of Man's Estate in the Creation, and of God's Rest. 8 1. Man the last and most
admirable of God's Works. 9 2. Of the Intellectual Mind of Man, and God's Image
in it. ibid 3. Of the frailty of our Bodies, and the Care due to our immortal
Souls. 11 4. Of the Spirit of Life breathed by God into Man. 12 5. Man a little
World, his Mortality, Disobedience: God rested on the Seventh Day. 13
CHAP III.
Of Paradise and the various Opinions about it. 14 1. That it was the First
Habitation of Man. ibid. 2. By some held to be Allegorical. ibid. 3. Moses's
Description of Paradise. ibid. 4. It Is no vain Curiosity to enquire after it.
15 5. Paradise not totally defaced by the Flood. ibid. 6, 7, 8. Paradise not
the whole Earth. Various opinions about it. 16 9, 10. Paradise was in Eden. 17
11, 12. Two Objections touching the Dvision of the Rivers, and Eden's Fertility
answered. 19 13, 14. Pison and Gehon two Rivers of Paradise. 20, 21 15. Paradise
most Pleasant and Fruitful, being in 35 Degrees. 21
CHAP. IV.
Of the two chief Trees in Paradise. 22 1. The Tree of Life a material Tree.
ibid. 2, 3. Becanus's Opinion, that it was the Indian Fig Tree. 23 4. Of the
Name of the Tree of Knowledge, and Adam's Sin. 24.
CHAP. V.
Memorable things between Adam and Noah. 25. 1, 2. Cain Murders his Brother.
Dwells in the Land of Nod. ibid. 3. Moses very brief in the Story of Cain. 26
4, 5. The various and Long Lives of the Patriarchs. ib. 6. The Patriarchs
deliver their Knowledge by Tradition. Enoch wrote before the Flood. 27. 7, 8.
Of the Men of War, and Giants before the Flood. 28.
CHAP. VI.
The Original of Idolatry, and Relics of Antiquity in Fables. 29. 1, 2, 3,
Ancient Truths in Old Corruptions, as in the Family of Noah, and the Old
Egyptians. ib. 4, 5, 6. Jupiter was Cain, Vulcan Tubal-Cain, etc. Of the
several sorts of Jupiters. 30 7. The Opinions of the wise Heathens concerning
God. 31 8. Heathenism and Judaism when destroyed. 32 9. Satan's last Refuge. 33
CHAP. VII.
Of Noah's Flood. 1, 2, 3. God's forewarning of it, neither Ogyges's Flood, nor
that of Ducalion, nor that of the Umbri, was Noah's. 34, 35 3, 4. Some Records
of the Universal Island, Noah's Flood supernatural. ibid. 6. No need of new
Created Waters. What the Chataracts of Heaven are. ibid. 8, 9, 10. Noah's
Memory among the Heathen; His Ark was of sufficient capacity; rested upon the
Hills Taurus. 36, 37, 38.
CHAP. VIII.
The Planting of Nations, Noah's Sons, which the Eldest. 45. 1. Whether Shem or
Ham Elder than Japhet. ibid. 2. All Histories must yield to Moses: Lords of the
first Ages, were of the Issue of Ham. 45 3, 4. Of the Isles of the Gentiles. Of
Gog, Magog, Tubal and Mesech. 46 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 Berosus's Fiction: Gomer and
Togarma settled in the East. Of the other Sons of Japhet. Of Ascanes and Riphath
Gomer's Eldest Son. Of the four Sons of Javan. 47, 48, 49. 10. Cush, the Eldest
Son of Ham, was in Arabia. 50 11. Mizraim chief Planter of Egypt. 52. 12. The
Bounds of Canaan, his Eleven Sons where situated. ibid. 13. The Sons of Cush.
54 14. The Issue of Mizraim. 55 15. Sem's Posterity. 56
CHAP. IX.
The Beginning and Establishment of Government. 58 Sect. 1. Of Regal Absolute,
and Regal tempered by Laws. 59 2. The approved sorts of Government. 60 3. The
good Government of the first Kings. ibid. 4. The Original of Nobility. 61
CHAP. X.
Of Nimrod, Belus, and Ninus. 62 Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4. Nimrod first Sovereign after
the Flood. Built Ninive. Established the Babylonian Monarchy. 63 5, 6, 7, 8. Of
Ninus and Belus, in whose time Image Worship began. The first Idolater. 64, 65
CHAP. XI.
Of Ninus, Semiramis and Belus. ibid.
BOOK II.
From Abraham's Death, to the Destruction of Solomon's Temple, which was 1525
Years. 67
CHAP. I.
The time of Abraham's Birth and Order of the Assyrian Empire. ibid. Sect. 1,
2, 3. Some Successors of Semiramis, and of the Birth of Abraham. 68 4. Terah
begat Abraham in his 130th Year 69 5, 6, 7. Answers to several Objections about
Abraham's Age. 70, 71 8. The Assyrian times regulated by Abraham's History.
ibid. 9. Amraphel probably was Ninias. 72 10, 11. Arioth King of Alassar. Tidal
King of Nations. 73 12. Chedorlaomer, chief of the Four. 74
CHAP. II.
Of the Kings of Egypt from Cham to the Delivery of the Israelites. 75 Sect. 1.
The Kings of Egypt, and the causes of the uncertainty of the History. ibid. 2.
Cham began his Reign in Egypt after the Flood, Anno 191. ibid. 3. The Dynasties
were not Kings but Viceroys. 76 4. Cham and Mizraim or Oris. ibid. 5, 6.
Osiris's Reign guessed at. Typhon and Hercules their Reigns. 77 7, 8. Busiris
or Orus's Reign. Rathoris succeeded his Sister. 78
CHAP. III.
Israel's delivery out of Egypt. 79 Sect. 1. Israel's Captivity, and Moses's
Birth. ibid. 2. Cities of Egypt in Scripture. ibid. 3, 4, 5. Moses's
Preservation and Education. Pharaoh and his Army drowned, and Moses's Passage
Miraculous. 80, 81.
CHAP. IV.
. 1. The Israelites Journey from the Red Sea to Sinai. 83 2. Of the Amalekites,
Midianites, Kenites, and of Jethro. ibid. 3. When the Law was given. 84
CHAP. V.
.1. The Story from receiving the Law to Moses's death. 84. 2. The Offering of
the Twelve Princes. The Passover, and Jethro's departure. 85 3. Israel's
Journey from Horeb to Kades. 86 4. Their unwillingness to return; they remove
to Zin. 87 5, 6. They turn to the North. ibid. 7. Of the Book of the Lord's
Battles, and other lost Books. 88. 8. Moses sparing Lot's Issue* 89 9. The
Midianites and Moabites corrupt Israel. ibid.
CHAP. VI.
Of the Bordering Nations: Of other Renowned Men, and of Iushua's Acts. 90
Sect. 1. How the bordering Nations were prepared to be Enemies to Israel. ibid.
2, 3. Of the Kings of the Canaanites and Moabites: Of the Midianites,
Amalekites and Ismaelites. 91 4, 5, 6, 7. Prometheus, Atlas, Pelasgus,
Ducalion, Hermies, Aesculapius; when they flourished. 92, 93, 94, 95. 8. Of
Joshua, Othoniel and his Cotemporaries. 96
CHAP. VII.
Sect. 1, 2. Of the Phoenician Kingdom, and the Invention of Letters. 99. 3, 4.
The Kings of the Ten Tribes, from Jeroboam to Achab. 101.
CHAP. VIII.
The History of the Syrians bordering their Tribes on Jordan. 103
CHAP IX.
Memorable things from Joshua to Jeptha. 107
CHAP. X.
The War and Destruction of Troy. 114
CHAP. XI.
Of Samson, Eli and Samuel. 117
CHAP. XII.
Of Saul the First King of Israel. 120
CHAP. XIII.
Of David and his condition under Saul; his Reign; overthrows the Philistines,
and Hadadezar; his Troubles; last Acts; his vast Treasure; his Cotemporaries.
126
CHAP. XIV.
Of Solomon Anno Mundi 2991. His Building and Glory sends a Fleet to Ophir; his
Fall, Writings; and Cotemporaries. 133
CHAP. XV.
Solomon's Successors to Jehoram. Rehoboam's Impiety, Punishment, End, and
Cotemporaries: Abija succeeds Rehoboam, Asa succeeds Abija; Israel unhappy
under her Princes. Jehosaphat succeeds Asa. His Cotemporaries. 136
CHAP. XVI.
Of Jehoram and Ahaziah. Jehoram's Reign alone. Ahaziah perished with the House
of Ahab. 143
CHAP. XVII.
Athaliah's Usurpation and Government for 6 Years. 149
CHAP. XVIII.
Of Joash, Amaziah, and their Cotemporaries; the Death of Jehojada, and
Apostasy of Joash. Zachariah murdered by Joash. The Death of Joash, who is
succeeded by Amaziah, who is overthrown by Joash, and afterward slain. An
interregnum in Judah. Of Amaziah's Cotemporaries, and of Sardanapalus. 153
CHAP. XIX.
Of Uzziah and his Cotemporaries, the end of his Reign, and Life. Of the
Olympian Games. Jothan and his Cotemporaries. Achas and his Cotemporaries. 165
CHAP. XX.
Of Italy and Rome's Foundation: The Aborigines. The Latin Kings 'till Aeneas,
a Trojan of the Blood Royal. The beginning of Rome. Romulus's Birth and Death.
171
CHAP. XXI.
Of Hezekiah and his Cotemporaries; his Deliverance; his Sickness and Recovery.
Kings in Media in his Reign. 175
CHAP. XXII.
Egyptian Kings from Moses to Hezekiah, many of which were only Regents or
Viceroys. 177
CHAP. XXIII.
Of Manasses who succeeded Sethon, and his Cotemporaries; his Bondage and
Enlargement: The Messenian Wars. 181
CHAP. XXIV.
Of Ammon, Josiah and the rest, to the Destruction of Jerusalem. 187
BOOK III.
From the Destruction of Jerusalem to Philip of Macedon. 197
CHAP. I.
From the Destruction of Jerusalem to the Assyrian Fall. The Connection of
Sacred and Profane History. The Babylonish Captivity, several Opinions
concerning it. Nebuchadnezzar's Victories and Actions. 197
CHAP. II.
The Persian Greatness how it grew. 204.
CHAP. III.
Cyrus the first Persian Monarch. He takes Babylon. His last Wars. His Decree
for Building God's Temple. His two Sons and three Daughters. 206
CHAP. IV.
The Persian Affairs from Cyrus to Darius. 110
CHAP. V.
Darius the Son of Histaspes his Actions and Death. 212
CAHP. VI.
Xerxes Emperor of Persia, his vast Army. Opposed by Leonidas, burnt the
Temple of Athens. The Peloponesians beat his Fleet. His Army is soon after
Vanquished. 216
CHAP. VII.
The Greek Affairs from the Persian Wars to the Peloponesian. 221
CHAP. VIII.
The Peloponesian War with the Condition of Athens, and Sparta, at the
beginning of it. Alcibiades his Victories, his deposing. 224
CHAP. IX.
Matters concurring with the Peloponesian War, and some time after. 230
CHAP. X.
Cyrus the Younger, his Expedition into Persia, and the great Services of
Xenophon. 232
CHAP. XI.
Of the Greek Affairs under the Lacedaemonians Command. 237
CHAP. XII.
Of the flourishing Condition of Thebes, from the Battle of Leuctra, to that of
Mantinea. Of the Peace that succeeded. A Comparison between Agasilaus and the
Roman Pompey. 241
BOOK IV. CHAP. I.
Of the Macedonian Kingdom from Philip, Father to Alexander the Great, to the
Race of Antigonus. 247
CHAP. II.
Of Alexander the Great; his Wars with Darius and others; his Cruelty, Death
and Character. 251
CHAP. III.
Aordaeus's Reign after Alexander. 271
CHAP. IV.
Of Antigonus's growth in Asia. 282
CHAP. V.
Of the Civil Wars of Alexander's Captains. 286
CHAP. VI.
Of the Wars between the New Kings 'till they were all destroyed. 287
CHAP. VII.
Rome's Growth, and the settling of the Eastern State. 299
BOOK V.
From the settled Rule of Alexander's Successors, 'till the Romans Conquered
Asia and Macedon.
CHAP. I.
Of the First Punick War. 307
CHAP. II.
What passed between the First and Second Punick War. 326
CHAP. III.
Of the Second Punick War. 336
CHAP. IV.
Philip King of Macedon Father of Perseus, subdued by the Romans. 370
CHAP. V.
Of the Roman Wars with Antiochus, and his Adherents. 380
CHAP. VI.
Of the Second Macedonian War. With the death of Philopoemen, Hannibal, Scipio,
etc. 396
ERRATA.
PAge 13. l. 31. r. but one. p. 32. l. ult. after slew, add many thousands of
them. p. 37. l. 25. instead of Cursed, r. not needful to be taken in. p. 38. l.
19. dele Toy E. p. 54. l. 26. r. of Chush. p. 64. l. 9. for Legal, r. Regal. p.
65. l. 29. for Babel, r. Babylon. p. 70. l. 23. for no, r. a. p. 94. l. 13. for
Linages, r. Images. p. 96. l. 10. r. many things. p. 96. l. 19. for Their, r.
Therefore; and for that r. a. p. 131. l. 15. for lightsomely, r. plainly. p.
139. l. 24. for Three, r. Third. p. 216. l. 27. after Thousand, r. Darici. p.
220. l. 10. for thirty thousand, r. three hundred thousand. ibid l. 20. after
fifty thousand, r. more. p. 226. l. 26. for first, r. worst. p. 243. l. 35.
after grown, r. powerful. p. 248. l. 28. r. set up Pausanius. p. 286. l. 13. r.
he would not share.

THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. PART I. OF THE First Ages, from the Creation to
Abraham.
CHAP. I. Of the Creation and Preservation of the World.
GOD Invisible is seen in his Creatures. From the Creation to Abraham, 2009
Years
God acknowledged by the wisest men to be a Power uneffable, a Virtue infinite,
a Light by the abundant Clarity invisible, an Understanding which it self can
only comprehend, an Essence eternal and spiritual, of absolute Pureness and
Simplicity, was, and is pleased to make himself known by the Works of the
World: In the wonderful magnitude whereof, we behold the Image of that Glory
which cannot be measured, and that one Universal Nature which cannot be
defined. In the glorious Lights of Heaven, we perceive a shadow of his Divine
Countenance; in his Provision for all that live, his manifold Goodness; and in
creating, by the absolute power of his own Word, his All Sufficiency; which
All Sufficiency in Power and Wisdom, which Light, Virtue and Goodness being but
Attributes of one simple Essence, and one God; we in all admire, and in part
discern by the Glass of his Creatures, in the disposition, order, and variety
of Bodies, Celestial and Terrestrial: Terrestrial in strange manifold
Diversities, Celestial in their Beauty, Magnitude, and continual contrary
motions, yet neither repugned, intermixed, nor confounded. By these potent
Effects we approach to the knowledge of the Omnipotent Cause, and by these
motions, their Almighty wise Mover. In these more than wonderful Works God
speaks to Men, who by their Reason may know their Maker to be God; who with
Corporal Eyes can no otherways be seen, but by his Word and this visible World:
Of all which Works there was no other Cause preceding but his Will, no Matter
but his Power, no Workman but his Word, no other Consideration but his own
Goodness.

. 2. The Worlds Creation acknowledged by ancient Philosophers. Mercurius
Trismegistus called God the Original of the Universe, and that God made it only
by his Word. In Poman^ro. Orpheus de summo Jove.
Jupiter having hidden all things in himself, did after send forth into the
grateful Light, the admirable Works he had forethought. Pindar calls him the
one God, Father and Creator of all: And Original, of all, says P^ato. Though
Scripture have no need of Foreign Testimonies, yet St. Paul despised not the
Use of Philosophers, etc. Truth by whomsoever uttered, is of the Holy Ghost,
said Ambrose.

. 3. All things began to be in the Creation, before which was neither Matter
nor Form of any thing, but the Eternal: For had there been a former Matter, the
Creation had not been first; and if any thing were before Created, Genesis 1.1.
there must be a double Creation; if any thing had been uncreated but God,
there must have been a Beginning and two infinite Eternals.

. 4. Heaven and Earth first Created, was not Matter without all Form, without
which nothing can exist; but it was that solid Substance and Matter, as well of
the Heavens and Orbs, as of the Globe of the Earth, and Waters which covered
it; the Seed of that Universal, says Calvin.

. 5. As Moses, by Heaven, meant the Matter of all Heavenly Bodies, and Natures;
so by Earth comprehending the Waters, he meant the Matter of all things under
the Moon: Waters in the plural, signifying a double Liquor of diverse natures,
mixed with Earth 'till God separated them.

. 6. Spirit of God moved, etc.] Seeing that God is every way above Reason,
though the Effects which follow his wonderful ways of working, may in some
measure be perceived by Man's Understanding, Ver. 2.
yet that manner and first operation of his divine Power cannot be conceived by
any Mind or Spirit united with a mortal Body: And St. Paul says, they are past
finding out. Therefore whether that motion, vitality and operation were by
Incubation, or any other way, that is only known to God. The English word Moved,
is most proper and significant; for of motion proceeds all production, and
whatsoever is effected. This moving spirit can be no other, but that infinite
Power of God, which then formed and distinguished, and which now sustains the
Universe. This motion of the Spirit upon the Waters, produced their Spiritual
and Natural motion, which brought forth Heat, whereof came rarefaction of
Parts; thus was Air begotten, an Element lighter and superior to the Waters.

Genesis 1.3.
. 7. The Light is next, which for Excellency is first called good; but, as I
conceive, did not yet distinguish Day from Night, but with reference to the
Sun's Creation, in which this dispersed Light was united, v. 14. 'till when,
there was no Motion to be measured by Time: So that the Day named, v. 5. was
but such a space as after by the Sun's motion made a natural Day. As then the
Earth and the Waters were the Matter of the Air, Firmament, upper and lower
Waters, and of the Creatures therein; so may the Light be called the Material
Substance of the Sun, and other Lights of Heaven. How beit, neither the Sun nor
other Heavenly Bodies are that Light, but the Sun is enlightened by it most of
all other; and by it the Moon, and so the next Region, which the Greeks call
Ether, (the supposed Element of Fire) is affected, and by it all Bodies living
in this our Air. And though the nature of Light be not yet understood, yet I
suppose the Light Created the First Day, was the substance of the Sun, though
it had not formal Perfection, Beauty, Circle, and bounded Magnitude 'till the
Fourth Day, when dispersed Light was united and fixed to a certain place; after
which it had Life and Motion, and from that time separated Day from Night: So
that what is said of the Day before, was by Anticipation; for 'till the
Creatures were produced, God's Wisdom found no Cause why Light should move, or
give heat or operation.

Genesis 1.6.
. 8. Firmament between the Waters, is the extended distance between the Sea and
Waters in the Earth, and those in the Clouds, engendered in the superior Air:
This Firmament in which the Birds fly, is also called Heaven in Scripture,
Genesis 49.25. Psalm. 104.18. Mat. 8.26. The Crystalline Heaven Basil calls
Childish.

. 9. God having Created the Matter of all things, and distinguished every
general Nature, and given their proper Form, as Levity to what should ascend,
and Gravity to what should descend, and set each in his place in the three
first Days; in the three last he beautified and furnished them with their
proper kinds; as the Sun, Moon, and Stars in the higher Firmament of Heaven;
Fowls in the Air, Fishes in the Waters, Beasts on the Earth; giving generative
power for continuation of their Kinds, to such as in the Individuals should be
subject to decay, or needed increase.

. 10. Nature is an operating Power infused by God into every Creature; not any
self-ability to be the Original of any thing of it self, no more than the Helm
can guide the Ship without an Hand, or an Hand without Judgment. All Agents
work by virtue of the first Act; and as the Eye sees, Ear hears, etc. yet it
is the Soul which gives Power, Life and Motions to these Organs: So it is God
which works by Angels, Men, Nature, Stars, or infused Properties, as by his
Instruments; all second Causes being but Conduits to convey and disperse what
they have received from the Fountain of the Universal. It is God's infinite
Power and Omnipotence that gives Power to the Sun and all second Causes, and
to Nature her self to perform their Offices; which operative Power from God
being once stopped, Nature is without Virtue. Things flourish by God, said
Orpheus. I endeavor not to destroy those various Virtues given by God to his
Creatures, for all his Works in their Virtues praise him; but how he works in,
or by them, no Man could ever conceive; as Lactantius confounding the Wisdom of
Philosophers, denied that all their study had found it; for could the precise
Knowledge of any thing be had, then of necessity all other things might be
known.

. 11. Destiny might safely be admitted, but for the inevitable necessity even
over Men's Minds and Wills, held by Stoics, Chaldeans, Pharisees,
Priscilianists, etc. Hermes and Apuleius conceived well That Fate is an
obedience of second Causes to the First. Plotinus calls it a disposing, from
the Acts of the Celestial Orbs, working unchangeably in inferior Bodies; which
is true in things not ordered by a rational Mind. Fate is that which God has
spoken concerning us, say the Stoics, Seneca, Ptolomy. And no doubt Stars are
of a greater use, than to give an obscure Light; neither are the Seasons of
Winter and Summer so certain in Heat and Cold, by the motions of Sun and Moon,
which are so certain, but the working of the Stars with them. God has given
Virtues to Springs, Plan^^, Stones, etc. yea, to Excrements of base Creatures:
Why then should we rob the Beautiful Stars of working power, being so many in
Number, and so eminent in Beauty and Magnitude?

The Treasure of His Wisdom, who is so Infinite, could not be short in giving
them their peculiar Virtues and Operations, as he gave to Herbs, Plants, etc.
which adorn the Earth. As therefore these Ornaments of the Earth have their
Virtue to feed and cure; so no doubt those Heavenly Ornaments want not their
further use, wherein to serve his Divine Providence, as his just Will shall
please to determine. But in this question of Fate, let us neither bind God to
his Creatures, nor rob them of the Office he has given them: If second Causes
restrain God, or God by them enforce Man's Mind or Will, then wicked Men might
lay the fault on God.

. 12. Prescience, or Foreknowledge (if we may speak of God after the manner of
Men) goes before his Providence; for God infallibly foreknew all things before
they had any Being to be cared for; yet was it not the Cause of things
following, nor did it impose a Necessity.

. 13. Providence is an intellectual Knowledge, Foreseeing, Caring for, and
Ordering all things: Beholding things past, present, and to come, and is the
Cause of their so being; and such we call Provident, who considering things
Past, and comparing them with the Present, can thereby with Judgment provide
for the Future.

. 14. Predestination we distinguish from Prescience and Providence; these
belong to all Creatures, from the highest Angel to the basest Worm; but this
only concerns Men's Salvation (in the common use of Divines) or Perdition,
according to some. Augustine sets it out by two Cities, one predestined
eternally to reign with God, the other to everlasting Torments; Calvin, Beza,
Buchanus, and the like are of the same Opinion. Why it pleased God to create
some Vess^ls to honor, some to dishonor, though the Reason may be hid, unjust
it cannot be.

. 15. Fortune, the God of Fools so much Reverenced, and as much Reviled,
falls before Fate and Providence, and was little known before. Homer and
Hesiod who taught the Birth of those humane Gods, have not a Word of this new
Goddess; which at length grew so potent, that she ordered all things, from
Kings and Kingdoms to the Beggar and his Cottage: She made the Wise miserable,
and prospered Fools, and Man's life was but her Pastime. This Image of Power
was made by Ignorants, who ascribed that to Fortune of which they saw no
manifest Cause. Yet Plato taught, That nothing ever came to pass under the Sun,
of which there was not a just preceding Cause; and the Scripture makes it
clear in things most casual, Deuteronomy. 19.5. Prove. 16.33. The best Philosophers
held, that all things in Heaven and Earth were ordered by the Soul of the
World, said Cicero. When Riches and Honor are given to empty Men, and Learned,
Virtuous, and Valiant Men wear out their Lives in a dejected condition, the
Cause is manifest to the Wise, though Fools ascribe it to blind Fortune. For
either it is Affection in Men preferring others, or great Persons which endure
no other Discourse but that of Flatterers: So that Honest, Openhearted lovers
of the Truth, which cannot Form themselves to it, must hang under the Wheel.
Shall he who tells a Ruler he is unjust, a General he is a Coward, or a Lady
that she is ugly, be made a Counselor, a Captain, or a Courtier? It is not
sufficient to be Wise, Just, and Valiant under such; but with the change of the
Successor, he must change, else the base Observant will out-go him in Honor
and Riches, by that only quality of Humouring Men's Vices as Virtues, with which
every Fool is won, said Menander: He therefore that will live out of himself,
and study other Men's Humors, shall never be Unfortunate; but he who values
Truth and Virtue, (except in a Virtuous Age) shall never prosper by the
Possession, or Profession of them. It is also the token of a Worldly Wiseman,
not to contend in vain against the nature of the Times, but to give way to
Fury. And he which aims at the Machivel's two marks, Glory and Riches, must
have a Steel Back to a Wooden Bow, to fit both weak and strong; or as Men at
Sea, must either Hoise or Strike Sails, as Calms or Storms do require, or use
Sails of small extention, and content himself to travel slowly; so must Men
which esteem Virtue for it self.

CHAP. II. Of Man's Estate in the Creation, and of God's Rest.
. 1. MAN was the last and most admirable of God's Works: The greatest wonder,
said Plato, out of Mercurius, meaning of the internal Form, whose Nature is an
immortal Spirit, Essence, and in quality, by God's Creation, Holy and Righteous
in Truth, and Lord of the World. This Image of God in Man, Chrysostom makes
chiefly to consist in Dominion; so Ambrose and others; but he denies it to
Women, contrary to the Text, let them rule, not excluding the Woman. Others
conceive this Image to be in Man's immortal Soul; which is one, and
Incorporeal, governing the Body, being in every part of it totally, as God is
totally in every part of the World; but the Soul's being totally in every part
more than potentially, is doubted of. Schoolmen make the Resemblance
especially to be in Man's Mind, whose Memory, Understanding, and Will, really
differ, and yet are but one Mind, resembling the Trinity. They also, with
Victorinus, made a difference of the Image, which they refer to the Substance
of the Soul not lost, and the Similitude, which is in Holiness and
Righteousness of quality. But as Augustine defended, that Man lost the
Perfection of God's Image; so St. Paul makes it the same with similitude, 1
Cor. 15.39. Ia. 3.9. Col. 3.10. Romans 1.23. Zanchius held this Image to be both
in Body and Mind, because it was referred to the Hypostasis or whole Man. De
op^r. Dei.
Yet he confesses, it may be answered Moses used a Synecdoche. But Augustine
anathematized him who compared the Deity to Man's Body. In general, Humane
Virtue is, liker God, than his Figure, said Cicero. Neither Dominion nor the
Immortal Soul, endued with Memory, Understanding and Will, is this Image;
seeing that Man has these common with Devils. Sybill called right Reason the
Image of God, that is, rightly to know, confess, serve, love, and obey God.

. 2. Of the intellectual Mind of Man, and God's Image in it. This Men's, or
Mind, is not taken for the Soul, which is the Form of the Nature of Man; but
for the principal Power of the Soul, whose Act is perpetual Contemplation of
Truth; and is therefore called Divine Understanding, and a Contemplative Mind:
Cusan calls it, a Power compounded of all Powers of comprehending. De Meant.
Idiot.
Mercurius held it the Essence of God, no other way separated from him, than
the Light from the Sun; which Error the Manichees also held. But as the Sun is
not of the Essence of the Divine Light, but a Body enlightened with a created
Light; so this Mind or Understanding in Man, is not of the Essence of God's
Understanding, but the purest of the Soul's Faculties, or the light of the
reasonable Soul; called the Soul of the Soul, or Eye of the Soul, by Augustine,
or Receptacle of Wisdom. Between this Men's or understanding power and Reason,
between it and Anima, and Animus, is this difference, that by the Soul we live,
by Reason we judge and discourse, by the Mind or Animus, we will and choose; but
this Mind called Men's, is a pure substantial Act of the Soul, not depending on
Matter, but has relation to that which is intelligible, as its first Object.
Mercurus says, the Soul is the Image of the Mind, which is the Image of God,
etc. Ficinus labors to prove the Mind has no need of Organs: Zanchius says,
the Mind needs no Means to understand by, yet confesses that the
Representations which come from the Sense to the Fantasy, are the Objects of
the Understanding; which Resemblances are to the Mind as Colors are to the
Sight. Thus he makes the Fantasy an Organ to the Mind, as the Eye to the
Sight, contrary to his first Assertion. However these be determined, we may
resemble our selves to God in Mind, in respect of that pure Faculty which is
never separated from Contemplation and love of God. The Mind, said Bernard, is
not the Image of God, because it understands, remembers, and loves it self;
but because it understands, remembers, and loves God, who Created it. So that
Immortality, Reason, and Dominion, do not make us God's shadow, but the Habit
of Righteousness, most perfectly infused into the Soul and Mind in the
Creation. It is not by Nature that we are printed with the Seal of God's Image
(though Reason be part of the essential Constitution of our proper Species or
Kind) but this is from the Bounty of God's Goodness, which breathing Life into
Earth, contrived therein the Inimitable Ability of his own Justice, Piety, and
Righteousness. So long therefore as Men walk in God's ways, which is called
walking with God, and do fear, love, and serve him truly, for the love of God
only, so long they retain this Image. But it cannot be in Unjust, Cruel, False
and Ambitious Souls, etc. And though Nature (according to common understanding)
do make us capable, and apt enough to receive this Image, yet if God's
exceeding Wisdom and liberal Mercy framed not Eyes to our Souls, we could not
come by it. For not only the Perfection, but the Image of it self, to wit, the
supernatural Gift of Grace and Glory, is wholly blotted out by Sin.

. 3. Adam's Body was made of Adamah, red fat Earth, of which God produced not
an Image, but a Body of Flesh, Blood, and Bones, in the Form it now has. And
though Nature and Experience assure our Mortality, and that our Bodies are but
Anviles of Pains and Diseases; and our Minds but Hives of innumerable Cares,
Sorrows, and Passions; and that our greatest Glories are but painted Posts for
Envy to cast her Darts at; yet our unhappy Condition and darkness of
Understanding is such, that we only esteem this Slave of Death; and only at
idle Hours remember the immortal imprisoned Soul, the everlasting Subject of
Reward or Punishment. This we never think on while one Vanity is left us: We
plead for Titles till our Breath fails us; Dig for Riches 'till Strength be
spent; and exercise Malice while we are able to Revenge: And then when time has
deprived us both of Youth, Pleasure, and Health, and Nature her self hates the
House of her old Age, we remember with Job, we must go whence we shall not
return, and that our Bed is made ready for us in the Dark. Then we look too
late into the bottom of our Conscience, and behold the fearful Image of past
Actions, with this terrible Inscription, God will bring every work to Judgment.
Let us therefore not flatter our selves, wilfully to offend God in hope easily
to make our peace at the last, which is a Rebellious Presumption, and Deriding
the dreadful God that can ruin us eternally.

. 4. To this corruptible Body, God gave a Soul spiritual and incorruptible,
which shall again return to him, as the body to the Earth. The Soul's
Immortality is manifest, comparing the manner of the Creation of other things
with it, Genesis 1.20, 24. with v. 26. and cap. 2.7.

Man thus Compounded, became a Model of the Universe, having a Rational Soul,
with ability fit for the Government of the World; an Intellectual Soul common
with Angels, and Sensitive with Beasts; thus he became a little World in the
Great, in whom all Natures were bound up together; our Flesh is heavy like
Earth, our Bones hard as Stones, our Veins as the Rivers, Breath as the Air,
Natural Heat like the warmth enclosed in the Earth, which the Sun stirs up
in procreation; Radical moisture, which feeds that Natural Heat, is as the
fatness in the Earth; our Hairs as Grass, our Generative Power is as Nature
which produces; our Determinations like wandering Clouds, our Eyes like the
Lights in Heaven; our Youth like the Spring, our settled Age like the Summer,
declining like Autumn, and old Age like Winter; our Thoughts are the motions of
Angels, our pure Understanding like the Intellectual Natures always present
with God; and the habitual Holiness and Righteousness of our Immortal Soul was
the Image of God, as a shadow may be like the substance. Man's Four Complexions
like the Four Elements, and his Seven Ages like the Seven Planets. Our Infancy
is like the Moon, in which it seems only to grow, as Planets; in our next Age
we are instructed as under Mercury, always near the Sun: Our Youth is wanton
and given to pleasures, as Venus; our Fourth Age Strong, Vigorous, and
Flourishing, is like the Sun: Our Fifth Age like Mars, striving for Honor; our
Sixth like Jupiter, Wise, and stayed; our Seventh like Saturn, slow and heavy,
when by irrecoverable loss we see that of all our vain Passions and Affections
the Sorrow only remains, and our Attendants are various Infirmities and
Diseases, of which, many are the remainders of former Follies and Excesses; and
if Riches yet continue with us, the more our Plenty is, the more greedily is
our End wished for; we being now of no other use but to detain our Riches from
our Successors, and being made unsociable to others, we become a burden to our
selves. Now, and never before, we think upon our Eternal Habitation, to which
place we pass with many sighs, groans, and doleful thoughts; and in the end, by
Death we finish the sorrowful Business of a wretched Life, toward which we have
been always traveling, sleeping, and waking; and by what crooked Paths soever
we have walked, yet it led us the straight way to the gate of Death. Neither
can beloved Companions, or rather our Gods, Riches or Honor, stay us one hour
from entering that all-devouring Dungeon of Death, which is not yet satisfied
with all those past Generations, but still cries all Flesh is grass, 'till it
have consumed all. Thus the Tide of Man's Life once declining, makes a
perpetual Ebb, never to return hither, and his Leaf fallen, shall never spring
again.

. 6. Our Parents having one Prohibition for trial of Obedience, would need
extend their freedom of Will to that, and so brought all Mankind into endless
Misery.

. 7. God on the Seventh Day ceased to Create more Kinds, having perfected those
he intended, and endued with Generative Power such as should continue by
Generation.

CHAP. III. Of Paradise, and many Opinions about it.
. 1. PAradise, the first Habitation of Adam, Eastward in Eden, about which Men's
Opinions are as various as the Persons that Disputed it; and many imbibe gross
Errors, led by the Authority of great Men, wherein many Fathers were far wide,
as it is the Fate of all Men to err, neither has any Man knowledge of all
things.

. 2. Many held Paradise in Moses Allegorical only; as Origin, Philo, and
Ambrose leaned to that Opinion; so did Strabus, Rabanus, Beda, Commestor.
Chrysamensis; and Luther thought it not extant, though it was formerly.
Vadianus Noviomagus held it the whole Earth. Tertul. Bonaventure and Durand
place it under the Equinoctial; Postellus under the N. Pole.

. 3. Paradise by Moses's description, was a Place on Earth, in Eden, a Country
Eastward, so called, for the Pleasantness thereof; as in America a Country is
called Florida. Here the vulgar Translation is mistaken in interpreting it a
Paradise of Pleasure from the beginning. This situation of Paradise in the
East, occasioned the praying, and setting Churches to the East, contrary to the
standing of Solomon's Temple, and the Priest turning to the West; yet God is
every where; neither is any Mystery in the word Eastward, but the place stood
so from Canaan. Moses's whole description proves it an Earthly place, and
Ezechiel witnesses Eden was a Country near Charan: So Adam's actions, and end
of placing in it, prove no less against those vain Allegories of Scripture
stories, confuted by Jews, as Epiphanius: Yet I exclude not an Allegorical
sense of some stories, besides ^he Literal, as Augustine and Suidas held
Paradise had both. Homer's Alcinous Garden, and Elizian Fields, were Poetical
Fictions stolen out of the Divine Treasury, and profaned by them.

. 4. It is no Curiosity to enquire after the Place; seeing nothing is in
Scripture, but for instruction; and if the truth of the story be necessary, the
place set out for the proof of it, is not to be neglected, and Men's fancies
therein overthrow the Story. For what is more ridiculous, than to seek Adam's
Paradise as high as the Moon, or beyond the Ocean which he waded through to
come to Judea; or that it is a separated ground hanging in the Air under the
Moon, from whence the four Rivers fall with violence, and force through the
Sea, and rise again in our habitable World; as Commestor dreamed, and others.
That therefore the Truth might receive no prejudice, God's Wisdom has so
carefully described the place for our easy finding, as the choicest part of
the Earth. And if it be a generous mind to desire to know the Original of our
Ancestors, this search cannot be discommended.

. 5. Paradise is not so defaced by the Flood that it cannot be found, as
Augustinus Chrysamensis judged; for though the Beauty of it be lost, and Time
has made it as a common Field in Eden, yet eight hundred and seventy years
after would not so particulary have described it, nor the Prophets have
mentioned Eden so often, if the same could not be found, or if the Rivers which
in his time bear the Names, were not the same, of which Euphrates and Tigris
were never doubted, as the Country of Eden is yet well known. As for the
alteration made by the Flood, changing the current of Rivers, and raising of
Mountains, as some judge, it is improbable; for the Waters covered the Earth
spherically, and did not fall violently from higher places, or come in with
Storms ebbing and flowing, which makes such choakings up of the mouths of
Rivers. The Waters then were raised by universal erruptions, and by down right
falls of Rain, which use to scatter the strongest Winds. Seth's Pillar erected
1426 year before, as Antiquitiy reports, and standing in Iosephus's days, and
the City under Libanus, whose Ruins remained to Annius's days, and by Berosus
forged Fragments called Enochia, built by Cain, and the City Ioppa remaining
after the Flood, argue the Flood had no such effect to work such alteration,
when even Bay-Trees outstood it. Antiquity also speaks of Baris, and Sion, on
which the Fable is that Giants were saved, which argues their Judgment
touching the Antiquity of Mountains. See Psalm. 90.1, 2.

. 6. Paradise was not the whole Earth, as Manichus, Vadianus, Noviomagus, and
Goropius Becanus judged, seeing the Text says it was Eastward in Eden, and the
Angel was placed on the east side of Paradise, and Adam was cast out of it, not
out of all the Earth. Yet the Error of Ephrem, Athanasius, and Cyrill, was
greater, that Paradise was beyond the Ocean, through which Adam walked when he
was cast out, to return to the Earth of his Creation, and was buried on Calvery.

. 7. Paradise by Bar-Cephas, Beda, Strabus, and Rabanus, was placed on a
Mountain almost as high as the Moon; neither did Rupertus differ much. It
seems they took it out of Plato, and Socrates who mis-understood it, no doubt
took this Place for Heaven, the Habitation of Blessed Souls after Death, though
for fear of the Areopagites, they durst not set down in plain terms what they
believed of that Matter. And though in the end Socrates was put to death for
acknowledging one only sufficient God, yet the Devil himself did him that
right, to pronounce him the wisest Man. As for the place in question,
Tertullian and Eusebius conceive, that by it he meant the Celestial Paradise:
Solinus indeed reports of a place called Acrothonos, upon Mount Atho, pleasant
and healthful, whose Inhabitants are called Macrobioi, long lived: Upon the
aforesaid Lunary Hill, they say Enoch was preserved; which Isidore and Lumbard
approve; and Tertullian, Ireneus, Justin Martyr believed the Souls of blessed
Men lived there; which Fancies Hopkins and Pererius have Confuted. As for the
Bodies of Enoch and Elias, they may be changed, as others shall be at the last
Day. The Schoolmen in this and their other Questions, were exceeding subtle,
but yet taught their Followers to shift better than to resolve by their
Distinctions. The Fables of Olympus, Atlas, and Atho, higher than any Clouds,
Pliny himself disproveth.

. 8. Tertullian, Bonaventure and Durand place Paradise under the Equinoctial;
to which Aquinas opposes the Distemper of Heat there. But this is Non causa
for causa; the true Cause is, Eden and the Rivers are not there; else the Clime
has as pleasant fertile places as any other; neither was any Region Created
but for Habitation, and those hot Countries are tempered by East Winds, and
long cool Nights as I well know; only where Mountains hinder the Wind, and in
sandy Grounds void of Trees, the Country is not so well Inhabited, as the other
parts, which are so Fertile, that the Inhabitants Idleness makes them Vicious,
and the Countries to be Terrae Vitiosae.

. 9. Paradise not being in the former places, we are certain it was in Eden,
not hard to have been found out, had not Names been changed since Moses's days;
and that other Nations have sought to extinguish both the Name and Monuments of
the Jews. For our help we have Euphrates and Tigris agreed upon, and that it
was Eastward from Canaan; which latter might agree with Arab^a, Stony and
Desert; but the former cannot, neither has it the property of being exceeding
Fertile. As for bordering Countries, though Moses name none, yet Esaiah and
Ezekiel do; and though that Amos name Eden, which is Coelosyria, and Beroaldus
finds a City there called Paradise, yet can it not be the Eden we seek,
seeing Coelosyria and Cyprian Damascena is full North from Canaan, and wants
our known Rivers. Come then to the Edomits in Thelassar, and the rest named by
Esaiah: Thelassar was a strong City in an Island upon the Border of Chaldea on
the River Euphrates, toward the North, which after Senacharib's death,
Merodach Balladan injoyning Babilonia, fortified against Esar Haddon, which
City Marcellinus calls Thelatha; Pliny, Teridata, which Julian durst not
assault. The other places in Esaiah are either in Mesopotamia as Charan and
Reseph, or in Media, as Gosan; so Ezekiel setting out the Countries which
traded with Tyrus, joineth Charan with Eden, as also Calne, which Ierom calls
Seleuiza, standing upon Euphrates toward Tigris, called also Canneh, and the
Inhabitants Schenits by Pliny; who Inhabited from Seleucia on both sides
Euphrates, Westward to Coelosyria, as far as Tapsachus, where the River is
Fordable. Charan therefore cannot be Channeh, the one standing on Euphrates,
the other on Chaboras, which falls into Euphrates, far off in Mesopotamia: Or
Aran between the Floods. Besides Channeh or Chalne, is by Moses named in
Shinar, one of Nimrod's Cities. Lastly, Sheba and Rhaama upon the Persian Gulf,
traded with Tyrus by Tigris, and so to Seleucia, and so to Syria by Euphrates,
'till they came to Aleppo or Hierapolis, from whence they went by Land to Tire,
and after decay to Tripoly, and now to Alexandretta in the Bay of Issicus or
Lajazzo. Chalmad is also joined with Eden by Ezekiel, a Region of higher Media,
N.E. of Eden called Coronitana by Geographers. Thus Eden is bounded on the E.
and N. E. by Elanah and Chalmad: On the W. and N. W. by Charan and Chanah: On
the S. by Sheb; between which Chalds (properly so called) is contained, which
is the Eden we seek.

. 10. Eden has not yet wholly lost the Name and notice of the old Country, as
is to be seen in two Epistles written by the Christians of Mesopotamia, to the
Pope, An. 1552. Published by Masius, mentioning the Island of Eden in the River
Tigris, which is commonly called Gozoria or Gezer. So that we may perceive,
that Eden before the Flood, comprehended, besides the Land of Babylonia in the
S. all Assyria, Armenia, and Mesopotamia, bounded by Mount Taurus in the North.
In this Isle, which is ten Miles^ compass, is the Metropolitan City and
Patriarchy of all the Nestorian Christians in Assyria, Mesopotamia, Chaldea,
and Persia, and is Twelve Miles above Mosell.

. 11. An Objection is made out of the Text, That a River, in the singular
number, divides it self into Four Heads. Answer, Kimchi and Vatablus say, the
Singular here is put for the Plural, as is used with the Hebrews. But take it
singular for Euphrates, and we find it divided into Four Branches in the
Country of Chaldea. And what alteration soever Time has bred, clear it is,
that Parah in Moses is Euphrates, and Hiddekel is Tigris, which runs through
Assyria, whose chief City is Nineve.

. 12. An Objection touching the Fertility of Paradise no where found, is
Answered; That no place after the Flood was the same as it was in the Creation;
yet Herodotus commends that Country about Euphrates near the which Tigris runs,
beyond all he had seen; yielding Two Hundred for One* with plenty of
Palm Trees, of which they make Meat* Wine and Honey: Strabo and Niger added
Bread, and Antony the Hermit, adds Flax. They mow the Blade twice, and after
feed it down with Cattle to prevent the Exuberance of overmuch Rankness: And it
is free from Weeds. See Pliny, lib. 18. ca. 17. who says the Babylonians reap
a Crop the second time without Sowing; and yet cut their Corn twice in the Year
they sow it, says Niger: And lest their Cattle should perish by too great a
satiety, they drive them out of the Pastures, says Q. Curtius.

. 13. Pison and Gehon, the other two Rivers of Paradise, must be found to
branch out of the River, or Rivers of Eden; and therefore the Fancy was strange
to search out for Ganges in India, and Nilus in Egypt. The Error about Pison
was occasioned by mistaking Havila in India, whose Founder was a Son of
Iocktan, for that Havila upon Tigris, afterward called Susiana, Planted by a
Son of Cush. If Largeness were respected in choice of Ganges, Indus is not
inferior; having Hydaspis, famous in Great Alexander's Story, and many like
Rivers falling into it, as Coas, Suastus, Acesinies, Adries, Hispalis, Smnoch:
Indus is also nearer Tigris by almost 40 Degrees, between which and Ganges, is
the great Kingdom of Magor. As for Nilus it can no way be a Branch of a River
which runs through Eden with the rest, seeing it runs contrary to them,
springing from the South Coast, and falls North, whereas they spring North
and fall into the South Sea. Pison therefore will rather be found a River
branching out of Euphrates into Tigris at Appanico, called Piso-tigris, running
through Havila or Susiana, from Hercelus's Altar, into the Persian Gulf, and
has Gold, and Bdelium and Onix-stones. Time has made greater Change of other
Names than this, as to call Babylon Bandas, Baldady Bagded, Boughedor and
Bagdet at this Day. Pison is called Basilius or Regius; and Gehon is
Mabar-sares, Marsias, Baar saris in Ptolomy and others. Euphrates at her
Fountain was called Pixirats and Puckperah: Plutarch calls it Medus and
Zaranda; others call it Cobar, which is a Branch of it: The Assyrians name it
Armalchar and Nahor Malcha; now it is called Phrat-Tigris, in Hebrew Hiddekel;
others call it Dighto, Diglath, Seilax, Sollax, now Tegil. Mereer conceived
well the Euphrates and Tigris stream into Branches, and that Euphrates falling
into Gehon, lost the Name, and is swallowed up in Caldee Lakes near Vr: But
Pison breaking into Tigris, falls into the Sea, and produced a Name compounded
of both, Pysotygris, running through Havilah, so named of the Son of Chush,
inhabits both sides, and mistaken for Ethiop. 1 Samuel 15.7.

. 14. Gehon by mistaking Ethiop for Chush, drew them to Nilus; which Error
Pererius would evade by an E. Ethiopia in Arabia-Petraea, and part of Felix,
which being granted, Gehon is not Nilus; no, the 1000000 which Zerah brought
against Asa, came beyond Egypt, but were Chushits, Midianits, Amalekits,
Ishmaelits, inhabiting that Land of Chush, over which Zera in Gerar near Judah
Commanded. But to Pererius, Pliny tells, the E. Ethiopia was about Nilus, S. of
Egypt; the W. was about the River Niger. So that all that take Chush for
Ethiopia, Numb. 12.1. do fail, as also 2 Chronicles. 21.16. Beroaldus seeking Gehon
at Gaza lost himself in the Desert by sinding a River scarce Twenty Miles long
for Gehon, which watered all the Land of Chush, Westward from Tigris, and went
toward Arabia through the South of Chaldea, where was Chusca, after called
Chuduca; from whence either Increase or Force of Nimrod's Posterity made them
disperse themselves more toward the West, out of that part of Shinar, where
Nimrod out of Wit and Strength had seated himself: As did his Father upon
Gehon, and a Brother of his called Havila, on both sides of Tigris, and along
the Sea toward Arabia.

. 15. To Conclude; it appears to me by Scripture, Paradise was a Created
place in our Habitable World, in the lower parts of a Country called Eden, from
the Pleasantness thereof, containing part of Armenia, all Mesopotamia and
Shinar. This Region in Thirty five Degrees is most temperate, abounding with
whatsoever Life needs, without Labor; exceeding both Indies, with their
perpetual Spring and Summer, which are accompanied with fearful Thundering,
Lightning, Earthquakes, Venomous Creatures and desperate Diseases, from which
Eden is free: I desire no other Reward for my Labor in this Description, but
suspense of judgment 'till it be confuted by a more probable Opinion.

CHAP. IV. Of the two Chief Trees in Paradise.
. 1. THAT the two Trees of Life and Knowlegde, were material Trees, the most
Learned and Religious Writers doubt not of; though they were Figures of the Law
and Gospel, yet some would have them only Allegorical, because of Salomon's
Words, Prove. 3.18. Apoc. 2.7. But Augustine answers, the one excludes not the
other; as Paradise was Terrestrial, and yet signified a Celestial, as Sara and
Hagar were Women, though Figures of the Old and New Testament: The words also
of the Text join these Trees with the rest that God produced. Touching the Tree
of Life it is hard to think, that Bodies nourished by Corruptible means should
be immortal; yet if Adam had not disobeyed God's Commandment, he and his
Posterity might have lived an healthful, unalterable Life, Four times longer
than the first Fathers, and then been translated as Enoch was. For God's
infinite Wisdom foresaw that the Earth could not have contained a perpetual
increase, or Millions of Souls must have been ungenerated. The Immortality of
Man, if he had not fallen, must be understood of Bodies, Translated and
Glorified.

. 2. Touching the Tree of Knowledge, Goropius Becanus will have the honor to
have found it to be the Indian Fig Tree; but however that Opinion be esteemed,
and that never Man thought better of his own, than he, yet herein he usurped
upon Moses Bar-cephas, who hit on this Conjecture 600 Years before, and cited
Pbilaxinus and others long before. Becanus upon a Conceit this Tree is only
found upon the Banks of Acesines, which runs into Indus, will therefore find
Paradise there; but my self have seen 20000 of them in a Valley of America, not
far from Paria, as also in Trinidado. The magnitude of this Tree in Pliny and
others, I am ashamed to report; the Stemm as straight as may be, without Branch
for Twenty or Thirty Foot, where they spread abroad their Boughs; and from the
Head branches a Gumm that hangs downward, and by increasing in a few Months,
as a Cord, reaches the Ground, takes Root and becomes a Tree; which also by
the like Gum makes others, and in a short time, such a Grove arises, like
which there is no Tree. And if a Branch hang over the Water, the Gum will
pierce the Water and take root, so that falling sometimes into a Bed of
Oysters, they are so entangled, that plucking up one of these Cords, I have
seen 500 Oisters hanging about it: The Leaves largeness, and Fruits
pleasantness I find not according to Report, yet have I traveled 12 Miles
under them. In conclusion, though Becanus count it impudent Obstinacy to dare
to think this not the Tree, yet Philo believes that the Earth never brought
forth the Tree since.

. 3. Becanus's witty Allegory of the Indian Figtree, believes it not worthy the
Commendation given it.

. 4. Touching the name of the Tree, Bar-cephas translated by Masius, says, it
was so called of the Event; for that after eating thereof, they should know by
experience the Happiness they had lost, and the Misery their Disobedience would
bring them into. Iunius follows this Exposition. Adam by excellency of
Creation could not be ignorant of the Good and Evil of Obedience, and
Disobedience; yet as Men in sickness better know the good of health, and evil
of sickness than they conceived before, so was it with Adam. For looking into
the Glass of his guilty Conscience, which Evil he never knew, he saw the
horror of Gods Judgment, and sensibly knew the loss of the Good which could
not be valued; and purchased Evil not to be expressed: And then he saw himself
Naked both in Body and Mind, that is, deprived of Gods Grace and former
Felicity; hereupon was it called the Tree of Knowledge, and not of any
Operation it had by a peculiar quality. For the same Phrase is used in
Scripture; and names are given to Signs and Sacraments, as to things performed
and done. But Adam being betrayed and overrul'd by his own Affection, and
ambitious of further Knowledge, and of the glory would attend it, and slightly
looking on what the Lord had threatened, was transported with the gentle winds
of pleasing persuasion, whereupon Satan strengthened his progression, poisoning
the roots of mankind, which he moistened with the Liquor of the same ambition,
by which himself perished for ever. The means the Devil used, was his Wife,
given to have been a Comforter, not a Counselor. She desiring to know what was
unsit for her, as does all that Sex ever since, and He unwilling to grieve or
discontent her, as all his Sex are to this day, yielded to her Charms. If this
befell him in his perfection, not yet acquainted with bewitching Imbracements,
and if Solomon the wisest could not escape the snare of Female Allurements, it
is not so wonderful, as lamentable, that other Men perish at that Ro^k.

CHAP. V. Of memorable things between Adam and Noah.
. 1. CAIN inheriting his Fathers Pride, and disdaining his Brother, who was
more acceptable than himself, became the first Murderer, and made his Brother
the first Martyr. And though God mitigated his Revenge of this Sin upon Cain's
complaint, yet for the Sins of Cruelty and Injustice he destroyed the World.

. 2. Cain's dwelling in the Land of Nod, or agitation, as Iunius expounds it,
is not as Ierom and others held, that he settled in no certain Country; but of
his distracted Thought and unquiet Conscience the Country was so called. This
Country in which he settled, and in which for fear of wandering he built a City,
Iunius supposes to be Arabia the Desert; but the Text boundeth it on the East
of Eden, whereas Arabia is West. As for the Nomades which lived upon Pasturage,
without Tillage, they were not any particular Nation, but it was a common Name
for all that so lived, as the Northern Tartars, Getulians, Numidians, Ancient
Britains, and Northern Irish. Besides, the World being unpeopled, and Adam's
Family small, and that also on the East side of Eden, in that part of Assyria
which Ptolomy calls Calena, it is unlike Cain would go so far West to Arabia.
Touching the City Enoch built, either for security, or to oppress others, as
Josephus judged, probably it was of great Repute in the days of Noah, when
mighty Oppressors carried all the Fame. It may be also, some Monuments of it
remained, as they say, of Ioppa, after the Flood, which might induce some of
Noah's Posterity, being of like violent disposition either to reedifie the
same, or some other of that Name. Hence it might be, that in time Colonies
scattered from thence their Captives; the name of Henochians from Bactria and
Sogdiana, East from Eden (where Pliny and Stephanus find the Name South from
Oxus) unto Iberia, Albania and Colchis near Pontus.

. 3. Moses has been very brief in the Story of Cain's Issue, it being utterly
to be destroyed: Yet the long lives of that Age and the liberty his Children
took in Marrying, may well argue he might in one quarter of his Life, people a
large City, which his Issue were more ingenious to supply with the Inventions
ascribed to them, while Seth's Posterity is commended for care of Religion and
Heavenly things.

. 4. The Patriarchs Ages, when they began to generate, is not found in them
that are named: For Moses's purpose was not to record a Genealogy of the first
begotten, but of the Ancestors of Noah before the Flood, and of Abraham after;
so that having the Age of these that succeed one another in that Line, it was
sufficient, whether they were younger or elder Brethren. Cain was the Eldest of
Adam's Sons, yet Adam's Age when he begat him is not expressed, as it is of
Seth: Neither can any one say directly, Adam had but Cain and Abel before, nor
that Enoch was Seth's Eldest Son, Mehalaleel begat Iared at 65. who begat
Chanoch at 162; the like or greater difference in the rest, which cannot be
ascribed to the long abstinence from Marriage upon Religious respect, as we see
in holy Enoch. Noah's Brethren perished in the Flood, and so might some unnamed
Children, begotten before the three named, being 500 Years old before See Aug.
de Civ. D.


. 5. The Patriarchs Years have been questioned, some holding them Lunary or
Egyptian; but that cannot be; for then some should beget Children at 6, 7, or 8
Years old, and the Eldest should live not 100 Years, which is short of many
after the Flood; yea long since, Pliny witnesses under Vespasian, in a search,
many were found above 120, and some 140 Years Old. Simple Diet and temperate
Life, made the Essaeans, Egyptian Priests, Persian Magicians, Indian Brachmans
live long, says Josephus. Pliny reports Nestor's 3 Ages. Tyresia's 6 Sybils
300 Years, Endymion's little less. Ant. Fumea a good Historian, reports of an
Indian above 300 Years Old, and my self knew the old Countess of Desmond, An.
1589, who lived many Years after, who had been married in the Reign of King
Edw. 4. To conclude, there are three things (not to speak of Constellations)
which are natural Causes of long and healthful Life: Strong Parents, pure Air,
and temperate use of Diet, Pleasure and Rest, all which excelled in the First
Ages. And though the Flood infused an impure quality into the Earth to hurt the
means of Man's Life, yet Time has more consumed Natures Vigor, as that which
has made the Heavens wax old like a Garment. Hereto add, our strange Education
of Children, upon unnatural Curiosity nourished by a strange Dugg: Hasty
Marriage, before Natures Seed be ripe, or Stock well rooted to yield a Branch
fit to replant. But above all, the Luxury of latter Ages, which wilfully
oppresses Nature, and then thinks to relieve her with strong Waters, hot
Spices, Sauces, etc.

. 6. The Patriarchs knowledge of the Creation might well come by Tradition from
Adam to Moses, seeing Methusalem lived with Adam 243 Years, and with Noah 500
Years, and he with Abraham 58 Years, from whom it was not hard to pass by
Isaac, Jacob and his Posterity to Moses: Yet for the more certainty of the
Truth, it was undoubtedly delivered to Moses by immediate Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, as his many Miracles do prove. Questionless also, Letters were from
the Infancy of the World, as Enoch's Pillars and his Prophecy witness, of which
part was found in Saba, says Origin, and Tertullian read some Pages; neither
can it be denied there was such, says Augustine.

. 7. The Patriarchs Lives were lightly passed over 'till Enoch, whose Piety is
commended, and his leaving the World not by Death: Whether his Change were such
as shall be at the last day, let Divines judge. Lamech's Prophecy of his Son
Noah is touched upon, but Noah's Life is handled more amply. The Wisdom, Policy
and Wars of that World, were no doubt, great, as may be gathered, Genesis 5.4. but
the Universal Impiety which brought the Universal Destruction, deserved that
the Memory of their Actions should be drowned with their Bodies. It were
madness to imagine the Sons of God spoken of, Genesis 5.24. were good Angels,
which begat Giants on Women, as Josephus dreamt, and deceived Lactantius,
Confuted by Augustine and Chrysostom.

. 8. The Giants spoken of Genesis 5. Becanus strains his Wit to prove, they were
not such properly, but so called for their Oppression: But Moses calling them
Mighty, which argues extraordinary Strength, and Men of Renown and great
undertaking, there is more Reason to hold them Giants in a proper sense,
especially considering what Scripture Reports of such in the Days of Abraham,
Moses, and Joshua, David, etc. yea of whole Kindreds and Countries. If such
were found in the Third and Fourth Ages of the Worlds decay, there is no Reason
to doubt thereof in the First and Second flourishing Ages. From this Story grew
the Conceit, That Giants were the Sons of Heaven and Earth: And from Nimrod
grew the Tale of Giants casting up Mountains to the top of Heaven.

CHAP. VI. The Original of Idolatry, and Relics of Antiquity in Fables.
.1 THE Greeks and others, corrupting the Story of the Creation, and mingling
their Fables with them, supposed that After-Ages would take those Discourses of
God and Nature for Inventions of Philosophers and Poets. But as skilful
Chemists can extract healthful Medicines out of Poison, and Poison out of
wholesome Herbs, etc. so may much Truth be found out of those Fables.

.2. The Antiquity of Corruption was even from Noah's Family. For the liberal
Grace of God being withdrawn after Man's Fall, such a perpetual Eclipse of
spiritual things followed, and produced such effects as the general Deluge
could not cleanse them, even in the selected Family of Noah, wherein were found
those that renewed the Defection from God, for which they had seen the Worlds
destruction. Hence the Caldeans, Egyptians, and Phaenicians soon after became
Idolaters, and the Greeks received their 12 Gods from Egypt, and erected to
them Altars, Images and Temples, says Herodotus.

.3. As Men, departed out of the way of Truth, stray on in unknown Vices to
Eternal Perdition; so these blind Idolaters being fallen from the God of
Heaven, to seek God's on Earth to Worship, beginning with Men, they proceed to
Beasts, Fouls, Fishes, Trees, Herbs, the Four Elements, Winds, Morning, Evening
Stars; Yea, Affections, Passions, Sorrow, Sickness, besides Spirits infernal;
and among Terrestrials even the basest wanted not divine Honor, as Dogs, Cats,
Swine, Leeks, Onions, etc. which barbarous Blasphemy, Iuvenal thus derided, O
happy Nations, which of their own sowing,
Have store of Gods in every Garden growing:


. 4. Of Jupiter and other Gods* That Egypt had knowledge of the First Age, by
Misraim the Son of Cham, who had lived 100 Years in it, we doubt not. Having
therefore learned that Cain did first build Cities, they made him ancient
Jupiter, whom the Athenians also called Pollyeus and Herceios, Founder and
Fortifier of Cities. This Jupiter married his Sister, as did Cain: His Father
Adam they made Saturn, and his Sons Iubal. Tubal, and Tubal-Cain were made
Mercury, Vulcan and Apollo, Inventers of Pastorage, Smiths-craft and Music.
Naome, Augustine expounds Venusta, which was Venus Vulcan's Wife, and Eva was
Rhea; the Dragon which kept the Golden Apple, was the Serpent that beguiled
Eva. Paradise was the Garden of Hesperides: So Saturn's dividing the World
between Three Sons, came of Noah and his Sons; and Nimrod's Tower was the
attempt of Giants against Heaven. The Egyptians also Worshipped Seth as their
most Ancient Parent, from whom they called their chief Province Setheitica; and
in Bithinia we ^ind the City Cethia Stralo lib. 17.
.

. 5. Of the Three Chief Jupiters; the First was Son of Ether and Dies; the
Second of Coelum an Arcadian, and King of Athens; the Third Famous in the Greek
Fables, was of Creet or Candia, as some say; but there is no certainty, etc.

. 6. Jupiter Chammon, more Ancient than all the Grecian Jupiters, was Cham,
Father of Misraim in Egypt; and before Jupiter Belus, Son of Saturnus
Babilonious or Nimrod: As for the latter Grecian Jupiter, he was a little
before the Wars of Troy.

. 7. The Philosophers opinion of God, Pythagoras, Plato, Orpheus, etc. believed
not the Fooleries of their Times, though they mingled their Inventions with
Scripture: Pythagoras hung Homer and Hesiod in Hell, forever to be stung with
Serpents, for their Fictions; yet Homer had seen Moses, as Iustine Martyr
^heweth in a Treatise converted by Mirandula. Plato dissembled his Knowledge
for fear of the Areopagits Inquisition; yet Augustine excused him. He delighted
much in the Doctrine of one God, though he durst not be known of it, or of
Moses the Author of it, as may be gathered out of Justin Martyr, Origin,
Eusebius, and Cyril, though he had from Moses what he writ of God, and of
Divinity; as Ambrose also judged of Pythagoras. Iustine Martyr observed, that
Moses described God to be, I am he who is. It is as hard to find out this
Creator of the World, as it is impossible, if he were found, to speak of him
worthily, said Plato; who also said, God is absolutely good, and so the Cause
of all that is Good; but no Cause at all of any thing that is Evil. The Love of
God is the cause of the Worlds Creation, and Original of all things. Apuleius
says, The most high God is also Infinite, not only by exclusion of Place, but
also by dignity of Nature; neither is any thing more like or more acceptable to
God, than a Man of a perfect Heart. Thales said, God comprehended all things,
because he never had a Beginning: And he beholds all the thoughts of Men,
said Zeno; therefore said Athenodorus, All men ought to be careful of their
Actions, because God was every where present, and beholding all things.

Orpheus calling Men to behold the King of the World, describes him to be one
begotten of himself, from whom all things spring, who is in all, beholds all,
but is beheld of none, etc. Who is the First and Last; Head and Middle; from
whom all things be: Foundation of Earth and Sky, Male and Female, which never
dies: He is the Spirit of all, of Sun, Moon, etc. The Original and End of all;
in whom all things were hidden 'till he produced them to Light. Cleanthes calls
God Good, Just, Holy, possessing himself, always doing good, and Charity it
self. Pindarus says, he is one God and Father, most high Creator and best
Artificer, who gives to all things diverse proceedings, etc. Antistbenes says,
God cannot be likened to anything, and therefore not elsewhere to be known, but
only in the everlasting Country, of whom thou have no Image. God, said
Xenophon, shakes and sets all things at rest: Is great and mighty, as is
manifest to all; but of what Form he is, none knows but himself, who
illuminateth all things with his Light. God, says Plato, is the Cause, Ground,
and Original of the whole nature of things, the most high Father of the Soul,
the eternal preserver of living Creatures, and continual framer of the World; a
Begetter without propagation, comprehended neither in place nor time; whom few
conceive, none can express him. Thus, as Ierom said, We find among the Heathen,
part of the Vessels of God: But of them all, none have with more Reverence
acknowledged, or more learnedly expressed One True God, and everlasting Being,
all ever-causing and sustaining, than Hermes the Egyptian. But of all these,
see Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Lactantius, Eusebius, Du Pless.
Danaeus.

. 8. Hethanism and Judaism, when confounded. Touching the Religions of the
Heathen, they being the Inventions of Mortal Men, they are no less Mortal than
themselves. The Caldean Fire is quenched; and as the Bodies of Jupiter and the
rest, were by Death devoured, so were their Images and lasting Marble Temples
by Time. The Trade of Riddles for Oracles, and Predictions by Apollo's Priests,
is now taken up by Counterfeit Egyptians and Cozening Astrologers; yet was it
long before the Devil gave way. For after Six several spoilings and sackings of
his Temple at Delphos, and as many repairings thereof, at last when Julian
sought unto it, God from Heaven, consumed all with Fire. So when the same
Apostate encouraged the Jews to re-build a Temple, God, by Earthquake
over-threw all, and slew many Thousands.

. 9. Satan's last Refuge to uphold his Kingdom; who being driven off the open
Stage of the World, crept into the Minds of Men, and there set up the high and
shining Idol of Glory, and all commanding Image of Gold. He tells men, that
Truth is the Goddess of Danger and Oppression: Chastity is an Enemy to Nature,
and all Virtue is without Taste; but Pleasure delights every Sense, and true
Wisdom gets Power and Riches to fulfill all our Desires. And if this
Arch-politician find Remorse in any of his People, or any fear of future
Judgment, he persuadeth them that God has such need of Souls to re-plenish
Heaven, that he will accept them at any time, and upon any Condition: And to
interrupt their return to God, he lays those great Blocks of rugged Poverty
and Contempt in the narrow way which leads to his Divine Presence: Neither
was he ever more industrious and diligent than now, when the long Day of
Mankind draws fast to the Evening, and the World's Tragedy and Time near to
an end.

CHAP. VII. Noah's Flood, the Universality of it, and Noah's memory of
Antiquity.
. 1. MOses's Divine Testimony of Noah's Flood, natural Men regard no farther
than Reason can reach, and therefore may have disputed the Universality of it;
and Josephus cites Nic. Damascen, who reports, that many were saved on the
Mount Baris in Armenia; and the Talmudists held the same, says Annius.

. 2. Ogyges's Flood, the Greeks, (the Corrupters of all Truth, says
Lactantius) make the most ancient, when yet Ogyges's Flood was sixty seven
Years after Jacob, and short of Noah's Flood by 500 Years; neither do any
Authors report, that it over-flowed any part of Syria, as Mela, Pliny and
Solinus do of Noah's, speaking of Ioppa's Ruins, etc. As for this Flood, as it
exceeded not Peloponesus, so was it foreseen by a concurrence of Causes, which
Noah's was not. Touching Varro's Report out of Castor, of the strange Color,
quantity and shape of Venus; the Fogs which then rise, might cause such
Apperances: For Galilaeus, a Modern Worthy Astronomer, by Perspective Glasses,
observed many undiscovered things in Stars, unknown to former Ages.

. 3. Deucalion's Flood, more certain for Time, being in the Reign of Cranaus
King of Athens, according to Varro, cited by Augustine, or under Cecrop's,
(after Eusebius and Ierom) in whose latter times, Israel came out of Egypt,
which, after Functius, was 753, or 739 Years, according to Mercator, after
Noah's Flood. But following the better Account, which gives Abraham 60 Years
more after the Flood, I reckon the Flood thus: The general Flood Anno Mundi
1656; Jacob's Birth 2169, which is 519 Years after the Flood of Ogyges; 100
after Jacob's. Now Deucalion was born Anno 2356; and his Flood when he was 89
Years old, which is Anno 2438; after Noah's 782; to which agrees Xenophon in
Annius. This Flood overran most of Italy, when Egypt also was afflicted with
Water; and the Italians which escaped it, were called Vmbri.

. 4. Noah's Flood, as Berosus reports, was heard of amongst the Caldeans: N.
Damascen makes particular mention of it. Eusebius also Records out of an
Ancient History of Abidenus, that one Sissitbus, forewarned by Saturn of a
Flood, fled to the Armenian Hills in a Ship, who after the Fall of the Waters,
sent Birds three times to discover, etc. Cyril cites Polyhistor mentioning a
general Flood: Plato also produces an Egyptian Priest, reporting to Solon out
of their Holy Books, of an universal Flood, long before Ogyges, in Attica; and
calls Noah Old Ogyges. He also speaks of a Flood of Nilus before that in
Attica, which afflicted the lower Egypt under King Prometheus, 'till by
Hercules's direction, Nilus, was reduced within her Banks; whereof grew the
Tale of an Eagle, which feeding on Prometheus's Liver, was slain by Hercules.
Xenophon, cited by Annius, speaks of the Universal Flood under the first
Ogyges, of Nine Months continuance; a second of Nilus under Prometheus, of one
Month; a third under Ogyges Atticus, of two Months; a fourth under Deucalion,
of three Months; a fifth under Proteus of Egypt in Helene's Rape. Diod. Siculus
remembers another in lesser Asia, before Deucalion's. There was one in the
Venetian Territories, Anno 590. In Friesland, a Flood drouned 100000, Anno
1238. In Dort in Holland, 10000 perished Anno 1446. Others are mentioned by
Strozius.

. 5. Noah's Flood was extraordinary, not upon natural Causes, as the other; but
by God's special Power strengthening the influence of Stars to fill all the
Cisterns of Waters in Fountains and Clouds: And though H. of Machline, Scholar
of Albertus, observed a conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in the last, and of a
watery Sign and House of Luna, over against the Ship, by which the Flood might
have been foreseen; and was also by Noah, as P. de Aliaao judges; yet however
God used second Causes, he added supernatural force to the Clouds and
Fountains, to empty their whole Treasuries of Waters.

. 6. There needed not new Created Waters in this Flood; not to dispute whether
God has restrained himself from Creating. For when he brake up the Fountains
of the Deep, and opened the Windows or Sluices of Heaven, he showed no new
Creation, but used his old Store, contained in the vast Concavities of the
Earth and in the Clouds, wherewith he compassed the Earth after an
extraordinary manner; besides his Condensation of the Air to convert it into
Rain, which is so ordinary; and thus might the Waters grow to exceed the
Mountains 15 Cubits. As for the Constellation they speak of, L. Vives reports
from a great Astrologer, that the like was observed Anno 1524, Genesis 6.11.
after which it was exceeding Fair. To conclude, I find no other Mystery in the
word Cataract, signifying the Windows or Floodgates of Heaven, but the violent
casting down Waters, not diffusively, after the natural manner, but as when it
is emptied out of a Vessel in a whole body, as it is sometimes in India, which
are called Spouts of Water. Thus God loosed the retentive Power in the upper
Air, and the Clouds, in which, at other times, he shuts up the Waters to
carry them to a place appointed.

. 7. Noah's Memory among the Heathen, who, for diverse respects, gave him diverse
Names, as Ogyges the first, because his Flood was before the Grecian Ogyges;
Saturn, because he was Father of Nations; Prometheus, for his foresight; Ianus
Bifrons, for his seeing what went before, and came after the Flood; Chaos, and
Seed of the World Coelum; Sun, Virtumnus Bacchus, Liber Pater before him of
Greece; but of old, the word was Boachus of Noachus: He was also called Nisius,
of Mount Nisa in India, joining to Paropanisus and other Easterly Mountains,
where the Ark rested, and where the Grecian Bacchus never came. His Posterity
also named Cities, Mountains and Rivers by his Name, Strabo.
as a City by the Red Sea; the River Noachus in Thracia.

. 8. Noah's Ark, touching the Name, Epiphanius in Ancyrius calls it Aron, which
properly signifies the Ark in the Sanctuary, as Thebell a Vessel which
swimmeth, called Larnenx in Greek. Certain places where it was framed cannot be
defined; yet Becanus conceives it was near Caucasus, where grow the noblest
Cedars, not far from the Nisaans, with whom Alexander made War. By all
Probability, the place was not far from where it landed, being so large, heavy
laden, wanting Sails, of Form not apt to move, and in a Calm, as it is in all
Rains, downright. It was thought to have a flat Bottom, and a crested Roof;
and the Wood Gopher, of which it was made, by all probability was Cedar, being
light, easy to cut, sweet and lasting; abounding in the Eastern Mountains; the
Pitch was like to a Bitume, which melts only by Fire, as is that by the dead
Sea and Babylon.

. 9. Of the Ark's Capacity; whose Measures, as God prescribed, so the
proportion, says Augustine, answered the shape of a Man's Body, whose Length
contained the Breadth six times, and the Depth ten; being a Figure of God's City
or Church in this World, etc. In the Measure, the Cubit is questioned; whether
it were the common, which is from the Elbow to the top of the Middle Finger, a
Foot and a half; or the plain Cubit, which is an handful more; or the Kings and
Persians which is three Inches more than the common; or the sacred, which is
double the common, wanting a quarter; or the Geometrical, which is six common
Cubits, and was embraced by Origin, as also by Augustine, who yet changed his
Mind, because Fishes were not Cursed. De Civ.
Though Man's mischievous Ignorance seeks many Impossibilities in this work,
yet no Monstrous thing is found in it; for the number of Kinds to be stored in
it, was not so great, (excluding such as sprung from unnatural Copulations, and
diversity of Soils) but that the common Cubit of those times may serve; for add
half a Foot to the common Cubit of our times, which is a Foot and half, and the
length rises to be six Hundred Foot, the Breadth one Hundred, the Depth Sixty:
As for the Geometrical Cubit, it was not in use then, as we see in the Measure
of Giants, and height of the Altar, which might have no Steps, Exodus 20.26.
Buteo hate proved that the Number of Creatures might well be placed in the Ark,
which contained 450000 Cubical Cubits, which is sufficient for a Hundred kind
of Beasts, and their Meat in the lower and second Story, and 280 Fouls, with
Noah and his in the third.

. 10. Of the Arks resting on part of Mount Taurus or Caucasus, between
East India and Scythia, passing by many needless Disputes, I will endeavor to
satisfy my self and others in the place of the Arks resting for the second
Plantation of the World, as I have done in the place of the Terrestrial
Paradise for Man's first Plantation. 2. The common Opinion is, The Ark rested
on Ararat in Great Armenia; the Caldee calls it Kardu, meaning the Hills
Gordei, in Great Armenia, which N. Damascen calls Baris. Berosus calls the
Armenian Mountains, Gordias. Strabo found such a Promontory in Arabia Felix;
Pliny, a Mart-Town, which Ptolomy calls Ociles; Pintus Acyla, Niger Zidon, Toy
E. Gordei; Damascen adjoins Mimmynd, perhaps for Minni, which word is used for
Armenia, and seems compounded of Minni and Aram, that is, Minni of Syria; for
Armenia was part of Syria. Pliny:
These Mountains stand apart from all others on the North side of that Ridge of
Mountains called Taurus, or Niphates, in the Plain of Armenia the Greater, near
the Lake Thospitis, whence Tigris flows in 75 Degrees Longitude, and 41 42
Latitude. One of these Gordei Epiphanius calls Lubar, which in the Armenian
Tongue, signifies Descent, of Noah's coming down, says Iunius; but any Hill
of easy descent may be so called, as himself confesses, correcting the Word
Kubaris in Josephus; from hence came Lubra, a Synagogue, being commonly on
Hills, and the Latin Delubra.

My first Argument against the common Opinion is, from the time of 130 Years,
which most, who follow Berosus, give Nimrod's coming to Shinar, which by easy
Journeys, might be travailed in 20 days from the Gordei in Armenia, having only
Mesopotamia between, and Tigris to help them. This makes it improbable, they
should be so many Years before they Planted such a Country so near them; which
could not be to them so long unknown, being Increased to a great Multitude long
before those 130 Years.

My 2 d. Argument is from the Civility and Multitude of the Eastern Nations,
who had used Artillery and Printing long before the West. It was thought a
Fable in Philostratus, that the Wise Men inhabiting between Hyphasis, and
Ganges, drive away their Enemies with Thunder and Lightning, whereby they
defeated Hercules and Bacchus, and made Hercules cast away his Golden Shield.
Io. Cuthenberge brought Printing from the East: Conrade, from him, brought it
to Rome; and Gerson bettered it; all about a 100 Years past. Alexander Macedon
found more Cities and Magnificence in the little Kingdom of Porus, which lay
close to India, than in all his Travels; esteeming Italy barbarous, and Rome a
Village: But Babylon was in his Eye, and the Fame of the East pierced his Ears.
Ioppan, now Zippingari, was exceeding Religious and addicted to Letters,
Philosophy, Prayers, and Worshipping but one God.

5. My Third Argument is from the resistance which Semiramis found in
Est-India, though her Army exceeded Three Millions, as Diod. Siculus, out of
Ctesias, reports, besides 500000 Horse, and 100000 Wagons; of all which, admit
but a third part true. Nimrod's Greatness is not doubted, nor that his People
grew into such Multitudes by Semiramis's time, Wife of Ninus, Son of Belus, Son
of Nimrod: But that a Colony sent from Babel into the East, should so increase
in so short a time, is incredible; yet these Authors Report, that Staurobathez,
King of East India, exceeded her in numbers, which could not be, if the East
were replenished by a Colony from Babylon.

6. My Fourth Argument is 1st. from Noah's person, who being at Babel's
Confusion, and the 731st Year of his Age, was not like to be unsettled, and to
seek a Seat. 2. The Text says, he became a Husbandman; which argues his
settled Course of Life; not a Wanderer from Armenia to Babylon, then to Arabia
Felix, then to Africa, so to Spain, Italy, ande. as they report; not
considering his Years, the difficulty of Traveling in an overgrown wild World,
which had lain waste 140 Years. 3. Besides the place of his Landing, being East
from Babylon, Rich and Pleasant, the Wise Father would not neglect the planting
of it, and seek out less pleasing Parts with such difficulties. 4. Neither is
it to be thought, the Reverend Father was at that presumptuous Work of Babel,
and restrained it not. 5. We find Ioctan, Havila and Opher Planted in India,
which were not like to have turned back from Shinar. Lastly, The Scriptures
silence of Noah, after his departure from the East to Shinar, argues him left
there; and so out of all occasions, which might touch the History of the Jews,
which Moses was to prosecute.

7. Annius on Berosus lands the Ark on the Caspian Mountain of Armenia; to
which purpose he confounds the Caspian and Gordian Hills, which Ptolomy sets
far asunder, and Mercator sets 5 Degrees, and Villanovanus, much more Ancient,
sets 7 Degrees, or 420 Miles one from the other. And though I grant, that Mankind
was renewed in Scythia, 250 Years before Ninus (as Porticus Cato records) yet
was not this Scythia in Armenia, but under the Mountains of Paropamisus in 130
Degrees of Longitude, according to Ptolomy; whereas the supposed Armenia Araxea
is in 87. neither has he any Scythia nearer Armenia Araxea; though he sets out
100 several Nations of Scythians, such as Imaus by the Asian Sarmatia on the
West; Imaus on the East; the Sacces, Sogdians and Margians on the South; and
the Mouth of Oxus and unknown Countries on the North. He also makes the Asian
Sarmatia to comprehend many Nations, and a great part between Armenia and
Scythia, besides Colchis, Iberia and Albania. Neither Prenetus, John
Plancrapio, Haytonus the Armenian, writing of Scythia or Tartaria, speak one
word of Armenia; nor Matheus a Micon, a Sarmasian Cannon of Cracovia, who
traveled a great part of Sarmatia Asiatica; yet he observed that Tanais, or
Don, and Volga or Edel, spring but of Lakes and Marshes, and not out of
Riphian or Hyperborean Mountains in Scythia. He also shows that the European
Sarmatia contains Russia, Lithuania and Moscho, and is bounded on the West by
Vissa or Vistula, parting it from Germany; That the Scythians in Asian
Sarmatia, came thither above 300 Years past out of the East, where the Ark
rested; and that the Sacae-Scythians were North of Taurus or Ararat: As for the
Ariacan Scythians, between Iaxartus and Iactus on the East of the Caspian, they
are no Armenians.

9. My fifth Argument is from the place where Noah Planted a Vine, which could
not be in Armenia, much colder than Italy and France, where yet Vines grow not
naturally, as they did where Noah Planted, as his Husbandry witnesses.

9. Objection 1. The Text says, from thence God scattered them, etc. Answer,
That is, the Builders of the Tower, which were not all, but certain of them,
which were increased after the Flood. Sybilla


10. Objection 2. Ararat signifies Armenia, which the Caldean Paraph. calls
Kardu. 2. Answer. Writers agree not about Ararat: The Sybill's Books place it
in Phrygia, near where Caelenes was built; whereabout the River Marsyas joineth
with Meander; but this is far from the Gordiean Mountains. Josephus, out of
Berosus, places Ararat between Armenia and Parthia, toward Adibene; where they
vent pieces of the Ark, but he erreth: For Adibene whereon Armenia Bordereth,
is part of Assyria, and has all Media between it and Parthia. As for the
Relics of the Ark, they make it but a Report, by an infamous Historian. The
Armenian Mountains, or Moschici in Ptolomy, or Pariedri in Pliny, stretch to
the upper part of Cappadocia in 43 and 44 Degrees, North of the Gordiaeans in
the 39 Degree 10/60. From the Northermost the Georgian Christians are called,
preserved from Infidels, which compass them.

11. Neither was it necessary the Ark should stay on the highest Mountains,
seeing Noah came not out till the Valleys were cleared; yet other Mountains are
higher than the Armenian, as Athos, or Olympus, between Macedon and Thrace,
whose shadows are above Thirty Seven Miles, now called Lucas, says Castaldus;
Olympus also in Thessaly over-tops Wind, Rain, and Clouds: Antandrus in Misia
seen to Constantinople whence Scamandrus flows, running through Troy: Altas
in Mauritania, no man's Eye can reach the Top: Caucasus is enlightened after
Midnight at the first Cock-Crow, said Aristotle, which I believe not, seeing
Tenerif in Canaria, which is known to be the highest in the World, is not Light
so soon.

12. These Incongruities rise from Ararat in Armenia. First, Sybil places it
in Phrygia, contrary to Berosus. Secondly, Baris is not the highest, and if it
were, yet the Ark might rest else where. Thirdly, Baris signifies high,
toward which may be any high Hill; especially, Caucasus, whence Indus rises:
Fourthly, Authors agree not where Gordia stands. Lastly, The Truth requires to
find an Ararat East from Shinar, and warmer than Armenia, in the North. Let us
therefore understand, that Ararat in Moses is no one Hill, but a common Name to
many, as the Alps and Pireneans; so that the long Ridge of Hills which Ptolemy
calls Taurus, Niphatus, Coatras, Coronus, Sariphi, and Pliny, call Taurus, till
they cross Imaus, where they are called Ararat or Armenia, for that they seem
to begin there. Thus Ptolomy calls all the Hills between the Caspian and
Euxinus, by one name Caucasus, which Pliny calls Hercanus, Armenian Coraxis,
Caspian, Moschian, Henochian, Scythian Amazon; so all the the Ridge of Hills in
America, from North Granada to the Magelan Straights, is called Andes. The
Mountain Ararat runs East and West, as Imaus North and South. As for Ptolomy he
used the Names fittest to distinguish the Countries, with the Hills bounded on
the North, or South side. For all the Asian Mountains have Three general Names,
Taurus, Imaus, Caucasus, which receive other Titles, as they divide particular
Regions. Taurus in Cilicia, is Imaus in Comogena, and so to Euphrates, on whose
East it is sometime Taurus, sometime Niphatis, which is the only name on the
East of Tygris, till they part Assyria, and Media, and are called Coatraes; and
in the middle of East Media, they are Orentes, and in the East side Coronus;
beyond Parthia they are Saraphi; on the South of Bactria, Paropamisus, and
lastly Caucasus, where Indus springs with Hydaspis, and Zaradrus, where
Caucasus Encounters the Scythian Imaus, in the 140 Degree of Longitude, and 35,
36, 37, of Latitude, where properly they are called Caucasus. In this part of
the World the Mountain and the River Ianus, and the Mountain Nisius (so called
of Bacchus Nisius or Noah) are found, on which the Ark stayed, as Goropius
Becanus conceived; where also are the best Vines, as they are in the same
Degree of Latitude through the World, as in Judea, Candia, parts of Greece,
Margiana. Under the South of these Hills the Clusters of Grapes are two Cubits
long, says Strabo, like those of Escol: And in Margiana, Alexander found most
delicate Wine, says Curtius.

To conclude, Ararat passes through Armenia, which is sometimes called Ararat:
but it is a common name to all that Ridge of Hills which runs East and West
from Cilicia to Caucasus, as the Alps, Pireneans, Andes in America, which run
Three Thousand Miles, etc. So the Mediterranean Sea is a common Name, which yet
upon diverse Coasts bears proper Names, as do other Seas. Let us then appeal
to the Word of Truth, and take it literally, seeing the plain Sense carries no
inconvenience, and let us fancy no strange Exposition from it. The Reverend
Respect we owe the Holy Scripture, every Word having its full weight in Gods
Book, shows that it is not to be taken otherwise than as we Read; as Augustine
said of the Gospel. Moses words are, And as they went from the East they found
a plain, etc. Which prove without Controversy the Ark rested Eastward from
Shinar. For Moses is every where precise in setting out Coasts, and Quarters of
Countries, as Nod Eastward from Eden, Sepher in the East, Genesis 4.16. and 10.30.
and 12.18. Ezekiel. 38.6. So Mat. 21. and 12.42. Now Armenia is so far from the
East of Babylon, that it is West of the North. The Gordian Hills for Latitude
are Forty One: Babylon Thirty Five for Longitude, (which makes the difference
of East and West) the Gordian are Seventy Five, and Babylon Seventy Nine, and
Eighty, which makes Five Degrees from the North to the West; besides a Quarter
of the Compass from East. But in Scripture the least difference may not be
omitted, every Point and Accent being full of Sense. The Eastern Parts then
from Shinar were first Civilized, having Noah himself for their Instructor,
whose numerous Armies overmatched the Millions of Semiramis, and whose
Fruitfulness made it fit for Noah's Husbandry, as Ish-Adamah, a Man exercised
in Earth, says Ar. Montanus.

CHAP. VIII. The Planting of Nations: Noah's Sons, and which was Eldest.
. 1. SHEM, in Augustin's Judgment was Eldest; but the Septuagint, Iunius, etc.
prefer Iaphet, from Genesis 10.21. The Hebrews putting the word Elder after
Iaphet, which the Latin sets before. Gods Blessings are not tied to Elder in
Blood, but Piety: Otherwise Iaphet was 2 Years older than Shem, being begotten
in Noah's 500 th Year; when Shem in Noah's 600 th Year was but 98. Compare Genesis
5.32. with 10.10. and 9.24. Namely Cham the Youngest.

. 2. In this Plantation it is to be presumed. 1. So far as the Scriptures Treat
of the Story of Nations, Profane Authors want Authority in point of Antiquity,
whose Records have been borrowed from thence only. For Moses is found more
Ancient than Homer, Hesiod, or any Greek, says Eusebius, Prooem. in Chron. 2.
We are to consider, that Noah who knew the World so long before, sent not his
Sons at Adventure, as Discoverers, but allotted them the Quarters of their
Habitation. This could not be suddenly, Considering what Woods, Thickets,
Pools, Lakes, Marshes, Fenns, and Boggs, 130 Years Desolation had bred in
those fruitful parts. This made difficult, and slow Journeys and Marches, both
from the East, and Shinar, till Increase of Issue forced them on further.

. 3. Iaphet, with whom Moses begins, Planted the Isles of the Gentiles,
Europe and the Isles about it, besides a Portion in Asia. Gomer, his Eldest Son
is without Reason, placed in Italy by Berosus, Functius, etc. in the Tenth Year
of Nimrod, and when Tubal was in Austria, or Biscai, in Spain, the Twelfth Year
of Nimrod, Ann. 142 after the Flood: For before Babels Confusion the Company
were not dispersed; consider then the time of Building such a City, and a
Tower, to equalize Mountains, said Berosus, or reach to Heaven, said Nimrod,
which took an exceeding compass, and whose Foundation in Marish Ground was full
of Labors: As for Materials the want was great, and the Workmen unexperienced,
and the Work almost finished.

This time Glicas judged to be about 40 Years: So that Gomer and Tubal could
not Plant so soon: Besides the tedious conveying of Wives, Children, Cattle
from Shinar, to Italy, and Spain, 4140 Miles, through Countries, now of much
more difficult Passage. Nimrod spent many Years in a short and more easy
Journey to Shinar; and why did Tubal leave many rich Countries to Plant in
Biscay, the most barren Country of the World? To say they had the Convenience
of Navigation, shows Men know not what it is to carry Multitudes by Sea, with
Cattle, on which they lived. Whether Navigation was then in Use, is doubted,
considering how long it was before Men durst cross the Seas, and that the
Invention was ascribed to the Tyrians long after by Tibullus.

. 4. Gog and Magog, Tubal and Mesech, settled first about lesser Asia, where
Beroaldus (whom I find most judicious in this Plantation out of Ezekiel 38. and
39.) finds the Gomerians, Tubalines, and Togarminans. Josephus in this
Plantation led Eusebius, Epiphanius, and Ar. Montanus into many errors; and
Gog and Magog have troubled many: But this Gog the Prince of Magogians, or
Coelo-Syrians, must needs be the Successor of Seleucius Nicanor, who sought to
extinguish the Jews Religion, and force them to Idolatry. Hermolaus Barborus
makes the Turks come from the Scythians: Iunius makes it a National Name from
Gyges, who slew Candaulus King of Lydia, where Strabo finds the Gygian Lake;
and in the South Borders Iunius finds Gygarta, or Gogkarta in Syriak, Gogs City
in Coelo-Syria, where Pliny places Bambice, or Hierapolis, which the Syrians
call Magog: Though Strabo make both to be Edessa in Mesopotamia; but Ortelius
doubts whether there be a mistake; yet may the Name be common, but certainly
both were North of Israel. Magog might be Father of the Scythians, who wasted
much of lesser Asia, Possessed the Coelo-Syria, and built Scythopolis, and
Hierapolis, which themselves of Syrians call Magog, being North from Judea;
which Bellonius makes Aleppo, where the Mermaid was Worshipped, called
Atergatis, and by the Greeks Derceto. Thus we see the Ancient Gomerians, and
Tubalins were no Italians, or Spaniards: Though long after they might send
Colonies thither.

The Iberians of Old were called Thobelos, of Tubal, who from thence passed to
Spain to search Mines, says Iustine; but it is more probable it was Peopled out
of Africa. Mesech also is Neighbor to Tubal, of whom sprung the Miseans from
Mount Adectas, to Pontus, afterward called Cappadocia, which is the Mazoca,
and is Magog's chief Country: Gomer was Neighbor to Togarma, Bordering on
Syria and Cilicia, whose Posterity Peopled Germany and the Borders of the
Earth, as Gomer signifies. But wanting Room forward to Exonerate their
swelling Multitude, they returned back upon their Neighbors: Whereof they were
called Cimbri, which signifies Robbers, in Camden's Judgment. And though in
Ancient times the Gauls used to beat them, as Caesar Reports; yet after they
grew Warlike they pursued rich Conquests, even into lesser Asia, the Seat of
their Progenitors. Samothes is by Annius made Brother of Gomer, and surnamed
Dis; but Functius, and Vignier do justly disclaim him; seeing Moses knew him
not.

. 5. Noah also by Annius is brought out of the East into Italy, to build Genoa,
and there to live Ninety-two Years; but Moses silence is to me a sufficient
Argument to disprove this Report, seeing he did so carefully Record Nimrod's
Cities. As for Berosus and others, whom he quotes for it, their Fragments are
manifestly proved Spurious, neither could Noah be that Italian Ianus their
First King, who Dyed but 150 Years before Aeneas, according to Eusebius, and
Lived in the days of Ruth, 704. Years after Noah. Let the Italians content
themselves with a Ianus from the Greeks, who Planted them 150 Years before the
Destruction of Troy; from whom they had their Idolatry, as their Vestal
Virgins, and Holy Fire from Vesta his Wife, which no man will believe to
proceed from Noah. There succeeded him Saturnus, Picus, Faunus, Latinus, before
Aeneas, in the Days of Sampson.

. 6. Nimrod Seating himself in Babylon, Reason and Necessity taught the rest to
remove, to take the Benefit of those far extended Rivers which ran along
Shinar, as well for convenience in their Journeys, as to provide for mutual
intercourse for time to come. Thus Chush the Father settled near his Son Nimrod
in the South of Chaldea along Gehon, which Tract Moses calls the Land of Chush,
Genesis 2.13: Havilaah, the other Son of Chush took down Tigris on both sides,
especially the East, which also is called the Land of Havila, Genesis 2.11.
afterward Susiana. Chush in length of time spread into Arabia the Desert, and
Stony, where was the City of Chusca afterward called Chusidia by Ptolomy. So
Seba and the rest Planted Arabia the Happy toward the Persian Gulf, from
whence after the stoppage of Euphrates, they Traded to Babylon by Tigris.
Gomer, Magog, and the other Sons of Iaphet took the lesser Asia, the better to
spread themselves West and North. Tubalin ascended into Iberia. The Magogians
to Sarmatia. The Gomerians in Asia were called Cymerians, says Herodotus; and
their Country was after was called Galatia by the Gallogreeks; whom the
Scythians drove into Albania, and some into Phrygia, both called Cymerians, as
was Bosphorus, and a City by it.

Togarma, Gomers Son, dwelt near Sidon, and overspread the lesser Armenia,
whose Kings were called Tigranes. Meshach, Iaphet's Son, settled in Syracena, in
Armenia, between the Mountains Moschici and Periards; out of whose North-East
springs Araxis; and Euphrates out of the South: Of whom came the Moscovites, in
the Judgment of Melancton. Madai, the Third Son of Iaphet, Planted Media.

. 7. Iavan, the Fourth Son of Iaphet (from the West of lesser Asia) sent
Colonies into Greece, whose Inhabitants were called Jones, that is, Athenians.
Strabo, out of Hecasius, says the Jones came out of Asia, where the Name also
remained. Meshech, the Sixth Son of Iaphet, of whom before. See. 4. which Name
differs little from Aram's Sons, Genesis 10.23. which 1 Chronicles. 1.17. is the very
same. They dwelt North from Jury, and were Enemies to the Jews; and it may be
they were under one Prince: but this Meshech commonly joined with Tubal. If
therefore he Planted first near Jury; yet his Issue might pass into Cappadocia,
and so into Hircania. Those which came of Aram, nearer the Jews, might be those
to whom David fled in his Persecution, Psalm. 120.5. Tiras is Father of the
Thracians, as is generally held* and was Iaphet's Seventh Son.

. 8. Ascanez, Son of Gomer, Eusebius makes Father of the Gothians: Pliny finds
Ascania, and the River of Ascanius, and the Lake of Ascanez, between Prusia and
Nice in Phrygia: Iunius takes them for Inhabitants of Pontus and Bythinia, in
which Ptolomy has such a Lake: Strabo finds a City, River, and Lake in Mesia
near Gio, as Pliny. But Ier. 51.27. determins it North of Asia near Ararat, and
Minni, Mountains of Armenia. Riphat, Gomer's Son, Father of Riphcior
Paphlagone, Famous in the North of Sarmatia, after called Henites; of whom
Polonia, Russia, and Lithuania were Peopled: Melancton thinks they spread from
the Baltic to the Adriatic Sea, and finds a Venetian Gulf in Russia, called
Heneti, the same with Veneti.

. 9. Elisa, eldest Son of Iavan, was Father of the Nicolians, from whence the
Grecians were called Helens, says Montanus; and Ezekiel. 27.7. mentions the Isles
of Elesa, that is, of Greece.

Tharsis, his Second Son, Planted Cilicia, where is the City Tharsis. This word
is often put for the Sea, because the greatest Ships were there, and they were
called Seamen, and the first Jones. Montanus and Call. Paraphrase mistake it for
Carthage.

Cittim, his Third Son, Father of the Macedonians, not Italians, Esa. 23. with
1 Mac. 1. Yet it may be, he first Planted Cyprus, where Josephus found the
City, which remained in Ierom's days, says Pintus; but this Isle proving too
narrow, they sent out and Peopled Macedon, whose Plantation Melancton ascribes
to him.

Dodanim, his Fourth Son, settled at Rhodes; Dodanim and Rhodanim being easily
confounded: He also sent Colonies to Epirus, where was the City Dodana.

. 10. Chush, Eldest Son of Cham, with his Associates, Peopled Babylonia,
Chaldea, and all the Arabias. Ethiopia was not his, as Josephus, the
Septuagint, and others misled by them, judged. First, From Numb. ^2.2. Moses's
Wife was a Chushite, not an Ethiopian, as Josephus Reports; who tells us, that
Moses leading an Egyptian Army against the Ethiopians, the Kings Daughter fell
in Love with, and betrayed the City Sheba to him, after called Meros. On the
contrary, Strabo, and all Geographers, place Sheba in Arabia, whence the Queen
came to visit Solomon. Damianus, and Goes, tell us, that the Prester John's of
the Aybssinians came of that Queen by Solomon. But without Scripture or
Probability, seeing her supposed Bastard assisted not his Brother Rehoboam
against Shishack King of Egypt. But Moses clears his Wives Kindred against
Josephus, making her a Midian, not far from Horeb. So Iethro's coming to Moses,
etc. Chrisamensis also proves Midia cannot be Ethiopia. Thirdly, So Ezekiel.
29.10. Nebuchadonosor's Conquest of Egypt is set out by the Bounds Seveneth,
which is next Ethiopia and the Chushits, ill Translated Black Moors, for
Arabians, the other next Neighbors; whereas the Moors were beyond Seveneth, or
Syene, as Scotland is beyond Barwick. Fourthly, So Ezekiel. 30.9. Chush cannot be
Ethiopia, but Arabia: Whereto Nebuchadonosor (having Conquered Egypt, even the
Tower Syene in Thebaida bordering on Ethiopia) sent Ships over the Red Sea;
which to the Ethiopians joining to Syene, he needed not to have done, neither
would the fall of Nilus suffer; nor was his invading that part of Arabia so fit
by Land, all the length of Egypt being between, and all the tedious Deserts of
Paran. Lastly, This placing a Family of Chush, from all the rest to go and come
through Misraim, would make a confusion in the Plantation: Besides, there was
never any thing between Jews and Ethiopians, as between them and Chushits.
Fourthly, So Esa. 18.1. turning Chush, to Ethiopia for Arabia, puts one Kingdom
for another, confounding the Story: For what Kingdom beyond the River of
Ethiopia can be found, which Assure was to waste as an Enemy to the Jews, who
were never injured by the Ethiopians, much less by any beyond them? But I
acknowledge, that here Egypt, which threatened Israel, is threatened, and Arabia
with it, Esa. 19.20. The like Error is committed in 1 Kings 19.9. Making
Tirhaka an Ethiopian, for a Chushite, or Arabian, as in Zerah, 2 Chronicles. 14.9.
For how should he bring such an Army through such a Kingdom as Egypt?

. 11. Mizarim, Cham's Second Son, took into Egypt along Nilus unto Syene,
bordering on Ethiopia to the South from the Mediterranean Sea; which was his
North Border. Phut, the Third Son traveled to the West beyond him along the
Sea, Inhabiting Mauritania. Egypt was known to Moses and the Prophets by the
Name of Mizraim, but was called Egypt by a King of that Name, otherwise called
Rameses, the Son of Belus, who chased his Brother Danaeus into Greece, where he
settled in Morea after the Flood, 877. Many are the Fancies of the Egyptian
Antiquity of Three Hundred and Thirty Kings before Amasis, Contemporary with
Cyrus; and of their Story of 13000 Years, etc. And Mercator pleads their
Antiquity from their Dynasties, of which the Sixteenth began with the Flood, so
that the first must reach the Creation. But Eusebius begins the Sixteenth with
Abraham 292 Years after the Flood. Annius begins the first Dynasty 131 Years
after the Flood, forgetting that he had said, that Nimrod came but that Year to
Shinar, so that the Dynasty could not begin till after the Confusion. But where
Pererius holds it impossible that Egypt could be Peopled 200 Years after Adam,
and supposing it not replenished at all before the Flood, I find no force in
the assertion. For we have no reason to give less Increase to the Sons of Adam,
than Noah, the Age of the one being double, and after a while treble to the
other, which Argues strength to beget many a long time. This appeared in Cham,
who replenished Five Cities with his own Issue. Nimrod's Troops at Shinar were
great, no doubt; yet it is probable all came not thither, as may be gathered by
the Multitudes, which Encountered Semiramis in the East Indian Wars. As for
Egypt being an Established Kingdom in the Days of Abraham, it argues 'twas
Inhabited long before: And contrary to Pererius, we may rather wonder how the
World could contain the Issue of those long living heathful Fathers, than doubt
the Peopling of it. For if our short Lives, wherein scarce one in Ten Lives to
50 Years, the World wants no People: And if Wars and Pestilence did not cut
them off by Thousands, the World could not contain them: What would it do if
none dyed before 50 or 100 Years? Then Conceive the Millions, when Men Lived 8
or 900 Years etc. Pererius is likewise deceived in the occasion of their
dispersing at Babel: For had not that occasion happened, their Increase would
in short time have forced them to seek new Habitations, etc. That therefore the
World was all over Peopled with offenders, it appears by the Universality of
the Flood. As for Egypt's Antiquity, it is probable that Mizaraim's Sons found
some Monuments in Pillars, Altars, or other Stones, or Metals, touching former
Government there, which the Egyptians added to the Lives of the Kings after the
Flood, which succeeding Times through Vainglory amplified. So Berosus, and
Ephigenes, tell us of the like Antiquities of Chaldea where the Babylonians
knew Letters and Astronomy 3634 Years before Alexander the Great. Egypt was
divided in the Upper, called Thebaida, from Syene to Memphis, and in the lower,
from Memphis to the Mediterranean Sea, making the Form of a D by Memphis,
Pelusin and Alexandria. Thebes had 100 Gates, called Diospolis by the Greeks;
No-hamon in Scripture, from the incredible number of Inhabitants. Phut, the
Third Son of Cham, Planted Lybia, whose Ancient People were called Phuts, said
Josephus; and Pliny found the River of Phut in Mauritania, running from Mount
Athos Two Hundred Miles: Phut and Lud Associated Egypt, Ezekiel. 30.

. 12. Canaan, Fourth Son of Cham, Possessed Palestine, from Sidon to Gerar in
length, Genesis 10. Sidon, his Eldest Son built a City of his Name in Phoenicia.
See ca. 7.6.3. Heth, his Second Son, Father of the Hittites, in the South about
Beersheba, near Paran. Iebusen, the Third Son, Father of the Iebusites, about
Iebus, or Jerusalem, Conquered by David. Amoreus, the Fourth, East of Jordan
from Arnon, past the Sea of Galilee, containing two Kingdoms. His Posterity
also Inhabited the Mountains of Judah, part of Idumea near Libania. Gergeseus,
the Fifth, East from the Galil^an Sea; where was Gerasa; he also Built Geris,
after called Beritus, Three Miles from the River Adonis in Phoenicia. Hevius,
the Sixth, under Libanus, near Emath: The Caphtorims expelled many of them.
Archius, the Seventh, between Libanus and the Sea over against Tripolis: He
Built Archas. Sinius, the Eighth, Iunius places him South of Iebus; more
probably he Built Sin, which the Jews call Sein, or Symira by Ptolomy, or
Synoctis by Arcas, after Brocardus. Aradeus, the Ninth, Built Arados in the
Isle against Phoenice, opposite to Antarados in the main Ocean. Zemari, the
Tenth Son, it is uncertain whether he Inhabited Coelosyria, or was Father of the
Perizzites, or the Emisani; or of Samaria, which latter the Scripture seems
to disprove, 1 Kings 16.28. Hamath, the Eleventh Son, Founder of Emath in
Iturea, East of Hermon, joining to Libanan; not Emath, which Iosepus and Ierom
confound with Antioch, or Epiphania, etc.

. 13. Seba, or Saba, Eldest Son Chush, settled in the West of Arabia the Happy,
East of the Red Sea. Regama, or Raama, the Fourth Brother, and Sheba his Son
took the West side by the Persian Gulf. Pliny says, the Sabeans dwelt along
the Persian and Arabian Seas, where Ptolomy places the City Saba toward the Red
Sea, and Regma toward the Persian; where also Sabta, another Brother, is found
by Montanus out of Ptolomy. Beroaldus thinks it strange, that any of these
Sabeans should go One Thousand Two Hundred Miles to Rob Job in Traconitis,
between Palestine and Coelosyria: But Guilandinus Melchior finds Sabeans
nearer in Arabia the Desert, whom Ptolomy calls Save, now Semiscasac, from
whence the Magi came to Worship Christ, as he judges. The Queen of Saba, which
came to Solomon, Beroaldus and Pererius bring from East Arabia; I rather think
the West next Midian and Ezion Gaber, then under the command of Solomon. Plin.
l. 14.12.
Sabeta has there left his Name in the City Sabbatha or Sabota.

Iosephus's fancy is, that Saba was Father of the Ethiopians about Meros, and
Sabta of the Aabanies, is Confuted by the Names. For in Arabia Desert, are the
Cities of Saba, or Save, and Ragana for Regma, and People called Raabeni, of
Raamah. In Arabia the Happy, are Rhegama and Rabana, and the Cities Sapta; in
the South of Arabia, is Sabatta the Metropolis, and the great City Saba toward
the Red Sea, and the Region Sabe more Southern.

Didan the second Son of Raamah, whom Josephus and Ierom carry to
West-Ethiopia, but Ezechiel joined with Father and Brother, in Trade to Tire,
with precious Clothes, which Naked Black-Moors never knew 'till the Portugals
Traded with them. But Jeremy and Ezechiel will show us Dedan near Idumea, which
will remove all Scruples.

. 14. Ludim, Eldest Son of Mizraim, Father of the Lybians in Africa, where the
Lydians are also adjoined, as a Nation of Africa: For 2 Chronicles. 12.3. Lubim, or
Luhaei is the same with Ludim in Hebrew, says Montanus, with some difference
in writing from the Lybies. Misraim's other Sons are assigned no certain place
in Holy Scripture; only the Philistines are said to come of Casluhim and
Caphtorim, in the Entrance into Egypt by the Lake Serbonis, and the Hill
Cassius. Caphtorim, between that and Pelusium, is a Tract called Sithroitis,
where Pliny and Stephanus place the City Sethron, which Ortelius takes to be
Hercules parva in Ptolomy. The Philistines Inhabited the South of Canaan,
driving out the Avims, or Hevites, says Iunius on Genesis 10.14. Deuteronomy. 2.23. Ios.
13.3. where their Bounds are set forth, and their five Principalities.

. 15. Sem's Posterity Moses reckons up last, that he might proceed with the
Genealogy of the Hebrews to Abraham, for which Arpbaxad's Age only is
expressed, and his Children, and of Aram. The common Opinion possessed him of
what was beyond Tygris to the Indian-Sea, says Ierom, saving India, which I
believe Noah held; to whom, after Ioctan, came Ophir and Havilah, and planted
there; of whom hereafter.

Elam, Father of the Elamites, the Princes of Persia, whose Seat was Susan, by
the River Vlai, which Ptolomy calls Eulaeus, which runs into Hiddekel.
Asher, the Second Son of Sem, Father of the Assyrians, disdaining Nimrod's
Pride, left Babel, and built Ninivy, according to the common Opinion, and
contended for the Empire. Sect. 1. Sect. 3.
Arphaxad was Father of those Chaldeans which were about Vr; the rest were
possessed by the Sons of Cham. Lud, Sem's Fourth Son Josephus and Ierom place
in lesser Asia, but I question it. Aram, his Fifth Son, Father of the Syrians,
as well about Mesopotamia as Damascus. Padan Aram, or Aram Neharaim, that is,
Syria between two Rivers, which were Tygris and Euphrates: Strabo reports it
was anciently called Aramenia, or Aramia; and the Name Aram was changed into
Syria by Syrus, before Moses, says Eusebius. Part of it is called Ancobaritis,
by Ptolomy, being divided by the River Chaboras, says Iunius.

Vz or Hus, Aram's Eldest Son, built Damascus, says Josephus, Ierom, and Lyra.
It has Jordan West, Mount Seir East, Edrai South, and Damascus North, in the
East part of Traconitis, and adjoining to Basan, where Job the Son of Hus, the
Son of Nahor dwelt; full of petty Kings in the days of Jeremy, 25.20.

Hal, Aram's Second Son, Father of the Armenians, says Ierom; but Iunius
places him in the Palmeri^n Deserts, by Euphrates; where Ptolomy places the
City Cholle. Gether, the Third Son set down in Cassiotis and Seleucis, and is
seated where Ptolomy places the City Gindarus.

Mesech, the Fourth Son set down North of Syria, tween Silicia and Mesopotamia,
near the Mount Masius. These Plantations can no other ways be known, than by
this probability: The Fathers having large Regions, planted their own Children
in them for mutual Comfort, 'till Ambition bred expulsion of Natives; and that
every Man began to desire a distinct place, and disliked to live in Common.

Phaleg, Son of Heber, in whose time fell the division of Tongues, which the
Hebrews refer to his Death, Anno 340 after the Flood; for at his Birth, Anno
101, there could be no multitude to divide. They say farther, that Heber gave
Phaleg his name by Prophesy, foreseeing the division to come. But Heber might,
without Prophecy, foresee the division of Families would grow upon the increase
of the World; besides, Phaleg might change his Name upon that occasion, as
Jacob into Israel, long before he died. For his death fell in Ninus's days, but
12 Years before Abraham, whereas the division had been long before, and the
Multitudes were infinite in Ninus's days.

Ioctan, Heber's other Son, had thirteen Sons, all inhabiting from Copuz or
Coas, a Branch of Indus, into the East, says Ierom; but their particular
places are uncertain.

Sheba, or Seba, one of them may be he of whom Dionysius Apher, writing of East
India, says, The Sabaei and Taxili do dwell in the midst of them. As for the
Sabeans which sprang of Chush, we found them in Arabia; and many will place
Shaba, Abraham's Grandchild there, in Arabia Deserta, where Ptolomy places a
City of his Name, whose Inhabitants pillaged Job. Job 1.15.

Opher, another of Ioctan's Sons, Ierom places in an Island of East- India;
and indeed Opher is found among the Molucks. Ar. Montanus and Diessis seek it
in Peru of America; and Iunius takes Barbatia in Characene, a Province in
Susiana to be it, corrupted from Parvaim to Barbatia. As for Peru, Iucatan,
etc. in America, they are late mistaken Names.

Havilah, another of Ioctan's Sons, is thought to Inhabit the Continent of
East India, watered by the River Ganges; as the Country of Havilah the Son of
Chush, was watered by Pison, West of Tygris, or rather to Shur. But if the
common Opinion of Ierom be true, Ioctan and his Posterity settled about Mesech,
or the Hill Masius; between Cilicia and Mesopotamia: And that these Three Sons,
or their Issue, went afterward into East India.

As for Sepher, a Mountain of the East, as Ierom looks for it in East India, so
Montanus in the West, makes it Andes in America: But for Moses Sepher, we find
Sipphora, placed by Ptolomy, on the East side of Masius; neither is it strange
to say, Mesopotamia is in the East, Numb. 23.7. This Order of Plantation which
I have followed, does best agree with the Scripture, Reason, and Probalities;
which Guides I follow, little esteeming Men's private Opinions.

CHAP. IX. Of the Beginning and Establishment of Government.
. 1. GOvernment hitherto in the World, was only Paternity and Eldership, from
which the word Elder was used, as well for Governors as the Aged; to show that
the Wisdom of Years should be in Governors; the first Government being from
the Father to the Elder Son. Hence grew Segnour and Segnourie, for Lordship and
Dominion, which is Puissance in Property and Power; Power having command of
Subjects, as Property has Mastership of Servants. Caesar has Power to Command
whatever a Man possesses, but Property only in his own. When Paternal
persuasion grew too weak to resist Inclination to Evil, and to Correct it when
it grew Habitual; Necessity, which binds all Mortals, made both the Wise and
Foolish at once, to perceive, that the Estate of Men would prove more miserable
than that of Beasts, if a general Obedience to Order and Dominion did not
prevent it; and that licentious Disorder promising Liberty, upon Trial, would
prove no less dangerous to all, than an intolerable Bondage. Necessity
propounds, and Reason confirms this Argument: All Nations were persuaded to
submit to a Master or Magistrate in some degree; which Change was pleasing when
compared with former Mischiefs in want of Government. Yet Time brought out
therein some Inconveniences, which Necessity also sought to avoid, and
thereupon thought upon some equal Rules, to limit Dominion, which before was
lawless. Laws being then set for Government, acquired the Title of Regal Power
or Government; and want thereof was known to be Tyrannical; the one Ordained by
God for his People's good, the other permitted to afflict them. In this Infancy
of Regal Authority, Princes, Just and Religious, were esteemed Gods, said
Fabius Pictor. And though Necessity and Reason seem Authors of Government, yet
God kindled this Light in the Minds of Men, and set them a Pattern in the Law
of Nature, wherein they see Bees, Cranes, Deer, etc. to follow a Leader; and
God, in his Word, takes it upon him to appoint Government, Prove. 8.15. Dan.
2.21. and 5.21. John 19.21.

. 2. What was the Government before the Flood more than Paternal, is uncertain;
or from what better kind of public Government, the Tyranny of that Age did
grow. After the Flood, Three sorts of Government are found approved. 1st. The
Government by one Ruling by Just Laws, called Monarchy, opposed to Tyranny. 2
dly. The Government by diverse principal Persons, Established by Order, and
Ruling by Laws, called Aristocracy, opposed by Oligarchy, in Usurpation of a
few. 3. The Government of the People, called Democracy, opposed to Ochlocracy,
which is a tumultuous Will of a confused Multitude without Law.

The Eldest of every Family at the first, set Order to his Issue, and upon
increase, planted them about him in one Field, of which grew Villages; then
followed Society, Pagus.
by diverse Villages, called Pagus, (...), which is a Fountain; for that all
these Villages drank of the same Fountain, like our Hundreds. And when Malice,
Pride, and Emulation set one Race against another, Men joined diverse Villages,
which had Banks and Ditches for defense, calling it Oppidum, as opposed to
their Enemies: Vrbs, ab Orb, a Circuit first made with a Plough, said Varro;
which word was first used for the Walls and Buildings, as Civitas for the
Inhabitants, but were after confounded; yet every Inhabitant is not properly a
Citizen, but he which has the Freedom and Privileges of it, and is capable of
bearing Rule in it. And as Cities grew by Association of Villages, so did
Common-Weals by Association of Cities.

. 3. The First Age after the Flood, was called Golden, while Ambition and
Avarice, etc. were in the Blade, Men being more plain, simple, and contented;
yet in respect of Government, they were as the following Ages, in which as good
Kings made Golden times, so the contrary; yea, Princes Beginnings are commonly
Golden, in which their Game is commonly smoothly played, but Time shrinks their
Hearts, and small Errors at first, breed greater; as it is also in every Man's
Life, his Youth is Golden, which when Time has eaten up, and bred such
alteration, we praise what is past. It is the Vice of our Malignity to extol
the past, and loath the present; such inquire not wisely, said Ecclesiasticus.
Our Ancestors have, we and our Children will make the same Complaints; and what
is new shall be old, says Arnobius. The Virtue of Kings (next after God)
produced their Crowns, and the Peoples Love so purchased, kept them on their
Heads.

. 4. From this beginning of Regality grew Nobility; Princes choosing by the same
Rule of Virtue, Men to assist them; which Honor succeeded not by Blood, but
Virtue, which is true Nobility, the note of one Excelling another in Virtue;
and should bind Nobility not to degenerate. As for Riches, Power, Glory, etc.
they do no more define Nobility, than bare Life defines a Man. Honor is the
Witness of Virtue and well-doing; and true Nobility is the continuance of it in
a Family; so that where Virtue is extinguished, they are like painted Images,
worshipped by the Ignorant, for Christ, our Lady, and other Saints. Flowers not
manured, turn to Weeds, and the purest Fountain running through a filthy Soil,
is soon Corrupted. Race and Lineage is but the Matter, Virtue and well deserving
of a Commonwealth, is the Form of true Nobility, which being found in
Posterity, over-weigheth our proper Honor acquired by our own Virtue; but if
Virtue be wanting to Nobility by descent, then Personal acquired Nobility is to
be preferred without comparison, for that by Descent may be in a very Villain.
There is a third Nobility, which is in Parchment, purchased by Silver, or
Favor, being Badges of Affection, which when Princes change, they could wish
they were blotted out: But if we had as much Sense in our denegeration in
Worthiness, as we have of Vanity in deriving our selves from such Parents, we
should perceive such Nobility to be our Shame.

CHAP. X. Of Nimrod, Belus, and Ninus.
. 1. NIMROD, the Sovereign after the Flood, was generally held a Tyrant: But
Melancton, and Onomasticum Theologicum judge otherwise. And it seems, that
his leading this Troop to Shinar, was rather given him, than Usurped, seeing it
is not Recorded that Noah, or any of the Sons of his Body came with him, or
were in that presumptuous Action. Some Ancients conceive Suphne and Ioctan were
also Leaders; but joined not in that unbelieving Attempt, and therefore lost
not their Language.

. 2. Nimrod, Belus and Ninus, were different Persons, though Eusebius and Ierom
confound the two first; and Augustine makes Belus King of Babylon, which
Argues him to be Nimrod. Mercator, with less probability confounds Nimrod and
Ninus, out of Clemens. Diodorus Siculus Reports that Ninus subdued Babylon,
which perhaps had Rebelled upon settling the Empire at Ninive, which was also in
Shinar.

. 3. Nimrod, not Assure, Built Ninive, as Iunius has rendered Moses's Text
agreeable to Reason and Sense, though Writers differ. That Assure Built it,
greeth not with Moses's Order, who especially intending the Story of the
Hebrews, first handles the Birth of Noah's other Sons, beginning with Iaphet,
proceeding with Cham, and lastly with Shem, not intermingling one with the
other, till he had set down a brief of all Three. In the Narration of Cham he
makes a distinct Discourse of Nimrod and his Brethren, being to speak after at
large of Babels Confusion by it self, to show us the Founder of the place, and
of the Empire, which first overruled all the rest. As for the Assyrian
Kingdom, it arose from the Babylonian, according to Iunius: So Calvin before
follows Epiphanius. Ierom, Cyril, Methodius and P. Comestor, with Cedrenus,
took Assure, Genesis 10.11. to be Nimrod's Son, as does Torniellus of late: But
Rab. Maurus understood it as Iunius. Yet Calvin contrary to Iunius and himself,
objecting Esaias 23.13. (than which no place more difficult) to prove Assure
founded the Chaldean, much more the Assyrian Empire. But the City of the
Chaldeans founded, and after destroyed by the Assyrians, may with good
probability be understood of Vr, called Vrcta by Ptolomy, Chaldeopolis by the
Greeks, and Cameria by Hecateus. This Vr stood upon the chief stream of
Euphrates; by which it passed into the Persian Gulf, though now it is stopped
and runs into Tigris, of which stoppage Niger and Pliny speak. This City
then had Trade with Tyrus, and was a Port Town: By which the Sabeans sent
Commodities to Babylon, and so to Tire. This Vr founded by Shem's Son Assure,
was afterward destroyed by the Assyrians, which God foreseeing, sent away
Abraham from thence. That the Founder differs from Assure the destroyer, is
agreeable to the Truth and circumstances. For thus Seth's Posterity which
followed Assure, being Planted at Vr, were separated from the Idolatrous
Chushits, And if Sem's Son Assure founded Ninive; how left he it to Ninus Son of
Belus, and Husband of Semiramis?

. 4. Nimrod, called Saturn by Julian Africanus, established the Babylonian
Monarchy, which he enlarged into Assyria: Where he Founded Ninive and other
Cities, which his Son Belus finished, who after Nimrods 114 Years Reign
succeeded, and spent much time in draining the Marshes of Babel, and began with
Sabbatius in Armenia, and Scythia Saga, which Ninus finished.

. 5. Ninus's days might well afford many Kingdoms, if we consider the order of
their departing from Babel according to their Kindred, every Family following
the chief thereof, whom Nature and Necessity taught the rest to submit unto;
and who took opportunity from Time and Nimrod's examples to exercise legal
Authority. Belus, who succeeded Nimrod, found Sabatius King of Armenia and
Scythia, able to resist him, whom I take to be Tanais in Iustine. As for his
Vexoris, Reineccius has judiciously taken to be Sesostris the Great, some Ages
after Ninus. Belus in common account Reigned 65 Years.

. 6. Belus, I judge to be a Name, rather given by Ninus, for Honor to his
Father, than taken by him. Cyrill calls him Arbelus; and says he was the first
that would be called God. Bell, say the Learned, signifying the Sun in Chalde,
and there Worshipped for God: And many words in Scripture grew from it, Bell,
Baal, Beelzebub, Baalim, which Name was given to God, till upon abuse he forbad
it. The first Idolatry grew from hence, etc. The Old, the most Ancient of every
Family, and Kings which Founded Cities, were called Saturns, their Sons
Jupiters, and Valiant Nephews Hercules.

. 7. Image Worship began from Belus in Babel, etc. Schoolmen shift off this
fearful Custom strangely. For seeing the very Workman-ship is forbidden, how
can the heart of a wise Christian satisfy it self with the distinction of
Douleia, and Latrua, and Hyperdouleia, which can imply but a difference of
Worship; and it is most strange, that Learned Men do strain their Wits to
defend what Scripture oftentimes expressly forbids, and Curses the practicers.
And where they say, the Prophets condemn Heathen Idols only, it is manifest
Moses spoke of the Living God, saying, You saw no Image when the Lord spoke to
you in Horeb. Basil forbids us to imagine any Form of God, lest we limit him in
our Minds; what Presumption then is it, to put him under the Greasy Pensil of a
Painter, or the rusty Tool of a Carver? Rome for 170 Years by Numa's Law, held
it impiety, till Tarquin, Priscas, and Varro, condemned it, as Augustine shows:
So Seneca, Sybil, Sophocles. And though Papists say, that Heathen Images are
instead of Letters; yet as Heathen Pictures proved notorious Idols, so those
Stocks, Stones, etc. called Pictures of Christ, our Lady, etc. were by the
Ignorant, not only Worshipped, but thought to live. It is safest then for
Christians to believe Gods Commandments directly against Images, and that which
the Prophets and St. Paul speak plainly and convincingly.

. 8. Ninus the first Idolater, an Invader of others, and public Adulterer: Of
whom nothing is certain which is written; for Berosus who chiefly followed him
in the Assyrian Succession from Nimrod to Ascalodius, in the days of Joshua, is
disproved by many Ctesias, who lived with Cyrus the Younger, a gross flatterer
of Princes, speaks of incredible numbers in Ninus and Semiramis's Wars. He,
with the help of Aricus King of Arabia, subdued Syria, Barzanes of Armenia, and
Zoroaster of Bactria, at his second Expedition, by the Valor of Semiramis,
whom he took from Menon her Husband, who for Grief drowned himself.

CHAP. XI. Of Ninus, Semiramis, and Belus.
. 1. NINVS finished Ninive, as Semiramis did Babel, began by Nimrod: Ninive,
Four Hundred Forty Furlongs in Circuit, the Wall an Hundred Foot high, and had
One Thousand Five Hundred Towers; yet Semiramis exceeded him in Babylon.

. 2. Ninus Dyed after 52 Years Reign, Anno Mundi 2019. Plutarch Reports he gave
Semiramis one days absolute Rule, as she desired; in which she commanded his
Death. She, says Justin, was so like Ninias her Son, as that she took upon her
to Personate him; but it is highly improbable, considering she Reigned 42
Years, and used her own Name.

. 3. Semiramis, as to her Parentage and Education is variously Reported, but
not determined by any Author.

. 4. Her Indian Expedition, if Ctesias were worthy of Credit, would yet burden
any Man's faith to believe she had Three Millions of Foot, One of Horse, Two
Hundred Thousand Charets and Camels Mounted. All which Power perished with her,
by the hand of Stenobates.

. 5. Belus's Temple Built by her Four Square, a Mile high by Eight Ascents,
each a Furlong high, and of lesser Circuits, on whose top the Chaldean Priests
observed the Stars. Many take the Ruins of it, made by Xerxes, for Nimrod's
Tower, etc. See Pyramids of Egypt.

THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. BOOK II. Part I. FROM Abraham's Birth, to the
Destruction of Solomon's Temple, which was, 1525 Years.
CHAP. I. Of the time of Abraham's Birth, and Order of the Assyrian Empire.
NINEAS, or Zameis, succeeded Semiramis in the Empire; altogether Effeminate
and unlike to Conquer Bactria, as Berosus reports, contrary to Diodorus,
Justinius, Orosius, and all others. He changed Governors Yearly out of
Jealousy of them.

Arrius succeeded, whom Suidas calls T^uras: He only reduced the Revolted
Bactrians. Aralius succeeded, sumptuous in Jewels, and the Inventer of some
Warlike Engines. Baleus Xerxes succeeded. The Date and Term of these Assyrian
Kings Reigns, are best found out by the times of Abraham, and his Posterity,
set down by Scriptures, which are only void of Errors, whereto all other
Writings are subject: No marvel then, if in the Ancient Affairs, History want
assurance, said Plutarch.

Abraham's Birth Year is therefore forced to be ascertained; all agree it was
in the 43 d of Ninus; but the Disagreement between Chronologers is about the
Year after the Flood, in which he was Born. Archilochus de Temporibus in
Annius, makes but 250 Years from the Flood to Ninus, whereto add 43, which
make 293 Years at Abraham's Birth: Others do account 352 from the Flood to
Abraham. In this Labyrinth and unresolved Question, I choose rather the scandal
of Novelty, than sluggishly to proceed in that easy way of Ancient mistaking,
seeing to be Learned in many Errors, or to be ignorant in all things, has
little advantage of each other.

. 2. Arguments for the First Date of 293.. First, they Argue from Scripture.
Secondly, from Authority of Josephus, Augustine, Beda, Isidore, and others.
First, The Scripture is Genesis 11.26. when Abraham is first Named the Worthiest,
and Son of the Promise; therefore Firstborn. Secondly, Moses respected, the
History of Abraham, not Nahor. Thirdly, If Abraham were not the Firstborn, his
Birth is uncertain. Fourthly, Unprobable; Terah had a Child at 130 Years of Age.

. 3. Answer to the Objections.. Leaving what Divines have Answered; to scan
this Question, we are to consider, whether Abraham made two Journies from
Charran unto Canaan; the former before; the latter after his Fathers Death, as
some conceive upon what is said, Heb. 11.3. Against this fancy. Martyr Stephen
Witnesses, that God brought him into the Land after his Father was Dead. This
can be no other than that of which Moses writ, Genesis 12. as Beza proves on Act.
7.2. etc. For as Stephen had none of whom to Learn the Story of Abraham's Life,
but Moses; so he would not give so great a scandal to the Jews, therein to
disagree with Moses.

Secondly, Consider the Journey from Charran to Canaan, distant Three Hundred
English Miles, unknown to him, and tedious, over Mountains and Deserts, which
he must pass three times in two Journies, and so make Nine Hundred Miles;
besides his Travel from Vr to Charran, as much more. And consider the Train
Abraham had with him, Genesis 12.5. which show no inclinations of returning to
Dwell at Charran, till his Fathers Death, as it is plain, Act. 7.4. when also by
their account, Abraham must be about 135 Years Old, and Isaac also must be
about 35: When he might well have Married him, and not send 5 Years after
thereabout on such a Journey: Neither can this Opinion agree with that which
Abraham's Servant Reported to Laban, touching his Master, which he could not be
ignorant of, if he had been so lately there; Moses has carefully set down all
Abraham's Journies, most of them of less importance than this; neither can any
reason be given, why Abraham did return this second time to Charran, but only
to support their Opinions.

. 4. To the Objection of Terah's Age un^it for a Child, as Abraham was at One
Hundred, Genesis 18 11. it is hardly worth answering; but if they consider
Sarah's, the wonder was in her own disability, not Abraham's, who had diverse
Sons 37 Years after; yea many Ages after, that Boaz, Obed, and Iesse, Begat
Sons at 200 Years, or there about.

. 5. To the Objection of making Abraham's Age uncertain, and so the succeeding
Times: I Answer, Abraham's Age is as certain as any other from his Father's
death, as if his Birth had been dated. For as St. Stephen tells us, his
departure followed his Father's death, so Moses records his Age to be 75
Years, and his Father's 205 at his Death. To the Objection, that Moses
respected not Nahor and Haran, to set out their Age, as he did Abraham's; I
Answer, There were great Reasons to respect them also, considering the Church
of God was to spring out of them by Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob's Marrying with
them. And though they had Worshipped strange God's, as Terah himself, Ios. 24.
Yet after Abraham's being called, their willing departure with him from their
Country and ordinary reverend Speeches of Iehova, prove they were no Infidels,
and without Faith, Genesis 24.31, 50. I dare not therefore pronounce them out of
the Church, who, I am sure were in the Faith.

. 6. Abraham's being first named, proves him not the Eldest:. If in Scripture
it appear not that God made especial choice of the Firstborn, as it is in
Seth, Isaac, Jacob, Judah, David, etc. the being first named can prove no
Birthright. Shem is first named among the Sons of Noah, whereof, said
Augustine, Order of Nativity is not here respected, but signification of future
Dignities, in Genesis 25. And he rather judged Abraham the Youngest of the Three.
Piety, says he, or rather Divine Election, which draws with it Piety and the
Fear of God, gave precedence to Shem among the Sons of Noah, and to Abraham
among the Sons of Terah.

Again, Moses testifies Abraham was 75 Years old when he left Charran: Stephen
says it was after Terah's death; at 83, he rescued Lot; at 86, Ismael was
born; and Isaac at 100, and all in Canaan. But if he begat Abraham at 70,
Abraham must be 135 Years old when he entered Canaan, etc. Moreover, by this
Account, Isaac must be 35 years Old, and Ismael 49. at Terah's death, and Born
in Mesopotamia, contrary to Scripture. Thirdly, by this reckoning, Terah should
be but 145 Years Old at his Death, when Abraham was 75. Fourthly, Sarah being
within Ten Years of Abraham her Uncle, Haran her Father being his younger
Brother, must beget her at Nine Years Old, which Reason Lyra uses. The like
Reason is taken from the Age of Lot, the Son of Haran, called an Old Man at
Abrahams's Eighty third year.

. 7. The Conclusion, noting the Authors on both sides.. It agrees with
Scripture, Nature, Time, and Reason, that Haran was Terah's Eldest Son.
Augustine was herein uncertain, and what he says in his City of God, lib.
16.15. is answered in his 52d Question on Genesis And as he followed Josephus, so
Isidore and Beda follow him. The Hebrews, and generally the Romanists following
the first Opinion, allow but 292 Years from the Flood to Abraham. But Theodoret
and diverse later, Beroald, Codornan, Beucer, Calvin, Beza, Iunius, etc. hold
Abraham begotten in the 130 th. Year of Terah. Scaliger, Seth, Calvisius, etc.
to the contrary, call it Heresy in Chronology; Bucholcreus, Chitreus, Functius,
and others, follow them; yet Torniellus in his Annals confutes them. But if we
advisedly consider the state of the World in Abraham's days, we shall rather
increase the time from the Flood to Abraham, as the Septuagint did to 1072;
than shorten it to 292: For such paring of Time to the quick, draws the Blood
of the Story, if Scripture's Testimony were not supreme. Seeing then we know
the World was so peopled, and Kingdoms so furnished with Cities of State and
Strength, more time is required for it than many imagine, etc.

. 8. The Assyrians Times ordered by Abraham 's History.. Thus Abraham's Birth
being 352 Years after the Flood, and so the 2009 th Year of the World, brings
Ninus's 43 to the same date of the 352 Years, we must consider what probably
was spent before the coming to Shinar, admitting Chus were born the Year after
the Flood. His youngest Son Nimrod, Founder of the Empire, born after Dedan Son
of Raamah, the fourth Son of Chus, could not, according to the ordinary course
of those Times, be esteemed Born, 'till 65 Years after Chus, allowing 30 Years
to Chus, before his first Son, and 30 Years to Raama, Father of Dedan, born
before Nimrod, and 5 Years for his five Elder Brethren. Allow 60 Years after
for two Generations before their setting forth before Shinar, and six Years for
their Travail with Wives, Children, and Cattle out of the East, through
overgrown Countries and Mountains. Thus 131 Years are spent before Babel is
taken in hand; the 221 Years which remain of 352, are divided, to Ninus 42
before Abraham's Birth, 65 to Belus, and 114 to Nimrod, yet this makes Nimrod
in all, not above 180 Years old, which was not much for that Generation, Genesis
11.3. in which they lived; yea, 400 Years. Ninus lived 9 Years after, and
Semiramis suceeded 42 Years, when Abraham was 52 Years old. Ninias, or Zameis
succeeded 38; in whose 23 d Year, Abraham at 75 years old, came to Canaan; and
10 years after, Abraham over-threw Amraphel King of Shinar, which may seem to
have been Ninias, in whose 33 d year it happened; though the Reasons to the
contrary are not easily answered.

. 9. Amraphel, King of Shinar, probably, was Ninias.. Ninias was King of
Babylon at that time, in the 85th year of Abraham. It is objected, that
Chedorlaomer was greater now than Amraphel, who therefore was not like to be
Ninias. To this it may be answered, under Ninias, the Babylonian Command was
fallen, and the Persian his Neighbor King of Elam was enlarged.

. 10. Arioch King of Ellassar.. This Country can neither be Pontus nor
Hellespontus, as some think; being so far out of the way to be drawn by the
Persian; who little needed to seek such aid against such petty Kings, which had
not in all, so much ground as Middlesex; of which sort Canaan had 33 destroyed
by Joshua. And the whole Country these four Kings subdued, was no more than the
two little Provinces of Traconitis or Basan; and the Region of the Moabites.
Stephanus, a Grecian Cosmographer de Vrbibus, finds Ellas in the Border of
Coelosyria; and Hierom calls it the City of Arioch. This City was also in the
Borders of Arabia, of which Arioch indeed was King, and Confederate with the
Assyrian Kings, as in Ninus's Life, etc.

. 11. Tidal King of Nations.. There were diverse petty Kingdoms adjoining to
Phoenicia and Palestine, as Palmirenia, Batanea, Laodicene, Apamena,
Chalcidice, Cassiotis, Chalibonitis, having Mesopotamia on the North, and
Arabia on the East. It is probable these were joined together under Tidal.

. 12. Chedorlaomer the chief of the Four.. He was not King of Assure, and the
other three Viceroys, as Pererius judges; for Moses never uses Elam for
Assyria or Babylon. Neither do I believe the Assyrian or Babylonian Kingdoms
were very large at this time. 1. From Example; Things hastily set up with
violence, last not, as Alexander's Conquests, and Tamberlain's, whose Empires
dyed with them; neither had they time to review what they had done, God
adjoining short life to assuage Fury; and Nature cares least for what she does
in have. Ninus persued boundless Dominion with Violence; Semiramis exceeded
him, etc. 2. Ninias having changed Nature and Condition with his Mother,
preferring Pleasure and Ease before Honor and Greatness; as he endured his
Mother's Reign, so wanted he Spirit to maintain what she left him, against
Neighboring Princes, whose Wounds and Wrongs from his Parents, put them in
mind to cure the one, and revenge the other. 2 And it was God's will, when he
would impose that long and tedious Journey upon Abraham, that the Countries
should be in Peace, through which he wandered; to which end those Millions of
Warriors and Engines perished with Semiramis, to make the Recovery of lost
Liberty the more easy. Lastly, Histories report, that Arrius, who succeeded
Ninias, recovered Bactria, and Caspia, and Baleus or Xerxes reduced the rest,
even to Egypt; which argues their former Revolt.

. 13. Consent of Writers almost forces us to think as I have delivered,
touching the Four Kings; yet if we take them rather for Four petty Kings, which
in that sluggish Reign of Ninias had gathered Colonies out of those Four
Countries, and Planted themselves elsewhere, we shall remove some difficulties.
For if Chedorlaomer were King of Persia it self beyond Babylon, what a Journey
were it to come so far and gather such Forces which must pass so great
Countries as Assyria, Chaldea, Mesopotamia, Syria, and part of Arabia, to
Conquer five small Cities, and leave all the rest of Canaan; yea, to come in
Person, and that the second time. But the Scripture makes this Invasion no
great matter, but as matching four Kings to five, as if the five were not so
unequally matched, though petty Kings, as of necessity they had been, if these
four had been absolute Kings of the Kingdoms, whose Names they bear. If then
the former Conjectures cannot agree to the Text, to the Authority whereof, all
Human Reason must subscribe, let the received Opinion stand, that Amraphel was
Ninias, who was become inferior to Chedorlaomer of Persia. From the Assyrian,
the History of Abraham, leads us to the Egyptian Kingdom, then also
flourishing.

CHAP. II. Of the Kings of Egypt, from Cham to the Delivery of the Israelites.
THE Kings of Egypt, 'till Israel 's Deliverance; and the causes of the
uncertainty of the History.. Cham, after Babel's Confusion, having known
Egypt's Fertility, Planted it Anno 191 after the Flood. Osiris succeeded Anno
352. Typhon, or Hercules, Anno 603. Orus, 620. Sesostris the Great, 735.
Sesostris the Blind, 786. Busiris, or Oris 2 d. Anno 782. Acenchere, or
Thermutis, or Meris, 820. Rathoris 832. Chenchrese 841, drowned. Augustine, a
diligent searcher of Antiquities, omitted the Succession of Egyptian Kings,
finding no certainty of them, through the Ambition of their Priests, who, to
magnify the Antiquities, which they only kept, filled the Records with Romances
and Names of Kings, which never Reigned. Other good Authors were overcredulous
of what they found so Recorded, Published the same in their own Names. Of
these, Annius finding some Fragments, and adding what he would, is no farther
to be Credited, than where approved Writers Confirm his Assertion. Herein the
Old Christian Writers follow Eusebius; but the Modern, Annius and Profane
Authors; follow Diodorus, Herodotus, etc.

. 2. Cham began his Reign in Egypt, after the Flood, Anno 191.. This is
gathered from the Dyanasties of Egypt, whose 16 th began in the 43 d. year of
Ninus: The 12 first under their 12 great Gods, lasted 84 Years, seven a-piece;
the 13 endured 14 years; the 14 lasted 26; the fifteen was 37, which three last
were under three younger Gods: All the 75 added together, make 161 years; which
being deducted out of 352, the remainder is 191, the beginning of Government
there, after Cham's arrival. The same also is probable from their coming to
Babel, which being after the Flood, Anno 131, and Forty years, according to
Glicas, spent in Building, we can allow no less than Twenty years, for the slow
passing such a Company through such a difficult long way; which Sums being
added, make up 191 years, when the first Dynasty began; for to begin them
sooner, were either to plant Egypt as soon as Babel, or with Mercator, to make
them before the Flood; which their number, exceeding the number of those
long-lived Fathers, will not admit.

. 3. The Dynasties of Egypt were not absolute Kings, but Viceroys under
Kings.. The probability of this will appear by the custom of Kings governing by
Great Men, as of old, the Kings of France, by the Master of the Palace; the
Turk by a Grand Vizier; the Philistin Kings which came out of Egypt, had a
Captain, as Abimelek had Phicol; the Kings of Israel, as Saul had Abner; David
had Ioab. And Cham's lend disposition to follow Pleasure, might breed the
Custom, which continued even to the days of Joseph, advanced to the place by
Pharaoh; from which Example, William Arch Bishop of Tire affirms the same Form
of Government continued in Egypt in his days, when the Sultans governed under
the Calif, as Lieutenants under a King. How these Dynasties succeeded, and how
long they continued, is uncertain.

. 4. Cham. and Mizraim or Oris.. Of Cham the Scripture calls that Country the
Land of Ham, not for being Peopled by his Sons, for so were other Countries,
which yet are never so called, but for that himself planted it. Osiris called
himself the Eldest Son of Saturn, as in Diodorus, lib. 1. which Saturn of
Egypt, was Grandfather of Ninus; as in his Monument. Of Cham came the Temple
of Hammon near Egypt: And in Ierom's days the Egyptians called their Country
Ham; so Ortelius says out of Plutarch, that Egypt was called Chemia. That Cham
reigned 161 years, is not improbable, considering Sem his Brother lived 600
years. Mizraim or Osiris, according to Diodor, succeeded, of whom the Land also
took its Name, and by the Natives, is yet called Mezre, as Reineccius shows.
How long he Reigned, is hard to determine; but that he began at Abraham's Birth
is probable, when the Dynastie of the Thebaei, began according to Eusebius.

. 5. Osiris Reign is guessed at by his Son Lebabim, or Hercules Lybeus his
Warring with Typhon, and the Giants, his Associates in Revenging his Fathers
Death. His Egyptian Wars he ended, and begun his Italian, in the 41 Year of
Baleus King of Assyria, according to Berosus, when he left the Kingdom to his
Brother Orus. To this Egyptian, and many other Wars before his Italian,
Krentzhemius allows but 6 Years, which draws Osiris Death to the 34 th Year
of Belus, and so makes him Reign 297 Years, and so should end 7 Years after
Israel came into Egypt. This cannot be, for the King under whom Israel came,
outlived Jacob, and had Reigned from before Ioseph's standing before Pharaoh;
yea, we may give 13 Years more of Ioseph's Bondage to him. This King then could
not be Osiris, who lived not so long as Jacob; nor Typhon, nor Hercules; but
Orus, Son of Osiris, advanced by Hercules.

. 6. Typhon, and Hercules, their Reigns are not distinctly defined; only Orus,
is placed 7 Years after Osiris by Krentzhemius, and whose Reign seems to last
115 Years, and from whose Death, to the Israelites Departure are 122 Years.

Sesostris, or Sesonchosis, succeeded according to Scholiast. Apollonii: He was
a great Conqueror in Asia, even into India, and Europe: Whom Justin
erroniously makes Vexoris, says Reineccius, some Ages after Ninus. This
Sesostris, some think is Besak, but it is not so, as diverse differences in
setting out their Wars do manifest. Whereas after Orus, Menas is Reported by
Herodotus and Diodorus. Reineccius notes that Osiris was so called by way of
Dignity. Krentzhemius probably gathers that Menas was Mercurius, Ter-maximus,
Conqueror, Philosopher, and Benefactor to Mankind, giving good Laws, and
teaching profitable Arts to his Conquered People. After 33 Years he fell Blind,
as did Pherones his Son, whom 14 Years after Orus, the Second, or Busiris
succeeded 75 Years before Israel's Departure out of Egypt.

. 7. Busiris, or Orus the Second, whom Reineccius judges to have been a new
Family, (though according to all Men's computation) he began 5 Years after
Moses's Birth; yet might he be first Author of the Israelites Misery, Ruling as
Viceroy under the blind King, whom he might easily draw to that Oppression of
Strangers, so to ease the Subjects, and to win their Favor, to promote his
Offspring to the Crown which he attained, and held 30 Years, according to
Eusebius. After him Thermutis, Pharaob's Daughter, which took Moses out of the
Water, succeeded. Eusebius calls her Acencris, but places Amenophis next
before Busiris. Herodotus, and Diodorus, call Sesostris Son Pheron; so it may
be she was his Daughter, who Marrying Busiris, Reigned after him 12 Years.

. 8. Rathoris, or Athoris, succeeded his Sister 9 Years; and after him,
Chencris, who perished in the Red Sea; and Achencris succeeded 8 Years, and
Cherres 15, in whose 15 Years, Epaphus, Son of Teligonus, Rathoris Brother
Reigns, in the lower Egypt, and Built Memphis. Epaphus had Lybia, which had
Agenor, Belus, and Busiris. Belus had Ameus, or Danaeus, who Reigned 4 Years
after Cherres, and then by Egyptus, or Ramesses, his Brother expelled, who
Reigning 68 Years; he had Fifty Sons; Danaeus had Fifty Daughters: He began the
Kingdom of Argos in Greece.

CHAP. III. Of Isreal's Delivery out of Egypt.
. 1. OF Israel's Captivty, and Moses Birth.. L. Vives, on Augustine, cites
diverse Opinions of Moses Birth; but to me it is most Probable, that he was Born
while Saphrus, called Spherus, and Ipberus Governed Assyria, Orthopolis
Cicyonia, and Criasus the Argives, and Sesostris 2 d. the Egyptians. For
according to Augustine, he led Israel out of Egypt about the end of Cecrops,
King of the Athenians; which falls about the 9 th Year of Ascatades of Assyria,
who Ruled 41. Sparetus, his Predecessor, 40. Mamelus, before him, 30. And
Saphrus, 20 before: So that from the 19 th of Saphrus, to the 9 th of
Ascatades, which was the 46 th of Cecrops, are 80 Years, which was Moses Age
when he brought Israel out of Egypt. There being then 64 Years between Iosephs'
Death and Moses's Birth, the Israelites Oppression seems to begin some 8 or 9
Years before Joseph Dyed, Anno Mundi 2370. Moses 80 th Year of Age was 2514.

. 2. Of the Cities of Egypt mentioned in Scripture.. Zoan, Number. 13.23. called
Taphnus, Ier. 2.43. etc. Ezekiel. 30. The Septuagint calls it Tanis, etc. This was
near Gosen, and chief City of the lower Egypt. On, or Heliopolis, in the South
of the lower Egypt, Genesis 41.45. after Iunius: Here Onias Built a Temple for the
Jews under Ptolomy Philopater, which stood till Vespasian's time. Noph the
City, Esa. 19.13. Hos. 9.6. is called Mopb, or Memphis; by the Septuagint,
Pelusium, which the Septuagint calls Sois. Montanus Lebna, Iunius Sin. Belbeis
after, now the Septuagint calls Diospolis, and was afterward called
Alexandrina, by Ierom.

Moses 's Preservation and Education.. Pharao^ having by Oppression
discontented the Israelites, and then doubting what a Poor Oppressed Multitude
might be provoked to, by suggestion of the Devil, resolved the Slaughter of the
Male Children in their Birth, giving Order to all their Midwives, by Two of the
Chief of them. But being by their Piety disappointed, he Commanded all his
People to perform his Bloody Decree, which yet his Beloved Daughter finding
Moses in an Ark of Reeds in Nilus, was so far from Executing, that she took him
out of the Water, and gave him Princely Education, as her own: Whose Excellent
Learning testified by P^ilo and Josephus, Martyr Stephen Confirms.

Leaving Iosephus's Fancy of Moses Besieging Saba of Ethiopia, which he won by
the means of the Kings Daughter, whom he Married, etc. Moses in Rescuing an
Israelite, having slain an Egyptian, fled into Arabia Petrea, in whose
Mountainous Deserts, apart from the Glory of the World, the Glory of God
covered him over, being from an Honorable, Adopted Son of a Kings Daughter,
turned into the Condition of an humbe Shepherd. In this Country, lying between
Judea and Egypt, he lived 40 Years skilful in the ways of the Wilderness,
through which he was to lead Israel; and by exercise in a Pastoral Life, he was
prepared to Principality, and perfected his Learning gotten in Egypt, by
Meditation in the Wilderness. From Government of gentle Cattle, Kings are
called Shepherds, to teach them to rule Men. Moses being called back into
Egypt, is Taught a Name, by which he Describes God to the Hebrews, setting out
his ever only Being; there being nothing, ^ that has being of it self but that
Eternal One, of whose being all other things are but shadows. Of all the Ten
Plagues, the last only brought that Tyrant Pharaoh, to an absolute submission,
when he began to fear his own Life. The Paschal Lamb was a Sacrament of our
spotless Savior.

. 3. Pharaoh seeing the Israelites departure, with the Spoil also of the
Egyptians, bethought himself, and pursuing them with all his Power, Exodus 14.7.
over-took them after Three Days March. And though Moses knew he went out with
the mighty Hand of God, yet he neglected nothing, becoming a Wise Man and a
Valiant Conductor. So he removed from Ramases in Goshen, whither the dispersed
Hebrews were gathered as to their Rendezvous, and Marched Eastward toward
Etham, and Encamped at Succoth, the Fifteenth Day of Abib, which thenceforth
was accounted the first Month of their Year, for Religious Occasions, leaving
another for Politic, which they distinguish from Sacred, in Recording things
Transacted.

. 4. Israel passing from Succoth, kept Mountainous, rough Ground on his
left hand to Etham, that Pharaoh's Chariots should not compass him. From Etham,
the next day he Marched South Eight Miles, and on the Third day he came to
Pihachoroth, between the Mountains of Etham, on the North, and Baalzephon on
the South, and Encamped upon the wash of the Sea.

. 5. Moses, who feared nothing but God himself, comforting the fearful
Multitude, Exodus 14.13. called on God; and putting in practice his Direction,
safely passed over the Foord which the Lord had made, and left their stupefied
Enemies to the merciless Waves, which returned upon them. This Sea, called
Chencrese, in which Pharaoh Perished the 16 th Year of his Reign, is commonly
called the Red Sea, though of the Color of other Waters. It seems to me,
that Name grew from the Clifts, Sands, Islands, and much of the Bordering
Continent, which being Red, by reflection makes the Water seem Red also. The
Greeks call it the Erythrean Sea, of King Erythreus; and for that Erythros
signifies Red, some think it was so called. The Portugals Report that store of
red Stones are found in it, on which, store of Red Coral grows. At
Pihachoroth, which is from Ramases, not above Thirty Miles, the Sea is about
Four Miles broad to Arabia, where Moses passed over, and not at Elana: For that
part of Egypt which is opposite to Elana, is from Ramases Eighty Miles, which
Moses with his Multitude, unfit for such Marches, could not pass in three days.

. 6. This Passage proved Miraculous; and not an Ebb, as the Egyptians, and
other Heathens object; for had it been an Ebb, all that part from Sues at the
end of the Sea, unto the place of Moses's passage, and further, which exceeded
Ten Miles, must have been dry, and so have served Pharaoh, and his Men to have
fled from the flowing of the Water. Neither could an East Wind make an
extraordinary Ebb, seeing that Sea lies North, and South. And why should
Moses, whom they Honored as a great Captain against the Ethiopians; leave this
passage over the Mountains, and venture a Foord upon an Ebb, which he knew not
whether Pharaoh would prevent him of? And who will think, that the Egyptians
were so ignorant of their own Sea and Havens, as to be overtaken in the Ebbing
and flowing thereof? Lastly, If the ordinary flowing had drowned the Egyptians,
their Carcases had been carried up to Sues, and cast upon the Arabian Shore,
where the Hebrews then lay.

CHAP. IV. The Israelites Journey from the Red Sea to Sinai.
. 1. MOSES having recovered the Arabian Banks, proceeded to the Desert of
Arabia Petraea, called Sur: And from thence for want of Water came to Merah in
Etham Desert, which is also called Sur, Exodus 15.22. from the Sea Twenty Five
Miles; where he made the bitter Waters sweet, by casting Branches of a Tree
therein: A plain Type of our Savior, who upon the Cross changed the Bitterness
of everlasting Death, into the sweetness of Eternal Life. From thence he
removed to Elim; which by all probability, was a City, it being so well
watered; of whose Ruins William Tire Reports, In Bello Sacro. From thence he
returned to the Sea, and so to the Desert of Zin; then to Daphca, and next to
Alus, and so to Raphidim.

. 2. Of the Amalekites, Midianites, and Kenites, and of Jethro.. The Amalekites
at Raphidim, setting upon the Israelites, were overthrown by the Efficacy of
Moses's Prayers, which were more prevalent than all the resistance of the
Bodies of Men. Here Iethro, Moses Father in Law, came to him, with his Wise,
and Sons. He was a Kenite, Judge. 4.11, 17. which was a Nation of the
Midianites, which came of Midian, a Son of Abraham, by Keturah, 1 Samuel 15. with
Genesis 25. There were others also which bare the same Names, like to spring from
Chus. Genesis 15.19. As for the Midianites which came from Midian, the Son of
Abraham, they were divided into Five Families, Genesis 25.4. of which some were
Planted near the Red Sea, with whom Moses matched himself, as not corrupted
with Idolatry: Others corrupted with the Idolatry of the Canaanites, joined
with them, and lived near the River Zered, tributary to the Amorites, and after
their overthrow joined with Moab, and were destroyed by Moses for their
Practices against Israel, Number. 22.31. Ios. 13.21.

. 3. When the Law was given.. The Twelve Tribes of Israel were in the
Wilderness of Sinai, near the Mountain of Sinai, or Horeb, which are the same,
Exodus 3.1. and 24.16. though parted in the top in two, of which Sinai is
highest; but Horeb sends a fair Spring into the Valley, where now stand two
Monasteries, furnished with pleasant Gardens of Fruits and Wine. P. Belonius.
It was like to be so in Moses's days, who continued thereabout almost a Year,
where he had Water, Exodus 32.20. Hither being arrived about the Forty Fifth
Day, the First Year, he received the Law the Fifthieth Day, and removed the
Twentieth Day of the Second Month of the Second Year.

CHAP. V. The Story from Receiving the Law, to the Death of Moses.
. 1. MOSES having Received and Published the Law, and finished the Tabernacle
of the Ark, he Mustered the Tribes, to see what number of Men were therein,
from 20 Years Old and upward; over whom, by the Lords direction, he placed
Leaders, the most Eminent Men in every Tribe. The whole Army was 603550 able
Men for War, etc. and was divided into 4 Battalions, of which each contained
Three Tribes. The first containing 186400, consisted of Three Regiments. Judah,
746000, Issachar, 54400, Zabulo^, 574^0, all under the Standard of Judah, who
held the Vaungard, Marched first, and Quartered at the general Incamping on the
East side of the Army, as in the chief place. The Second, containing 151450,
consisted of Reuben the Leader, and Simeon and Gad. The Third, containing
108100 under Ephriam, whom Manasse and Benjamin followed. The Fourth containing
157600, Led by Dan, and followed by Naphtali, and Asher.

Besides the Twelve Princes of the Twelve Tribes, they had Captains over
Thousands, over Hundreds, over Fifties, and over Tens, as appears by the
Insurrection against Moses.

In the midst of these Four Armies, was the Tabernacle, or Portable Temple,
carried, surrounded by the Levites; to the service whereof Twenty Two Thousand
Persons were Dedicated, of which Eight Thousand Five Hundred and Eighty had
peculiar Charge. All these Encamped within the general Armies, next the
Tabernacle in Four Quarters. Moses Reverend care about the least part of the
Tabernacle, did Witness his inward humble Zeal to God. The industry in Framing,
curiosity in Working, charge in Provision, observance in Preserving, Solemnity
in removing, etc. all Ages have in some sort imitated; yet our Age has bred up
many Familists, Anabaptists, Brownists, and other Sectaries, which esteem all
Cost bestowed upon the Church wherein God is Worshipped, to be a kind of
Popery, etc.

. 2. The Offering of the Twelve Princes, the Passover, and Jethro's Departure..
The Twelve Princes Offered Six covered Chariots, and Twelve Oxen for carrying
the Tabernacle, which were delivered to the Sons of Gershom, and Merari: As for
the Sanctuary, the Koathites bare it on their Shoulders, when it was taken
down: Each of the Princes also offered a a Charger, and a Bowl of Silver, and
an Incense Cup of Gold; the weight was after the Shekel of the Sanctuary, which
contained Twenty Gerahs, every Gerah worth Three-half-pence, Sterling; after
which rate all the Plate came to Four Hundred and Twenty Pound Sterling. The
common Shekel was but Ten Gerahs. This done, the Passover was Celebrated the
Fourteenth of the Second Year, and upon the Twentieth, the Host removed from
Sinai to Paran, Marching in their prescribed Order. At this time, Iethro the
Father in Law to Moses, called also Hobab, left Moses and returned to Midian;
but it seems either he, after setting his Country in Order, or his Children,
returned and became incorporate with Israel.

. 3. Israel 's Journey from Horeb to Kades.. In this Journey they murmured for
Flesh, and were fed with Quails, even to a Surfeit, of which great numbers
Dyed. Then after the First Month, they came to H^zaroth, where Miriam was
smitten with Leprosy; and so to Rithma, near Kades Barnea, whence the Spies
were sent; upon whose Return they mutined the Tenth time, which being more
Rebellious than all the rest, God punished it accordingly, extinguishing every
one of those Seditions, even the whole Multitude that came out of Egypt, Two
only Excepted* And though the mildest of all Men was earnest with God for their
Pardon, yet not one escaped. He spared them Forty Years, till their Children
were grown up and Multiplied; that in them he might perform his Promise, which
was never frustrated.

. 4* Of their Return, and unwillingness thereto, etc.. Moses having related the
Commandment of God, touching their Return back toward the Red Sea, they
bewailed their Folly too late; and as it is with Men whom God leaves to
themselves, they would needs amend their former Passionate Murmuring, with a
second desperate Contempt. For now, when God forbids with Threats, they will
desperately venture their own Destruction, and were repelled, and with
Slaughter forced to take their way back to the Sea, as God Commanded, and came
to Remmoparez, etc. Their Twenty Fourth Mansion was at Pharez, where began the
dangerous Insurrection of ^orah; for which Offense, and Contempt of God, and
his Ministers, as 14700 Perished suddenly by Pestilence, and 250 by Fire; so
those Laymen, who would Usurp Ecclesiastical Authority, were suddenly
swallowed up alive of the Earth. Form thence the 30 th Mansion was at Ietabata,
where Adrichomius makes a River which runs into the Sea, between Midian and
Aziongaber. Now though it be Probable there was store of Fresh Water at
Aziongaber, where Solomon furnished his Fleets for East India: And though
Herodotus mention a great River in Arabia the Stony, which he calls Corys; yet
is Adrichom deceived in this, as in many other things. For it was at Punon that
those Springs are spoken of, which in Deuteronomy. 10.7. is also called Ietabata, a
Land of running Waters, which by probability falls into the River Zared, next
adjoining; whereas that way is very long to Aziongaber. Besides, Belonius
reports of diverse Torrents of Fresh-waters, in those Sandy parts of Arabia,
which running a few Miles, are drunk up in the Sands. From Ietabata, they came
to Hebrona, and after Aziongaber, called Beronice by Josephus, and Essia by
Ierom, which as yet, was not in the command of Edom, as after in Solomon's days.

. 5. From Aziongaber they removed to Zin, Kades or Beeroth, where Miriam dyed.
Then they came to Mount Hor, where they murmured for Water, and where Aaron
dyed, and Eleazer his Son succeeded.

. 6. Israel leaving the way by Edom, after they had compassed the South, they
turned to the North, toward the Wilderness of Moab, leaving E^^ o^* the West.
When Arad, King of the S^^th-C^^^^anites, thinking they would come by him while
(...) lay at Hor; having had his Forces ready upon h^ Borders, made out into
the Desert, before Israel was removed, and set upon such part of the Army as
lay for his Advantage, and took some Prisoners. It is probable, that either
this Arad, or his Predecessor, had joined before with Amalek, and worsting
those Mutineers, were thereupon encouraged to this Attempt. As for the
Overthrow which is reported, Number. 21. to be given them by Israel, it is rather
to be understood of what was done after by Joshua, than now by Moses. For had
Moses given them this Overthrow and destroyed their Cities, he would never have
left the South of Canaan, once entered by him, to wander about Edom and Moab,
and to seek a new Passage: Neither could Israel have cause to Murmur the next
day for Bread: Or been weary of the Way, if they had so lately taken the Spoil
of Arad's Cities. Yea, they would rather have mutined against Moses, for
leaving such an Entrance into the intended Conquest; and to lead them back into
the Deserts, which had consumed them. They murmured presently upon their
leaving Hor, when they came to Phunon, crossing the way to Aziongaber through
Moab to Coelosyria; and here the Brazen Serpent was erected. From thence they
proceeded, as in the Holy Story, and so came to Diblathaim; Whence Moses sent
to Sehon King of the Amorites, to desire a Passage through his Country, which
he denied.

. 7. Of the Book of the Lord's Battles, and other lost Books.. Iunius
understanding thereby, no special Book; and Vatablus doubts. Siracides refers
it to Joshua, who fought the Lord's Battles, cap. 46. But it seems probable
there was such a Book lost, as many others, whereto reference is often made, as
Ios. 10.13. and 2 Samuel 1.18. and 2 Chronicles. 33.18. and 2 Chronicles. 9.29. and 12.15.
and 20.34. 1 Kings 4.32, 33. Enoch's Books, etc.

. 8. Of Moses sparing Lot 's Issue.. Moab at this time inhabited the South of
Arnon, having lost the better side, which the Amorites won from Vatablus the
Predecessor of Balac. What therefore Moses found in the Possession of Moab, as
also of Ammon, he might not attempt; but what the Amorites had taken from them.
The Emims and Zamzummims, Giantly Nations, had formerly dwelt there, as the
Anakims in Canaan; but Moab and Ammon destroyed them. Sihon proud of his
Conquest against Moab, presumed against Israel, and lost All. Og King of Basan,
or Traconitis, an Amorite, was also destroyed, and his Sixty Walled Towns taken
by Iaer, a Son of Manasses.

. 9. The Midianites with the Moabites practice against Israel, and draw them to
Idolatry; for which God destroyed 24000 with the Pestilence. The third time of
numbering of the People, who are found to be 601730, of which 12000 are sent
against the Midianites, who slew there Five petty Kings, and destroyed their
Cities; after this, Moses having divided his Conquest, and blessed the Twelve
Tribes, dyed.

. 10. Observations out of Moses's Story, touching God's Providence, working his
own purposes ordinarily by Men's affections. Pharaoh's Fears bred his ungodly
Policies and salvage Cruelties; by this Moses is cast upon the Compassion of
Pharaoh's Daughter, and so provided of Princely Education. Men's Affections cast
him into Exile, procured him a Wife, and so a long stay to know the Wilderness,
to wean him from Ambition, and so fit him to know God, and to Govern. Thus what
Men think most casual, God orders to the Effecting his own purposes many
Years after.

CHAP. VI. Of the Bordering Nations: Of other Renowned Men; and of Joshua's
Acts.
. 1. HOW the Bordering Nations were prepared to be Enemies to Israel.. Though
the Ismaelites, Moabites, Ammonites, and Edomites, descended from Abraham and
Isaac, as did the Israelites, and were not molested by them, and therefore they
should not have hindered their Conquest of Canaan; yet God's all-disposing
Providence, had ordered to the contrary, by ordinary means. For first, these
Nations having settled there from the beginning, and matched with Canaanites,
and fallen to their Idolatry; and having had neighbourly Commerce with them, it
could not be, but they should affect them, being also the ancient Inhabitants.
Secondly, the Israelites by long abode in Egypt, were become strangers to them,
and the less affected for differences in Religion, and feared, for being a
Potent, United People; whereas the Canaanites were divided, and therefore not
feared of them so much. Thirdly, both Ismalites and Edomites being Carnal
People, might resent the Actions of Israel for their old Quarrels between their
first Parents; yet none of these directly opposed them in defense of the
Canaanites. Only the Amalekites (which are commonly taken to be a Tribe of
Edom) offered them violence, See cap. 8. Sect. 3.
which was never forgiven.

. 2. Of the Kings of the Canaanites and Moabites.. Speaking of the Canaanites,
we understand the seven Nations descended from Cham by Canaan; whose proper
Habitation was bounded by Jordan on the East, the Mediterranean Sea on the
West. Of these, the first we read of, is Hamor the Hittitish Lord in Jacob's
days, of the Hittites. Arad is the Second, who is named King of the Canaanites,
in the South of Canaan, bordering on Edom and the Red Sea. Sihon King of
Heshon, and Og King of Bashan were next; who had driven out the Moabites, and
Ammonites out of all the Valley East of Jordan. Adonizedek is the Fifth, with
whom Joshua names Four other Kings, all Amorites. Iabin King of Hazor, or
which afore-time was head of those Kingdoms, and Iobab King of Madon; then
Adonibezek, that Tyrant of Bezek, and Iabin the Second, King of Hazor, Judge. 4.
overthrown by Baras.

The Midianites descended from Abraham, by Midian the Son of Ketura: Some of
them dwelt by the Red Sea, where Ragvell, or Revell, called also Iethro and
Kenis, was King and Priest; others of them were mixed with the Moabites, and
dwelt in Nabothea, on the South-East of the Dead Sea, whose Five Princes are
named. There are four others named, slain by the Ephramites and Gideon: Oreb
and Zeb, Zeba and Salmunna.

. 3. Of the Amalekites and Ismaelites. Of Amalek's Original. See cap. 8. Sect.
3.
. Of them and of the Israelites few Kings are named, and though the Ismaelites
were more in number, yet in Moses's days, Amalek was more renowned than the
rest of the Ismaeliets, as after in the days of Saul, when they were increased
so far, that he pursued them from Sur to Havila. It seems the Israelites had
left the barren Deserts of Arabia Petraea, called Sur, Paran, and Sin, to the
Posterity of Ketura, which joined with them, and planted themselves in the
better parts thereabout. Nabaioth the Eldest of the Twelve Princes, enjoyed
that fruitful part of Arabia Petraea, which borders on Iudaea on the East; they
also peopled a Province of Arabia Felix. Kedar the Second, gave name to the
East part of Basan, or Batanea, called Kedarens, or Cedrens. Abbiel the Third,
gave Name to Adubenes, near the Mountains, and divides Arabia Felix from the
Desert. The Raabens were of Moshma; which joins to the Orchen near the Arabian
Gulf; by Zagmais Duma, of whom came the Dumeans between the two former, where
was the City Dumeth. Massa bred the Massams. Hadar, or Chadar the Athrites in
Arabia Felix by the Napatheans. Thema begat the Theminians among the Mountains,
where is the City Thema. Ietur, Father of Itureans, or Chamathens, whose King
was Tohu, in David's days. Naphish bred the Nubeans in Syria Zoba, under King
Adadezer in David's Days. Cadma, of whom came the Cadmonaeans, or Asitae,
Worshipping the Fire, as did the Babylonians. The Amalekites opposed Israel
from their coming out of Egypt, joining with all their Enemies, as with the
Canaanites, Moabites, Midianites, and Edumaeans.

. 4. Prometheus, Atlas, and Pelasgus, flourished in Moses Days.. Pelasgus was
now chosen King of Arcadia, for teaching the Inhabitants to Erect Cottages, and
to make Food and Bread of Acorns, who before lived on Roots and Herbs. So long
was it before Agriculture and Civilty came into Europe, out of Egypt, and the
East. Prometheus, also flourished in this Age of the World: Of whom it was
Reported, he formed Men out of Clay, for his framing Men unto Wisdom. Augustine.
His stealing Fire from Jupiter, was his skill in the Stars, which with great
Study, he got on Caucasus, which occasioned the Fable of his being bound there,
etc. Africanus makes him within 44 Years of Ogyges; Porphyry puts him with
Inachus. Atlas, his Brother now flourished, both Sons of Iapetus, who according
to Aescu^us had two others, Oceanus, and Hesperus, Famous in the West. There
were others of the same Name, but Mount Atlas, South of Marocco, came from him;
and both these, of Cepheus, and his Wife. Cicero says, their Divine Knowledge
occasioned those Fables. Atlas skill in Astronomy, produced the Pleiades, and
Hyades, Augustine
from his Daughters. Some ascribe the finding out the Course of the Moon to
him, but others to Archas, of whom Arcadia took Name, who boast they are more
Ancient than the Moon, that is, before her Motion and Influence was observed.
Natalis Comes.
But Isacius Tzetzes, a curious searcher of Antiquity, ascribes it to Atlas of
Lybia, of Incomparable Gifts and Strength, of whom Thalis Mirtius had his first
Rudiments.

Ducalion, King of Thessaly, was the Son of Prometheus, says Herodotus
Apollonius, Hesiod, and Strabo. In his time fell that great Inundation of
Thessaly, in which, so few escaped the Vengeance which their exceeding
Wickedness had drawn upon them: Only Ducalion and Pyrrha excelling in Virtue,
escaped upon his Fathers fore-warning. Phaetons Confiagration happened in
Ethiopia, and in Istria, and the Mountain Vesuvius.

. 6. Mercurius Ter-Mximus, called Hermes of the Greeks, now flourished,
excelling all the Heathens in Wisdom. Plato ascribes all invention of Letters
to him, whom Philo Biblius calls Tauntus, Egyptians T^oyth, Alexandrians Thot.
As for the Conjecture, that a Grecian Mercury carried Letters into Egypt, is
improbable, seeing all profane Antiquity acknowledge that Greece had Learning
out of Egypt, and Phoenicia: And that Cadmus brought Letters out of Egypt into
Greece, which was while Minos was King of Crete. Lyncius, the King of the
Argives, who succeeded Danaus, who had Reigned 50 Years, and Stenelus, 10 Years
before him, and Crotopus before him, in whose 10 Years Moses Dyed: So much
difference of time is between Hermes and Cadmus, his coming into Boetia.
Neither did the Two Mercuries of Egypt, mentioned by Augustine, come out of
Greece; but Epolemus, and Artapances, ascribe that invention to Moses, who
taught it the Hebrews, of whom the Phoenicians had it, and Cadmus from them.
Ficinus is deceived, thinking that Mercury, upon whose Book he Commenteth, was
Four Descents after Moses: So Ludovicus Vives thinks the Author of those Books,
was Grandchild to Mercury TerMaximus. His long life of 300 Years, might give
ocsion to some, to find him at one time, to others at another; and they which
Collected the grounds of Egyptian Philosophy, make him more Ancient than Moses,
being Author of the Egyptian Wisdom, wherein Moses was Learned. True it is,
that Hermes Divinity is contrary to Moses, in many things; especially, in
approving Linages: But the advised, rather may perceive those Books have been
corrupted by the Egyptian Priests; and were they in all things like themselves,
it were not unsafe with Eupolemus to say, Hermes was Moses; And that the
Egyptian Theology was devised by the more Ancient Hermes, which others judge to
be Joseph. But these are overcurious Opinions: Whoever he was, God knows;
and Lactantius testifies this of him. He Writ many Books of Divine things,
touching the Majesty of the most High, and one God, calling him by the Name of
one God, and Father, as we do, etc. And his acknowledgments of God, are so
contrary to Egyptian and Grecian Fictions, that what is found in his Book
inclining thereto, was by corruption inserted: For thus he speaks, God is the
Lord and Father of all things; the Fountain, Life, Power, Light, Mind and
Spirit, and all things are in, and under him. For his Word which out of himself
proceeds, being most Perfect, Generative, and Operative, made Nature Fruitful
and producing. And says Suidas, he was called Ter-Maximus, for affirming there
was one God in Trinity. He foresaw, says Ficinus, the Ruin of the Old (or
superstitious) Religion, the Birth of the New Faith, the coming of Christ,
future Judgment, Resurrection, Glory of the Blessed, and the Punishment of
sinners. Lastly, Calcidius the Platonist, and Suidas cited by Volaterius,
Report this his Speech, Hitherto, O my Son, being driven out of my Country, I
have lived a Stranger and Banished Man; but now I am repairing homeward again
in safety: And when after a while being loosed from the Bonds of the Body, I
shall depart from you, see you do not bewail me as Dead: For I I do return to
that best and Blessed City, whereto all her Citizens by the Condition of Death
are come. For there is the only God, the most High and Chief Prince, who
replenishing his Citizens with wonderful Sweetness, in regard whereof this,
which many call Life, is rather to be called Death. I therefore adjure thee, O
Heaven! Thou Wise work of the great God, and thee, O Voice of the Father, which
he first uttered when he framed the whole World; I adjure by his only begotten
Word and Spirit, comprehending all things, have Mercy upon me.

. 7. Aesculapius also flourished in this Age, and became the God of Physicians;
he was Brother of Hermes, as Vives on Augustine Judged. Iamnes, and Iambres,
those notorious Sorcerers that opposed Moses, now lived and made such a Figure,
as if Moses and they had used the same Art, as the beholders of common Capacity
judged. Though Moses charge them not with familiarity with the Devil, and the
Greeks call them (...), Workers by Drugs; yet did they excel in the impious
Art, as in dazzling Eyes, whom we call Prestigiators in natural Magicks, which
is a knowledge to use the Creatures qualities beyond common Judgment, which
discern not the best Virtues, that God has endued them with: This the Cabalist
calls the Wisdom of Nature, used by Jacob in the Pied Lambs, as Moses did; that
which they call the Wisdom of Divinity in his Miracles. Hereby God made him
excel all that ever were; when he showed himself so often to him, and employed
him in such Services. Moses, is remembered by Profane Authors, Clearchus,
Magastenes, and Numenius. The Patriarchs long lives are remembered by Estius,
Hyeronimus, Egyptius, Heasteus, Elanicus, Acusilaus, Ephorus and Alexander, the
Historian. The deluge by Berosus, Nicen, Damascenus. The Confusion at Babel, by
Abidemus, Estieus, Sybil. Abraham was Honored by Berosus; written of by
Hecolaeus; and his Journey into Canaan by Damascen: Eupolemon writ of him,
beginning from Babel's Building, to his calling out of Canaan, or Ur in
Chaldea. Eusebius collects many which confirm the Books of Moses. Lastly,
Worthy is the Testimony of Strabo, saying, Moses taught the Egyptians were
mistaken in Attributing to God, the Image of Beasts; and the Africans, and
Greeks, Erred greatly, giving their Gods the shape of Men; whereas, that only
is God indeed which contains both us, Earth, Sea, the Heaven, the World, and
the Nature of all things; whose Image doubtless, no Man will dare to Form to
the likeness of any thing. Their rejecting all Images, that worthy Temple and
Place of Prayer was to be Erected to him for his Worship without Images.

. 8. Of Josua, and so to Othoniel, and his Contemporary.. Joshua entered upon the
Government in the First Month, Nisan, or March, the 14 th Year of their
Egression, in the Reign of Aminias, the Eighteenth King of Assyria. Corax, the
Sixteenth. Siciona, Danus of Argives, and Ericthonius of Athens, says
Augustine, de civ. Joshua appoints Reuben, Gad, and the half Tribe of Manasses
unto the Vanguard, to lead the Host till the Land was Conquered, as Judah had in
the Wilderness: So upon the Tenth Day he led them over Jordan, which gave way
to them, and Encamped in Gilgal, and Circumcised them; and on the Fourteenth,
they Celebrated the Passover the Third time, when the Manna ceased. The Wars
and Victories of Joshua, the Miraculous assistance of God, and the Division of
the Land are particularly at large set down in God's Book* In the whole Story I
observed in those Petty Kings, First, want of Wisdom (as it is with Governors
forsaken of God) to Unite themselves against a strong and common Enemy, before
he had broken diverse of them. Secondly, Joshua, though sure of Divine
assistance, yet used the uttermost skill of a Wise Leader; As, sometime by
Ambuscades, Stratagems, and show of flying; So by Surprise, and Night-Marches,
and by pursuing his Victory. Thirdly, In the Passage between Joshua and the
Gibeonites, the Doctrine of keeping Faith, is excellently taught, taking away
all perfidious cunning of Equivocating, or crafty distinctions. It is not
possible to have a Case affording better Pretense to go off; they were Hivites,
of whose Destruction God had given Express Commandment; they Counterfeited in
Word and Deed deliberately, to deceive, and lie in the very Point, touching the
Persons to be Covenanted with; they were detestable Idolaters; and as long as
they lived, were the Memory of Isreal's Error, and Iosua's oversight to be so
overtaken, and to be a scandal to Israel. Joshua might say, he Covenanted not
with the Gibeonites, but with Strangers, and had no Commission, but a former
Express Law to the contrary; yea, and the People Mutined about it, etc. All
notwithstanding, Joshua durst use no Evasion to start from the Oath of the Lord,
wherein he was bound, not to Man so much as to God. It were a great sin to call
God to Witness a Lie, and so make him a Deceiver; but we call him to be our
Surety: Yea, we call him to Judge, and so make him false in Witnessing, in
undertaking our Faith, and corrupt in Judgment, the least of which Offenses
were heinous to a King; how odious then is it to God, to make him break
Promises, to Deceive, to pervert Judgment? Four Hundred Years after, Readiness
breaking this Oath of his Forefathers, brought evil on all Israel, which
manifested that God had not forgotten, that his Name had secured secured that
Poor People, and he did them Justice on Readiness House. And certainly if
Equivocating may delude another, the strength of the Objection is broken, and
Truth in all Trials is driven away, and honest Men are Inthralled to Villainies:
No League between Kings, nor Truce between Armies, but the Sword must still be
held unsheathed. Yet can it not do oftentimes, what the Powerful Name of God in
an Oath can do, in making of Peace, and procuring Passage; for Men held no
security like an Oath, no Witness, Surety, or Judge like God; neither durst Men
which feared him, call him forth to their occasions, but with Religious Truth.
Almarick, the Fifth King of the Christians in Palestine, breaks Faith with
Elbadech, Caliph of Egypt, who thereupon called the Turk to aid; who after he
had made War, beat the Christians out of Pal^stine; neither could the Wooden
Cross, brought into the Field, as the last Refuge, Save them, having for-sworn
by him which was Crucified on it. So when Eugemenes Commanded the King of
Hungary, after a great Victory, to break the Oath with Amurath, he lost
himself, and Thirty Thousand Christians. Lastly, Observe how it pleased God,
that the unconquered Cities became Thorns in their Eyes, etc. See Josh. 1. and
2. and 11. and 13. Joshua Governed 18 Years; others hold more, or less; but the
Necessity of 480 Years, from their Delivering, to Solomon's Temple, admits no
more, nor any space between him and Othoniel. Ericthonius King of Athens,
Lynceus of Argive, Phoenix, and Cadmus flourished now.

CHAP. VII. Of the Phoenician Kingdom, and of the Invention of Letters.
. 1. I Have gathered a Brief of those Kings, of whom Time has left any Record
to Posterity* The Limits of this Kingdom of Phoenicia in the South, are
uncertain: Strabo extends it to Pelusium the first Port of Egypt: Corvinus, and
Budaeus, to Gaza: Pliny takes but Ioppa. Ptolomy, who seldom failed in his Art,
stays at Chorseus, which seems to be the River at Megiddo: He also begins
it in the North at Elutherius, which falls into the Sea at Aradus, North of
Orthosia. Thus it comprehends these Maritime Cities, Aradus, Orthosia,
Tripolis, Botris, Biblus, Beritus, Sidon, Tyrus, Acon, Dora, and Caesarea of
Palestine; so that it Commanded the Trade of the Mediterranean for all the
East. Zidon was the Regal Seat, and so continued till Joshua; and all the
People were called Zidonians, as Procopius confirms in his Vandal Wars. That
Zidon, the First Son of Canaan was the Founder, we doubt not, and yet it was in
his Posterities command in Moses Days: As for Agenor, whether he was an
Egyptian of Thebes, or a Native of this Country bred up there, it may be that
in Joshua's days, he and his Four Sons, Cadmus, Phoenix, Cyrus, and Cilix,
might come out of Egypt, with such Force as the Egyptians could spare, to the
succo^r of the Coast, and so to Fortify the Sea Towns, having the benefit of
such Ships as were then in use. And when Cadmus his Eldest, pursuing Taurus
King of Crete, who had stolen away his Sister Europe in the Surprise of Tire,
was drawn into Greece, he seated himself there. Agenor commiting this Country
to his Two Sons, called it by his Name; when also North Tyrus was Built, and
Zidon Fortified, whereof it was that Agenor was reputed the Founder, from whose
time Phoenicia became more Famous. Belus, whether Grandfather, or Father to
Agenor, as some judge, it is no matter; but it seems he was Ancienter to the
Phoenicians, who Honored that Name; great was the strength of these
Phoenicians Cities, which held out against the Jews, but put Nebuchadonosor,
and Alexander, to great difficulties.

Touching the mention of Letters, the Ethiopians claim it; and that Atlas,
Orion, Orpheus, Linus, Hercules, Prometheus, Cadmus, had the first light from
them, and that Pythagoras was instructed by the Lybians. The Phoenicians boast
of it, and indeed they were very Ancient, and had Famous Records used by
Josephus. Lastly, Some ascribe it to Moses, without all probability, seeing
Learning then flourished in Egypt, and Assyria; but true it is, the Excellent
Spirits of the First Age found it, either Seth, Enos, etc. And God every where
present, has given this Invention to Nations, which never had Commerce with
others. As in Mexico, were found Books like Egyptian Hieroglyphics: The
Americans have an Heraldry.

. 2. Of the Phoenician Kings, especially of Tyrus.. Agenor living with Joshua,
Phoenix succeeded, after whom, till the Siege of Troy, when Phasis Governed, we
find not who succeeded. In Ieremy's time we find Zidon and Tire had petty
Kings; and in Xerxes time, Tetrannestus Ruled that part of Phoenicia at the
Persians Command, and afterward subdued by Nebuchadonosor. Alexander also,
cast out Strabo King of Zidon, and put in Balonimus, a Poor Gardner, of the
decayed Royal Blood, preferred by another Citizen, to whom Hephestion offered
it by Alexander's gift; more we find not of Zidon.

Tyrus, sometime a Daughter of Zidon, outlived her* Mother, and had her own
Kings, of which Twenty in Descent are found in Josephus, and Theophilus
Antiochius, though they differ in the time of their Reigns, and other
particulars. Abibalus the First, whom Suron succeeded, and paid Tribute to
David and Solomon. Others, Named by Josephus, and Theophilus, Fellow to
Ithabalus, called in Scripture E^hbaal, Father to Iezabel, who is there called
King of the Zidonians, and by Josephus King also of the Tyrians. The Third from
him, they Name Pigmalion, whose Sister Elisa Married Sycheus, whom Pigmalion
slew for his Wealth, but was prevented by Elisa, who Conveyed it to a Ship, and
fled into Africa, where she Built Carthage 143 Years, 8 after Solomon's Temple,
and as long before Rome, and 289 after Troy's Destruction. Eluleus succeeded,
who overthrew Salmanassers Fleet in the Port of Tyrus. Ethobales succeeded, in
whose time Nebuchodonoser, after 13 Years Siege, won Tyrus. Baal succeeded
Ethobales, and after Baal 'twas governed by Judges successively.

. 3. Bozius believes that the Tyrians proceeded from the Edumaeans, etc. But is
confuted by Scripture, by which it appears, that Eliphas, which came from
Theman to Job, was no Edomite, nor was that Theman in Edumaea, but in Arabia,
East from Job, whereas Edom was South. Ismael had a Son called Theman, who by
all likelihood gave Name to Theman in the East. From whom Eliphaz, Jobs Friend
descended. Suhe also a Son of Kethura, and Midian his Brother, of whom came
Bildad, the Shuite; and the Midianites, at their first settling were sent by
Abraham into the East, which from Canaan, was Arabia the Desert, not Seer which
was South. So in the History of the Judges, the Midianites and Amalekites are
said to be of the East: Yet were there of them Dwelling in the South; they were
grown so many, that the East could not hold them.

. 4. Kings of the Ten Tribes from Jeroboam to Achab.. Jeroboam flying from
Solomon into Egypt, to Shisha^ (whom Eusebius calls Osochores) whose Daughter
he Married, as Adad the Edumenian, had his predecessor's Wive's Sister, and
were prepared by Shishak, to shake the Kingdom of Judea, that he might pillage
it, as he accordingly did in the fifth year of Rehoboam. This Man was exalted
to be King of the Ten Tribes, preferring the Policies of the World before God's
Service and Honor. To prevent the ^eoples falling from him by resorting to
Jerusalem, he erected the two Calves, etc. Jeroboam reigned at Sichem Twenty
two years. Nadab his Son succeeded two years, and was slain by Baasha, who
rooted o^^ all Ieroboam's Seed, and reigned twenty four Years at Thersa, and
Ela his Son succeeded two years, and was slain in his Cups by Zimri, who
succeeded seven days; but Homri, in revenge of Ela, besieged him, and made him
burn himself, and succeeded; transferring the Regal Seat to Samaria, and
reigned twelve years.

. 5. Ahab suceeded his Father, married the Daughter of the King of Zidon, and
embraced her Religion, as Jeroboam had his Egyptian Wives: Ahab was slain after
twenty two years. Ocharius succeeded his Father, and dyed of a Fall, in his
second year, and his Brother Ioram succeeded 12 years; who, with Aid of Judah
and Edom, could not subdue Moab, who sacrificed Edom's Son taken in an ^ruption
which he made out of the City; whereupon the Siege was broken up through Edom's
displeasure against Israel, for refusing to make Peace with Moab, to save his
Son, Amos 2.1. Iehu slew Ioram, and succeeded twenty eight Years; whose Son
Ieho^haz succeeded seventeen years, and was molested by Aza* Ioas succeeded his
Father sixteen years; recovered from Aram what his Father lost, and sacked
Jerusalem.

Jeroboam succeeded his Father forty one years; r^^over'd all from Ham^th to
the dead Sea, and Zacharias his Son succeeded Six Months, and was slain by
Shallum, who succeeded two Months, and Menahen slew him and succeeded ten
years, with much Cruelty. Pekahia his Son succeeded two years, and Peka slew
him, and succeeded twenty years. In his time Tyglath Pileser, King of Assyria,
Invaded Israel, and carried many Captives into Assyria: He was drawn in by
Achas King of Judah, whom Peka of Israel, and Rezin of Damascus wasted; and
first he surprised the Monarchs of Syria and Damascus, and then Israel prepared
the way to Judah. Hosea slew Peka, and succeeded nine years, in whose time
Tiglath Pileser carried the rest of the Ten Tribes Captives, and re-peopled the
Country with Cuthites out of Arabia Deserta; the Persians with Calaneans,
bordering on Syria, and Sepharims out of Mesopotamia, with the Avims, of old
inhabited the Philistines Land, but now Inhabited Deserta, and called Havaei.

CHAP. VIII. The History of the Syrians bordering their Tribes on the East of
Jordan.
DAmascus in this Border, most famous for Antiquity, Beauty, Riches, is called
the City of Joy, and House of Pleasure. The Hebrews think it built by Hus Son
of Abraham; others, as Ierom ascribe it to Damascus, Son of Eleasar, Abraham's
Steward; but was before Eleasar; David subdued it in the overthrow of Adadezar;
but Rezin, Servant to Adadezer, escaped with the broken Forces, recovered it,
and was made King* Adadezer returned out of Egypt, and forced out Rezin, and
became King of Syria for Nine Descents.

. 2. Of the first Kings of Damascus, and their growing up.. That Damascus was
of Note in Abraham's days, his Steward is an Argument; what the Government was
then, and long after, the Reason of Moses's Story led him not to handle. The
first occasion was in David's Reign, who seeking to Establish the command of
Israel unto Euphrates, as God had promised, Invaded Adadezer, who was then of
the greatest Force in Syria, strictly taken, containing Damascus, Saba, Camath
or Ituraea, and Geshur. Adadezer King of Saba, called to his assistance the
Damascenes, who are not ranked under a King, but after the overthrow. Reason a
Commander under Hadadesar, gathered the broken Forces, surprised Damascus,
where David had put a Garrison, and was made King there, as it seems after
David's death. So that as Rehob and his Son Adadezer are the first Kings of
Syria; Saba and Toi the first Kings of Camath; so Rezon is the first King of
Damascus, which before was commanded by the Kings of Saba, whose Power became
formidable to the King of Camath. The next King is Adad of Edom, who coming out
of Egypt, whether he fled from David, and finding his Forces too weak to
recover Edom, it seems he surprised Damascus, and became King of Aram. The
next King of Aram was Hezion, whom his Sons Tabremmon succeeded, the Father of
Benhadad, who assisted Asa King of Judah against Baasha King of Israel. Almost
Fifty years after Benhadad was taken Prisoner by Achab, and promised to restore
what his Father had taken from Israel: ^ Judge.
This was a Second Benhadad, who slew Achab, and Besieged Samaria the second
time, and was smothered by Hazael; who succeeded him, and did much mischief to
Lud, but brought Israel to a low Ebb, 2 Kings 13.7.

. 3. Of the later Kings was Benhadad, two or rather three, who lost what Hazael
had gotten; three other succeeded of the same Name, in one of whose times
Jeroboam 2 d. recovered Damascus it self, and Chamath to Israel, which by
David's Conquest had belonged to Judah. Rezin the 10 th, after Adad 1 st,
molesting Achas, and was taking Elath, is, by Achas's Procurement, taken, and
Slain by Tiglath Pileser, and the Kingdom of Damascus dissolved.

. 4. Of lesser Kingdoms in Syria, Gessur, where Talmai reigned after Ammihur,
N. Damascenus Numb. 12. in success.
Sophena, or Syria Saba, or Coelosyria, had Rehob and Adadezer after him; whose
Kingdom translated to Damascus by Rezin, ended with the Kingdom of Israel, not
long after Ninus's Race in Sardanapalus had been ended by PhulBelechus, Father
of this Tiglath, whose Son Salmanassar led Israel Captive, as his Father had
Damascus; Senacharib, Son of Salmanasser, attempted Jerusalem in vain; but 132
years after Israel's Captivity, it also went to Babylon.

. 5. Jerusalem, in Joshua's days, had Adonizedek for King, and was not
inferior to Hozar the chief of all Canaanites. This City of old, called Iebus,
Inhabited of by Iebusites, and therefore likeliest to be Builded by Iebusaeus,
the Son of Canaan, and not by Melchisedek; for it could not be in Abraham's way
returning from his Victories; but rather that Salem by Jordan, of which we
spoke in Manasses. Though Joshua slew their King, yet they held out 400 Years
till David won it. Solomon so perfected the Strength, Beauty, and Riches of it,
(besides the renowned Temple) that the World had not the like: That Ditch hewn
out of the Rock, Sixty Foot deep, and Two Hundred and Fifty broad, with Walls,
Gates, and Palaces, defended One Hundred Fifty Thousand Men, besides. Women
and Children. It endured many changes: Shishak of Egypt Sacked it; so did Ioas
of Israel; but Nebuchadonozor fulfilled all Gods Judgments, threatened, and made
way to Seventy Years Desolation, and Captivity of City and People. After the
restoring by Cyrus, Bagoses Lieutenant, and Artaxeres spoiled it; and after
Alexanders Empire was divided, Ptolomy the First, pretending to Offer
Sacrifice; then Antiochus Epiphanes, and Apollonius his Lieutenant after him
spoiled it; and Pompey long after took it. But after all Repairs, that wicked
Herod did so Reedifie, and Adorn both Temples, and Cities, that it far exceeded
what Solomon did; continuing in this state, about Forty Years after our
Savior's Death. Titus invested it till it was taken, and Demolished it, in
which by Famine, Pestilence, Sedition, and Enemies Sword, 1100000 were
consumed, 65 Years after being in part repaired. Elius Adrian, for a new Revolt
Overthrew all, and Built another, which he called Elia Capitolia; and Decreed
that never Jew should dare after to enter, or from high place look to behold
it. Yet after the Christian Religion flourished in Palestine, it was Inhabited
after by Christians 500* Years; and then it was taken by Egyptian Sarazens, and
held 400 Years; and then regained by Godfrey Bouillon, and so continued 88
Years, when the Souldan of Egypt won it; but lastly, Selim the Turk took it,
and called it Cusunbaris.

. 6. Malicious Reports of the Heathen, as Quintilian, Diodor, Strabo, Justin,
Tacitus touching the Jews Original, answered by Josephus, against Appion, and
Tertullian, in his Apologet.

CHAP. IX. Memorable things from Joshua, to Jeptha, and the Destruction of Troy.
. 1. IVDA, by Gods Directions took the Management of the War, after Joshua was
Dead. Caleb with Phineas, and the assistance of Seventy Elders were in Joshua's
time, Commanding in Chief. Their Achievements we read, Judge. 1. as also of the
other Tribes, which sought to establish their own Territories. What befell them
after, upon their making Peace with the Canaanites, and their affliction 8
Years, and how Othniel, the Son of Cenas, Younger Brother to Caleb, delivered
them from Chushan a King of Mesopotamia, who Oppressed them, we read in
Scripture. How long it was between the Death of Joshua and Othniel, is
uncertain; though it could not be a short time, considering what Wars followed;
and the Surprise of Laish by the Danites, and their Warring with Benjamin are
thought to be in this interim; which War so weakened them, that they could not
so strongly resist their Bordering Enemies.

. 2. Othniel Governed 40 Years, in whose 20 th year Pandarius, Fifth King of
Athens entered, and Reigned 40 Years, Father of Erictheus, and Progne and
Philomela in the Fables. Cadmus, about this time obtained Thebes, which
Amphion, and Zethus Governed after. Triptol^mus is placed first by Augustine;
of whom, and the rest* Authors so disagree, that I desire to be excused, if I
Err with better Judgments, whereto I submit. For if the first Authors had but a
borrowed uncertain light from other Conjectures, all our labor in Example to
uncover the Sun, is for ought I see a more over-shading.

. 3. Ehud was next, who Delivered Israel from Eglon, King of Moab, after 18
Years Misery. Samgar his Successor, freed them from the Philistines; so from
Othoniel's Death 8 Years expired: Elimelek, went to Moab in Ehud's days, and
Ruth's Story is referred hither. Adoius, King of the Molosseans in Epirus, had
by Ceres his Wife, a Fair Daughter called Proserpina (a common Name of such)
whom Peritheus intending to steal, drew Theseus into the attempt, which being
discovered, Aidonius surprised them, cast Peritheus to Cesarus his Mastive, and
kept Theseus Prisoner, till Hercules delivered him by a strong hand. Pindus's
Mountains in Epirus, of which Oeta is Chief, whence Acheron springs.
Erictheus, was King of Athens, whose Daughter Orythia, Boreas King of Thrace
Forced. Tereus, King of Phocis in Greece, Inhabited by Thracians, Married
Progne, the Daughter of Pandarius, and Ravished her Sister Philomela, and cut
out her Tongue, for which Progne killed his Son Itys; and made Meat of him for
Tyrus, and fled to Athens. Tros began to Reign in Pardania, the 47 th Year of
Ehud, about which time Tantalus was King of Lydia, not Phrygia; whose study of
Wisdom made him neglect the Pleasure of Riches, of which he had great Plenty:
Others said his covetous Mind made him miserable, whereof grew that Fable, etc.
Here the Author is out, Taxing the unfolding of Secrets to Vulgars, perverting
Mar. 4.11. Cecrops 2 d. and 7 th. King of Athens, and Arrisius, Thirteenth King
of the Argives now Reigned the first 40 Years; the other 31, toward the end of
the 8 Years Pelops lived, of whom Peloponesus took Name: Titius Tyrant of
Panopea, in Phocis, slain by Apollo; Admetus, King of Thessaly, Perseus of
Peloponesus, and Medusa slain by Perseus Soldiers, of whose Blood sprang
Pegasus, Belerophon's Horse, with which he slew Chimera, a Pyrat of of the
Lycians. Ion, of whom the Athenians are called Jones, or rather of Iovan, etc.

. 4. The former 80 Years of Peace and Plenty, having bred security, it brought
forth neglect of Gods Commandments, and their ripe Sins called for God's
Judgment, who raised Iabin King of Hazor, who laid an heavy yoke on Israel 20
Years, keeping his chief holds, even in Naphtalim, and reduced them to such a
weakness, as among Forty Thousand a Weapon was not seen. But as Volumes may be
gathered of Examples, proving all Power is the Lords, how impotent soever his
means be; so now the Lord set it out in delivering Israel; two Women, Deborah
and Iael, striking the chief stroke. Thus Forty Years were expired under Iabin,
Deborah, and Barac.

Argos's Kingdom, which had continued 544 Years, was Translated to Micenae,
Built by Perseus Son of Danae, Daughter of Acrisius King of Argos. The King of
Argos. The King of Argives, we find Inachus, whose Daughter Io, was the
Egyptian Isis, Phoronius, Apis, Argus, Pirasus, Phorbas, Triops, Crotopus,
Sthelenus, Donaus, Lynieus, Abas, Acrosius, Pelops. After the Translation to
Micenae, Perseus, Sthenelus, Eurystheus, Atreus, Son of Pelops, Agamemon.
Egypthus, Orestes, Tisamenus, Penthilus, and Cometes. Midas, now King of
Phrygia, and Ilus who Built Ilium, Contemporaries with Debora.

. 5. Barac was no sooner dead, but Israel returned to their impious Idolatry,
and God raised up the Midianites, assisted with the Amalekites to infest them;
yet his Compassions, which never fail, raised them up a Deliverer, Gideon the
Son of Ioash, whose story is largely set down in Holy Scripture. His severities
in the revenge upon Succoth and Penuel, his own Sons found shortly after his
death: For the debts of Cruelty and Mercy, were left unsatisfied. And because
he Converted the Gold into an Ephod, a Garment proper to the High Priest, and
set it up in his City Ophra; as it drew Israel to Idolatry, so was it the
destruction of his own House. Aegeus Son of Pandeon now reigned in Athens:
Euristheus in Micenae, whom Atreus succeeded, who killed Thyestes his Brother's
Children, and feasted their Father therewith, which Cruelty was revenged on
him, and Agamemnon his Son* and all his Lineage, by a natural Son of Thyestes.
Minos was now King of Crete; whose Wife Pasiphae inamoured of Taurus her
Husband's Secretary, Dedalus being her Pander, had a Child by him, and another
at the same Birth by Minos, of which grew the Tale of the Minotaurs. Dedalus
upon discovery, fled with Icarus in two Boats with Sails, unto Cocalus King of
Sicily: In the flight, Icarus was drowned, and Minos was slain in persuing
Dedalus, whom Cocalus defended. Sphinx a Woman Robber by Sea and Land, upon the
Borders of Corinth, was overcome by Oedipus, Commander of the Corinthian
Forces; her Swiftness and Cruelty bred the Tale of her Wings, and Body of a
Lion. Anteus the strong and cunning Wrestler near Hespendes in Mauritania,
lived about this time.

. 6. The Argonauts Expedition fell out about Gideon's Eleventh Year. Many
Fabulous Discourses have been hereof written, and mystical Expositions made,
but Dercilus's Opinion is most probable. That Jason with the Harvest-men of
Greece, went by Ship to rob Colchos, enriched by certain steep falling
Torrents, not far from Caucasus, which wash down many Grains of Gold, which the
Inhabitants get by setting many Fleeces of Wool in those Water-falls. The many
Rocks, Straights, Sands, and other difficulties in the Passage between Greece
and Pontus, are Poetically converted into fierce Bulls, Armed Men rising out of
the Ground, Sirens, a Dragon cast asleep, etc. by Orpheus, one of them.

. 7. Abimelech, Gideon's natural Son, Ambitiously Fought, and got what his
Father had refused as unlawful, without special direction, a Ruler over God's
peculiar People; and for his Establishment in his Usurped Power, he slew
Seventy Brethren upon one Stone; Iotham the youngest, only escaped this unheard
of Inhumanity. Such is Human Ambition; a Monster which neither fears God, nor
respects Nature, and forgets the All-powerful Hand, whose Revenge is
without date. All other Passions and Affections which torment the Souls of Men,
are by Contraries oft-times qualified; but this darling of Satan, and
firstborn Sin that ever the World knew; more Ancient than Human Nature,
looks only toward the end, which it self sets down; forgetting nothing how
Inhuman soever, that may conduce thereto, and remembers nothing that Pity or
Religion can offer to the contrary. As for the deplorable effects that such
attempts have had, it ascribes to the Errors or weakness of the Undertakers,
and rather praises the Adventure, than fears the like Success. The Sechemits
in a vain Glory to have a King of their own, readily condescended to his
Ambitious motion, imbrue themselves, with him, in the Blood of Innocents, and
fit themselves to partake with him in the Vengeance foretold by Iotham*

The Tapithae and Centaurus made War about this time against the Thebanes;
these were the first in those parts which learned to ride on Horses; so that
coming from the Mountains of Pindus on Horseback, they were thought compounded
Creatures.

Thola, of Issachar, governed after Abimelek 23 Years, and Iair 22 years after
him. Priamus, after that sacking of Ilium by Hercules, being Ransomed, began to
Reign, having rebuilt Troy, and enlarged the Dominion almost over all the
lesser Asia. Of Fifty Sons, he had Seventeen by Cuba, Daughter of Gisseus King
of Thrace: Paris, one of them, attempting to recover his Aunt Hesione, See cap.
1.4. Sect. 2.
carried into Greece by Hercules, took Helena the Wife of Menelaus, etc.

Theseus, the Tenth King of Athens, in his Father Aegeus's Reign he put himself
among the Seven young Men, which the Athenians sent for Tribute yearly to Minos
King of Crete, who gaining Ariadne the King's Daughter's Affection, received of
her a Bottom of Thread, by which to conduct himself out of the Labyrinth after
he had slain the Minotaur, that is, the Son of Taurus, begotten of Pasip^ae, to
whom those Youths were committed, etc. He took Hippolita the Amazon Queen,
Prisoner, and by her had a Son Hyppolitus, whom he after sought to kill upon
his Stepmother Phaedra's false Accusation, whose incestuous Caresses he had
rejected: In his Escape, he had received many dangerous Wounds, of which being
Cured, the Tale of Esculapius grew, etc. After much good done to the ungrateful
multitude, they banished him. They say he stole Helen from Aphidna, in the
First Year of Iair, according to Eusebius, which is not probable, seeing she
should prove Fifty Years old at the fall of Troy.

Under the two former Judges in Assyria, reigned Mitreus and Tautanes after,
and in Egypt, Amenophis Son of Ramses, and Anemenes after him. In Sicyonia
reigned Thyaestus the Twenty second King, Eight years; Adrastus succeeded Four
years; then Polyphides the Thirteenth. Mueschea succeeded Theseus King of
Athens.

. 8. The Theban War, the most ancient that ever the Grecian Writers handled,
happened in this Age, wherein Greece continued but salvage, holding and getting
all by strong hand, Robbing by Sea and Land, little using Merchandise, and not
acquainted with Money; and having few walled, and but small Towns. As some
latter idle Chroniclers wanting good Matter, fill their Books with Reports of
Feasts, dry Summers, etc. So they which write of Greece then, tell us of great
Floods* Metamorphos^^ of Men-killing Mo^^ters; Adulteries of their Gods
begetting Mighty Men, etc. This Theban War, (the first Grecian Story of Note,)
arose upon the disagreement between Eteocles, and Polynices, Sons of Oedipus,
Son of Laius King of Thebes. These Brethren having Covenanted to Rule by
Course; Eteocles beginning, was unwilling to lay down a Scepter once taken into
hand, which forced Polynices to fly to Adrastus King of the Argives, who gave
him a Wife, and raised Forces to re-establish him in Thebes. Eteocles
withstands the Force, and both Armies, after great loss, desire the Brethren to
end the Quarrel by a single Combat, in which both lost the day, with their
Lives; and yet another Battle was fought, in which the Argives were discomfited
and fled, and of the Commanders, only Adrastus came to Athens. At his request,
the Argives sent Forces under Theseus against Creon, Governor of Thebes, for
denying Burial to the slain Argives, who took the City and buried the slain.
But this contented not the Sons of the Noble Argives, who Ten years after,
levied new Forces, and forced Laodamas, Son of Eteocles, to fly, and some says
he was slain; the Town was destroyed, but repaired by Thirsander, Son of
Polynices, who reigned after, and led the Thebans to the War of Troy shortly
after.

. 9. Iephtha judged Israel Six years, and relieved them from the Oppression of
the Ammonites, which lay heavy upon the Tribes on the East of Jordan, along
Gilead. He defended the Israelites Right against the Ammonites Claim, both by
Reason and the force of Arms; and drove them, not only out of all those Plains,
but also over the Mountains of Arabia, to Minneth, and Abel of the Vineyard:
As for his Vow, the Opinion that he did not Sacrifice his Daughter, is more
probable. The Ephramit^s quarreled with Iephtha, who slew in that Encounter
42000, which so weakened the Land, that way was thereby made to their future
Calamities, and most grievous slavery under the Philistines, that ever they
endured. Ibzan succeeded, and judged Seven years. Elon after him, Ten. The
Seventy, and Eusebius has him not.

CHAP. X. Of the War of Troy.
. 1. HAbdon Succeeded and Judged Israel 8 Years. The Philistines 40 Years
Tyranny cannot be from the 9 th of Iair, to the end of Abdon, as some would
have it; for then Ephraim's strength had been so diminished, as not to have
quarreled with Iephtha; or being able to bring 24000 Men into the Field, they
would not have neglected a common Oppressor, to fight against a Brother; those
40 Years must therefore be supplied elsewhere, as from the death of Abdon,
'till after Sampson. Troys Destruction seems to fall upon the 3 d Year of
Abdon, after 10 Years Siege, began about the 3 d of Elon. The Original and
Continuance of the Ancient Kings are uncertain; but it is commonly held that
Teucer and Dardanus were the first Founders of that Kingdom, of which, Teucer
the first, according to Virgil, Reigned before Dardanus built Troy, and came
out of Crete; though Reineccius following Diodorus, think him a Phrygian, and
Son of Scamander. Dardanus, Son of Electra, Daughter of Atlas, and Wife of
Jupiter, had for his second Wife Boetia, Daughter or Niece of Teucer. As for
this Atlas, I take him rather for an Italian, than African, and Jupiter to be
more ancient than he, whose Children lived about the Trojan W^r. Touching the
Destruction of Troy, Diodorus makes it to be 780 Years before the 94 th
Olympiad, which is 408 before the first. Dionysius Halicarnassus agrees hereto,
placing Rome's Foundation in the first of the seventh Olympiad, which is 432
after the fall of Troy. Solinus also makes the Institution of the Olympiads by
Iphitus, 480 years later than Troy's Destruction; the Destruction then being
408 Years before the Olympiads. Eusebius leads us from Dardanus, through 4
Kings Reigns, by the space of 225 Years. For Laomedon's time he takes it upon
trust, from Annius, out of Menetho.

. 2. Helen's Rape by Paris Son of Priamus, all agree to be the Cause of the
Greeks taking Arms; but what moved him to that Undertaking is doubted.
Herodotus's far-fetched Cause has no probability, as have they which say he
enterpris'd this Rape to procure the Re-delivery of Hesione, King Priamus's
Sister, taken away by Hercules, and given to Telamon; yet I do not think this
was the ground of Paris's attempt, but rather his Lust, which was an usual
incitement in those days, as Thucydides shows; whereupon none durst dwell
near the Seacoast. Tyndarus also, the Father of Helen, remembering that Thoseus
had Ravished her, caused all her Wooers, which were most of the principal
Greeks, to Swear, that when she had chosen an Husband, they should join in
seeking her recovery, if she were taken away; which Oath taken, she chose
Menelaus. Thus the Grecian Princes, partly upon the Oath, and upon the
Reputation of Agamemnon and Menelaus; were drawn into this business of the
Trojan War. The Fleet was 1200 Sail of small Ships, meet for Robbing, the
greatest carrying but 120 Men; so that the Army might be 100000. which argues
the Trojan Power able to hold out against such Forces so many Years. But their
aids out of Phrygia, Lycia, Misia, Amazonia, Thrace, yea Assyria, were great.

. 3. The Greeks being prepared, sent Menelaus and Ulysses Ambassadors to Troy,
to demand Helen; and as Herodotus, from report of an Egyptian Priest makes it
probable, were answered, that Paris in return being driven by storm into Egypt,
Helen was taken from him; which Report, Herodotus seeks by Reason to confirm.
But whatsoever the Answer was, the Greeks incensed, set forward to Troy,
notwithstanding Chalchas the Soothsayer objected great difficulties, etc. Their
Names under the Command of Agamemnon, were Menelaus, Achilles, Patroclus, etc.

. 4. After their Landing, in the first encounter, Patroclus was slain by
Hector, and others; but want of Victuals soon distressed the Greeks, who were
forced to employ a great part of their Men to and fro in seeking relief for the
Camp, by Sea and Land. And Herodotus Report is credible, that after the first
Year, 'till the tenth, the Greeks lay little before Troy, but rowed up and down
by Sea and Land for Booties and Victuals, wasting the Country round about. But
being all returned to the Camp, the tenth Year a Pestilence fell among them,
and a Dissension about dividing their Captive Virgins, which made Achilles
refuse to Fight, because Agamemnon had taken away his Concubine. But after his
Friend Patroclus, to whom he had lent his Armor, was slain by Hector, and
pillaged of his Armor, as the manner was, Achilles desirous of Revenge, was
content to be reconciled, upon Agamemnon's seeking to give satisfaction by
Gifts and Restitution of his Concubine Briseis. After this, in the next Battle,
Achilles slew Hector (though Homer's Narration of his flying about the City
thrice be unprobable) and drew him at his Chariot about the Field, and then
sold his Body to Priamus at a great rate. Not long after, Paris revenged that
Cruelty, and slew Achilles, though Authors differ in the manner.

. 5. Troy at length was taken, either by the Treachery of Aeneas and Antenor
opening the Scaean Gate, whereon was an Image of an Horse, or that the Greeks
by an Artificial Engine, like to an Horse, battered the Walls as Romans did
with a Ram, or scaled the Walls at that Gate suddenly, while the Trojans slept
securely, upon the departure of the Greek's Fleet to Tenedos the day before,
etc. The WoodenHorse filled with Armed Captains is unprobable. The numbers
slain on both sides, 600000 Trojans, and 800000 Greeks is Fabulous; so is the
report of many Nations in those parts, striving for a descent from the
remainders of Trojan Princes; though it be probable the Albans, and from them
the Romans came from Aeneas, and first Padanus from Antenor.

. 6. The Greeks after their Victories, tasted no less Miseries than the
Trojans, by division of Princes, separating in return; Invasion of Borderers,
and Usurpation of Domestics in their absence; and Tempests at Sea; so that few
returned home; and of them, few joined their own. The rest driven on strange
Coasts, gladly planted where they could, some in Africa, some in Italy, Apulia,
Cyprus, etc.

CHAP. XI. Of Sampson, Eli, and Samuel.
. 1. OF Sampson, read Judges 13, 14, 15, and 16. In whose Story observe, 1. His
Mother is forbidden all strong Drink, and unclean Meat, as that which weakneth
the Child conceived. 2. The Angel refused Divine Worship, which proves, the
Diviners Angels which accept Sacrifices, are Devils. 3. Whom no Force could
overthrow, Voluptuousness did. 4. Though he often revenged Israel, yet he
delivered them not, Chap. 15.11. Lastly, his Patience was more provoked by
Contumely, than Pain, or Loss.

. 2. Of Eli, see the First Book of Samuel. He was the first of the stock of
Ithamar, that obtained that High Priesthood, which continued in his stock,
until Solomon cast out Ab^athar, and put in Z^dok, descended from Eleazer, 1
Kings 2.26, 35. In his time, for the Sins of the Priests and People, the Lord
gave his Ark, the Sacrament of his Presence, into the hands of the Philistines,
as he did his Temple, to be destroyed by the Chaldeans, and after by the
Romans, because they put more Confidence therein, than in the Lord himself,
whose Law they would not observe. Whereas, after the Captivity, and in the time
of the Machabees, while they feared the Lord, they were Victorious without an
Ark, more than they were when they guarded themselves with the Sign, void of
substance. David also knew the Ark was not made for an Ensign in the Field. The
Trojans believed, that while the Paladium, or Image of Minerva was in the City,
it should never be overthrown. The Christians also carried into the Field, in
the last Fatal Battle against Saladine, the very Cross (as they were made to
believe) whereon Christ died, and yet lost themselves, and the Wood. But
Chrysostom said well upon St. Matthew, (if that be his work) of them which wore
part of St. John's Gospel about their Necks, for an Amulet, or Preservative, If
the words profit thee not in thine Ears, how can they about thy Neck? For it
was neither the Wood of the Ark, or of the Cross, but the Reverence of the
Father that gave them, for a memory of his Covenant, and the Faith of his Son,
which shed his Blood on the other, for Redemption, that could or can profit
them, or us, either in this Life, or after it. The Holy story tells us, how
after this Victory of the Philistines, the Ark of God was in Captivity; yet they
overthrew the Philistin's Dagon, and brake off both Head and Hands, to show he
had neither Wisdom nor Power in God's Presence; and that God and the Devil
cannot inhabit in one House, or one Heart. If this Idol then could not endure
the representation of the true God, what Marvel is it, that when it pleased him
to Cloth his only Begotten with Flesh, and sent him into the World, that all
the Oracles wherein the Devil derided and betrayed Mortal Men, lost Power,
Speech, and Operation at that instant? For when the true Light, which never had
any beginning of Brightness, brake through the Clouds of a Virgins Womb,
shining upon the Earth, long obscured by Idolatry, all these stinking Vapors
vanished. Plutarch rehearses, a Memorable History of that Age, of the death of
their great God Pan, but could not find the true cause thereof, etc. God also
plagued the Philistims, as well as their God, and forced them to return his
Ark, and to give him Glory, after they had tried all their wit to the contrary.
See the Story. Thus God is acknowledged of his Enemies, as he had been of
Pharaoh, and was after of Nebuchodonezer, Darius, etc.

. 3. Of Samuel's Government, 1 Samuel 7. He descended of Korah, 1 Chronicles. 6.22.
for his Father Elcana, a Levite of Mount Ephraim, came of Korah, the Son of
Izaar, Son of Cheath, Son of Levi. His Mother, after long Barreness, obtained
him by earnest Prayer, to avoid the reproach of Barrenness, as it was esteemed,
considering it was God's Promise, Deuteronomy. 7. and Blessing to Adam, and Abraham,
etc. Under his Government, the Lord freed Israel from the Philistines, who at
his Prayers, were miraculously overthrown; as were the Amalekites, at the
Prayer of Moses. He Ministered Justice at three fit places: Of which, see Cap.
12.. 1.

CHAP. XII. Of Saul, the First King of Israel.
. 1. THE deliberation to change the Government into a Kingdom, arose upon
Samuel's being grown unable to sustain the Burden of so careful a Government,
which he put over his Sons; who failing of their Father's Care and Uprightness,
and relishing nothing but Gain, sold Law and Justice to the best Chap-men. The
Elders observing this, and that the Old Man, though a Prophet, yet as a natural
Father, discerned not his Sons Errors; and remembering the lamentable success of
Eli's Sons Rule, saw no other way to put them off, than by desiring a King.
This Motion displeased Samuel, who seeking Counsel from God, as in a Cause of
so great consequence; he was ordered to hear the Voice of the People; yet so as
God accounted it a Wrong to himself, rather than to Samuel, and therefore
commanded him to declare unto them, the Inconveniences and Miseries which
shall befall them under that Government. All which are not intolerable, but as
have been, and are still born by Subjects free Consent. But the Oppressions
threatened, verse 14, etc. give an occasion ^o the Question, Whether a King
fearing God, or one which will Rule by his own discretion, and plays the
Tyrant, be here set out, as some judge; or that the Text only teaches, what
they ought, with patience, to bear at their Sovereigns hand, as others judge.
The first ground themselves upon Deuteronomy. 17.14. etc. and on the words of the
Text, which do not say, he may, but he will do so and so, showing, what Power,
severed from Piety, will do, as in Achab's Example, contrary to the Law, Deuteronomy.
16.18. The Arguments on the other side are largely handled in that Discourse of
free Monarchies, which I shall not take upon me here to Insert.

This change of Government God foretold, Genesis 15. and 17. and 49. and provided
for the direction of it by Laws, Deuteronomy. 17. But whether the Reasons which move
most Nations, moved them to choose a Monarch, or thereby to be cleared from the
Sons of Samuel, does not so plainly appear; for neither Persuasions nor Threats
could draw them from their desire of a King.

. 2. Saul' s Election.. Samuel by God's direction, having yielded to the
People, returned to his City Rama, expecting the Lord's direction, touching the
King to be chosen, which the Lord accordinly performed, giving him warning the
day before* Samuel hereupon, prepared to entertain whom God should send; and
Saul intending nothing less than a Kingdom, found it, and was Anointed, and
Confirmed by signs given him by Samuel, and returned home. Thus God often by
meanest occasions, orders the greatest things, and in Moses and David's
Calling from feeding Sheep, James and John from Fishing, etc. Among the Signs
given to Saul, one was of the Company of the Prophets; not such as by divine
Revelation foretold things to come, as Moses, Joshua, Samuel, etc. but such as
were exercised in Expounding Scriptures, as were those, 1 Cor. 14. at which
time God changed his Heart from a Vulgar condition to a Kingly. After this,
another Assembly at Mispezh, Saul was Published, and designed King by God, and
accepted of the People, and saluted King.

. 3. Readiness Establishment after his Victory against the Ammonites, 1 Samuel 11.
The Ammonites attending the Advantage of Times, for recovery of their
Territories taken from them by the Amorites, having in vain attempted it in
Iephtha's days, finding Isreal's weakness by long oppression of the Philistines,
who had disarmed them, had also slain 34000 of them, and that 50000 perished
about Bethshemes, and their King was not yet so acceptable to all his Subjects,
who were encouraged to begin with Iabesh Gilead, so near unto them. Saul to
show himself King, being proprobably descended of one of the Four Hundred
Virgins taken from the Gileadits, undertook the relief of Iabesh, assembling
330000 Men, and Defeated the Ammonites. Hence Samuel drew them all to Gilgal,
where Saul was again Confirmed King; where also Samuel exhorted them to fear
the Lord, and rehearsed his own Justice. After a Years Reign, Saul chose him a
strong Guard of Three Thousand, 1 Samuel 13.2.

. 4. Saul 's Disobedience and Rejection.. Jonathan with his Regiment of 1000,
surprised a Garrison of the Philistines, which some judge was in Careatjearim,
where was the Ark; but Iunius takes it to be Gebah in Benjamin, near Gibha,
where Jonathan stayed with his Thousand; so that though the Philistines were
much broken under Samuel, yet they held some strong places in Israel, of which
this was one, whose Surprise so enraged them, that they gathered together the
greatest Forces, mentioned 1 Samuel 12. while Saul was at Gilgal, expecting
Samuel, as he had been required, 1 Samuel 10.8. But because Samuel came not so
soon as Saul expected, he haste^ed to Sacrifice, taking the Office of a Priest
on him, as some think; or, as others judge, he in diffidence, and distraction
upon the Philistines Power, and his Peoples deserting him, attended not the
Prophet's coming to direct him, and pray for him. For Samuel had sharply
reproved and threatened him with great Indecency, had he not had extraordinary
warrant from the Lord. So they departed each from other. Saul being come to
Gibeah, his own City, being of strength; his Forces were but 600 between him
and Jonathan, and of these not one had Sword or Spear, of which the Reason is
rendered in the Text. The like Policy Nebuchadonozer used in the Conquest of
Iudaea, and Dyonisius in Sicily. It may be, the other Israelits had some,
though these Six hundred had not, for they might gain some at the overthrow of
the Philistines, and Ammonites. As for the Weapons the Israelites used in these
Wars, they were Clubs, Bows, and Slings, wherein they were expert, 1 Chr. 12.2.
and their Victories were rather extraordinary, as by Thunder or Astonishments
sent from God, as in this next Overthrow by the hand of Jonathan and his
Armourbearer, wherein God set them at dissension, cap. 14.10. So that the
Israelites needed no Swords, when every Philistin's Sword supplied the want.
After this Victory, Saul undertook by turns, all the bordering Enemies, and by
special Commandment, the Amalekites in Arabia Petraea and the Desert, ravaging
from Havila to Shur. But for presuming contrary to God's express Charge, to
spare Agag, etc. he was utterly rejected of the Lord, for all his pretense of
Sacrifice; and Samuel never after visited Saul.

. 5. Samuel fearing to Anoint another King, as God willed him, is directed how
to do it safely. So that by cautious care to avoid danger, he did no way
derogate from God's Providence; seeing the Lord himself, though All-sufficient,
instructed, Samuel to avoid Readiness Fury, by the accustomed cautions ways of the
World; and therefore Men neglecting of Prayer to God, and exercise of that
Wisdom he has endued the Mind of Man with, for his preservation, are stupefied
with the Opinion of Fate, etc. Iesse having presented all his Sons, but David,
to Samuel, he only whom the Father neglected, is chosen of God, and anointed by
Samuel. The Philistines in the mean time considering how Readiness Power increased,
while they sat still, and doubting least Israel might become able to revenge
themselves, if they were suffered thus to increase, thought it good to offer a
new Check, presuming of their own Abilities and former Successes; as for late
Disasters, they might suppose the one was by a casual Tempest, and the last by
a mistaken Alarm, which wrought needless fear, and put the Army to Rout.
Having therefore taken the Field, Encamping near Readiness Army, and both keeping
their ground of advantage, they maintained some Skirmishes, not joining in
gross; which the Philistines had cause to fear, considering their late Success,
and thereupon perhaps, provoked to single Combat with their Giant, upon
Condition of a general subjection of the vanquished Nation, in their Champion.
This gave occasion to David, now to make a famous entrance into the public
notice of the People, with the success Recorded in Scripture. By this Victory,
David fell under the heavy displeasure of Saul, by reason of his great Merits;
whereupon he became a Convert Tyrant, faithless to Men, and irreligious to God,
as the History shows, which brought him to the end we read of.

. 6. Of such as lived with Samuel and Saul.. Aeneas Sylvius began to Reign over
the Latins in Alba, about the 11th year of Samuel, and Reigned Thirty one
years. The same year Dorcillus began in Assyria, being the Thirty first King,
and Reigned Forty years. The Doors which came with Heraclides, obtained
Peloponnesus in this Age. Here follows the Account of the First Planters of
Greece, from Iopetus, Father of Prometheus, Father of Deucalion and Pyrrha,
King and Queen of Thessaly, of whom came Helen. Father of Xuthus, Dorus, and
Aeolus. Xuthus fled to Erictheus of Athens, of whose Daughter came Achaeus and
Ion. Achaeus for a slaughter, fled to Laconia in Peloponnesus, and gave it his
Name, and after, recovered Thessaly. Ion was made Governor of Attica, which he
brought into a civil Course, and Planted Syciona, then called Aegiolio, and
Married Helice the Kings Daughter, of whom also the Land took Name. Dorus
second Son of Helen, Planted about Parnassus and Lacedemon; but when the
Heraclides, Nephews of Hercules, Invaded Peloponnesus, the Doors assisting,
they expelled the Achaeans in Laconia, who seeking Habitation, drove out the
Ionians, who failed into Asia, on whose West Coast they Built Twelve Cities.
Hercules, Ancestor of the Heraclides, and his Twelve Labors of Fabulous Poets
rehearsed. Sure it is Greece, was obliged to him for freeing it from many
Tyrants and Thieves, which oppressed the Land in the Reign of Euristheus, who
employed him therein, being Jealous of him for his Virtue and Descent from
Perseus. His Children after his Death, fled to the Athenians, who assisted them
against Euristheus, whom they slew; but upon the death of Hillus, Son of
Hercules, slain in Combat by Echenus King of Tegeates in Arcadia, who assisted
Atreus, Successor of Euristheus, they were to leave the Country for one Hundred
years, now expired, when they returned under Aristodemus, when Tisamenus was
King of Achaea.

. 7. Homer the Poet seemed to live about this time; but the diversity of Men's
Opinions, and curiosity about this Age is so Ridiculous, that I would not
offend the Reader therewith: But to show the uncertainty of Historians, as well
in this, as other Questions of Time, etc. Eusebius in his Evan. praepar. out of
Tatian, names many Greek Writers more Ancient than Homer. Hesiodus's Age is
also questioned; some hold him Elder, some Younger than he: But Varro leaves it
uncertain, finding that both the Fathers lived some Years together. Senyes, or
Senemyres seemed to have Ruled Egypt at this time: For Tenefersobris, his
Successor, preceded Vaphres Father-in-Law to Solomon. About the end of Saul,
the Amazons and Cymmerians Invaded Asia. After the Fall of Troy, Six Kingdoms
grew up, as the Latins in Italy; Lacedemon, Corint^, and Achaia in Greece;
Syria, Soba, and Damascus, under the Adads in Arabia, of which were Ten Kings,
which began and ended, in effect, with the Kings of Israel, which now changed
their form of Government into a Monarchy.

CHAP. XIII. Of David; First of his Estate under Saul.
. 1. DAvid's hazards after he was designed King, were many; first, with Golia^,
which won him Fame with all; Love with Jonathan, like that he bare to his own
Soul; and a ground of deadly Hatred in Saul, though it brake not out 'till he
had entertained him to play on his Harp, and had made him his Son-in-Law; when
in a raving Fit, he threw his Spear at him. Censorinus speaks of Esculapius a
Physician, and Seneca of Pythagoras's Curing Frenzy by Music; but Readiness
Madness arose from the Cause of Causes, and therefore incurable; and the ease
he had, God ordained for the Musician's good, more than the King's. Saul after
this, fearing to trust David about his Person, employed him against the
Philistines, hoping of his Fall by them: And being disappointed therein, he
moved Jonathan and his Servants to kill him; but in vain. From many other
desperate Perils the Lord delivered him at home and abroad, yea in a Mutiny of
his own, etc. as the History of this part of his Life witnesses. Saul being
slain, the Philistines Victory was! such, as some Towns, even beyond Jordan,
were abandoned, and left to their Oppression, without resistance. It is
therefore to be wondered at, that they being Warlike and Ambitious, did not
follow the Victory, to make the Conquest entire. But it may be, that the Civil
Wars between David and the House of Saul immediately breaking out, gave them
hope of an easy Victory over both; whereas their farther Pursuit might enforce
an Atonement against a common Enemy.

. 2. David's beginning of his Reign was opposed by Abner, who sought to advance
Ishbosheth the Son of Saul, yet without right, while Mephibosheth the Son of
Jonathan lived. The first War was defensive in David, when Abner fought it upon
a Challenge of twelve Combatants on either side, which slew each other; like
the Combat between 300 Lacedaemonians, and as many Argives, wherein three
survived; and between the Horatii, and the Curatii, for the Romans, and the
Latins. The Text Chap. 3.1. makes it probable. The Wars between David and
Ishbosheth lasted longer than two years; so that those two Years mentioned,
Chap. 2.13. some Rabins refer to the time when this was written.

. 3. Abner being reconciled to David, was murdered by Ioah, in revenge of
Asael, and in jealousy of his Place and Dignity, which admitted of no
Companion, much less a Superior, as he doubted Abner would prove, being
General of Ten Tribes. Upon like jealousy, he also murdered his own Kinsman
Amasa. The death of Abner might greatly have endangered David's Condition, if
any thing could withstand God's Ordinance; therefore he wisely bewailed it so
openly, complaining of Ioab's Greatness; which makes Princes often put up Wrongs
at their hands; yet he publicly Cursed him, etc.

. 4. David's Reign over all Israel after Ishbosheth's death being confirmed,
his first Enterprise was against Jerusalem, the Center of the Kingdom, held by
the Iebusites, from Joshua to that day; whose strength was such, that in
derision they Manned the Wall with Blind and Lame Men, but lost it. The
P^ilistins hearing of David's Anointing, thought it good to try him before he
was warm in his Seat; but were overthrown twice. David after this, brought the
Ark to the City of David; after which he intended to Build a Temple, but was
forbidden, because he was a Man of War. The Wars which he had made were just,
yet God refused to have the Foundation of his Temple to be laid by his hands;
whereby the damnable Pride of Princes appears, who by terrors of Wars think
to grow to Greatness like the Almighty; not caring to imitate his Mercy and
Goodness, or to seek the blessed Promise by our Savior to Peacemakers; yet
God so accepted his Religious intent, that his Kingdom was confirmed to him,
and his; and a Promise is made of that Everlasting Throne to be Established in
his Seed.

. 5. David after this overthrew the Philistines, and demolished their strong
City of Gath, which was their Frontier Town, at the entrance into Judah, and
Ephraim; from whence they made their incursions, and thither retreated; and was
therefore called in the Text, the Bridle of Amgar. See Junius.
After this he gave them 4 Overthrows; of which see 2 Samuel 21.17. But the
Conquest of Moah, and the Arabian Wars came between. Of Moab he slew two parts,
and saved a third to till the ground; yet the occasion is uncertain; only Moses
for bad them to seek their peace. From thence to Syria Zoba, against Hadadezer.

. 6. David overthrew Hadadezer, going to enlarge his Borders to Euphrates;
which purpose for Euphrates cannot be understood of David, who upon this
Victory, and winning of Damascus upon it, had a fair way and help of Chariots
and Horses now won, sit for such a Journey, if he had intended it; all which,
notwithstanding he returned to Jerusalem: This purpose is better referred to
Hadadezer. Next hereto, followed the Victory against the Ammonites, and their
Confederates, with the severe Revenge David took for the Affront Hanun showed
his Ambassadors. But before Rabba, afterward called Philadelphia, was
Besieged, David gained another great Victory over the Aramites, brought to
Helam by Adadezer out of Mesopotamia; from whence yet David proceeded not to
Euphrates.

. 7. David 's Troubles in his Reign.. As Victories beget Security, and
Prosperity, Forgetfulness of former Misery, and many times of God himself, the
giver of all Goodness; so it fell out with this good King. For being free from
dangerous and apparent Enemies, he began to indulge Human Affections, as we see
in his Carriage toward Vriah and his Wife; forgetting the zealous care which
formerly he had to please God, in the precise keeping of his Commandments.
After this he fell by degrees from the highest Happiness, and his Days were
filled with inter-changeable Joys and Woes, and the Sword never departed from
his House. Then followed the death of the Adulterous Child, Incestuous Rape of
Thamar, Murder of Amnon, Insurrection, Usurpation, Incest, and Death of
Absalom, the Treachery of Ziba, the Affront front of Shimei, the Insolence of
Ioab, the Rebellion of Sheba, the Murder of Amasa, etc. The Land also endured
three Years Famine for Readiness wrong to the Gibeonites, which was relieved by
the death of Seven of Readiness Issue, of which Five were the Sons of Micho^'s
Sister, as by an Elipsis the Hebrew will bear, as in the like, ver. 19. As the
Lord by this Execution secured David's House from Competitors, so was the
Nation strengthened by the valor of many brave Commanders, of which, Six
Colonels under the General, had Thirty Captains of Thousands, among whom the
difference of place and Honor, grew by mere consideration of Virtue, as we see
Abishai, Brother of Ioab, and the King's Kinsman, short in Honor of the first
Three. David thus Established, in ostentation of his Power, provoked the Lord
to punish his People with Pestilence, for his numbering of them, and slew
Seventy Thousand.

. 8. David's last Acts.. Abishag in his impotence, keeps him Warm* etc.
Adonijah aspireth, which causes David publicly to declare Solomon his
Successor, and to set him in his Throne; whereupon Adonijah and his Associates
were scattered. After this, David having two especial Cares remaining, of which
he desired to discharge his Thoughts, one concerning Solomon's peaceable
holding his Crown, the other about building the Temple; he called a Parliament
of all the Princes, etc. In this Assembly, he signifies his purpose, and the
approbation of God; charge all, and Solomon by Name, v. 9. and produces the
pattern of the Work, according to the Form which God himself had appointed,
laying down his own preparation; whereto the Princes and others added their
freewill offering. This being done, David made a solemn Feast, at which time
Solomon was again anointed King, and received Fealty of the Princes, People,
and the King's Sons. After all this, David, as upon his Deathbed, again with
powerful words, gives Solomon the Charge of the Lord his God; and then
advises him concerning Ioab, who otherwise though of exceeding desert, yet for
his intolerable Insolence, came to such an end by Justice, when time served, as
many worthy Men had done for acts of the like presumption. David, after Forty
Years Reign, died, being Seventy Years old, having been a Man of small Stature,
exceeding Strength; and for internal Gifts and Graces, passing all others; and
putting his Human Frailty apart, commended by God himself, to be according to
his own Heart. Being a Prophet as well as a King, he foretold Christ more
lightsomly and lively than all the rest, and writ many Psalms; De Civ. li*
13.14.
but whether all the Book, is disputed, though Chrysostom and Augustine hold it.
Christ and his Apostles cite him.

. 9. David and Solomon's Treasures.. David's Treasure exceeded, as appears by
what he gave toward the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 22.14. which amounts to 3333^ Cart
loads of Silver, or 6000 l. sterling to every Cart-load; and 23 Millions and
1000 l. in Gold; a matter incredible, but for Testimony of Scripture; where
consider how such a Treasure could be raised by Parcimony. Eusebius cites
Eupolemus for a Navy which he sent from Melanis, or Achanis, to the Isle Vpher,
or Opher, by Ortelius; then his Husbandry, which was great, his Presents,
Tributes, Taxations, Capitations, his Spoils; the Riches of the Sanctuary long
increasing by large Gifts, and the Portion out of all Prizes from Enemies, even
from Joshua's days. Of Solomon's Treasure, see 1 Kings 9.20. and 10.14.29. See
Josephus of the Treasure he hid in David's Sepulcher, Ant. l^. 7.12.
out of which Hircanus took 3000 Talents, and Herod more.

. 10. David's Contemporaries.. Achis a Philistin King of Gath, and another in
Solomon's days, Latinus Sylvius, King of Alba. Cedrus the last King of Athens,
after whom they changed the Government into a Principality for Life, without
Regal Title. This change was made in honor of Codrus, voluntarily slain for
their sakes in a War with the Doors, to disappoint the Oracle. Eupalus the
Third King of Assyria, sat 38 Years; Ixion the second King of the Heraclids in
Corinth, Son of Eurythenes. Agis the second King of the Heraclids in Lacedemon,
he restored the Laconians, and made the Citizens of Helos Slaves, for refusing
Tribute, as at length, all the Messenians were, and thereof called Helons, that
is, Slaves: Slave came from Sclavi, which were Samaritans, now Russians, which
Conquering Illyria, would be called Slaves, which with them signifies
glorious; but when the warm Clime had thawed their Northern hardness, (but not
ripened their Wits) the Italians, which made many of them Bondmen, used their
Name in Reproach, calling all Bondmen Slaves. Achetratus succeeded Agis, in
whose time Androchus the Third Son of Codrus, assisted by the Jones, built
Ephesus in Caria, and was slain of the Carians. He also held Erithrae, famous
for Sybyls, which writ Verses of Jesus Christ, Son of God, the Savior,
reported by Augustine, who saw them. Vaphres King of Egypt began to Reign, when
David Besieged Rabba, Magnesia, on Meander in Asia, founded now, and Capua
Campania.

CHAP. XIV. Of Solomon, Anno Mundi, 2991.
. 1. SOlomon began to Reign in the 2991 st Year of the World; and was first
Congratulated by Hiram King of Tire, according to the Ancient Custom of
Princes. Though his Reign were peaceable, yet his beginning was with the blood
of his Brother Adonijah, without warrant either from his Father, or the Law of
God. The occasion was his desire of Abyshag; but being his Elder Brother, who
also had sought the Kingdom, it was enough, as a word is to the Wise; and he
which sees the Claw, knows whether it be a Lion or no. Solomon took the
motion, as a demonstration of a new Treason; such was the jealousy of seeking
a King's Widow, or Concubines; as Absolom's taking his Father's Concubines, was
a taking possession of a Royalty, so it was applied to David by Nathan, etc. 2 Samuel 12.8. Birthright pleaded by Adonijah, was according to God's Law, and of
Nations; but the Kings of the Jews were more Absolute, and not without Example
in Jacob, for private Inheritance. As for what we read of Peoples Elections, it
was but an acknowledging him whom the Lord chose, and not to frustrate the
Elder's Right. Solomon also executed Ioab, deposed Abiathar, and put Shemei to
death. He Married the Daughter of Vaphres (as Eusebius calls him) King of
Egypt; and according to his request to God, obtained extraordinary Wisdom,
especially for Government; as appeared in the Example purposely set down, of
his judging the two Harlots; yet did he excel in all other Knowledge.

. 2. Solomon's Building and Glory.. Renewing the League with Hiram of Tire, he
had much of his Materials for his Buildings from him. Of the Glorious Temple,
and parts of it, many Learned Men have Written; as Salmeron, Montanus, Bibera,
Barradas, Azorius, Villalpandus, Pineda, etc. The Letters which passed between
Solomon and Hiram, Eusebius sets down out of Eupolon, which Josephus also
Records in his Antiquities, Lib. 8.. 2. Besides the matchless Temple, he made
many other Magnificent Buildings, of which Gerar on the Border of Ephraim,
taught the Egyptians to visit those parts in Rehoboam's days, before they were
sent for. Thadimor, Joseph held to be Palmyra, in the Desert of Syria, to the
North-East of Libanus, the utmost Border of Solomon's Dominion, which Ierom
calls Thermeth; and by Adrian Rebuilt, and called Adrianopolis. He also
Repaired and Peopled the Towns Hiram refused, and made his first and only
Journey in Syria Zobah, to establish his Tributes, and then visited all the
Borders of his Dominions; from Palmyrena in the North, to Eziongaber and Eloth
in the South, upon the Red Sea.

. 3. Solomon from Eziongaber, sent a Fleet to Ophir, an Island of the Molucca's
in East India, from whence he received 430 Talents of Gold, all Charges
defrayed. Of the word Tharsis see before, lib. 1. c. 8.. 9 and 10. Pineda
dreamt Ophir was in the Cades, or Calis-Malis, his Country in Spain, of old
called Turtessus, whereto the next way by the Mediterranean was hindered by the
great Atlantic Island, exceeding all Africa, swallowed up and choking the
Streights with Mad; like his Dream of Ionas's Whale, which in 3 days swam about
all Africa, into the Red Sea, to cast him up, 12000 Miles in compass. Solomon's
Chariots, Horsemen, daily Provision, Wisdom, etc. See 1 Kings 4.10. with 2 Chronicles. 9.

. 4. Solomon 's Fall, and term of Life.. Solomon forgetting what the Lord
Commanded; as he had plenty of all other things, so of Wives, even of
Idolatrous Nations, 1 Kings 11.1, 2. prohibited; whereupon they turned his
heart after other Gods; for which, the Lord punished him with Enemies in his
Age, and rent his Kingdom from his Son, as he threatened, 1 Kings 11. Touching
his Age, it is conjectured by his Father's Actions, whose Conquests were ended,
before he wan Rabba, when Solomon was not Born. So that half of David's Reign
being spent at the time of vanquishing the Ammonites, Solomon's Birth must fall
after David's 20 Years; and above a Year it could not be, seeing Rehoboam's Age
at Solomon's death, compared with the many heavy things which befell David
after; and that David in his Charge to Solomon, speaks as to a Man grown;
though Solomon at Nineteen Years old, speaking to the Lord about his weighty
Charge, might well call himself a Charge. Some time after, Ammon forced Thamar,
and two Years after was slain by Absalom, who fied to Geshur, where he abode
three Years, yet saw not his Father's face for two years. How long after he
brake into Rebellion is uncertain, which seems to be the 30 th Year of
David's Reign, but the 40 th Year after his Anointing; as those words 2 Samuel
15.7. may well be taken. Which 40, Josephus, Theodoret, and the Latin
Translation read 4 Years; to wit, from Absolom's Return.

. 5. Solomon's Writings. In his Proverbs he teaches good Life, and correcting
the contrary. In Eccles. the Vanity of Humane Nature. In the Canticles he
sings the Epithalamion of Christ and his Church. The Book of Wisdom, the best
Learned make us think it none of his; and Kimchi ascribes the 3 other to
Isaiah the Prophet. Josephus also tells us of his own Invention, rather than
truly that Solomon wrote Books of Enchantments. But certainly so strange an
Example of Human Frailty was never read of; that a Man endowed with Wisdom, by
God himself; in honor of whom, and for his Service he built the first and most
glorious Temple of the World; was made King, not by Law, but the Love of God,
and became the Wisest, Richest, and Happiest of all Kings, did in the end by
persuasion of weak, wretched, Idolatrous Women, forget and forsake the Lord of
all the World, and giver of all goodness, See Siracides. 47.^3, 14. etc.
of which he was more liberal to him than to any that ever the World had.

. 6. Solomon's Contemporaries, were Agelaus in Corinth; Labotes in Laced^monia;
Silvius Alba over the Latins; Leosthenes in Assyria; Argastus, and after
Archippus in Athens; Baliastrus succeeded Hiram in Tire; others put Bozorius
between: Sesac, after Vaphres in Egypt, whom Eusebius calls Smerides; and
others by other Names.

CHAP. XV. Solomon's Successors to Jehoram. The Kingdom divided.
REhoboam succeeded his Father, but was not so Wise as to resolve the People's
Petition without Counsel; nor yet to discern of Councils, which is the very
best of Wisdom in Princes and all others; for though he consulted with grave
advised Men, yet he was Transported by his Favorites, who, ignorant of the
nature of Severity, which without the Temper of Clemency, is Cruelty it self,
thrust him on to threaten an Increase of what was unsupportable already;
ignorant also, that Severity is to be used for the Help, and not for the Hurt
of Subjects. These foolish Parasites could better judge of the King's
disposition, which Learning was sufficient for to enable them to the Places
they held. This Answer of Rehoboam, set forward Ieroboam's designs, and the
Prophecy of Ahijah, as the sequel showed; for the People at once chose
Jeroboam; and after the manner of all Rebels, forgetting Duty to God, and Bonds
of Nature, renounced all interest in David; the Honor of their Nation, and
murder the Officers sent to appease them. After this, Rehoboam intended Wars
upon them, but was stayed by the Prophet from God. Jeroboam fortified himself,
and to prevent re-uniting by communion in Religion, impiously set up a new
Worship, learned in Egypt, expelling the Levites. Thus by irreligious Policy,
he founded that Idolatry, which rooted Israel out of the Land at last; neither
could he be stayed by the Prophet that foretold his Advancement, nor Miracle
upon his own hand. This point of Policy must be made good, though it cast off
God, and the Religion of his Fathers. Whereunto an Italian Historian compares
the Policy of his Nation, in making good the State they have gotten, by what
means soever, as if God would not oppose it. Upon this ground, Amos must not
Prophecy at Bethel, it is the King's Court. Iehu will upon this ground
maintain the Worship of Calves; and Hen. IV of France change Religion, etc.
whom yet the Protestants whom he forsook, never hurt, as the Papists did whom
he followed. But of the wretched end of such Policy, all these are notable
Examples.

. 2. Rehoboam 's Impiety, Punishment, End, and Contemporaries.. Rhehoboam
Fortified his Cities, as well against Egypt, as Jeroboam, and then forsook the
Lord, 1 Kings 14. and 1 Chronicles. 11. But in his Fifth Year, Sesac of Egypt, who
favored Jeroboam, taught him how weak Fortifications are, where God watches
not the City. Sesac brought with him the Lybeans, Cusits of Arabia, and
Succaeans, which were not the Troglodits spoken of by Pliny, and Ptolomy, as
Iunius judges. These were 600 Miles from the best of Egypt, and were in the 22
d degree North from the Line, too far for such an occasion. The Succaeans were
rather Arabian Egyptians, as the Ichthyophagy in Ptolomy, between the Mountains
Alabastrine, and the Red Sea, when this powerful Ses^c wan Jerusalem, and other
Cities of Judah, and added to the Spoil of them the Temple, and the King's
House, and the Egyptian Kings after claimed Sovereignty of Judah. After 17 Years
Reign, Rehoboam died, and Jeroboam outlived him 4 Year. Tersippus in Athens,
Doristus in Sparta, Priminas in Corinth, Sylvius Alys over the Latins,
Periciades in Assyria, and Abdastrartus in Tire, whom his Foster-Brother
Murdered, and Usurped 12 Year; but Astartus Son of Baleaster, recovered the
Kingdom from them.

. 3. Abia succeeded Rehoboam in his Kingdom and Vices; yet God was pleased to
give him the Victory over Jeroboam, of whose Subjects he slew 500000, though he
suffered his Father to be vanquished by Sesac the Egyptian; not for want of
Strength, but Wisdom and Carriage, which God gives when and where it pleases
him: Who by the Affinity by which Solomon thought to assure his Estate, the
Lord brake it in his next Successor. And though then God used to show the Causes
of such Judgments by his Prophets, yet is he the same just God, to raise and
throw down Kings and Estates for the same Offenses. And those Afflictions of
Israel, and the Courses thereof, are set down for Presidents to succeeding
Ages. As the Famine for Readiness Cruelty, David's Calamities for Vriah, Solomon's
loss of Ten Tribes for Idolatry, Rehoboam for Idolatry and Sodomy in the Land:
Jeroboam, Ioram, Ahab, Iesabel. The like Judgments are executed daily for the
like Offenses, though Men, wise in the World, raise these effects no higher
than to second Causes.

. 4. Asa, after three years, succeeded Abijah, who reformed Religion, and
prospered. He overthrew Zerah and his 100000 Men, etc. That Zerah was an
Arabian, not an Ethiopian, was proved before Lib. 1. Sect. 3, 14. and c. 10.
. But after he fell to rely on Man, and hired Benhadad against Baasha, not
relying upon the Assistance of God, he fell to persecute the Prophet which
reproved him, and to oppress the People, for which God plagued him. There lived
at the same time, Agesilaus and Bacis of Corinth, Astartus and Astarlaius Kings
of Tire; Alys and Capis, Kings of the Latins; Ophrateus in Assyria. Tersippus,
and Phorbas in Athens; Chemmis in Egypt, whom Cheops succeeded, and Reigned
Fifty six years, to the sixteenth of Ioas; Baasa King of Israel began in the
Third year of Asa, and Reigned Twenty four years, which was about the Twenty
sixth Year of Asa; so that his Attempt against Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.1. was the 26th
of Asa, but the 36th of the Kingdom of Judah called Asa's, because he there
Reigned in it. Consider that Rehoboam Reigned seventeen years, Abijah three,
and Asa Forty one, in whose Three Baasan began, so the Thirty sixth year of
Iuda's Kingdom, fell in the Sixteenth year of Asa.

. 5. The Alterations in the Kingdom of Israel in the Reign of Asa, might have
reduced the Ten Tribes to the House of David, if God had not determined the
contrary. Jeroboam lost 500000: Nadab his Son, in two years, lost his Life and
Kingdom, so that of his Fathers Worldly Wisdom, to Establish a Kingdom in his
Posterity, nothing remained but the hateful Memory, that he made Israel to sin.
Baasa rooting out Ieroboam's House, yet embraced his Idolatry, which drew the
same Sentence of God's Wrath upon him and his Family; and though he thought it
Wisdom, to Fortify his Kingdom, which he found weakened by Asa, by making
League with Benhadad; yet God turned his Wisdom into Foolishness, and by the
same Hand destroyed Nephtalim. Ela Son of Baasha succeeded, and was slain by
Zimri; who wanting strength to defend himself against Omri, had Courage enough
to burn himself in Terza. Omri by the Peoples Division was a while opposed by
Tibni, but prevailed.

. 6. Israel thus afflicted under those unhappy Princes, it is a wonder that the
People returned not to their ancient Kings, and reunited not to those Two
Mighty Tribes; but they still continued in grievous oppressions of the Factious
Usurpers and Competitors, and under the revenging hand of God for their
defection. To say God's secret Will was such, was not reason either to the Ten
Tribes not to return, nor to Abijah, after he had so weakened Israel, not to
perfect his Conquest; for though his Father was restrained expressly by the
Lord, yet was not he. We may then boldly look into two Causes. First, Why the
People bore so quietly the slaughter of Nadab, and interpretation of Jeroboam
their own chosen King, and revenged the death of Ela Son of Baasa, an Usurper.
It is therefore probable, that the People by defection from Rehoboam, seeking
ease of former Burdens, found Jeroboam and his Son to retain some Kingly
Prerogatives, which had been grievous to them under Solomon, which Baasa had
forborne, and reduced the form of Civil Government to a more temperate Method,
which much pleased them. Secondly, the same may be the Reason they returned not
to the House of David, whose Scepter they found so heavy under Solomon, and
were threatened by his Son with more burden. They had seen Ioab and Shimei
slain without all form of Judgment, Adonijah without Cause, as Jeroboam should
have been; which lawless Power grew more barbarous in Iehoram, Manases, etc. As
for the Kings of Israel, we find no such arbitrary proceeding; for even Iezabel
kept the form judicial against Naboth. And well it may be, though Jeroboam had
established a Law against the Prophets of God, which the Idolatrous People
approved; by which Law Iezabel slew so many. This difference of Power,
Arbitrary, and according to Law, made the People of Judah less affectionate to
their Princes than the Israelites, who were accustomed not to kill their Kings
as the Iudeans did, but revenged when they were able, such as were slain by
Usurpers. The like moderation of Kingly Prerogatives in the Government of
England, gained such affection of the People, as never any perished by the Fury
of the People, whose heat in greatest Insurrection was extinguished with the
blood of some great Officers. Let not Monarchs fear straitning of their
Absoluteness by mighty Subjects, as long as by their Wisdom they keep the
hearts of the People, who will be sure to come in on their side: As Briarius
with his hundred hands assisted Jupiter, when all the Gods conspired against
him. For a good Form of Government is sufficient of it self, to retain the
People, not only without assistance of a laborious Wit, but even against all
devices of the shrewdest Politicians; every Sheriff and Constable being sooner
able to arm the Multitude in the King's behalf, than any overweening Rebel
against him. Princes immediately assigned by God, or getting Command by strong
hand, have presumed of more Absolute Prerogatives than Kings Chosen; and the
People which thought Obedience to Princes a part of Duty to God, will endure
much more with patience, than others who have Kings of their own choosing.

. 7. Iehosaphat, a Religious Happy Prince, succeeded Asa, whose Forces of Men
of War were 1160000, by which he recovered his Tributes from the Arabians and
Philistines, besides his own Garrisons; yet his Country did not exceed the County
of Kent in largeness. This number may be thought strange in so small a
Territory, being far greater than any Muster ever taken of that Country. Ioab
had found 500000, Rehoboam 180000, Abia 408000, Asa 580000, Amazia found
300000, Uzziah 307000; and surely if Iehosophat had 1160000 Men, he would not
have feared Moab and Ammon, etc. I am therefore of Opinion (submitting to
better Judgments) that the numbers spoken of, 2 Chronicles. 17. were not all at one
time, but that the two first numbers under Adnah and Iehobanan, were after
Mustred, and Commanded by Amasia, Eliada, and Iehosabad; yet this Mighty Prince
made a League with Ahab, and matched his Son Ioram with his Daughter, and
assisted him at Ramoth-Gilead, for which he was reproved by Iehu the Prophet;
as he was a second time by the Prophet Eliezer, for joining with Ahab's Son in
preparing a Fleet. So he joined with Iehoram against Moab, and had perished by
Famine, if Elisha had not relieved them from God, whose Goodness was ever prone
to save the Evil for the sake of the Good, but never destroyed the Good for the
Evil.

Ophratenes now Reigned in Assyria, Capetas and Tiberinus at Alba in Italy,
Atazedes in Athens, Agesilaus in Corinth, Archilochus in Lacedemon, Badesorus
in Tyrus, Achab, Ochozias, and Iehoram in Israel.

CHAP. XVI. Of Jehoram, and Ahazia.
JEhoram, the Son of Iehosaphat, being thirty two Years old, began to Reign,
and Reigned 8 Year, of which, 4 was in his Father's Life; who at his two
Journeys with Ahab and Iehoram, Kings of Israel, left him Viceroy 'till his
return. The first was in Iehosaphat's 17th Year, when also Ahazia Son of Ahab
began to Reign; whose Brother Iehoram, the 2 d year after, succeeded K. of
Israel in the 2 d year of Iehoram, King of Judah; that is, of his Reign when his
Father Iehosaphat took the sole Government again upon him, 'till the Fifth year
after, when he reassumed his Son Ioram into the Government, 2 Kings 8. two
years before his death, in the fifth year of Iehoram King of Israel. So that
Iehosaphat Reigning Twenty five years, 2 King. 22.42. it is evident, his Son
Iehoram could not be King of Judah, 'till the Eighth year of Iehoram King of
Israel. The like regard is to be had in accounting the Reigns of other Kings of
Judah and Israel, whose years are sometime to be taken complete, current, or
confounded with other Kings preceding, or succeeding, as the comparing of their
Times together shall require. In this History, consider that Iehosaphat, a
Religious King, is the first of Rehoboam's Issue, that entered a League both
Offensive and Defensive with the Kings of Israel, with whom his Predecessors
had tired themselves in vain with continual Wars. This Confederacy with one
which hated the Lord, could not long prosper, not issuing from the true Root
and Fountain of all Wisdom; yet as a piece of sound Policy, it wanted not fair
Pretenses of much common good, as mutual Fortification of both Kingdoms against
Uncircumcised Ancient Enemies. For confirmation of such an apparent Good unto
Posterity therefore, the Bond of Affinity was knit by Marriage of Iehoram with
Athalia, a Lady of a Masculine Spirit, who had learned so much of Iezabel her
Brother's Wife, that she durst undertake more in Jerusalem, than the other in
Samaria, as a Firebrand ordained by God, to Consume many Nobles in Judah, and
perhaps some, whose Worldly Wisdom, regardless of God's pleasure, had brought
her in. The Syrian Wars at Ramoth-Gilead, were the first Fruits of this League,
undertaken upon equal Adventure, but upon the hope of Benefit only to Ahab: As
godly Princes seldom thrive by matching with Idolaters, but rather serve the
Turns of those false Friends, who being ill-affected toward God, cannot be
well affected to his Servants. At this time also, as Ahaziah was designed King
by Ahab his Father, so was Ioram by Iehosaphat after the others Example,
without Example in any of their Predecessors,

. 2. Iehoram's Reign so diversely dated in Scripture, argues, that Iehosaphat
having taken him into the Government, as Ahab had given Example, found cause
after to recall that Power. Probable it is, that his Insolent Idolatrous Wife
having corrupted him, was the cause that the Government, both for Religion and
Justice, grew so far out of order, that Iehosaphat was forced to the
Reformation we read of, and sequestered his Son from the Government, 'till it
were settled again; and so after five years called him to it the second time,
which bred a new Date, as did his Father's death two years after, breed a
third: Many things might move Iehosaphat to Iehoram's second calling to Govern
him, as to try what Wisdom his restraint had wrought, or to prevent his
Brethrens Insolency against him, if Iehosaphat had at his Death, left him in
disgrace, which might be the cause of great Tumults; it may be also, Iehoram,
by dissimulation, had won the good Opinion on of his ^ather and Brethren,
formerly offended, it being usual in violent fierce Natures, to be as abject
and servile in their Adversity, as insolent and bloody upon Advantage.
Howsoever it was, this is manifest, that his Father at his death, doubting his
Affection to his Brethren, for their better Security, besides great Riches,
gave them the custody of strong Cities, and unusual means against unusual
Perils.

. 3. Jehoram 's Reign alone, in which Edom and Libna Rebel.. Iehosaphat's
providence for his younger Sons availed nothing against the determination of an
higher Providence; for these strong Cities were a weak defense for the young
Princes against his Power, to whom the Citizens were obedient. If they came in
upon the King's Summons, he had them without difficulty; if they refused, they
were Traitors; yet could not hold out, when all would fail them, for fear of a
Potent King. However it was, all were slain, and many great Men with them, who
had any way offended the Tyrant, either formerly, or in behalf of his Brethren.
Iehoram, after this, made innovation in Religion, not only encouraging the
People prone to Idolatry (of all other sins detested of God) but using
Compulsion also, and was the first we read of, that enforced Irreligion. Edom,
in the mean time, revolted, and made themselves a King, having, from David's
days, been Tributaries, and governed by Viceroys. Now Isaac's Prophecy began
to take effect, that Esau should break the Yoke of Jacob; for after this, Edom
was never subject to the Kings of Judah: Yea, in process of time, Antipater and
Herod, Elumeans, Reigned as Kings in Jerusalem. Lybna, also a City of the
Levites in Judah, rebelled against him, because he had forsaken the Lord God of
his Fathers; In defense of whose Worship, these Levites thought themselves
bound, especially against his inforcement to the contrary. Wherein also they
might take Encouragement for Iehosaphat's Charge, 2 Chronicles. 29.8. But as Iehoram
had left Edom in their defection, so he attempted nothing against Libna; which
seems to proceed from a doubtful Mind, whether to put Weapons into the Hands
of his Subjects against their Fellows, whose Cause might well be favored by
many, who yet durst not discover themselves, being unarmed, as they might when
Weapons were put into their Hands. So desperate is the Condition of Tyrants,
who think it a greater Happiness to be Feared than Loved; yet are obliged to
fear those whose Love would make them dreadful to others.

. 4. Iehoram taking no notice of God's displeasure by these Afflictions, was
threatened by a Prophetical Writing sent to him; being such a Tyrant, as the
Prophets durst not reprove him to his Face, as they had done many of his
Predecessors, bad as well as good, but they writ to him, keeping themselves
from him; Elias being Translated, might have left this Writing, or, (as some
conjecture) by mistaking in Writing one Letter for another, Elias is put for
Elisha, etc. The Accomplishment of the Prophecy, proved as terrible as the
Sentence, when the Philistines, which from David's days durst never look out,
brake in upon him, etc. with the Arabians, a naked People on Horseback, of no
Force, dwelling in a Barren Desert. So that the one quarter of those whom
Iehosaphat Mustered, had been able to repel greater Forces than both these
Enemies could raise, had the Iudean People been Armed, as by their Prince's
Jealousy, they were not, according to the Policy of the Philistines in the days
of Saul: The House of Iehoram, which they surprised, seems rather a Country
House than in Jerusalem, considering they made no further Ravages. It is
probable, all Iehoram's Children were not now slain, considering the Slaughters
made after by Iehu and Athaliah, within two years: Lastly himself, after two
years Torment, voided his Guts, etc. And as the People had small cause of
comfort in his Life, so they observed not the decency of pretending Sorrow for
his Death; neither had he the Honor of his Ancestors Burial, though his Son
Succeeded, and his Wife did all. Athaliah busy in Plotting her own Greatness,
and providing trusty Counselors for her Son, thought it unreasonable to offend
the Eyes of the People with a magnificent Funeral of a Man by them detested;
and chose rather to let the Blame of past Actions lie upon the Dead, than by
doing him Honor, to procure an ill Opinion of her self and Children, which it
now concerned her to avoid. Such is the quality of Wicked Instigators, to
charge the Man whose Evil Inclination they corrupted by sinister Counsel, not
only with his own Vice, but with their Faults also, when once he is gone and
can profit them no longer. Thus we may clearly see, how the corrupted
Affections of Men impugning the Revealed Will of God, accomplish nevertheless,
his hidden Purpose; and without miraculous means, confound themselves in the
seeming Wise Devices of their own Folly. All Men may likewise learn to submit
their Judgments to the Ordinance of God, rather than to follow Worldly Wisdom,
contrary to his Commandments.

. 5. Ahaziah succeeded his Father in the Twelfth year of Iehoram King of
Israel, and was guided by the same Spirits that had been his Father's Evil
Angels. Touching his Age, 2 Chronicles. 22.2. a Point more difficult than important;
I see not a more probable Conclusion than that of Torniellus's mentioning an
Edition of the Seventy at Rome, Anno. 1588, which says, he was Twenty years
old when he succeeded; and the Annotations thereon, which cite other Copies,
which give him two years more, etc. He accompanied Iehoram King of Israel to
Ramoth Gilead, and returns home after the Battle, and presently took a new
Journey to visit Iehoram. It seems his speedy return to Jerusalem was not
pleasing to Athaliah, as interrupting her in her Plots, who therefore sought to
oblige him abroad, if it were but in a vain Complement, to visit one whom he
had seen but yesterday. But however these things may seem accidental, yet all
concurred, as disposed at this time, to fulfill the high pleasure of God; yea,
Athaliah's secret Plots, which intended nothing less.

. 6. Ahaziah and that Family perished with the House of Ahab.. Iehu is anointrd
King, and made Executioner of the Sentence of God against the House of Ahab,
according to the Prophecy of Elias, and is proclaimed by all the other
Captains. He having this Honor upon the sudden thrown upon him, was not slow
in the heat of their Affections, to put himself in possession, and to set on
foot the Business which so nearly concerned him, and not to be retarded, being
no more his own than God's. Ahab's House never so flourished, having Seventy
Princes of the Blood, a valiant King, honored with the Victory of Ramoth
Gilead; so deeply Allied with Judah, and Courted by the King, and so many
Princes of his Blood, that it might discourage all common Enemies, and make
Rebellious Enterprises hopeless. In this Security and Joy of the Court for the
King's Recovery and Entertainment of the Princes of Judah, the King, his Court,
and Friends are suddenly surprised and slain; neither could Iezebel's Painted
Majesty, nor Man-like Spirit, with untimely brave Apothegms, terrify her
Adversary, who, of her Servant, became her Lord; at whose Command, her base
Grooms feared not to violate her affected Majesty: Ahaziah is also wounded to
Death.

CHAP. XVII Of Athaliah, and Ioash, that succeeded her.
. 1. AThaliah Usurps, and upon what pretenses,. Ahaziah being dead, after one
Years Reign his House was not able to retain the Kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 22.9. which
Speech has bred the question of Ioash's Pedigree. Athaliah having Reigned
under her Sons Name, had laid the Plot to play the Queen under her own Title,
if her Son failed; and to that end, had furnished the King, Council, and Places
of Chief Command, with Men fittest for her purposes. And though Ambition be
violent, yet seldom is it so shameless as to neglect Beauty. It is not
therefore improbable to think that Athaliah seeing the Royal Blood so wasted in
her Husband and Son's days, had by some means drawn her Husband or Son to make
her Heir if the King's Blood should be extinct; considering, that without some
such order taken, when the King's Blood failed, the Kingdom were like to be
torn in sunder by Competitors, or some Popular Seditious Man should be chosen,
that would subvert all regularity, and exercise his Cruelty on such as they
loved most, and cast aspersions on the Royal House. Pretense of Testaments to
thrust out true Heirs is no new thing: Yea, what is new under the Sun? To
prefer a younger before the natural Heir, has proof in David; and for
StatePolicy to slay a Brother, by example of Solomon, etc. And though these had
ground of their doings, yet they which follow Examples which please them, will
neglect the Reasons which please them not. Solomon slew Adonijah which had
Rebelled, and was entered a new practice; Iehoram slew his Brethren better than
he; David purchased the Crown, yet he gave it by God's direction, when as
Ahaziah sought to cut off David's Issue, which the Lord had appointed to Reign,
2 Chronicles. 23.3.

. 2. Iehu had so much business in establishing his own Kingdom, that he could
not molest Athaliah as he desired, she being of Ahab's House. Among other
things about Religion, he destroyed Baal's Priests; and though never King of
Israel had such a way to overthrow Ieroboam's Idolatry, seeing he needed not
fear the Peoples return to David's House (in appearance) quite rooted out, and
had his Calling by an unexpected Favor of God; and for his Zeal against Baal,
had a special promise for Four Generations; yet he would needs piece out God's
Providence with his own Circumspection. He had, no doubt, displeased many about
Baal, and should offend more in taking away Ieroboam's ancient Idolatry; yet
all these never thought of making him King, if God had not done it; when more
difficulties appeared in getting them now, than in keeping them, though with
their offense whom he sought to retain by forsaking God. This Ingratitude of
Iehu, drew terrible vengeance from God on Israel, executed by Hazael, according
to Elisha's Prophecy, 2 Kings 8.12. with 10.32. Thus Israel succeeded under
Iehu, whose carriage and success was better in murdering his Master that
trusted him, than in defending his People from Cruel Enemies. And thus it
commonly falls out, that they which can find all difficulties in serving him,
to whom nothing is difficult, instead of finding what they propound by contrary
Courses, overwhelm themselves with troubles they sought not; and are by God,
whom they first forsook, left unto the miserable Labors of their own blind
Understanding and Wisdom, wherein they reposed all their Confidence.

. 3. Athaliah's Government, by Israel's Calamities stood the safer, she having
leisure to settle it. It is probable also she held Correspondence with Hazael,
as King Asa had done, and had secured her self by Gifts, having robbed the
House of God for Baalim, whose Idolatry she set out with Pomp, to recommend it
to the People, as she sought by want of means to make the Service of the
Sanctuary neglected.

. 4. Ioash's preservation was by means of Iehoshabeth, Ahaziah's Sister, and
Wife unto Iehojada the High Priest, the upholder of God's Service in those
unhappy times. By her Piety it seems she was not Athaliah's Daughter, yet had
she access to the Court, and conveyed the young Child with her Nurse into the
Temple, where he was secretly brought up, that the Tyranness could not discover
it; and thought it not fit to make much ado about him, but rather let it be
thought he was dispatched with the rest; lest the People hearing of his escape,
should hearken after Innovation.

. 5. Athatiah had acted as Queen above 6 Year, without molestation, when
suddenly the Period of her Glory and Reward of her Wickedness met together, and
the young Princes Age required no longer to be concealed, for his better
Education, to fit him with Courage and Qualities proper for a King, and to
prevent the over-deep rooting of Impiety by the longer Reign of that Cursed
Woman. Iehojada wisely considered this, and combined with Five Captains, of
whom he was best assured, by whom he drew over other great Men to Jerusalem.
And because it was difficult to draw open Forces together, he gave order to the
Levites, which waited by course in the Temple, that they should not return home
'till they knew his further pleasure. Thus admitting new Comers, and retaining
the old, he secretly gathered together a competent number to encounter the
Queens Guard, and furnished them out of the Armory of the Temple which King
David had made; with which also he armed the Captains and their Followers, etc.
All things being in readiness, they proceed to the Execution, and the young
King is joyfully Crowned; and the Tyranness Usurper coming in desperately,
without Forces, ignorant of the business, ended her own Tragedy with a sudden
and shameful death. Iosephus's Report of her coming with her Power, which were
repelled, etc. is not credible; though all the Forces she could bring, could
not frustrate the Council of God, yet her Indiscretion made the effect more
easy:

. 6. Athaliah had no doubt considered Iehoram King of Israel's rashness,
casting himself into the gaping Gulf of danger; yet her self is by the like
Bait drawn into the same Trap; and as she lived like Iezebel, so was she
rewarded with her.

These two Queens were in many things alike; each Daughter, Wife, and Mother to
a King; each overruled her Husband, was an Idolater, Ambitious, Murderous;
each slain by Conspiring Subjects suddenly, etc. We read not what became of
Athaliah's Sons, her Sacrilegious Imps which robbed the Temple, etc.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Joash, Amaziah, and their Contemporaries.
. 1. JOASH about Seven Year Old began to Reign, under the protection of
Iehojada during his Minority. When he came to Age, he took two Wives by
Iehojada's Advice, repairing David's Family, almost worn out. The first Act he
took in hand after he Ruled without a Protector, was the reparation of the
Temple, which had been his Sanctuary, which he followed with much Zeal.

. 2. Iehojada the Priest being 130 Year Old, died, before his Country could
have spared him, and was buried among the Kings, as he well deserved. This
Honor seems to have come from the People, for the King had soon forgot him,
as one eased of Debt, and was easily flattered by the Princes, so that he
quickly forgot his old well-deserving Counselor, yea God himself, Author of
all Goodness. He which had 30 Years showed Zeal to restore true Religion, and
root out Idolatry, which had been growing some 16 Years, was easily drawn to
fall away, when he perceived his Princes Inclinations; and being once entered
that course, he ran headlong, as one who thought Liberty the only Token of a
King, no longer to endure the sower Admonitions of Devout Priests. Hereby it
appears, he which had been so long among the Devout, as Saul among the
Prophets, was not of them; but like an Actor upon the Stage, had counterfeited,
to express more Zeal and lively Affection than they could do, which were truly
Religious.

Iehoahaz Son of Iehu King of Israel, Reigned 17 Years, from the 23 d of Ioash
King of Judah.

. 3. Ioash having broken loose from God, is given over to Men not so easily
shaken off; for Hazael King of Aram, returning from Gath, set on toward
Jerusalem, which forced Ioash to buy his Peace with all the Treasure he could
make, Holy, or Common; yet he never enjoyed Peace with Hazael, who sent a small
Army after, and destroyed his Princes, and ravaged his Country. Many might be
the Motives to excite Hazael against Judah; he had an experienced Army; Judah
had assisted Israel at Ramoth, and the Journey from Gath to Jerusalem short;
yet it is probable that the Sons of Athaliah encouraged him, with hope of a
great Party to be drawn by them, of such as favored them; otherwise it is
improbable that Hazael would have awaked a sleeping Enemy. However it were, it
was of God, who knows how to prefer Motives to such as he will employ, though
they intend it not. Some confound the two Invasions of Hazael's; but they are
different; the first was a complete Army, which frighted Ioash, and had
Hazael's presence; the second was small, and was encountered by the Iudeans,
when the King of Aram was at Damascus. Some hold the Invasion was in Iehojada's
days; but it seems otherwise, seeing the Service of the Temple flourished all
his Days. God sometimes prevents Men's Sins by affliction, before Men see
cause, because it reforms them. As for the Wicked, usually their Sins get the
start of their Punishment, which can do no good upon them, through hardness of
heart by custom of Sin, as it was by this unhappy Man, whose villainous Pattern
few Tyrants can endure to imitate.

. 4. Zecharias the Son of Iehojada, after other Prophets, is moved by the
Spirit of God to admonish them of their Wickedness; whom though many personal
Reasons might move Ioash to respect, beside the Reason of Reasons, that he was
a Reverend Prophet of God, yet at Ioash's Commandment they murdered him. Not
unlike the Husbandmen, who killed the Heir, in whom all the hope to win any
thing at their hands did rest. For it might well be expected, that this Man
might be bolder, and prevail more than all the rest; yet of all the rest, he
succeeded least. It seems Ioash thought himself no free Prince, as long as any
might be thought to have such interest in him, as to dare to deal plainly with
him.

. 5. Ioash having committed this odious Murder, as the unthankful Snake upon
the Man in whose Bosom he had been fostered, as a wretched Tyrant became
hateful to his own Times, and his Memory detestable. Neither did the deserved
Curse of the Martyr stay long; for within the Year, when the Tyrant thought he
was now absolute King without Control, the Aramites broke into his Country,
rather for Pillage, than to perform any great Action, being so few. The King of
Judah many ways discovered his Cowardice, as by drawing blood of Friends,
basely buying Peace with Enemies, when he was able to draw into the Field
300000 Men, as his Son did after; and now in levying a great Army against a few
Foreigners, or Bands of Rovers. Against these his Wisdom thought fit to advance
among his Princes, to show his Valor, when he presumed through incomparable
odds to be free from danger. But God, that laugheth at the Folly of Wise Men,
and casts contempt upon vainglorious Princes, intending to do more by the
few Aramites than themselves merit, whether by Folly of Leaders, amazement of
Soldiers, etc. this great Army fell before them, and they had the slaughtering
of those Princes, which had drawn their King to Rebel against the King of
Kings, and the beating and ranzoming of Ioash himself, who thereupon was forced
to take his Bed, in which two of his own Servants, slew him, for the blood of
Iehojada's Children.

. 6. Contemporaries with Ioash, were Mezades and Diognetus in Athens; Eudemus
and Aristodemus in Corinth; Agrippa, Sylvius and Syvius Alladius in Italy;
Cephrenes the 4th from Sesac, succeeded Cheops in Egypt, the 16th of Ioash, and
Ruled Fifty Years; Ocrazapes, or, Anacynderaxes succeeded Ophratanes in
Assyria, Forty two years; Ioas 18th. Pigmalion King of Tyrus, in whose Seven
years Dido built Carthage, from the Building Solomon's Temple 143 Years, as
Josephus found in the Tyrian Annals; which was 143 years before the Birth of
Romulus, and 289 years after the destruction of Troy. Thus all Virgil's Tale of
Dido and Aeneas, is Confuted, as Ausonius notes in his Epigram upon her
Statue. The History of Carthage is referred to the Punick Wars.

. 7. Amaziah, Son of Ioash, succeeded, being Twenty five Years old, who having
learned the Art of Dissimulation of his Father, finding the Princes dead which
favored Idolatry, and seeing the Peoples dislike of his Father's Courses, by
their Countenancing his Murder; he framed himself to the necessity of the
Times, forbore the Traitors, endured his Father's disgrace in his Burial, and
Conformed to Religion. But after the Peoples outcry against his Father, had
tired it self, and that he saw the Conspirators had neither Might, Partakers,
nor Abettors, he put them to Death, but spared their Children; which gave
Content to the People, as a point of Justice; thus by long Peace and
Conformation to Religion and Justice, he grew strong.

Ioash, also, King of Israel, grew in Power, following the War against the
Aramites, and prospered, though following the Idolatry of the Calves, which had
almost consumed the Ten Tribes by Hazael and Benhadad. Yet at the Prayer of
this Idolater, God had Compassion in giving him success, that he recovered his
Fathers temporal Losses; but God's Favor more worth than all, he neither
sought nor got. This Man entered in the 37th year of Ioash King of Judah, and in
the Fifteenth of Iehoahaz, his Father, who lived two or three after. He
receiving his Father's poor Stock of ten Chariots, Fifty Horsemen, and One
Thousand Foot, his thriving with this Stock, he ascribed to the Prayers of the
Holy Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings 13.14. This Prophet dyed about the Third or Fourth
year of Ioash, and for a Legacy, bestowed three Victories upon him, whereby he
set Israel in a good way to recover all their Losses.

. 8. Amaziah, inflamed with desire to undertake some Expedition, by Example of
Ioash King of Israel, though he could furnish 300000, yet knowing they had lived
without Exercise a long time, except that with the Aramites, which rather
discouraged them, he therefore thought good to hire 100000 Experienced Men out
of Israel, with which he would recover Edom, which revolted under Iehoram. But
upon a Prophet's Warning, he dismissed the Israelites, not beloved of God, and
went in confidence of God's Assistance, and prospered; while his discontented
hired Israelites ravaged in their return; yet he recovered not Edom. He took
some of Edom's Idols, which might have been led in Triumph, but the wretched
King which took them, was besotted by them, and made them his Gods; neither
would endure the Prophet's reproof from the true God. If the costly Stuff, or
the Workman-ship ravished his Fancy, he might have disposed them to Profit or
Ornament; if the Edomites Devotion to them, it should rather have moved
laughter at them and their Gods, who had failed their Old Clients. I therefore
think a proud Coffeehouse carried him from God, whom having Obeyed in
sending back his Mercenary Israelites, he looked that the Lord would have
subdued Edom unto him, as well as give him a Victory; forgetting that God had
promised that Esau should break off the Yoke of Jacob at length; and therefore
should have limited his desire, and been contented with an honorable Victory.
But as Men careful before the Battle, to pray to God, acknowledging him the
giver of Victory; and when the Field is won, vaunt of their own Exploits, as if
God used their Foresight and Courage therein; so Amaziah finding God did
nothing extraordinary, arrogated what was ordinary, to himself, and scorned to
be checked by a Prophet, having before lost One Hundred Talents by one of them,
without any Benefit. From this proud Contempt of God, and Conceit of his own
Sufficiency, little Inferior to David, he challenged Ioash King of Israel, and
upon occasion of the late Wrongs done by his Subjects, perhaps required
Subjection of the Ten Tribes, by Right from his Ancestors David and Solomon.
Had he only required Satisfaction, It may be, Ioash would not have returned
such an Answer, as argues an Insolent proud Challenge. Ajax's Father wished
him the Victory by the Gods assistance: He answered, that Cowards got Victory
so, but he would have it without them; after which proud Speech, and many
valiant Acts, upon some disgrace, he fell Mad and killed himself. Amaziah's
Thoughts were like Parents of like words, and he might as well have said, he
had the Victory without God; which made him insolently challenge Ioash, as if
he were able to encounter a valiant Leader, and People trained up in a long
Victorious War, because he had defeated the weak, broken Edomites. As his first
Counsel among his Parasites, to defy Ioash, was foolish, so was his proceeding,
which was carelessness in providing and preventing; in both which, his
Adversaries took the start, and prevented Amaziah with a brave Army in his own
Country, to save him the labor of a long March. This sudden Invasion much
discouraged Judah, who having devoured Israel in their greedy hopes, saw
themselves disappointed, and their own Estates seized by the others: This Issue
was, that Amaziah was taken, and was led in Triumph to Jerusalem, which, to
save his Life, he basely procured to be opened to the Conqueror, who made a
large breach in the Wall, at which he rid in, made what Spoil he thought fit,
and departed.

. 9. Ioash King of Israel, being in Possession of Jerusalem, it may be
marvelled why he seized not upon the whole Kingdom; especially considering he
might think the Kingdom was not tied to the House of David, as appeared in
Athaliah; and that the Iudaeans were liklier to endure his Government, being
such a Conqueror, and descended of Kings, of which Iehu was Anointed from God.
I need not add the Commodities growing by Union of these two Kingdoms; neither
read we of any special Prohibition to him; but it appears, Ioash minded not the
Kingdom, for then he would not have aimed at such a Triumph and Entrance at a
Breach, which is one of the greatest Affronts to Citizens, but would have
entered at a Gate with fair Entreaty of a People, rather yielding than
vanquished; he would also have forborne the Spoil, especially of the Sanctuary,
which the People prefer to their Lives; and in forbearing whereof, he had won
the Opinion of Piety, as the Sacrilege upon the House of their God and his,
branded him with a Mark of extraordinary Profaneness, who by execrable
Church-Robbery, became odious, and lost the Inheritance of the whole Orchard,
by stealing a few fair Apples. The Citizens provoked by these Indignities,
after a few days, would gather Spirit, to conceive the Enemy was of their
Mould, and that themselves were not disarmed, were a great multitude, had
Provision and such advance of Place as Armed Women and Children; and
considering the Evils grown, and like to increase by former Cowardice, would
grow to a desperate Resolution to correct the first Errors. Upon these grounds,
it is certain that great Towns entered by Capitulation, are not so easily held
as entered, as Charles VIII th of France found at Florence, which made him come
to Terms, when he saw the Citizens Resolution, rather to hazard all, than to
submit to his intolerable Conditions, being now entered the Town. Besides,
Ioash might consider how hardly he could make good his Possession against the
Army of Judah, rather terrified than broken; and lastly, Ioash having had the
Three Victories against Aram, promised by the Prophet, he should not expect a
perpetual Success against them; and therefore thought it best to return home
with the best Security he could for conveying his rich cumbersom Booty, and to
make head against the Aramites, who, in his Absence, had taken the Advantage,
and given Israel such a Blow as he could never recover; taking therefore
Hostages for his quiet Passage, he returned home.

. 10. Amaziah, who threatened to work wonders, and raise again the Empire of
David, was stripped of his Lions Skin; and appeared nothing so terrible a Beast
as he had been painted, and became an Argument of scoffing to many; as the
Shame which falls on an Insolent Man, seldom fails of much Reproach. Governors
are commonly blamed by the Multitude, for the Calamities which befall them,
though by the Peoples default; but every Child could see the Root of all this
Mischief in this Bastard, which having provoked a valiant Adversary, for Fear
betrayed the City, opened unto him by this base entreaty, to save his Life
(which his Brutal Father would not do) which he redeemed at so dear a rate, as
the Spoil of City and Temple, which might easily have been saved by a little
delay, which would have forced Ioash faster home than he came out, hearing of
the Aramites; and a little Courage, in that space, recovered, would have
persuaded him to leave his Baggage behind him, had not this good King given
Hostages for a Convoy. That this punishment and dishonor brought him back to
God, appears not, but the contrary, by the Reason of the Conspiracy Related
by the Holy Ghost. He which tells a Man in Adversity, of his sins past, shall
sooner be thought to upbraid him with his present Fortune, than to seek his
Reformation; which might make the Priest and Prophets little welcome to him. On
the other side, his Flatterers which sought to raise up his Heart, of which
themselves might always be Masters, wanted no plausible Matter; and he was not
the first Noble Commander which has been foiled, as David himself abandoned
Jerusalem to Absalom. Sesac was sent into the City as well as Ioash; the
Temples Pillaging had been excused by Necessity of State; his Captivity
excuses his Command to open the City, but they which opened it were to blame,
knowing he was not his own Master, when he commanded it; his Captivity was his
Honor, who might have escaped by Fight, as others did, which betrayed him by
running away while he fought to encourage them by his Example; yet his
Mischance saved Thousands, while the Enemy wisely preferred the surprise of a
Lion, before the Chase of an Army of Stags which followed him. These, or the
like Speeches might have satisfied Men, if the King had studied to please God;
but as he still neglected the Favor of God, so after this, he out-living his
Honor Fifteen Years, recovered no Love of his Subjects by his Government, but
increased their Hatred to his Ruin. He which thinks himself less Honored
than he deserves in his own Opinion, will force his Authority, to be esteemed
a severe Man; that by affected Sowerness, he may be thought a grave, wise Man,
and that by the Fear in which the Oppressed live, he may be thought a Reverence
to the Oppressed; at least it will dazel the Eyes of Underlings, keeping them
from prying into the weakness of their Governors. Thus the time in which, by
well using it, Men might attain to be such as they ought, they do usually
mispend it in seeking to appear such as they are not, so procure more
Indignation than was feared, instead of the Respect that was hoped; which is of
dangerous Consequence in an unable Spirit in high Authority, too passionate in
Execution of an Office, and cannot be checked but by violence. If Amaziah
thought by extreme rigor to uphold his Reputation; what did he but make the
People think he hated them, who easily believed he did not love them? He had
indeed provided for his own security, by revenging on his Father; but who shall
take Vengeance (or on whom) of a Murder in which every one has a part? Surely
God himself, who has not given Leave to the People to shed the blood of his
Anointed. Yet as he was careless of God, and was carried headlong, with his
own Affection; so his Subjects, by his Example, not enquiring what was their
Duty, rose up against him with a precipitant Fury, which yet he could not avoid
by flying to Lachish, as a choice Town for Strengh and Affection, where yet he
found no other Favor, but that they would not kill him with their own Hands,
but abandoned him to the Conspirators sent after him, who dispatched him with
little Opposition.

. 11. Amaziah being Slain, the Throne of Judah was vacant Eleven Years; for as
he outlived Ioash King of Israel 15 Years, which Jeroboam held, and must dye
the 15 th of Jeroboam, so it is expressly said, V^ziah his Son began to Reign in
the 27 th of Jeroboam, being 16 Years old, and Reigned 52 Years; which argues
11 Years Inter-regn^m. Others to avoid this Inter-regnum, have made diverse
Conjectures; as G. Mercator, etc. But I know not why it may not be admitted in
Judah, seeing the like necessity has enforced it in the Kingdom of Israel, as
between the death of Jeroboam 2. and his Son Zecharias, and between Peka and
Hosea. Such suspense of the Crown of Judah is more probable, considering how
things stood at the death of Amaziah, although the computation were not so
apparent. For the Public Fury which extended so far against the King's Person,
was not like to be appeased, 'till order was taken to redress the Matters which
caused that eruption. We need not then wonder that they who involved themselves
in the former Treason against the Father, would stay the Crown 'till things
were set in order, the Prince being so young, and to be under protection, etc.
To make Ieroboam's Reign to begin the 11th with his Father, were the best, but
only for swallowing up so much of Ioash's Reign, extending the Years of the
Kings of Israel, and contracting the Years of the Princes of other Nations.

. 12. Contemporaries with Amaziah, and Eleven Years after, were Ioash and
Jeroboam in Israel; Cephreras and Mycerinus in Egypt; Sylvius Alladius, and
Sylvius Aventinus in Alba; Agamemnon in Corinth; Diognetus, Pheredus, and
Ariphron, in Athens, Thelectus in Lacedemon, when the Spartans won Towns from
the Achaians.

Sardanapalus in the 21 st Year of Amaziah, succeeded Acrozapes his Father in
Assyria 21 Years, and was slain the Year before Azariah entered, and ended
Ninus's Line after 1240 Years Empire. This unhappy voluptuous Prince was so
base, he durst let no Man see him; 'till at length Arbaces Governor of Media,
got a sight of that beastly Spectacle of a Man in Woman's Attire counterfeiting
an Harlot; which moved him to such indignation, that he brake with Belosus a
Chaldean, about casting off the Yoke of so unworthy a Creature. Belosus pleased
him too well, to tell him he should enjoy the Kingdom, who promised him
thereupon the Kingdom of Babylon. Being thus agreed, the one stirred up the
Medes and Persians, the other the Babylonians and Arabians, and so drew
together 40000 Men against Sardanapalus, who, contrary to his former course of
Life, became a Man, gathered his Forces, and encountered the Rebels, and foiled
them in three Battles; and had not Belosus promised unexpected Succors, Arbaces
had broken up the Camp. About that time an Army out of Bactria was coming to
assist the King; but Arbaces encountering it, upon promise of Liberty, drew them
to join with him: In the mean time, the King supposing Arbaces to be fled,
Feasted his Army, Triumphing before Victory. The Rebels strengthened with new
Supplies, came upon him by Night, forced his Camp, unprepared for resistance,
and made the King retire into the City Ninive, leaving Salaminus, his Wives
Brother, to keep the Field 'till new Succors came. Arbaces overthrew the
King's Army, slew Salaminus, and lay two whole Years before the City, in hope
to win it by Famine; for force it h^ could not, the Wall being an hundred Foot
high, and so thick, that three Chariots might pass in the Front upon the
Rampire. But what he could not now do, the River Tygris did the third Year; for
in a swelling after a Rain, it cast down 20 Furlongs, and made a fair Breach
for Arbaces to enter. Sardanapalus either terrified with accomplishment of the
old Oracle, that Ninive should never be taken, 'till the River became an Enemy
to it; or seeing no means of resistance, he at last consumed himself and Family
with fire in his Palace. Diodorous Siculus out of C^esias.


CHAP. XI.X Of Uzziah, and his Contemporaries in Israel, and elsewhere; of his
two Successors.
. 1. UZziah, or Aaria being Sixteen Years of Age, succeeded his Father Amaziah,
in the Twenty Seventh Year of Jeroboam, and Reigned Forty Two Years; he served
the God of his Fathers, and prosper'd. His Victories and Atchievments were far
beyond any since the time of David, and his Wealth exceeded any since Solomon's
days. Jeroboam also King of Israel prospered in the North, and won Damascus,
and Hamath; not for his Piety, being an Idolater: It was only the Lord's
compassion on Israel, so extremely afflicted by Aram. Yet as God's goodness to
Iehu his Grandfather, could not win him from Ieroboam's politic Idolatry of
the Calves, no more could it make Jeroboam his Son render the Honor due to the
only giver of Victory; so that the Promise made to Iehu for Four Generations,
grew to an accomplishment, to be a fair warning to his Son to expect a Change,
except himself or his Son would change his Idolatry. But as Jeroboam ended his
days in his Idolatry, so his Son Zachary, who should have succeeded presently,
was held out many years without apparent reason, but only the two Calves at Dan
and Bethel; yet Secondary Causes were like not to be wanting. Probable it is,
that as Ieroboam's Reign had bred many brave Captains, so they saw so little in
Zechary to respect him for, or perhaps found something which moved disdain,
that they could not agree to submit unto him 'till some principal of them were
dead; every Man of them in the mean time holding what he could, etc. This
Anarchy lasted about 23 Years, from the 11 th Year of Vzziah, when Jeroboam
died, unto the 38 th of the same Vzziah, in the which Zechariah entered, and
sat 6 Months. And though some suppose Jeroboam to Reign 11 Years with his
Father, and to cut off so much of this Inter-regnum, yet they leave 12 Years;
but I prefer the former, as best agreeing with the Reign of other Princes, and
not extend Ieroboam's Reign and Life as this does. Zechariah the Son of
Jeroboam, the last of Iehu's Line, after 6 Months Reign, was by Sallum slain,
fulfilling the 4 Generations following to Iehu; yet not warranting Sallum to
slay him, as Iehu had been against Iehoram. Thus Iero^oam's Captains were grown
so headstrong, that they neither endured his Son, nor one another; so that in
14 Years their Reigned five Kings. Sallum after 1 Month's Reign in Samaria, was
slain by Menahem. M^nahem of Tyrza Reigned 10 Years, a Cruel Persecutor of
Sallum's Friends. In his time came Pull the Assyrian, whom he pacified with a
Thousand Talents of Silver, and so was confirmed in his Kingdom, against such
as opposed him.

Pekahiah succeeded his Father 2 Years, in the Year of Azariah King of Judah.
Peka the Son of Remaliah slew Pekahia, and Reigned 20 Years.

. 2. Vzziah, whose Succession had been endangered by the hatred to his Father,
but by Holy Men brought up and advanced, as was Ioash, and had his Holy
Zechariah, under whose direction he prospered, as Ioash under good Iehojada.
But as Ioash after his Tutor's death, so Vzziah after his Zechariah, forgetting
the Law of God, which had separated the Priest's Office from the King's, would
needs usurp the same; for which presumption, being reproved by Azariah the
Priest, the Lord seconded the just reprehension, and struck the King with
Leprosy. Thus he which presumed to draw near the Holiest, was cast from among
common Men. Josephus enlarges this History, and reports of an Earthquake,
which some mistake for that in Am^s, which was in Jeroboam the 2 ds days, long
before Vzziah.

. 2. Contemporaries with Vzziah. Among the small Prophets, Hosea, Joel, Amos,
Obadiah, and Jonas lived with Uzziah, if Hierom's Rule hold, to range a Prophet
whose time is not expressed, with the next before; then Joel and Obadiah are of
this time. Jonas seems to me the first that foretells Ieroboam's Victory, and
Prophesied of Christ, rather by Sufferings, than Writing now extant; whereas
all the other Prophets have express Promises of the Messiah. Esaiah also now
prophesied, writ much, with excellency both of Style and Argument; foretells
the Birth, Miracles, and Passion of our Savior, with calling of the Gentiles;
more like an History of things past, than a Prophecy of things to come, as
Hierom says. Bochoris had Reigned in Egypt 10 Years when Vzziah entered;
Asychis succeeded, then Anysis, whom Sabacus succeeded 50 Year; of which, the
10 first were with Vzziah.

Ariphron's 2 last Years of 20. Thespeus 27. Aganestor's 20. and Aeschylus's 3
first of his 23 in Athens, ended with Vzziah, so did the 7 last of Sylvius
Aventinus's 37. with 23 of Sylvius Procas, and the first of Sylvius Amulius. 22
in Alba. In Media, Arbaces began his new Kingdom with Vzziah, and held it 28.
and Sosarmus his Son 30 Year.

. 4. Arbaces having taken Ninive, utterly ruined it, to transfer the Empire to
the Medes, as he had promised; he also made his Partakers Rulers of Provinces,
retaining only the Sovereignty; yet with such moderation, as neither offended
the Princes his Assistants, nor the generality of the People. For calling
Belosus into question for Embezling the Treasure, he referred his Condemnation
to the Captains, and then pardoned him, and gave him the Province of Babylon,
with the Treasure. He also ^^eed the Persians and Bactrians as he promised, and
so weakened his Sovereignty; so that in time, the Assyrian incroached upon some
Towns of the Medes, and extended it self to Israel; but when the Assyrian cast
off the Mede's Yoke is uncertain: As also when Babylon and Ninive became
subject to one. The Opinion current 'till of late, is according to Metastenus
in Annius; That ^elosus, called also Phut Belosus, and in Scripture Pull, or
Phul, Reigning 42 Years in Babylon, got part of Assyria into his hand, and left
it to Tigla^ Pileser his Son, and his Posterity, 'till Merodach prevailed. This
Tradition, though Annius's Authors be suspected, is justified by Circumstances
in other Authors; as Belosus enjoying Babylon, D^^dorus relates, and no Authors
speak of any special Governor of Assyria; neither stood it with Policy to set
a particular King in Assyria; when to prevent the ri^ing again thereof, Ninive
was ruined, and the Inhabitants transplanted. Upon the like Considerations,
Ro^e destroyed Carthage, and Capua, being Towns Capable of Empire, etc. It is
not then to be thought that Ninive and the Assyrian^ could rise in three or
four Years, by any other t^^n Be^osus, so near a Neighbor, and of so rich a
Province; for H^rodotus esteemed it, for Rich^s and Power, as the third part of
the Per^i^^ Empire; who also joined the Treasure found in the Palace of Nin^ve.

. 5. The Olympian Games were restored by Iphylus in the Fifty first of Vzziah.
The first Founder of them was Hercules, and were so called of the City Olympia
or Pisa, near Elis a City in Peloponesus, near the River A^pheus, where Jupiter
had a Temple, reputed one of the Worlds Wonders. These Games were exercised
after every Four years end; which were discontin^ed long, until the days of
Iphitus, when Lycurgus lived; and continued in Greece 'till the Reign of
Theodosius, says Cedrenus; or to Constantine, after others. Varro held all
Grecian Stories Fabulous before these; but Pliny esteems none true before the
Fifty fifth Olympiad, when Cyrus began to Reign. Many seek to find the Years of
the World when they began, but can set down no certainty; others seek it from
Troy's Fall, more uncertain than they. The certainty of things following the
Olympiads, teaches to find their beginning, to which use, Eratosthenes has
set down the years ensuing unto the death of Alexander from the Olympian
Institution, Four Hundred fifty three years. So for placing their beginning the
51st of Vzziah, we have Cyrus's Reign to prove it, being the first of the Fifty
fifth Olympiad. So Alexander's death the First year of the 144 th Olympiad. So
the Eclipse when Xerxes mustered at Sardis, the last of the Sixty fourth
Olympiad, or the Two Hundred Sixty Seventh year of Nabonassar, which leads us
back to Xerxes, and so to Cyrus, whence we have Seventy Years to the
destruction of Jerusalem, and so through the Reigns of the Kings of Judah to
Vzziah's 51st. The Solemnity was such by concourse from all the Greeks; their
Exercise was all bodily Feats; and the Reward, a Garland of Palm or Olive; so
that the choice Orators, Poets and Musicians resorted thither to show their
skill in setting out his Praise that won the Garland, with such Vanity (said
Tully,) as if it had been a Conquest of a Province. The time of the year was
the Fifteenth of Hecatobaeon, our June, whereto they brought the Full Moon.

. 6. Iotham, Twenty Five years old, succeeded his Father Vzziah in his life
time, and reigned 26 years; happy in all things, as he was Devout and Virtuous,
2 King. 15.33. Contemporaries, Aucomenus succeeded Pelesteus in Corinth, whom
Annual Magisteus succeeded; contrary to Pausan.

Strabo, Plutarch.
Aesculus in Athens; Accamenes in Sparta. Tiglath Pileser in Assyria, Twenty
five years, and Two with his Son, Twenty Seven in all. Nahum the Prophet now
foretold the destruction of Ninive, One Hundred and Fifty years beforehand.
Sosarmus and Medidus succeeded Arbaces in Media, the Second and Third Kings
there.

. 7. Achas succeeded in Judah one year, with Iotham, in the Seventeenth year of
Peka; he was Twent^ years old, and Reigned Sixteen years; an exceeding
Idolater, Sacrificing his Sons to Moloch, or Saturn, after the manner of the
Heathens used of old, Levit. 18. Deuteronomy. 12. by many Nations, and at this day by
the Americans, as Acosta witnesses, etc. God raised ^im Enemies on all sides,
so that when he saw his dead Gods failed him, yet neglecting the living God, he
sought Aid of Tiglath Pileser, who embraced the Advantage to go through with
what his Father entered, but had no leisure to finish it. He therefore invaded
Syria, and won Damascus, all Israel; made Judah Tributary, though Achaz had
hired him.

Contemporaries, the Ephori in Lacedemon, 130 years after Lycurgus, opposed to
Kings, as the Tribunes in Rome against Consuls. Alcamenon in Athens, the last
Governor for Life; after which followed a Magistrate for Ten years. Sylvii of
Aeneas's Race, ended after Three Hundred Years. Romulus now built Rome, the
Eighth of Achaz, the First of the Seventh Olympiad.

CHAP. XX. Of Italy, and Rome's Foundation in Ahaz's time.
. 1. ITALY, before the Fall of Troy, was known to the Greeks, by the names of
Hesperia, Ausonia, Oenotria, of a Colony of Arcadians; and Italy of Italus.
Reyneccius derives the Name rather from a Colony of Aetolians, which Inhabited
Brundusium, from whose Names, with small Change, that part was called Italia,
which in time grew the common name, says Pliny. Such change in the Aeolic
Dialect is Familiar, as to call an Island Peopled by Aetholians, Aethalia. The
Original of Greeks and Latins, was from Iavan, who sailing over the Ionian Sea,
between Aetolia and the Western Ocean, planted Greece and Italy. Reyneccius
makes Atlai Italus, one which Berosus calls Cethim Italus, but is deceived, for
Atlas is esteemed more Ancient than Moses; and if he were Cethim or Kithim,
Noah's Grandson, his Antiquity exceeds that of Italy; which Name, Virgil
confesses later, and from a Captain. But seeing Hercules a little before
Troy's Fall, left a Colony of Eleans or Aetoleans, it may be under the command
of one called Aitolus, a Name famous among Aetolians: Italy might take Name of
him.

. 2. Aborigines, that is, the Natives of the place Inhabited Latium, whom
Halycarnassus, Varro, and Reyneccius, think to have been Arcadians, who used to
vaunt of their Antiquity, having more constantly kept their Country in
Peloponesus, than other Greeks yet being fruitful, sent Colonies to other
Countries, as when Evander was sent into the same parts of Italy.

Pelasgi, an Ancient Nation, after gave Name to all Greece, but such of them as
came into Italy, lost the Name of their Tribe in a short time. Sicani, Ausones,
Aurunci, Rutili, in after Ages, disturbed Latium, which Sat^rn had brought to
some Civility, and taught to dung the Ground.

That Latium took the name of Saturn's lurking there from Jupiter, is far
fetched, and questionless a Fable; yet many Fables were occasioned from some
Ancient Truths. It may be then that Saturn hiding himself, was some allusion to
the old Opinion of the Wise Heathen, that the true God was an unknown God, to
whom Paul found an Altar dedicated. It cannot be in vain, that the word
Saturnus should also signify hidden, coming of the Hebrew Satar to hide (as
some think) etc. Reyneccius proceeds in deriving Latium from the Posterity of
Iavan, Inhabiting a Territory in lesser Asia, called Elaitia, who after the
Trojan War, went into Italy, whence might grow Elaitinus, and so Latinus, etc.

. 3. The Latin Kings 'till Aeneas, were Saturnus, Picus, Faunus, Latinus.
Whether Saturnus were he whom the Greeks called Cronos, ande. the time of the
Aborigines will admit; but his Names of Stercus, or Sterculius, do argue him
another; so called of the Dungs he taught them to lay upon their ground.
Ezechiel often calls Id^ls, Deos Stercoreos, as Belzebul is Dominus Stercoreus,
etc.

. 4. Aeneas, a Trojan of the Blood Royal, came to Latium with some 1200
Trojans, and Married Laviana, King Latinus's Daughter. He had a Son before, by
his Wife Creusa, Daughter of Priamus, called Ascanius, and Surnamed Iulus.
After Aeneas's death, Lavinia was great with Child by him, and fearing
Ascanius, fled into a Wood, where being Delivered, the Child was called Sylvius
Posthumus. B^t upon the Peoples disapproving of Lavinia's flight, Ascanius
called her home, used her like a Queen, and Educated her Son. Ascanius, to
avoid dissension, left the City Lavinium, to Laviana; and Founded Alba-Longa,
where he Reigned about 30 Year, and left his Son Iulus; who upon contention
with Sylvius, whom the People favored, left the Kingdom, and took the
Priesthood, for him, and his Posterity. Sylvius Posthumus Reigned 29. Sylvius
Aeneas, 31. Sylvius Latinus, 10. Sylvius Alba 39. Sylvius Atis 36. Sylvius
Capijs 28. Sylvius Capelus 13. Sylvius Tiberinus 8. Sylvius Agrippa 41. Sylvius
Alladyus 19. Sylvius Aventinus 37. Sylvius Procas 23. Sylvius Amulius 44. He
expelled his Elder Brother Sylvius Numitor, slew his Son Aegestius, and made
his Daughter Ilia a Vestal-Virgin. Numitor, who yet, either by her Uncle, or
some Warlike-Man, conceived 2 Sons, Romulus, and Reineccius, who in time slew
Amulius, and all his Family, and restored Numitor, in whom the Kingdom of Alba
ended, and received Magistrates. Yet it contended with Rome, 'till her Three
Curiatij were vanquished by the Three Horatij, Champions for Rome. After this,
Metius the Alban Dictator, following Tullus Hostilius in his War, upon Tullus's
disadvantage, withdrew his Companies to distress Tullus; for which he was torn
in pieces at two Chariots, and Alba Reigned; but the Citizens were made free
Denisons, and her Nobles, Patricians of Rome; among whom was a Family of Iulij,
which has since risen in Julius Caesar, etc.

. 5. Rome, which devoured the Alban Kingdom, and brake all the Kingdoms from
Euphrates, to the Western Ocean, as that Alban the IV th, a Beast with
Iron-Teeth, forespoken of, comes now to be handled, only touching her
Original, which some seek to derive from Ianus, others from the Greeks.
Pl^tarch in the Life of Romulus, remembers many F^unders of the City, but Livie
will have it the Work of Romulus, etc. Of his Begetting, Birth, and Education,
Plutarch says, it is probable, that Amulius came armed to Rhea, which
occasioned the Tale of Marce; as the Nursing the Children by some Harlot,
occasioned the Tale of a Woolf; for Harlots of old were called Wolves.
Halicarnassus tells us of the like Reports they have of Cyrus's Nursing by a
Bitch, and Semiramis by Birds. So of his End, they say he was taken away in a
storm of Thunder, etc. Which was probably the fury of the Senators, remembered
also by Livie. But as many Authors speak of great Lightning and Thunder that
day, so it may be he was slain by it, as was Anastasius the Emperor, and
Emperor Carus. Halicarnassus says, they caused it to be remembered, nearest to
Truth, which say his Citizens slew him, etc. Plutarch reports of his Conquests
of a few Miles about him, not worth the speaking of, if the following Greatness
of Rome had not caused it to be remembered. He Reigned 37 Years; first alone,
then with Tatius, and after his death single, 'till he was slain. Numa a Man
unknown to Romulus, succeeded, more Priestlike, etc. well resembling Rome's
latter days; which falling from Emperors Command, into subjection of a Prelate;
swelling by degres, from a Sheep-Hook, to a Sword; wherewith Victorious, to
excessive Magnificence, it fell to Luxury; and being unfortunate in defensive
War, is driven again to betake himself to the Crosier-Staff.

CHAP. XXI. Of Hezechiah, and his Contemporaries.
. 1. HEzechiah at 25 Years old succeeded, about the end of Achaz 14 Years, in
the 3 d of Hosea King of Israel, and Reigned 29 Years. His first Work testified
his Pious Zeal in opening the Temple, shut up by his ungracious Father, and
reformed Religion, etc. Comp. 2 Chronicles. 29, and 30. with 2 Kings 18. It is
uncertain whether he did this in his Father's time, or in his sole Government,
as I rather think. He invited also the Ten Tribes to the Passover, which the
Generality scorned. In the fourth Year of Hezekiah, the Israelites which
scorned to Celebrate their Deliverance out of Egypt, fell into a new Servitude,
wherein they continued to this day. For Salmanasser, Son of Tyglath, hearing
that Hosea King of Israel, practiced with So King of Egypt, against him; came,
and after Three Years Siege, won Samaria, and carried the Ten Tribes into
Assyria, and Media, and placed others in the Land.

These later Assyrian and Persian Kings following, are the first we find
mentioned both in Profane and Sacred Books, and therefore must serve to join
the times of the old World with that following, seeing none but Prophets have
written otherwise than Fabulous of former Times. True it is, that Cyrus and
some Persian Kings bear the same Name in Scripture, and Profane Stories; but of
others the diversity of Names have bred question of the Persons, as whether
Salmanasser in Scripture be Nabonasser in Ptolomy, and Nebuchadnezzar be
Nabopolassar, both which points Bucholcerus out of good Mathematick
Observations, has well proved; for by them it appears, that from N^bonasser to
Christ, were Seven Hundred Forty six years, which agrees also to Salmanassar,
which is proved; for that the space between Merdocenpadus and Nabonassar is
found the same between Merodach (who was Mardocenpadus) and Salmanassar. So
Functius.
That as from the destruction of Samaria to that of Jerusalem, are 133 years,
so in Ptolomy, the same time is found between Nabonassar and Nabopolassar, the
Eighth year differing in Ptolomy, being before the winning of Samaria, spent in
his Reign.

. 2. Hezekiah having denied the Tribute to Senacherib, which had been
Covenanted with Tiglath his Grandfather, acknowledged his Fault, and labored
to purchase his Peace by Three Thousand Talents of Silver, and Thirty of Gold,
by Senacherib's intending to set down the Conditions with his Sword, sent from
Lachish, where he lay and invested Jerusalem, etc. where Vengeance from Heaven
destroyed so many Thousands for their Master's Blasphemy; who also drunk a Cup
of the Wrath of God, from his own Sons.

. 3. Hezechiah his Sickness, Prayer, Recovery and Sign thereof, 2 Kings 20. His
Lamentation, says Ierom, was for want of a Son, of whom the Messiah might
spring. His entertaining the Babylonian Ambassadors, and vainglory therein,
reproved. Yet, according to Humane Reason, he thought fit to entertain them
familiarly, coming to Congratulate his Recovery with Presents, being one which
had weakened the Assyrian, his greatest Enemy, by seizing upon the Kingdom of
Babylon, of which he had been Lieutenant under Senacherib, whose Son weak in
Understanding, and molested by his Elder Brethren, gave him opportunity to
Usurp Babylon, as Belochus had dealt with Sardanapalus. Thus Belochus Forty
Eight years, Tiglath Pilesar Twenty Seven, Salmanassar Ten, Senacherib Seven,
Esarhaddon Ten, the Three last being Contemporaries with Hezechiah.

. 4. Hezechiah's Contemporaries in Media, after Arabaces and Sosarmus,
according to Eusebius, are Medidus Forty years, Cordiceas Fifteen Years. Then
followed Deioces Fifty four, Phraortes Twenty four, Cyaxares Thirty two,
Astyages Thirty Eight, and Cyaxares Two, according to Xenophon. Metasthenes in
Anneus and Diodorus out of Ctesias, differ much from Eusebius, whom Mercator
would fain reconcile, but in vain. In Athens, Four of the Four Ten year
Governors. In Lidea Candaulus slain by Gyges, who succeeded.

CHAP. XXII. Egyptian Kings from Moses to Hezekiah.
. 1. THE Egyptians at this time, contending with the Assyrians about
Sovereignty, gives the occasion to consider the state of the Country which had
flourished so long. Of Cham, Osiris, and Orus, and the rest with their
Dynasties, 'till Israel came out of Egypt, we have heard; and are to proceed
from thence, not regarding the idle Catalogue of Names of Kings, set out by
Herodotus and Dyodorus, from the Mouths of the Egyptian Priests, who, for the
most part, were but Viceroys, or Stewards, like Joseph, and such as were the
Soldans in later Ages. For First, we may not believe that the number of
Generations we speak of, were above Eighty, from Abraham to the Persian Empire;
whereas we know, there were but Forty two Generations to our Savior Christ;
especially, considering many of them were of about Forty years continuance; we
must therefore proportion the number to that of other Countries, according to
the time; and esteem the rest but Regents, who yet Ruled as Kings; of which
sort there might be many, as may be well conceived in Reading W. Archbishop of
Tire, who shows that there was the Caleph Elhadech, supreme over Egypt, under
whom the Soldans ruled as Kings, making War and Peace; yea, supplanting one
another without the Calephs privity, as fell out under Elhadech, under whom
San. was Sultan, and yet chased away by Dagon, and upon his death recovered
again without the great Caleph's Hand, who in the mean time only attended his
state, and delights in his Palace, which manner of Ruling by Viceroys, the
Author judges to have been from the Ancient Kings of Egypt.

. 2. It were vain to be curious about these Kings, seeing Diodorus varies from
Herodotus, and Eusebius from both, neither do late Writers know whom to follow.
The Kings from Chencres or Tuoris, or Proteus, are agreed upon, of which
according to Eusebius, Acherres was next, whom Reyneccius thinks to be Vchoreus
in Diodore, Founder of Memphis; but then Timaus cannot be the great Osymandias
as he also judges; for there were more than Eight Generations between them,
contrary to Diodorus. Touching Osymandais, Mercator, makes him the Husband of
Acenc^eres, Daughter to Orus Second, and finds Vchoreus the Eighth from him:
But I will pass over these inextricable doubts, etc.

. 3. Cherres after Eight years of Acherres succeeded Fifteen years; Armeus five
years; Ramesses Sixty Eight years, which two last are the Danaus and Egyptus
spoken of by the Greeks, who make Danaus expelled Egypt, become King of Argos
in Greece: But Reyneccius believes not Armeus to be Danaus, though their time
agree; but rather thinks he was Meris, which made the great Lake Myris, 3600
Furlongs compass, and Fifty Fadoms deep, to receive Nilus overflowing, for
store, when Water was scarce.

. 4. Ameraphis succeeded his Father Forty years; then Sethosis Fifty years, to
whom some ascribe improbably, the famous Acts of Great Sesostris. In him began
the Dynastie of the Zarths, or Generals, which Title Five only held, Ramases
succeeded Sixty years, mistaken for Sesostris the 2d. Amenophis succeeded Forty
years: Andemenes Twenty six years; T^uoris, the last Zarth, Seven years, whom
some make Proteus, whose Son Remphes succeeded, but I doubt neit^er Father nor
Son were Kings.

. 5. Many other Names of the Egyptian Kings are found scattered, as
Tonephersobis; Senemues or Senepos; Banchistis Thulis in Suidas, who asking
Seraps the Devil, who was, or should be, so mighty as he, was answered, First
God, and then the Word, and then the Spirit, which Three be One, and join in
One all Three, whose Power is endless. Get thee hence frail Wight, the Man of
Life unknown, excelling thee. Cedreus has the same, and gives this King as
great Antiquity as the Indies, citing a Book called Little Genesis, which word
little, alone argues Impostor, besides the Frierly stuff he cites out of it.
His List of Old Egyptian Kings here set down, are not worth writing out,
neither the Kings named by others. Vaphres and Sesac will lead us into a fair
way a while; the first was Solomon's Father-in-Law, according to Clemens
Alexandrinus and Eusebius; the second, Eusebius calls Smendis, with whom he
begins the Twenty First Dynastie, whose Entrance is found about the Twentieth
of Solomon, reckoning from Neco's death in the Fourth of Iehojakim, King of
Judah upward; as from the Fifth of Rehoboam, wherein he plundered the
Sanctuary, but enjoyed that Sacrilege, as did Ioas and Craseus, not one Year.
For the Kings, from Sesac to Necho, I chose the Greek Historians, for Eusebius
is out, by failing to keep the reckoning between the Kings of Judah and Israel.

. 6. Chemmis or Chembis succeeded Sesac Fifty years, and built the great
Pyramid, whose Base was Seven Acres square, and Six high, which Diodore saw One
Thousand Years after, in Augustus's days* C^abreus or Cheops succeeded Fifty
years, and then Cephrenes Fifty six, both Builders of Pyramids for their
Sepulchers: Mycerinus his Son Six years, as the Oracle had threatened for his
opening the Idols Temple, which his Predecessors had shut. It may be Chemmis
had learned their Vanity at Jerusalem, and thereupon shut the Temple up.
Reyneccius gives him Fifty years; Bochoris, or Banchyris by Suidas, succeed
Forty four years. Then Sabacus an Ethiopian. But Herodotus omits both, and
has Asychis, who decreed the Debtors dead Body, should be given to the will of
the Creditor, 'till the Debt were paid. Anysis succeeded him, and both could
be but Six years. Then came the former Ethiopian, who Reigned Fifty years;
Scripture calls him Zonaras, Sua, with whom Hosea, King of Israel, made a Vain
League against Salmanassar. They say he left his Kingdom, and returned into
Aethiopia, to avoid his God's Commandment to kill all the Priests of Egypt;
such was their Zeal to their Priests.

. 7. Sethom succeeded in the Twelfth of Hezekia^* and Fifth of Senacherib, when
Assure and Egypt contended which should Rule or serve. Hezekiah, though fixing
special Confidence in God, held it fit to make a League with Egypt by his
People, relying more on Egypt than on God. Egypt promises much, but only
furnished him with some Treasure, sent to hire Arabians, which was intercepted:
Herodotus tells us a Tale of Sethom's Praying to Vulcan his God for Aid against
the Assyrians, who lay before Pelusium, and he sent Mice which gnawed their
Bowstrings, and Straps of their Armor, which made them depart. His Reign
Functius resolves to be 33 years, giving no Reason; yet upon search I find it
within One Ye^r, by dividing the years from Rehoboam's 5th to Ieh^jakims 4th
among the Kings of Egypt, giving each his set time, and the Remainder to Sethom.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Manasses, and his Contemporaries.
. 1. MAnasses, Son of Hezekiah succeeded, being Twelve Years Old, and Reigned
Fifty Five Years, of whose Idolatry, and extraordinary Wickedness, see 2 Kings
21. and 2 Chronicles. 33. Of his putting the Reverend Prophet Isaiah to death, with
a Wooden Saw, being Eighty years old, Eusebius, Epiphanius, Isidore, and others
confirm. His Captivity in Babel, his Repenting, Prayer, Reformation, and Death,
see 2 Chronicles. 33. Merodach having loved his Father, might more easily be
persuaded to restore him.

. 2. Egypt, after Sethom was miserably distracted with Civil dissension two
Years; then ill reformed by a Government of 12 Princes, of which 11 falling out
with the 12 th. were by him subdued, and the Kingdom Usurped; which Anarchy
Diodore put, after Sabacus, omitting Sethom, contrary to Herodotus. These
Twelve, for a Monument of their Government, made a Labyrinth near the Lake
Maris, which Heroclus prefers to the Chief Pyramid, which excelled Diana's
Temple. Diodorus reports it the work of Marus, or Menides, five Generations
before Proteus, or the Trojan War; and Reyneccius takes him to Annemenes, as he
does Amenophis to be Amasis, and Sethom to be Actisanes. But he was deceived,
for the times we are now in, show us Amasis was Anisis, Actisanes Sobacus, and
Marus one of the 12 Governors which made this Work. Whereto serve the 12 great
Halls in it, etc. Psamniticus one of the 12. cast out by the rest upon an
Oracle (as Herodotus tells the Tale, which Diodore believes not) hired Power
out of Caria, and Ionia, with which he overthrew his Fellows, and Ruled alone
54 Years, says Hierom; which Mercator divides; 44 alone, and 10 before,
according to Eusebius. And to make the reckoning fall even with the years from
the 5 th of Rehoboam, and the 4 th of Iehojakim, we must confound the last of
the 15, ascribed to the 12 Governors, with the first of Psamnitius. He first
entertained Amity with the Greeks, displeasing his Soldiers, ^ith preferring
his Mercenaries to the right Wing, i^ an Expedition into Syria. So that 2000
de^erted their Country, and went to dwell in Aethiopia. He won Asotus after 29
Years Siege, by reason the Babylonians deferred it long. The Report of breeding
up Two Infants for trial of the Original Language, is ascribed to him; and that
the first word they spoke was Beccus, which in the Phrygian Language is Bread.
Hereof Goreus Becanus is proud, because in his low Dutch, Becker is a Baker,
etc.

. 3. Manasses's time of Bondage and Enlargement is diversely disputed; and were
it certain, it is like we should find the Egyptian Troubles no small occasion
of both. Torniel repeats 3 Opinions, 1. of Bellarmine, who thinks him taken in
his 15 th Year of his Reign. 2. Great Hebrew Chronologers hold it the 27 th. 3.
Kimchi, after 40 years of Idolatry. Torniellus rejects the two last, and
defends the first; but in Affection rather than Judgment. It is more probable
Manasses lived longer in his Sin than 15 years, if not 40. by two places of
Scripture, 2 Kings 21.17. and 2 Kings 24.3, 4. utterly remits his Repentance.
Manasses's 15 th Year was Merodach's 31. his 27 th was the other's 43. and his
40 th. the 5 of Nabolassar, Son of Merodach; now which of these, or what other,
were the Year of his Captivity, I forbear to show my Opinion, etc. This was the
first Mastery the Babylonians had over Judah, greater than what Salmanassar had
of Achaz; by which the Babylonians utterly alienated Manasses and his Son from
Egypt, and made them join against it; as was seen in Josias, against Necho.

. 4. Contemporary Actions were the first and second Messenian Wars; one in the
Reign of Hezechias, the other of Manasses* The occasion was slight, about
private wrongs between a Messanean, and a Spartan; but sufficient to the
ambitious Spartans, though they were the Aggressors; who could be drawn to no
fair Composition, offered by the other, but the Sword must end it; such was
their restless desire to the fair Country of Messena, bordering upon them. They
therefore swore secretly to follow the War, 'till the Messenians were
Conquered; they then surprised Amphia, a Frontier, and put all to the Sword.
The Messenians Army, an obstinate Force, fought without Victory, ended by dark
night. After this, Friends came in on both sides, and three other Battles were
fought; but in the last, the Lacedaemonians were put to flight. Thus the War
continued so long by the obstinacy of the Spartans, that their Wives sent them
word their Cities would become dispeopled for want of Issue; whereupon they
sent back their ablest young Men, promiscuously to accompany their young Women,
whose Issue became the greatest part of the Nation, and were called Parthians.
The Messenians at length, by Oracle, were ordered to Sacrifice a Virgin of the
Stock of Egyptus, of the Arcadian Royal Blood. Aristodemus the King, ripped up
his own Daughters Belly, to prove her a Virgin, contrary to her Lover's report;
which to save her, said she was with Child; yet the Messenians prevailed not:
So that the miserable Father slew himself at the Grave, with whom the
Messenians lost their Courage, and yielded after twenty years rigorous
Contests. After thirty years, the young Men of the Messenians, of whom, young
Aristodemus, descended from Aegyptus, was Chief, finding their strength, and
scorning such Masters; finding also the Argives and Arcadians firm, resolved to
attempt the Lacedaemonians, under the Conduct of Aristodemus, in the Fourth Year
of the Twenty Third Olympiad. The Lacedaemonians have to quench the fire before
it be too hot, but found their Servants their Equals; and Aristodemus refusing
the Title of King, for his Valor became their General; and in the next Battle,
assisted with Argives, Arcadians, and Sicyonians, put the Spartans,
Corinthians, and others to flight; and after surprised a Town in Laconia, and
vanquished Anaxander King of Sparta. But by a treacherons defection of
Aristocratus, hired by the Enemy, the Messenians are forced, and slain, Andamia
the Chief Town, and others far from Sea forsaken, and the People forced to Era,
a strong Mountain, which held the Enemy work for Eleven Years; wherein
Aristocratus with three hundred Soldiers abroad, performed great things;
Supriz'd and Sacked Amicta, which was thrice taken, and still he escaped. Of
which escapes that was admirable; that being cast with Fifty more into a deep
Natural Cave, he died not of the Fall as the rest, yet without hope; 'till by a
little light he spied a Fox eating on a dead Carcass, and got it by the Tail,
and followed it 'till he could no further, and then let it go, seeing light in
the hole, and so wrought himself out with his Nails. The Spartans believed not
them which reported he was escaped, 'till the slaughters he made of the
Corinthians at Era assured it. Thus Eleven Years were spent about Era, which at
last was entered in a stormy Night, through neglect of the Watch; which was
discovered to the Spartans by a Slave fled from his Master into the City. So
the Messenians were dispersed, and Built Messina in Sicily, and three hundred
years after returned, by Epaminondas's means.

. 5. Ardis King of Lydia succeeded Gyges his Father Forty nine years, in the
second of the twenty fifth Olympiad. He incroached upon the Ionians in Asia,
took Colephon, and Priene; but the Cymmerians expelled by the Scythians,
Invaded Asia, won Sardis, and held it 'till Alyatts, this Man's Grandchild.
Phraortes King of the Medes, the third Year of the twenty ninth Olympiad, the
last of Manasses, succeeded his Father Deioces, who had Reigned fifty three
years; who Commanded more absolutely than his Predecessor, and by a more
State-like Severity and Ceremonies upheld Majesty, almost fallen. He desired
not to enlarge his Dominions, but to Govern well his own; and differed so much
from his Predecessors, that he seemed to be the first King of the Medes, as
Herodotus reports. He was Founder of Ecbitane, now Tauris, and chosen by the
Patrons of the Books of Judith to be Arphaxad, and so must Ben Merodach be
Nebuchadnezar. But the brief decision of this Controversy is the Book of
Judith, which is not Canonical: For as Chronologers can find no time to place
that Story, so Cosmographers are as much troubled to find Iapheth's Borders
there set down, and Phud and Lud; so that for time and place, they are Extra
Anni Solisque Vias.


. 6. Other Contemporaries, as Numa Pompilius in Rome, who succeeded Romulus
after one Year. In the second year of Manasses, he brought the rude multitude
of Thieves and Outlaws, which followed Romulus, to some good Civility; by
devising Ceremonies of Superstition, as things of great importance, learned of
his Nymph Egeria. Which Superstitions himself Condemned, in his Books, found
almost Six Hundred Years after in his Grave, which were publicly burnt, as
speaking against the Religion then in use. After forty three year, Tullus
Hostilius succeeded in Manasses forty sixth, and Reigned thirty two years; for
for the most part as Numa, in Peace. He made breach with the Albans, but
doubting the Tuscans, their common Enemies, would make advantage of the
Dissension, they put it to a Combat of three Brethren on either side; Cousin
Germans, and of equal years and strength; but the Horatij of Rome prevailed
against the Curatij and Alba, where the Latins submit to Rome, and Alba not
long after was demolished. Hyppomanes had Ruled seven years in Athens, in the
entrance of Manasses, and the three last Governors for ten years were in his
time. In whose times ^ follow Halicarnasseus; who professing care in matching
the Grecian years with the Roman Occasions, begins with Rome's Building, the
first year of the seventh Olympiad, and the first of Cecrops in Athens. Midas
now Reigned in Phrygia, etc. The Scythians invaded him; Syracuse in Sicily,
Founded by Archias, Miscellus, and other Corinthians. Nicomedia, formerly
Astacus in Propontis, enlarged by Zipartus's Navy of Thrace. Sybilla of Samus
now lived, according to Pausanias. Croton on the Bay of Tarentum, built by
Miscellus. Gela in Sicily, Phaselis in Pamphylia. Chalcedon in Asia, built by
the Magerenses. The Parthians expelled Lacedemon, were Conducted by Phalantus
into Italy, where they took Tarentum.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Ammon, Josiah, and the rest, to the Destruction of Jerusalem.
. 1. AMMON, Twenty two years old, Succeeded two years, and was as Wicked as his
Father had been; his Servants slew him. Josiah Eight years old, succeeded
Thirty one Years. He sought after the God of his Father David, and at Twelve
years old made a worthy Reformation, fulfilling the Prophecy delivered at
Bethel, to Jeroboam. By which History it appears, that Bethel and some parts of
the Ten Tribes were come under the Power of Judah; either taken in by Hezechiah
upon the death of Assurhaddon, while the Babylonians, who loved him, were busy
in Assyria; or at Manasses's Enlargement: The Babylonians not yet fit to deal
with the Egyptian so far off, to oblige Judah to them, were content with this
Enlargement as necessary against the Egyptians. This may be the Reason Manasses
Fortified himself after his return, which was not against the Babylonians, but
the Egyptians, as appeared in Josiah his opposing Necho with such earnestness,
as argues a firm League with the Babylonians. That Egypt's Friendship was
little worth, Judah had often found, and paid for, by the Assyrians and
Babylonians displeasure, for adhering to Egypt; yet had it been a small matter
upon his earnest Request to let him pass, if Josiah had not been obliged to the
Babylonians by his Ancestors Covenant, to Offend and Defend; neither had it
been Wisdom to Encounter such an Army, offering no Violence. Whatever moved
Josiah, it is likely he forgot (as the best do sometimes) to ask Counsel of
God, and depended on the Babylonians too much, which could not please God. The
Conclusion was, that God for the Wickedness of the People, took away that good
King, who had stayed his Hand from Revenging himself upon them, whose Miseries
presently insued his Death, so much bewailed of all.

. 2. Neco, Son to Psamniticus, following his Fathers designs, who had made
entrance into Syria, being assisted by the extraordinary Valor of the Greeks,
and knowing how Assyria, stood in danger by the Power of the Medes, intended
with a Powerful Army to visit Euphrates, and strengthen the Passages about
Carchemish, or further to Invade Syria. Having therefore over-thrown Josiah in
his way, not intending to stay the Conquest of Judah, he proceeded and took
Cadytis, perhaps Carchemish, and became, in a manner, Lord of all Syria, says
Josephus, particularly of the Phoenicians, whom he set to Sail from the Arabian
Gulf round about Africa, by the Cape of good Hope. In his return from
Euphrates, he took Ieboahaz, the younger Son of Josiah, whom Jeremy calls
Shallum, whom the People had made King, and put him in Bonds, and put Eliakim
in his place, calling him Iehojakim, and laid a Tribute on the Land, but
forbore the Conquest. Iehoahaz was King but three Months; Iehojakim the Elder
Son of Josiah, Reigned Ten years, he was of the Egyptian Faction, and of the
behavior of the worst of his Ancestors, which had so Infected the Land, that
the Chief Priests also were defiled therewith. Yet the Lord raised up Prophets
which reproved him, among whom Vriah, flying from the Tyrant which sought his
Life, is from Egypt sent back to death, contrary to the Custom of Nations.

. 3. Of the Kings of Media and Babylon.. Merodach, Son of Baladan, taking
advantage of Senacherib's Misadventure and Death, with the Assistance of his
Sons, made himself King of Babylon, but kept in Action 'till Assurhaddon's
death, Eleven years, so that he could not intend Syria, but was well rewarded
then, by a great part of Assyria, if not by all, as some less probably think.
Yet his little concern with the Assyrian Affairs all his long Reign, argues him
busied at Home in settling his Purchases there; and having Amity with Hezekiah.
Ben. Mirodacb his Son succeeded Twenty one years, whose Governors (as I take
it) captivated Manasses, in whose time Psamniticus, with his Greek Mercenaries,
prevailed in Syria, which might procure Manasses his release, and it may be a
part of the Kingdom of Samaria, which the Babylonians could not now intend.

Nabulassar his Son succeeded Thirty five years, whose works at home kept him
from looking abroad; for Phraortes King of the Medes, Invaded Assyria, and
Besieged Ninive, which it seems was not yet subject to Babylon; for Nabonassar
repelled him not, but the Scythians Invaded Media, and forced him thence.
Phraortes Son of Deioces King of Media, having enlarged his Dominions,
attempted Ninive, which yet remained of her self well enough, says Herodotus.
Custom of Danger hardened the Un-war-like, whom sudden unknown Dangers amaze.
Ninive had now been long exercised, so that Phraortes and his Family perished
there.

Cyaxares his Son, a braver Man of War, won in Lesler Asia, all from Halis
Eastward. He Besieged Ninive, and took it, says Eusebius, whom I rather
believe, than Herodotus, saying, the Scythians came upon him, which is not
likely, for we cannot think him so improvident; but rather hearing they were to
guard Media, he left the City, which about this time was destroyed, as we read
in Tobit, a Book of sufficient Credit, for the Story of those Times. And sure
we are, the Prophecy of Nabum was fulfilled by Nebuchadnezzar; and probable it
is, that Nabulassar, after Cyaxares left it in weak case, might seize upon it
easily, and put a Viceroy in it, which upon their Rebellion against
Nebuchadnezzar, were utterly destroyed.

. 4. The Scythians, about this time, made a great Expedition into Asia, of
which Herodotus speaks much, and many Fabulous things ill agreeing with the
time. Their first Eruption must needs be within the Reign of Psamniticus King
of Egypt, who met with them in Palestine, and got them by entreaty and gifts to
leave the Country. Before this they had wasted Media, and molested Assyria,
Babylonia, etc. and^ are said to have Dominereed in Asia Twenty eight Years,
within the Compass of the Reign of Ardis, Sadiatts, and Haliatts, Kings of
Lydia, and the Twenty eight last years of Nabulassar King of Babel. What these
Nations were, is next to be considered. Herodotus tells us, the Cimmerians
being driven out of their Country by the Scythians, invaded Asia, and that the
Scythians pursued them into remote parts, and by chance fell on Media and
Egypt, etc. But it is no uncommon thing for the Greeks to slander them, by whom
their Nation has been Beaten, as they were by these. For the Cymmerians, or
Cimbrians are well known by their Conquests of many Nations, to have been no
such Cowards. These were of the Posterity of Gomer, who Peopled most of the
Western World, and whose Reflux overwhelmed no small portion of Greece and
Asia; of whose Original, read Goropius Becanus his Amazonica, where we find the
Cimmerians, Scythians, and Sarmatians were all one Nation, distinguished by
diverse Names according to their Tribes, etc. Homer also spoke disgracefully of
them for the same cause; for they had wasted his Country, as had the Amazons.
As for the expulsion they write of, it was no more than sending out of Colonies
into Asia, with an Army of Scythians to help to Plant them elsewhere, their own
Country being overcharged. The Sarmatians also were their Companions, as their
return by Novogrod in Russia, which was Sarmatia, shows. Such another
Eruption they made above Five hundred years after. The Cimmerians being the
first Company, held the way of the Euxine Sea on their Right hand, passing
through Colchis, entered Pontus, then Paphlagonia, where fortifying the
Promontory, whereon the Greeks after built Synope, they there left the
unserviceable men of their Train, under Guard. From thence to Lydia, Phrygia,
and Ionia, the way lay open. In Lydia they Won Sardis from the King of Ardis,
etc. The misery of Wars is never such, as when Men are forced to seek a State
which others possess; when all is little enough for the one side, and works
the rooting out of the other. They which Fight for Mastery, are pacifyed with
Tribute and Services; but in these Migrations, the Assailants are so
unsatiable, that they need all the Defendants have, even to the succeeding
Infants Cradle. The merciless terms of this Controversy, arms both sides with
desperate Resolution, seeing all is at the stake on both sides, to the utter
Ruin of the one side. Our Britains can witness the differenc of Conquests, who
lost but Liberty by the Romans, for the which they gained civil Acts, which
before they never knew; but by Saxons they lost all, to the eradication of the
Britains Race. The Danes made the like attempt on the Saxons, with such
continuance as bred acquaintance between them, neither being able to subdue the
other; so many Danes became peaceable Inhabitants in wasted parts, and the rest
returned home. Such was (as I think) the end of the Cimmerian War in Lydia,
which having continued long, made both sides willing to rest; so that upon some
Victory of King Halyattes, the Cimmerians were content with what they had
gotten on the East side of the River Halys; which henceforth became the Border
of Lydia, on whose East side, dwelt the Amazons, that is, the Cimmerians and
Scythians. Hereto serves, that when Cyaxares of Media sought Revenge on the
Scythians, Haliates assisted them, to prevent his encroaching Westward.
Herodotus's Tale of this War about the Scythian Fugitives, is less probable.
The Scythians and Sarmatians took to the South, as the Cimerians had to the
West, passing between Caucasus and the Caspian Sea through Albania, Colthene,
etc. where now are Servia and Georgia, and entered Media in the time of
Phraortes, who was glad to Compound with them, while Psammiticus reigned in
Egypt, and in the sixth year of Nabulassar, from which their Twenty Eight Years
Dominion ended in his Thirty fourth; the Medes not venturing a second Battle,
thought nothing dishonorable to remove such troublesome Guests, and therefore
submitted to a Tribute, and so got them to remove; who finding the Country more
Pleasant toward the South, were easily persuaded. How Babylon, being in their
way to Egypt, escaped, is uncertain; yet it is certain, that all those parts of
Asia were Tributaries to them. Psamniticus, to prevent their entering Egypt, (as
a Jealous Husband of a fair Wife) which he would not be willing they should
see, met them in Syria, on the South of Palestine, and at their being at
Ascalon, and he at Gaza, and with fair words and rich Gifts so persuaded 'em,
that they returned to visit their high Country Friends, and left Syria the more
easy for him to deal with, while the Nations beyond Euphrates who had new work
to entertain these Strangers with, returned. The Scythians flowing back, the
way they came, grew an intolerable Burden to all they light on, especially the
Medes, which there over-swarm'd, being Rich and near home, in a Climate best
agreeing with their Bodies. Here they fell from exacting, the agreeed Tribute,
to take what they liked; yea All, from many; whereby the Land was unmanured.
Cyaxares, to remedy this oppression, took this Course; that the Medes Feasting
the better part of the Scythians, made them drunk, and slew them, and recovered
all; like as the Danes had been used in England. It Is like that this was done
on the Chief Leaders, which forced the Multitude upon indifferent Conditions to
return home, being yet strong enough against the Encounters by the way. Others
perhaps were settled in the Country before; others might go to their Countrymen
in Lydia. At this time is reported the Story of the returned Scythians, which
vanquished their Corrival Slaves at home with Horsewhips; according to the
Custom of the Muscovian Women sending a Whip, which she Curiously Works, to
the Man which shall be her Husband, in token of Subjection.

. 5. Contemporaries, besides the Kings of Egypt, Babylon, Medes, and Lydians,
of whom we spoke. Tullus Hostilius Reigned in Rome 'till the twenty first year
of Josiah: Ancus Martius succeeded twenty four years. Tarquin Priscus, a
Stranger, was next, who being Tutor to Ancus's Children, was so gracious with
the People, and so Rich, that they chose him King, the fourth year of Zedekiah,
and Reigned thirty eight years. Cypsilus in Corinth expelling the Bacides,
Reigned thirty years in Peace. Periander his Son succeeded; a Tyrant, who slew
his Wife, and in Honor of her, stripped all the Women stark naked, and burnt
their Apparel to her Ghost. Yet the Greeks were then so Wise as to admire his
Wisdom, as one of the Seven Sages. Draco the Lawmakers of Athens, punished
every Offense with death. Solon abrogated them. Zeleucus, Lawgiver to the
Locrians, in Italy; his Law put out the Eyes of the Adulterer; and to save one
of his Sons offending that way, put out one of his own. He restored Women's
immodest Attire, by allowing it to entice a Lover, not to go out of the House
by Night, but to play the Whore; nor to be attended with more than one Woman
abroad, except they were drunken; which Dispensations, Women were ashamed to
claim.

. 6. Jerusalem in the third year of Iehojakim is Besieged by Nebuchadnezzar,
the second year of his Reign with his Father; and, notwithstanding the
assistance of Neco King of Egypt, forced Iehojakim to become his Vassal, and
took Daniel and his Fellows Hostages; but hasted home, not intending there to
stay, Neco coming with such disadvantage so far from home, in a Country which
loved him not. Besides, his Father's death called him to possess his own,
before he sought other Men's. But the next year, which was Nebuchadnezzar's
first, and Neco's last, they fought on the Bank of Euphrates, where Neco Fought
his last, and Nebuchadnezzar recovered all Syria. Pausanius succeeded Neco, but
inferior in Valor; he thought to restore Iehoahaz his Prisoner, and cast out
Iehojakim, but the Lord said to the contrary. Iehojakim also relied on the
Egyptians, 'till Nebuchadnezzar forced a Tribute on him; so he submitted
quietly three years; in his fourth year it seems that Jeremiah was first
Imprisoned.

Tyrus holding out against Nebuchadnezzar, was in his seventh year Besieged,
and in his fourteenth year taken; for her. Captivity was limited to seventy
years, and her Siege was thirteen. It was divided from the Main by a deep broad
Channel, excelled in store of Ships, which Nebuchadnezzar wanted, and every
Wind brought supply from Foreign Parts, so that it feared neither Force, nor
Famine. But God, that had threatened Tire, sent a King impatient of resistance,
to undertake such a piece of work, to stop a vast Channel in the Sea, using
thereto the Wood of Libanus, not far off, and the Ruins of old Tire, with the
toilsom labor of many thousands of Men, wherewith he prevailed at length. But
the wealthy Citizens fled by Sea to Creet, and left little Wealth for Booty;
therefore the Lord promised them Egypt; see Ezekiel. 29.18, 19. Iehojakim, upon
what occasion is uncertain, (whether Mutiny among the Soldiers, or Rumor of
the Egyptians coming against Nebuchadnezzar) renounced his Subjection, but was
presently subdued by Nebuchadnezzar, and slain, and his Son Iehojakim or
Ieconias put in his place, and after three Months, removed to Babylon, and
Mattanias his Uncle established in his stead, and called Zedekiah, who took an
Oath of subjection. In his fourth year he went to Babel, about some business,
wherein it seems he was not satisfied; for upon his return, he began to
practice with the Neighboring Princes of Moab, etc. what year Iohanan the
False Prophet opposed Jeremy. Nebuchadnezzar hearing of Zedekiah's practice,
came in the dead of Winter, and Besieged Jerusalem; and though the year
following he raised his Siege to meet Hophra, Apries, in Herodotus.
yet upon the Egyptians abandoning his Enterprise, he returned, and gave the
City no rest, 'till he brake it up.

Zedekiah escaping in the Night through a Vault under the Earth, is yet
overtaken, etc. and his Eyes being put out, he was carried into Babel, but saw
it not, as Ezekiel foretold, Chapter 12.13. This was the eleventh year of Zedekiah,
and eighteenth of Nebuchadnezzar, the year after the Temple was burnt; the four
hundred thirty first year after the Building. What followed, is written 2 Kings
25. Ier. 39. and 52.

THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. BOOK III. Part I. FROM The Destruction of Jerusalem
unto Philip of Macedon.
CHAP. I. The time from the Destruction of Jerusalem to the Assyrian Fall.
. 1. THE Connection of Sacred and Profane, History.. Before the Grecian
Olympiads, and the Eastern Date from Nabonassar, the Course of Time had no
beaten Path, as after it had more certain Marks; yet from Ierusalem's
Destruction, the former, with the succeeding Ages, are more clearly discerned
in their Connection. The harm which some have found in the years of the
overgrown Monarchies, does preserve their Names, which otherwise might have
been forgotten, but cannot show the Year of such a King, in which any thing
expressed in Scripture was done. Neither could any certainty be gathered from
the late Kings of the Assyrians, etc. if Nebuchadnezzar's Reign had not been
precisely applied to the years of Iehojakim, and Zedekiah. Hence have we the
first light to discover how to connect Sacred and Profane Histories; for
Judah's Seventy years Captivity begin under Nebuchadnezzar, and ending the
first of Cyrus, directs us backward and forward. This first year of Cyrus, is
joined with the first of the fifty fifth Olympiad. And that he Reigned twenty
three year before his Monarchy, and seven after, is apparent; and giving them
four hundred and eight year between Troy's Fall, and Iphetus's restoring the
Olympiads, we may arrive to the knowledge of the true Grecian Antiquities. For
other Nations, let St. Augustine be trusted.

. 2. The Seventy Years of Babylonian Captivity being our chief mark of
direction, we are to inform our selves truly therein. Some begin from
Ieconias's Captivity, eleven year before Zedekiah; citing Ezekiel. 40.1. Beraldus
judges that it began the first of Nebuchadnezzar, and fourth of Ioakim; citing
2 Chronicles. 36. and Dan. 1. Matthew. 1.11. but cannot thus make it good. Wretched
Porphyrie scoffeth at St. Matthew. 1.11. not knowing Iosias's Sons had diverse
Names, as Epiphanius showed. The Wretch affirms the Book of Daniel was
written long after his death, at or near the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, whom
Eusebius, Apollonius, etc. have answered. And the Seventy Interpreters
Translated it out of Hebrew, one hundred year before that. Iaddus the
High Priest also showed the Book to the Great Alexander, etc. True it is, the
Jews ascribe it to Esdras, and equal it not to the Prophet, but put it among
the Hagiographs, or Holy Books; which are Daniel, Psalms, Job, Proverbs,
Canticles, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, Hester, Nehemiah, and Chronicles.
Our Christian Councils and Fathers acknowledge it Canonical; and our Savior
who cited no Apocrypha, cited it as a proof exceeding all.

. 3. That the Seventy Years Captivity began at Ierusalem's destruction, not
Ieconias's Captivity, is clear; Jeremiah himself, explained himself, and
Daniel, cited by some to the contrary. Compare Chap. 25.9, 11, 12. with Chap.
29.10. where, in the first place, he expressly begins the Captivity of
Seventy years, at Ierusalem's Destruction; and thereof certifies the Captivity
in the second place. So also it is understood by themselves, 2 Chronicles. 36.19,
20, 21. So Dan. 9.2: the Seventy years referred to Ierusalem's Desolation.

. 4. Touching the King's Reigning in Babylon those seventy Years, and the time
of each, help us a little to the times before or after; neither it seems were
most of their Acts worth Recording. For as Nebuchadnezzar's latter times were
either in delights, or madness, so his Posterity grew slothful, as Sons whose
Fathers have purchased enough to their hands; yet let us consider of Men's
Opinions therein, and judge as we see cause. The surest Opinion, is theirs
which follow the Scripture; which Name only Nebuchadnezzar, Evilmerodach, and
Balthazar and Jeremy, which seems to limit the Dominion of Babel, to Father,
Son, and Grandson. To qualify this, I see no necessity, except Profane Authors
were constant and probable in more Successions, which they are not. Josephus
reckons five, citing Berosus; but far otherwise than does Ierom, etc.

Anius Metasthenes names five, of which, the three last were Brethren; but
neither he, nor the rest, can qualify Jeremiah.

. 5. Scaliger's Opinion is here handled, and disproved, beginning the
seventieth year from Iechonias's transportation: and giving Evilmerodach but
two years, Balthazar one, of which he makes four, spent in his protection, and
makes him a Son of Nebuchadnezzar's Daughter. But as Ieremiah's speech of
Evilmerodach's raising up Ieconias, argues longer time, so his speaking
expressly of Nebuchadnezzar's Sons in the Succession. So Daniel employed in so
high a Place by the King, and after falling to a private Life, could not have
been forgotten of him in two year, or less. Scaliger also finds one Nabonidus
after Balthazar, and gives him seventeen years, and makes him Darius Medus,
whom others make the same with Balthazar, to make good Berosus, whom Scaliger
his chief Patron, herein forsakes. His grounds are, one, out of Daniel 5.31.
where Darius is not said to win, but receive the Kingdom; makes no strong
conclusion, etc. His other is out of Megasthenes in Eusebius, calling Nabonidus
a Mede, but I find it not; and if I did, I would little regard it, considering
his other improbable Reports with it. Besides, the Opinion agrees hardly with
Scripture, which says, the Kingdom should be divided between the Medes and
Persians. So that either Darius was not Nabonidus, or else bethink us what
Persian shared with him. Nay, both the Nations made the Empire, as Daniel's Ram
shows; and the Greeks call the Wars made by Xerxes, the Wars of the Medes. So
that the Notion of the Chronologers holding Darius Partner in Cyrus's
Victories, was not well condemned.

. 6. Lyra, and others, who hold those only named in Scripture, to have reigned
in Babylon during those Seventy years; I esteem more comformable to Reason. For
the years of their Reign, it is clear, that Evilmerodach began to Reign, 2
Kings 25.27. Ier. 52.31. in the Thirty Seventh year of Iechonias's Captivity,
from which, deduct Zedekiah's Eleventh year, when the City was taken, there
remained Twenty Six of the Seventy. How to distribute the other Forty four to
the succeeding Kings, is not so needful, as long as the total Sum is certain.
Yet I will be bold to conjecture, as others have done, giving to Belthasar
Seventeen years, with Josephus; so there remain Twenty Seven, of which one may
be taken away for the First of Darius; so Twenty six remain for Evilmerodach:
Besides Josephus, all that confound Balthazar and Nabonidus, give him Seventeen
Years; and Daniel's being grown out of Balthasar's Knowledge, who yet had
served him his Third year, argues some long time between. That Evilmerodach
Reigned some good time, is probable, by Iechonias's favor under him; and some
of great judgment, have given him Twenty three years, and more might be given
as well as that.

. 7. Touching the actions of these Kings. Nebuchadnezzar's former years were
Victorious. In his Nineteenth year he won Jerusalem and proud Tyrus, Esa.
23.15. The same year Egypt was next aimed at, as the fairest Mark; but the
petty Nations about Judah, who desired the Ruin thereof, were to be made sure,
for fear of incommoding his Return from Egypt, if he succeeded not. All these
ill Neighbors which imagined to gain by Judah's fall as Tyrus had, and had
followed the Camp as Ravens, were suddenly opposed by Nebuchadnezzar, as the
Lord had threatened, and brought into the Condition Judah was in, Esa. 16.14.

. 8. Nebuchadnezzar having freed the Coast behind him, through Syria and
Arabia, leaving neither Friend to Egypt, nor Foe to himself, able to give
impediment to his Proceeding or Retreat, he presently took it in hand, and
according to our Three great Prophets, had a Victorious Conquest of Egypt,
although some good Authors following Herodotus and Diodore, extenuate it to a
Ravage without Conquest; and that Apries, or Hophra their King, was slain after
in an Insurrection of his Subjects, and Amasis chosen to succeed. But Herodotus
and Diodorus are herein contradicted by such Authority as Force our Belief, as
Esa. 20.4, 5, 6. Ier. 43.10. and 44, and 46.25, 26. So Ezekiel. 29.20.30. and
32.31. So that Iunius, who in one place took Hophra's Enemies to be Amasis and
his Fellows, yet on Ier. 44.30. he Confessed the Egyptian Priests had abused
Herodotus. Josephus also herein is rather to be believed, reporting Egypt's
Conquests, and slaying of the King by Nebuchadnezzar, who appointed another in
his stead; all which is consonant to the Prophets.

. 9. Nebuchadnezzar's Victories after the Conquest of Syria, more enlarged his
Dominions than his former; for besides the Conquest of Egypt, we are bound to
believe he Conquered Phut, and Lud, and other Nations, as it seems, even to
Mauritania. Hitherto Egypt had flourished Fifteen hundred Eighty years; but
from henceforth, Forty years under a Viceroy, and was long after in recovering
strength, but never to her Ancient Glory, Esa. 19.11. Ezekiel. 29.13. etc.

. 10. Nebuchadnezzar's Actions are diversely dated, some from the beginning of
his Reign, whose first year ran with part of Iehojakim's Third, when Daniel was
carried Captive. Another date was from the beginning of his Empire, which was
after the Conquest of Egypt, as his Dream, Dan. 2.1. which could not be the
Second years Reign, considering the third then being up of Daniel, before he
stood before the King, as also that Nebuchadnezzar was yet no such King, as he
was when Daniel declared the Dream, etc. After the Conquest of Egypt, Ninive,
which Rebelled, was destroyed by him, as Nahum foretold; whose Prophecy went
between the destruction of Egypt and Ninive.

. 11. Nebuchadnezzar's last Times are found only in Daniel, as his Buildings in
Babel, cap. 4.27. wherein he glorified so much; and no marvel if Iosephus's
report out of Berosus, be true, of an Orchard supported by Arches, as high as
Mountains, reared in Fifteen days. But his over-valuing his own Greatness,
abased him as low; and the Lord, for his presuming to erect an Image to be
worshipped to his dishonor, whom he had before acknowledged, cast such
contempt upon him, as never befell such a Man. For, after the Lord had convinced
him by the miraculous cooling of his Furnace, and by a second Dream, warned
him, and given him one year respite, he had Human Sense taken from him, etc.
Upon his restoring, Augustine and others, held him saved.

. 12. Evilmerodach succeeded, in whose Nineteenth year ended the Fortieth year
of Egypt's Desolation, and now brake the Babylonian Yoke under Amasis their
King. This fell out while Astyages the Mede, Grandfather to Cyrus, held War
with Evilmerodach, and had the better, which emboldened Egypt. Astyages died in
the Ninth year of Evilmerodach, and left the Medes and Persians in Arms against
Evilmerodach, whom also they slew.

. 13. A conjecture how it might be that in Nebuchadnezzar's Seven Years of
Madness, Niglisar might govern by his Wife Nitocris's means, Nebuchadnezzar's
Daughter and Labassardach after him, but slain after Nine Months, presently
before Nebuchadnezzar's Restoration.

CHAP. II. The Persians greatness, how it grew.
. 1. THAT the Medes were chief in the overthrow of Babylon, the infallible
Witness of Two great Prophets, makes good, Esa. 13 17. Ier. 51.11.28.
according to which, Julius Africanus proves Babel was taken before Cyrus began
to Reign. So that the Empire lost by Balthassar, the last of Belochus's Line,
fell to Cyaxares or Darius Medus, the last of Arbaces's Race, who succeeded.
his Father Astyages, etc.

. 2. Cyrus, to whom alone the Greeks ascribe the Conquest of Babel, was thought
immediate Successor to Astyages, by some who deny he had any other Son than
this Cyrus Son of Mandane his Daughter. Viginer also probably reasons, that
Astyages had no such Son as Darius, being unknown to so many Authors there
named. But Negative Arguments from Authors, are of no force and necessity.
Either Astyages must be Darius, in Daniel 9. which his Time will not suffer, or
another Successor before Cyrus must be granted, who for Life commanded all. Yet
in regard he was Old, and followed not the Wars in Person, but Cyrus as his
Lieutenant, did all; the Greeks, who heard only of him, ascribed all to him; as
did the Persians, in Honor to him, who shortly brought all to them.

. 3. Xenophon's Report of the Wars between the Assyrians and the Medes, and
Persians. The Assyrians having command of so many Countries, desired to bring
under the Medes and Persians. Knowing therefore their great strength, he
persuaded Cro^sus, the rich and strong King of Lydia, to join with him, which
he easily yielded, for the quarrel to the Medes, who had warred against
Alyattes his Father. These together compose an Army of Two Hundred Thousand
Foot and Sixty Thousand Horse, but are overthrown by Darius; and Cyaxares King
of the Medes, and Cyrus General of the Persian Forces, and the Assyrian King
slain; so that many Assyrians revolted, and Babylon was glad, for her security,
to get mercenary strength, while Cyrus pursues his Victory to lesser Asia, and
took Croesus Prisoner. After this followed the Attempt at Babylon, Cyaxares
bearing the Charge, and Cyrus being Leader, etc.

. 4. Achaemenes governed in Persia, when Arbaces did the like in Media, and
both joined with Belochus against Sardanapalus, and after held Persia for
himself, as the other did Media and Babylon; yet Arbaces's absolute Command
decayed 'till Deioces One hundred fortys year after, when Salmanassar Reigned
in Syria; so that neither the Medes nor Persians found it fit to stir. From
Deioces to Astyages, there past above Ninety years, in which time Phraortes
Reigned, but not like to have Conquered Persia, as Herodotus Writ. For Susiana
was under Daniel's Charge for Nebuchadnezzar; who also would hardly have
ventured into Syria and Egypt, leaving such an Enemy on his Back. It seems,
the Successors of Achaemenes did little worth remembering, seeing in the Persian
Greatness, nothing was Published of their first Kings. Xenophon reports the
Crown descended from Father to Son many Descents; and that Cambyses begot
Cyrus; so that the Story of Astyages's giving Mandane his Daughter to a base
Man, to disable her Issue, whose Greatness he feared, is improbable. Two Races
sprung from Achaemenes; the First, according to Reyneccius, are Darius, Cyrus
First, Cambyses, Cyrus the Great, Cambyses, etc. Of the Second Race came the
Seven Princes who overthrew the Magi, and chose Darius, Son of Hystaspes, one
of them for King.

Persia, first called Elemais, of a Son of Shem, etc. Their City called
Persepolis, in the Second Book of Maccabees, is called Elemais in the First
Book, and now Cyrus; but Built in another place, for that which Alexander
destroyed at the request of the Harlot Thais. The First Kingdom known to us,
according to the Interpreters of Genesis 14. was Chedorlaomer, with whom Amraphel
or Ninus joined in the War against the Arabians.

CHAP. III. Of Cyrus the First Persian Monarch.
. 1. CYRUS, says Strabo, was so called of the River which waters Persia;
Herodotus says, it signifies a Father; Plutarch says, the Son Esai named him
almost Two Hundred years before. He Conquered Lydia, and took Croesus before
Babylon, which he won in the Fifty Fifth Olympiad, and in the Twenty Eighth
Olympiad, upon a Rebellion, subdued it again.

. 2. Lydia had Lydus the Son of Atys, her first King, which Family was
extinguished; Argon descended from Hercules, was chose by the Oracle, and held
Twenty two Generations, to Candaulus the last: Gyges succeeded him in Bed and
Kingdom, which he left to Atys Father of Sadiattes, Father of Halyattes, who
begat Croesus: All their time was One Hundred Seventy years. Croesus so
enlarged his Dominion, that he was Inferior to no King of that Age, commanding
Phrygia, Bythynia, Caria, Misia, Paphlagonia, etc. He, in confidence of his
good Success, envying Cyrus's Fame, and desirous to check his Prosperous
Undertakings, asked Counsel of Apollo; Then Darius, who assured Croesus passing
Halis's River, shall dissolve a great Dominion. An Answer doubtful, because the
Devil was Ignorant of the Event.

. 3. Croesus thus resolved, despised all Sandanes his Consellor's Arguments to
the contrary, as the Barrenness of the Enemies Country, their hard manner of
Living, Warlike, Indefatigable and Prosperous; by whose Fall he can gain only
Fame, wherein he excelled; and if he were Beaten, his Loss could be hardly
told, or soon conceived. Croesus proceeds with a powerful Army, but is staid at
Pterium, a strong City of Capadocia, which he sought to force, while Cyrus
advanced; Cratippus answered Pompey well, That Kingdoms have their Increase and
Periods from Divine Ordinance; and so was it with these two great Princes,
whose Forces meeting, the Persians had somewhat the better, but Night parted
them. Croesus, doubtful of the next days Success, quit the Field to Cyrus, and
with all haste, got into Sardis; and because of Winter, sent home his Forces,
not doubting any persuit.

Cyrus finding the Lydians gone, followed slowly after, to avoid discovering;
and having good Intelligence of Croesus's proceedings, delayed 'till the Forces
were disposed to their Winter Garrison; when unexpectedly he invested Sardis,
and in fourteen days forced it. Croesus thrusting in among the multitude, was
ready to be slain, had not his dumb Son, forced by Passion, cried Spare
Croesus; who thereupon was brought to Cyrus, who judged him to be burnt. Being
upon the heap of Wood, he cried out, O Solon! Solon! Solon! and upon urging to
declare what he meant, answered, That he found Solon's words true, That no Man
knew his own Happiness 'till his End. Cyrus hearing thereof, called for him
(remembering his own Mortality) forgave him, and ever after used him as a King,
and Companion. Xenophon Reports, that Cyrus used him so, without speaking of
the purpose of burning; belike thinking it a Cruelty unworthy Cyrus, so to use
his Great Uncle by his Grandmother, whose Brother he was. Cyrus ever after so
trusted him, that in his Journey to Scythia, he left him to advise Cambyses his
Son.

. 5. Cyrus after the Conquest of Lydia (as it seems) Invaded Scythia, and
taking Amorges, whose Wife Spartha renewing the War, took Cyrus, and so by
exchange, recovered her Husband. He also reduced the Phocians and Greeks in
lesser Asia, being fallen off; and having settled all his Provinces, prepared to
attempt Babylon, as the height of his Designs; whereto he enforced Head and
Hand. Cyrus having spent ten years in ordering former Purchases, and preparing
for Babylon, knowing the strength of it, being treble Walled, of great height,
and surrounded with Waters unfordable, and victualled for twenty years,
despaired to carry it by Assault, or to Famish it in short time, or without
great and assured Guard, considering the vast circuit of the Wall, above forty
eight Miles, of thirty two Foot thickness, and one hundred Cubits high. Cyrus
having considered these difficulties, with the inconveniency of lying long at
the Siege with such a Multitude, and the doubtful Terms of Conquered remote
Provinces, with the dishonor of making show to attempt, what in probability
could not be compassed, contrived how to turn aside Euphrates by many Channels.
Balthazar in the mean time, secure of any thing the Enemy could do, fell to
Feasting, etc. when the Lord of Heaven, against whom he exalted himself, sent a
Message by a Divine Handwriting, which marred all their Mirth. The execution
of that fearful Sentence came on as fast, when in the same night, Cyrus causing
the Dams between the River and his Trenches to be cut down, Euphrates suddenly
failed the City, and left the Besiegers a ready entrance, upon a secure People,
drowned in their Cups. No Historian, if he had been present, could have better
set out Babel's Calamities in that surprise, than did Isaiah two hundred years
before, and Jeremy above seventy years, whose Prophecies were now accomplished.

. 6. Cyrus his last Wars and End are diversely reported. Herodotus and Justin
tell us of his Wars with the Massagets, and his death by Queen Tomyris. But I
believe with Viginier, that War was rather that which he had before with the
Scythians; and that Tomyris was Sparta. Ctesias reports he was wounded in his
War with Derbician Scythians, and died three days after; and by Strabo's
Report, he was buried in his own City Pasagardes, whose Tomb Alexander the
Great opened, says Curtius. There is no likelihood of any such overthrow of
the Persians in Scythia, considering Cambyses's present Journey into Egypt, and
therefore I believe he died at home, as Xenophon reports, setting down his
Oration to his Son, etc.

. 7. Cyrus his Decree for building God's Temple, was, in true consideration,
the noblest of all his Acts, as a Service to the Author of all goodness,
accomplishing what the Lord had promised seventy years before, touching the
return of the Jews, etc. restoring the Vessels of the Sanctuary, and
re-building the House of God. Yet was the Work hindered all the days of Cyrus,
by the Samaritans, and Governors of the Provinces, who wrought upon Cambyses
in his Father's days; and after, upon suggestion that it was a Rebellious City,
etc. He Reigned thirty, or one and thirty Years.

. 8. Cyrus had two Sons, Cambyses, and Smerdis: Three Daughters, Atossa, and
Meroe, whom Cambyses their Brother Married, and Aristona Wife to Darius
Hystaspes, as was Atossa after Cambyses's death. Codman mistakes her for
Hester, because she was called Hadasa; but nearness of Names confounds not the
Person, where the one was the known Daughter of Cyrus, the other a Jew; who
though a while she concealed her Kindred, yet she after discovered it, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of the Persian Affairs, from Cyrus, to Darius.
. 1. THE Persian Kings are diversely numbered; but Eusebius, and most Latin
Authors follow the Greeks. Krentzheim has refelled all the other; and Beucer
makes it good by Scripture. Cyrus Reigned in all thirty years, named 2 Chronicles.
36. and Ezra 1.1. and elsewhere. Cambyses with the Magi eight years named in
Daniel 11.2. Darius Hystaspes, Ezr. 4.5. he Reigned thirty six; then Xerxes
twenty one years, plainly set out, Dan. 11.2. Artaxeres Longintanus forty
years, Ezr. 4.7. called also Artasta, Ezra 4.7. and 7.7. Darius Northis
nineteen years, Ezra 4.24. and 5.6. Nehem. 12.22. Artaxeres Mriemon forty three
years, Nehem. 2.1. Father to Artaxerxes, Octius, and Arsames, in whom the Line
of Cyrus ended. Octius Reigned twenty two years, Arsames three; Darius the last
was of another Family, and Reigned six years. All these are by Eusebius fitted
to the Olympiad.

. 2. Cambyses succeeded his Father; like him only in desire to increase the
Empire. In the fifth year of his sole Reign, the third of the sixty third
Olympiad, he Invaded Egypt, for that Amasis denied him his Daughter; but
Psamneticus Reigning after, is slain by Cambyses, six Months after Amasis's
death; others give him six years.

. 3. Cambyses also forced Evelthon King of Cyprus to submit; he destroyed the
Egyptian Images and Temples, and sent to do the like to Jupiter Ammon, in
Lybia, but the Devil by a Storm oppressed them with Sand, yet himself attempted
it after in vain; he also slew Apis the Egyptian Bull. But shortly after, upon
a Dream that his Brother sat upon his Throne, he procured Praxaspes his
Favorite to kill him. Intending to Marry his Sisters, he asked his Judges what
Law permitted it, who answered, Persian Kings are Lawless. Yet he caused
Sisanus a Corrupt Judge to be flaied alive, covering the Judges Seat with the
Skin, and put his Son into the Office. He shot Praxaspes's Son in the Heart, to
show his Father the Wine he delighted in had not taken away his Wits. Mounting
his Horse in haste to Persia, hearing of Semendis a Magus, upon likeness to his
Brother usurped the Crown, his Sword falling out, gave him his death's wound.
He Built Babylon in Egypt, where Latopolis had stood, and Meroe in Nilus by his
Sisters Name, whom he slew, for weeping for Smerdis.

. 4. The Seven Princes descend from Achaemenes's discovering the Fraud of the
Imposture, with joined Forces rooted him out; and after Consultation, whether
Popular Government, or a few Choice Men, or Regal, were best, the Resolution
was to make him King, whose Horse should Neigh first after the Sunrising.
Darius, one of them, Consulting with Oebarus Master of his Horse, caused his
Horse to cover a Mare in the Suburbs the Night before; who coming the next
Morning by that place with the rest, made Darius Emperor, by his Horse Neighing
first. Her. lib. 3.


CHAP. V. Of Darius the Son of Hystaspes.
. 1. Darius came of the second Race of Achaemenes, thus. Cyrus the First begat
Teispius, who begat Arianes Father of Arsanes, who accompanied Cyrus in
Scythia; where Cyrus, upon a Dream, grew Jealous of Darius; but afterward he
followed Cambyses into Egypt, Married two of Cyrus's Daughters. Reyneccius
gives Hystaspes five Sons, Herodotus four.

. 2. Darius made many equal Laws, gave his Subjects easy access, and was so
mild, that many Nations offered subjection; yet he laid diverse Taxes on them.
Babel being revolted in the time of the Magi, Darius Besieged it, and by
Zopirus, who for his sake cut off his own Ears and Nose, fled to the
Babylonians, and complained of Darius's Cruelty. For dissuading the Siege of
Babel, he is made their Leader, and recovers it.

. 3. He gave order for Building the Temple, and made a Decree against all that
should hinder it, Ezr. 6.

. 4. Darius having recovered Babylon, invaded Scythia, passing over Ister, or
Danubius, by a Bridge of small Vessels, which he committed to the keeping of
the Ionians, and Aetolians; among whom Miltiades persuaded them to break it
down, so to distress Darius; but Histiaeus Prince of Milet of Ionia dissuaded
'em. Darius entering the Desert Country of Bessaravia, found neither People,
nor Relief; the Scythians there being all Grasiers, and Horsemen, without any
Town or Tillage, and living in Wagons, which at every station they set in
order of a Town, as do the Chrim Tartars their Posterities at this day. Darius
wearied with seeking, and seeing his Folly, sent to them, either to submit, or
try his Valor: who for Answer, sent him a Bird, a Frog, a Mouse, and five
Arrows. This dumb show Darius took as a yielding him All, even the Elements in
which these Creatures live, and their Weapons: But Gobrias, one of the Seven
Princes, construed their meaning aright, as telling him he cannot escape their
Arrows, except by flight, diving, or hiding himself. This they made good, by
assailing his Camp, vexing it with continual Alarums; and so fearless, forsook
his Camp by Night, and hasted to Ister, whither yet the Scythians came before
him, missing him as they came. They persuaded the Ionians to depart, assuring
them the Persians should never hurt nor harm them; which had proved true, if
Hystiaeus had proved firm, and stayed for them there.

. 5. Darius escaping the Scythians, Invaded Thrace, and Macedon, transplanted
the Paeonians, and possessed Chalcedon, Byzantium, Perinthus, etc. and the best
part of Thrace. Then he sent to Amyntas King of Macedon, requiring his
subjection by the Earth and Water, as the Persian manner was. He doubting his
own strength, entertained the Ambassadors, who offering incivility to the
Ladies at a Feast, were slain by the device of Alexander the King's Son;
sending young Men in the Ladies Attire. Darius intending to revenge the
Affront, was pacifyed by Bubaris, a principal Commander under Darius, to whom
Alexander succeeded his Father, and had given Gygea his Sister; who persuaded
him how necessary the amity with Macedon was, in the intended War with the
Greeks.

. 6. The War with Greece, grew upon occasion of Pysistratus, who, in the time
of the Annual Government, upon a divsion of two great Families in Athens,
usurped the Government as in behalf of the People; who yet perceiving he aimed
at a Monarchy, which of all Forms of Government, they could not brook, they
forced him to fly the first and second time; but the third time, by hiring
Forces he recovered, and Ruled Seventeen years after, and left it to his Sons,
Hyppias and Hyppar^hus, the last of which was Murdered by Hermodius for his
unnatural Lust to him. Hereupon Hyppias doubting himself, and falling to more
severity than had been there used, they raise Armies with the Lacedaemonians
aid, and forced him to give over, and leave the City. He being Allied to
Aeantides, Tyrant of Lampsacus, was by him presented to Darius.

. 7. These Grecian Colonies in the Sea Coast of Asia, after Five hundred years
Liberty, were brought under by Croesus, and fell with him under the Persian
Yoke, and were by the Practice of Histiaeus, put into Rebellion, because Darius
had taken him to Susa, and they, under show of Honor, held him, as doubting
his greatness in Ionia. This he perceived to be practiced with Aristagoras, his
Cousin and Deputy in Miletum, to make a Breach, hoping to be sent to reduce
them, as he was. For Darius hearing of this Revolt, and of the Athenians
joining with them, was exceedingly provoked against Athens, being excited by
Hyppias; as for the Ionians, he sent Histiaeus, who promised what he intended
not; but before his coming, Artaphemes had broken their Power, being Viceroy
in Lydia; so that Histiaeus, after vain attempts, was taken and lost his Head.

. 8. Darius, who first pretended only against the Athenians and Eritraeans, for
assisting the Ionians, and Burning Sardis, seeing the good Success of the
Forces against them, sent, and demanded Acknowledgments from all the Greeks,
who generally refused, and forced the Aegenits, which had submitted, to
renounce it. Darius prepares an Hundred Thousand Foot, and Sixty Thousand
Horses, which, as they passed over the Sea, took the Cyclad Islands, and so
advanced to Eritria in Euboea, and sacked it. From thence they pass into
Attica, conducted by Hippias their King, Twenty Years after, who Encamped in
Marathon toward Athens. The Athenians sent Phidippidus to the Lacedaemonians for
Succor, which he failed of; but in Arcadia, a Familiar Devil (supposed to be
Pan) promised the Gods assistance, which much Encouraged the Multitude, who
rely more on blind Prophecies, than solid Reason. The Athenian Forces were Ten
Thousand and One Thousand Plataeans, with which coming into the Field, the
Persians scorned their small numbers, and thought them void of Understanding,
to venture into the Field. But, in conclusion, the Greeks fighting for all they
had, and the Persians for what they needed not, Necessity provoked the one, and
Confidence in their Multitude, making the other secure, the Persians are put to
Rout, fly to their Ships, which will drive them too, when Courage was lost. Of
the Persians, were slain in the Place, Six Thousand Three Hundred; of the
Greeks One hundred Ninety two; which they say fell out by strange Sights,
frighting the Persians. Miltiades carried the honor of this Victory; but
having broken his Thigh in a Service which he sought against the Isle Paros; at
his return, his ungrateful Citizens cast him in Prison, where, in a few days,
he ended his Life. Darius, after Thirty Six Years Reign, dyed.

CHAP. VI. Of Xerxes, Emperor of Persia.
. 1. XErxes succeeded, and inherited, with his Crown, a double War; one with
Egypt, the other with Greece; as terrible in Preparation, as ridiculous in
Success; from which War, Artaban, Brother to the late Darius, dissuaded him:
But Mardonius, Grandchild to Hystaspis, as was Xerxes, and his Brother in-Law
by Marriage of his Sister, persuadeth it. Herodotus tells of 1700000 Foot; but
Trogus makes it 700000 Foot, and 80000 Horse, besides Camels, Chariots, and
other Beasts for Carriage. The Commanders were all Princes of the Blood, of
which Mardonius, Cousin to the King, was chief; only the Immortal Regiment,
which was ever supplied with Ten thousand select Persians, was given to
Hydarnes. Galleys Two thousand two hundred and Eight, and three thousand
Vessels for Transportation.

. 2. This World of an Army made their Rendezvous at Sardis, whose whole Company
Pythias, a Lydian, entertained with Food, and presented the King with two
Thousand Talents of Silver, and four Millions of Gold, wanting Seven thousand,
which Xerxes made up, and gave all back again. Yet the Tyrant cut one of his
five Sons into two parts, for whom the Father had entreated to be spared in
this Expedition, to tend him in his Age. He cut Mount Athos, and five Cities in
the half Island from Thrace. He also made a Bridge of Six hundred Seventy two
Galleys over the Hellespont, over which all his Army passed in Seven days,
which he beheld in the Plains of Abidos from an high place. Here Artabanus put
him in mind, That Man's Life is so much more miserable than the end, that the
happiest man often pleases himself more with the desire of Death than Life, etc.
and laid before him two great Dangers that might proceed from such a
Multitude; at Sea, by Storm, having no Harbor to command, or able to receive
them; at Land, the Country not able to feed them, etc. He only replied, that
great Enterprises were never undertaken without great Perils; which is a good
Resolution, if Necessity enforce the Enterprise, which here it did not, etc.
and such Multitudes are rather heavy Burdens than strong Aids, impossible to
be Marshalled.

. 3. Xerxes having Transported his Army into Thrace, being to pass the Straits
of Thermopile, of half an Acre between the Mountains, which divide Thessaly
from Greece, was resisted by Leonidas King of Sparta, with three hundred Men,
and three or four hundred Greeks, 'till a Fugitive Grecian taught the Persians
a Way by the Ridge of the Mountains, by which, part of their Army ascending,
came upon their Backs. Yet Leonidas, with his Seven hundred Men, stood to it,
and slew twenty thousand, and two of the Kings Brethren; though in the end, he
and the rest were sl^in. This valorous Resolution, especially of the
Lacedaemonians, terrified Xerxes; so that he asked Counsel of Demoratus, a
Banished King of Sparta, who advised to send sufficient Force in three hundred
Ships, to ravage Lycaonia, so to divert the Lacedaemonians and their Neighbors
at home, while Xerxes subdued the rest. Achamenes the Kings Brother advised him
to keep the Ships together near the Land Forces, considering four hundred were
cast away in a Storm. But the Grecian Navy lying at Artemisium, where the
Persian Armada thought to enclose them, knowing they had sent two hundred Ships
about, met them in the Night unlooked for, and Defeated them. The other
intending, by strong hand, to repair that loss, set upon the Grecian Navy, but
had the worst, leaving both the place and Spoil to the Enemy.

. 4. Xerxes being entered the Phocians Country, ravaged it and the Regions
adjoining; he sent also to pillage the Temple of Delphos, but was overwhelmed
(they say) by two Rocks, which brake from Parnassus. Surely his Attempt was
Impious, seeing he believed Apollo a God; so that the only Holy might give the
Devil leave to defend himself against his own Servant which dishonored him.
For, says he, will a Man spoil his God? Mat. 3.8. Ier. 2.9, 10. Yea, the
Persians had blamed the Athenians for Burning Cybel's Temple in the City
Sardis. He proceeded to Athens, which was forsaken, and Burnt the Citadel and
Temple.

. 5. The Athenians had removed their Wives and Children to Salamis, etc.
prising the common Liberty of Greece before private; yet the Greeks resolved to
abandon Salamis and Aegina, had not Themistocles, Admiral of the Athenian
Fleet, dissuaded them from it, as also from the purpose to fortify Peloponesus
only, and abandon the rest of Greece, as not defensible; yet could he not
prevail, 'till he threatened, that the Athenians, whose Ships were the Strength
of the Greek Navy, would take their Wives and Children, and remove to Italy,
and there plant themselves. The Peloponesians knowing how desperate the Case
would be with them, were glad to yield.

. 6. The Persians deliberate to offer the Greeks a Battle, which the King
desired, and the Leaders, to give him content, seem to approve of it. But
Artemisia, Princess of Halicarnasseus, advised the King to set forward to
Peloponesus, to separate the Greek Navy, while every one would haste to defend
his own, and so single, were easily mastered, which conjoined, were too strong
by their better Skill at Sea. The Peloponesians amazed at the approach, and
fearing the Enemies March to Peloponesus, esteeming all Greece lost but that
part, resolve to set Sail for Isemus. Themistocles knowing he had no spare time
to bestow on Ears shut up by Fear, sent a trusty Messenger to tell the Persians
of this intended flight; willing them with speed to send some Forces about the
Island. The Persians thinking the Athenians did this to make their way for
Favor, as meaning to fall to the King, followed the Advice. The Peloponesians,
in the Morning, intending to weigh Anchor, saw the Enemy in their way, and so
were forced to the Fight in the Straights of Salamis, where they had a
memorable Victory; forcing the Enemies Ships to fall foul one upon another, and
so could neither Fight nor fly.

. 7. After the Victory, every Captain, by Scrutiny, was willed to write his
Name which merited most, and every Man ambitious of the Honor, set his own
Name first, and Themistocles next; Affection serving her self first, is then
content to yield to Virtue next. Xerxes set a good Face on it, as intending a
new Preparation; but the Princes which knew his Temper, discerned his saint
Heart, especially Mardonius, Author of this War. He therefore to prevent the
King's Indignation, went unto him with many fair Words, laying the faul^ upon
the Cowardly Egyptians, Phoenycians, and Cilicians, which was no dishonor to
the King, who had taken Athens, which was principally intended, and the most of
Greece. Hereupon he desired the King to leave him three hundred Thousand men to
finish the War, and himself, with the rest, to return to Asia. The King's Care
liked well hereof, and made haste, hearing the Greeks intended to break his
Bridge, as Themistocles had informed, underhand, so to weaken the Army, and
ease the Country.

. 8. Mardonius having undertaken to reduce Greece, removed to Thessaly, and
from thence, sent Alexander, King of Macedon, with great Promises, to persuade
the Athenians to come in, which the Lacedaemonians understanding, sent likewise
to persuade them to remain firm. The Athenians Answer Alexander, renouncing
Amity with Xerxes as long as the Sun kept his Course; whereupon Mardonius
hasted to Athens, which was again left to him void. From thence he solicited
them with many fair promises in vain; yet the Lacedaemonians grew cold in
sending Aid, 'till the Athenians grew to threaten a Course which would little
please them. A Counselor of Sparta thereupon said, our Wall upon Istonus will
little avail us, if Athens listen to Mardonius; with which Speech, the
Lacedaemonians bethought themselves and dispatched five thousand Spartans, and
gave orders for five thousand more.

. 9. Mardonius's Army of thirty thousand was increased to fifty thousand, with
the Macedonians, Thaebans and Thessalians, against which, the Forces of Greece
were One hundred and ten Thousand, of which forty thousand were weightily
Armed. All these comfronted one another in a convenient place belonging to the
Plataeans, who gave it to the Athenians, upon the Oracles promise of Victory,
if the Battle were fought on Athenian ground. In the end the Armies encounter
each other; Mardonius is slain, his Army destroyed, and Artabasus, with three
thousand, flies to Byzantium, and so Shipped into Asia.

. 10. Xerxes being at Sardis, committed Sixty thousand to Tygranes to keep
Ionia and the Coast, where his two Admirals lay at Mycale, who perceiving the
Grecian Fleet was coming, drew their Ships on ground, and fortifyed the places,
and disarmed the Samians among them, and set the Miletians far off, to keep the
Streights, doubting them. The Greeks resolutely ^orce them, and the Samians in
the Fight, get what Weapons they can, and play the Devil against the Persians,
whose Example the Ionians follow; so that the Persians are overthrown, and of
those that fled, the Milesians had the slaughter; this was the Evening of that
Day, the Battle was at Plataea, which was the last that was heard of this
mighty Army levied against Greece.

. 11. Xerxes not regarding these Losses, was engaged in the love of his
Brother's Wife, who rejected him; and after of her Daughter, Wife to his Son;
whereof did follow the Salvage Cruelty of Amestris his Wife, on his Brother's
Wife, and his Murder of his Brother Masistes, her Husband.

CHAP. VII. The Greek Affairs, from the Persian Wars, to the Peloponesian, of
Twenty Seven Years.
. 1. THE Greeks having utterly defeated that Persian Army of Seventeen Hundred
Thousand, and left a few thousands of them, that the Peloponesians sent home,
leaving Xantippus, and his Athenians, assisted with the revolted Jones, who
took Sestos in the Straight of Hellespont, between which, and Abidos, Xerxes's
Bridge had stood; and in the Spring returned home, taking their Wives and
Children with them, out of the Islands where they had left them. The Athenians
neglecting their private interest, fell presently to fortify their City; which
the Lacedaemonians, doubting the Athenians power at Sea, dissuaded; but in vain,
being held in suspense with fair words, till the work was ended; and then were
answered, That Athens knew what belonged to her safety, as they had showed in
the Persian War, without direction from others.

. 2. The Athenians sent out Thirty Ships, the Lacedaemonians Twenty, the rest of
Greece adding thereto, Pausanias of Lacedemon having the Conduct; who having
possessed themselves of many Principal Places in Cyprus, went from thence to
Thrace, and recovered Bizantium, now Constantinople, from the Persians. After
this, Pausanias beginning to play the Tyrant, is called home, and Docres put in
his Place, who is also mis^iked, as indeed a good Commander might be, in
comparison of the Wise and Virtuous Aristides Commander of the Athenians, much
more Men of ill desert. The Lacedaemonians being weary of following the War, of
which the Athenians were eag^r, return home and take their eas^, while the
other got Honor, and had all the rest of the Greeks willing to be Commanded by
the Athenians and to bear what Charge they lay upon them for the common defense
of Greece, gladly referring themselves to A^istides. But just Aristides could
not prevent the Athenians making Slaves of their Fellows in short time;
imposing Thirteen Hundred Talents a year upon their Confederates. Timon Son of
^^^^iades was General, who brought many Inhabitants (...) Greece into the
Athenian Servitude; while neglecting to follow the Wars, choosing rather to bear
the Change than se^ve, grew weak as the other became strong. Timon having taken
Phaleis, entr^d Erquidom in Pamphi^ia, overthrew the Persian Army at Land, and
took two hundred Ships, and forced Eighty Sail of Phaenicians to r^^ on gro^nd
and per^^^* This forced the Persians to an honorable Peace with the Athenians.

. 3. Xerxes becomes cruel to his Kindred, and those about him; which made hi^
Uncle Arta^^^^^ to repose less safety in his Fidelity, tha^ in the hope of a
Crown, by destroying a Cruel Cowa^dly and Hated Prince. Thus by means of
Millorldatus an Eunuch, the King is murdered, and his Son Darius charged with
it, and put to death. But Artabanus is surpised by Artaxerxes, and slain.

. 4. Artaxerxes making Peace with the Athenians, Themistocles seeking to check
the Peoples insolency in their Democratical Government, is Banished Ten Years,
who for safety fled to Persia, where, to avoid leading Forces against Athens,
he Poisoned himself.

. 5. Athens, contrary to the Peace with the Persians, measuring Honor by
profit, thought to Surprise Cyprus, a convenient Seat for any State, which
would Trade with Syria, Egypt, Cilicia, etc. But Timon with two hundred Sail,
solicited by Icarus King of Lybia, to join in Conquest; and showing him Egypt,
accepted the motion, succeeded in the Attempt, to the taking two parts of
Memphis, 'till Magabazus sent Forces to assist the Persians there; by which
means, the Athenians were forced to Prosopotes, and there slain, with loss of
all their Galleys, and fifty more sent to their assistance.

. 6. The Athenians in these six years of Egyptian War held their own with
advantage, winning the Egyptian Phocis, Tanagra, etc. spoiled the Seacoast of
Peloponesus, and then made a Peace with them.

. 7. Artaxerxes Longimanus, to whom most good Authors give forty, and some
forty four years, was he which so much favored the Jews, as we see in Esdras,
and Nehemiah; which was that Ahasuerus who Married Hester, lived in Susa, and
Reigned from India, to Aethiopia, and therefore a Persian. Now as Darius
Hystaspes his many Wives, the Honor he left Atossa in, Iojachim's being
High Priest in the days of Artaxerxes, prove he was not Hesters Husband, so
much less was Xerxes; and Mordocha proves he could be none of the succeeding
Kings of Persia.

. 8. The Greeks prosecute their Civil-War, leaving the Persians in Peace for
many Ages. Their Egyptian Expedition being come to naught, the Lacedaemonians
recover Delphos, which the Athenians regain, and commit to the Phocians. But
the Baeotians recover their Liberty against the Athenians, as did Eubaea, and
Megaras, and Athens seek Peace with Sparta for thirty years; but after six
years Invaded Samos.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Peloponesian War.
. 1. GReece was never under the Government of one Prince 'till Philip of
Macedon, and Alexander his Son, and by them rather United than Subjected, as
they were by the Kings following; who brought all Greece into servitude, except
those Two which deserved it most, Athens, and Lacedemon, which distracted all
by their private quarrels, drawing all the rest to side with them. Lacedemon
having lived under one form of Government four hundred years, used only to War,
as glorying only in Valor. The Athenians to the contrary, measured Honor, and
all by Gain. The Lacedaemonians were deliberate, grave, and resolute, for which,
all other S^ates of Greece followed them; the Athenians were eager, sudden in
concluding, and hasty in execution; obeyed by force, and by means of their
Ships, forced the Islanders to hard Tribute. The Lacedaemonians being
In-Landers, perceiving the Athenians to grow great, became jealous of them.

. 2. Athens to enlarge her Command, used to protect the weaker States against
the stronger, though having been their Colonies, as Corcyra was to Corinth.
This Wrong Corinth complained of to Sparta, as others did; and when Sparta
could not prevail by entreaty, they resolve on Force, which Athens prepares
for. The Lacedaemonians exceed in numbers and qualities; the Athenians in many
Ships, and absolute Subjects.

. 3. Athens the t^o-first years had all the Country about wasted, and the Towns
visited with a grievous Pestilence, by the throng of People and Cattle, fled
thither. The Lacedaemonians win Plataea, but cannot rescue Mytilene from the
Athenians, for want of Ships; their Confederates also grew weary, so that the
Lacedaemonians seeing how little hurt they can do to Athens, which was easily
relieved by Sea, fall to build Ships, but to no purpose, wanting good Seamen.

. 4. Sparta hearing that a Fleet of Athenians by contrary Winds stayed at
Pilus, a Promontory, began to fortify themselves there, and hasted from
Attica, to put off such ill Neighbors from planting so near Peloponesus; but
finding the Garrison not so easily to be forced, they possessed the Haven, put
four hundred Men into the Island, and send part of the Fleet for Materials to
ruin the Garrison. The Athenian Fleet hearing of the Garrisons distresses,
returned, and overthrew the Spartan Fleet, etc. The four hundred Men in the
Island, the Magistrates of Sparta seek to recover, by sending to Athens to
treat of Peace, but in vain; for Athens weighed Honor by Profit, and held the
advantage gotten; and in the end, by force took the Spartans in the Island
Prisoners, and sent them to Athens.

. 5. The Lacedaemonians in this Condition, labor for Peace, which the insolent
Athenians neglected, 'till the overthrow their Forces by the Lacedaemonians
employed in Thrace, had received, which made the Athenians more earnest to
effect a Peace; especially, considering, that beside the Athenian Power, the
Argives their ancient, and not to be neglected Enemies, were like to join with
the Athenians, the Thirty years Peace being expired. The Peace at last is
concluded, but Conditions impossible; for Lacedemon could not restore all the
Cities which the Athenians had lost by their means, as the Cities taken into
their Protection, refused to return subject to their old Lords the Athenians.
But before any quarrel grew, the Spartans enter into a straighter Alliance with
Athens, by a League Offensive and Defensive, to disappoint the Argives. This
League put all Greece in jealousy that these two would prove Lords of all.

. 6. The States of Greece, which had excessively admired the Valor of Sparta,
seeing it now to seek Peace, upon Terms not so Honorable, grew to contemn it,
as the Corinthians, Thebans, etc. who cast their Eyes upon the great Rich City
of Argos, and conceived great matters of it. This is the common base Condition
of the most, who curiously searching into other Men's Vices, cannot discern
their Virtues; and comparing our best parts with their first, are justly
plagued with false opinion of that good in others, which we know wanting in our
selves; the Corinthians beginning, complain that the Lacedaemonians had left
some of their Towns in the Athenians hands; the Mantinians follow, who feared
revenge, for that they had drawn some Arcadians from the Spartans, to follow
them. These begin to enter League with the Argives, and other Cities of
Peloponesus follow. The Lacedaemonians knowing the scope of this new
Confederacy, send to Corinth, to stop the Matter where it began, chargeing them
with their Oath of old Alliance, which the Corinthians answer; saying the
Lacedaemonians had first broken in concluding with Athens, without care of
restoring the Towns taken from Corinth, etc. The Corinthians thereupon enter
League with Argos, and draw others, only the Thebans were not so forward,
because Argos was a popular State. The Corinthians also, for further security,
sought Peace with Athens, and obtained a Truce, but no League. But in
conclusion, as Athens, had, by force, gotten an absolute command, and could
perform what she promised, so Lacedemon, which had so many followers, but
voluntary, could not do so; as where they should restore Panacty held by the
Thebans, for recovery of Pylus, they could not, and so gave discontent to
Athens. There were also in Athens, Alcibiades a young brave Nobleman, and
others, as also some in Sparta desirous of War, who promoted the breach of
Peace what they could. Alcibiades therefore sent to Argos, which thought not
now of superiority, as lately she did, but of Security, advising them to
secure-themselves by League with Athens. The Lacedaemonians seeing that Argos
took that course, sent to Athens to stay the proceeding, knowing the
Combination was not for their Wealth; but by a trick of Alcibiades, lost their
labor.

. 7. The Argives presuming of their Allies, molest the Epidaurians, which the
Spartans were bound to defend; upon which occasion, the Athenians and Spartans
collaterally infest each other, and the Corinthians, Baeotians, Phocians,
Locrians, follow the Lacedaemonians, who, in one Victory, recovered much
Reputation; so that the Nobles of Argos getting the uper-hand of the Citizens,
made League with them, renouncing Athens; but the People recovering, chased
away their Nobles, and reversed all.

. 8. Athens, in the intermission of open War at home, renew their hopes of
subduing Sicily, and sent such a Fleet as Greece never set out, of which
Alcibiades was one General. Siracuse is besieged, but relieved by the
Lacedaemonians, and the Fleet blocked up in the Haven; neither could Athens
relieve it through home Factions, whence Alcibiades was driven, to banish
himself; and by this reason Sparta, in the absence of their Forces, Invaded
Attica, the Persians lending Money. The Lacedaemonians also by Alcibiades's
Advice (who fled to them) fortifyed Decelia near Athens, and all the Country
about; Yet the Athenians, in their Obstinacy, sent another Fleet, which was
quite vanquished in the Haven, and the Army, by Land, utterly over-thrown. This
befell the Athenians deservedly by Nicias's Resolution, who chose to venture
little less than all the Power of Athens, rather than to incur the Athenians
Censure upon Return, to be condemned unjustly, as other Generals had been; this
Resolution cannot be commended, seeing an honest valiant Man should do what
Reason directs, and measure Honor and Dishonor by a well-informed Conscience,
rather than the malicious Report and Censure of others; yet it is excusable,
considering the Peoples Injustice; and knowing an ill Fact is nothing so
pernicious as an unjust Sentence, which begun upon one, becomes a President.
But his fear to fly, as he thought to do, was ridiculous, because of an Eclipse
that day, which made him defer it 'till twenty seven days after, with
lamentable effect.

. 9. The Athenians, after this loss had also their Subjects abroad rebellious,
and which recovered their long lost Liberty. At home also the principal
Citizens, wearied with the Peoples Insolency, changed the Government, procuring
the Captains abroad to set up an Aristocracy in the Towns of their Confederacy,
as four hundred usurped it at home. But the Army at Samos disliked that
usurpation, and Alcibiades, who was f^ed from the Lacedaemonians, who had
honored him much, till his Virtue had bred him Envy, and was with Tissaphernes
the Persian Viceroy, with whom he was grown into such Favor, as he persuaded
him to stay his Favor to the Lacedaemonians. Yet his Revocation was not
confirmed at Athens, 'till the four hundred wearied with the Troubles of the
Times, and not prevailing with Sparta for Peace, resigned their Authority to
Five thousand, which had been their Assistants, who presently agreed to the
revocation of him and his Companions.

. 10. After this, Alcibiades joining with the Athenian Fleet, after an
Overthrow of the Lacedemonian Fleet, commanded by Mindarus, took Cyzicus,
Perinthus, Chalcedon, Bizantium, and with this Honor returned to Athens, where
he was made High-Admiral. But upon a loss of a great part of his Fleet by his
Lieutenant in his Absence, fighting contrary to his Commandment, he was again
forced to banish himself, to a greater loss to Athens than before.

. 11. After this also the Athenians Ships in a discomfiture, were forced into
the Haven of Mytelene, where they were beset, so that Athens were compelled to
Man all their Vessels, to relieve them at Argamusae; yet the ten Captains,
which had the Victory of the Lacedaemonians, were condemned at Athens unjustly,
as after appeared.

. 12. Lysander, with the Peloponesian Fleet, Besieged Lapsacus; the Athenian
Fleet of an hundred Eighty Sail came too late to relieve it; and then put in at
Sestos, and after at Aeges-Potamos, from whence they daily braved Lysander, not
a League off, and return to Ages Potamos, from whence the Men used to go by
Land to Sestos, leaving the Ships. Alcibiades lived near, and saw their
negligent endangering the Ships, and gave them warning, which they regarded
not; so Lysander came suddenly on them, and overthrew them, went to Athens
with Pausanias and Agis, the Two Kings of Sparta, and Summoned the City, which
refused 'till Famine Forced, which fell on them by the Lacedaemonians taking the
Islands from them, which used to relieve them. So all her Subject Cities are
freed; the Wall, to the Port cast down; her Government restrained to her own
Territories; and she to use but Twelve Ships, and to follow Sparta in all Wars.
And so ended the Peloponesian War, after twenty seven years. Her only hope of
Recovery was in Alcibiades, whose death the Lacedaemonians procured. Lacedemon
abusing this good Success, grew Odious, so that many Cities of Greece combined
against her, and Thebes, under the leading of Epaminondas, who trained up
Philip of Macedonia, gave her a great Foil.

CHAP. IX. Matters concurring with this War, and a while after.
. 1. PERSIA after, had Artaxerxes, Xerxes the Second, and after him, Sogdianus
his Brother (who seem to be the Sons of Hester) but one year; whom Darius
Notbus succeeded, who slew Sogdianus as he had his Brother Xerxes. He reigned
Nineteen years. Amyrtaeus an Egyptian, Allied himself with Greece, overthrew
the Persian Garrisons in Egypt, and Reigned; while Darius assisting the
Lacedaemonians with Money, by the Overthrow of Athens, recovered what had been
lost in Asia the lesser, over which he made Cyrus, his younger Son, Lieutenant,
but upon some dislike, intended to have dealt sharply with him, had not Death
prevented.

. 2. Athens, after her Overthrow, had Thirty Governors, called Tyrants, chosen
to execute the Law, with supreme Authority. These contriving to retain that
Power, put certain Seditious Fellows to death without Law, which all Men
approved, considering their Lewdness, but not that it might prove their own
case, if their Governors please to call them Seditious, as it fell out. For
their Thirty sent to Lacedemon, to desire a Garrison, pretending to cut off the
Seditious; but by entertaining the Captain to his liking, they grew bold with
the Chief Citizens, and shed much Blood. Theramenes one of them, showing his
dislike, after they had chosen Three thousand Citizens of their liking, to
assist in the Government, with privilege, in question of Death to be tried by
Law, and not at Commandment of the Thirty; they call Theramenes in question, as
without the privilege, and put him to death.

. 3. After this, the Tyrants Outrage made many good Citizens fly to Thebes,
where Thrasybulus, and about Seventy more, resolve to free Athens of the
Tyrants, and take Phyla, a strong place in the Territory of Athens, which the
Tyrants, in vain, sought to recover, their strength increasing to a Thousand,
with which they got Pyraeus, the Suburbs of Athens on the Port, and slew
Seventy of the Three Thousand which came to expect them, and Critias the chief
Tyrant. The Tyrants send for Aid to Sparta, and Lysander is sent with Forces,
and Pausanias followed, not to overthrow Thrasybulus, but after some show, to
work Peace, which he did, sending the Thirty, and others that were the cause of
the Tumult, to Sparta,

CHAP. X. Cyrus the Younger, his Expedition into Persia.
. 1. ARtaxerxes Mnemon, or the mindful, succeeded in Persia, Established by his
Father; who also at his Mother Parasali's earnest entreaty, pardoned his
Brother Cyrus's aspiring, and Established him Viceroy in Lydia, and those
parts.

. 2. Cyrus after such Disgrace from his Brother, who spared his Life only for
his Mothers importunity, of whose Favor he presumed; knowing also the
Affections of his People, and presuming upon the Lacedaemonians formerly aided
by him; thought his Interest to the Crown worth prosecuting. He sends to
Sparta, which commands their Admiral to be at his command; he seized on some
Towns subject to Tissaphernes; furnished the Grecian Captains with Money to
List Soldiers to be at his Command; then making a show of Besieging Miletus,
he calls over his Grecian Forces, and suddenly set forward toward Persia.

. 3. Tissaphernes posting to the Court, his News caused great Exclamations and
Fear, in which the King gathered his Army of Nine hundred Thousand, with which
yet he durst not venture the Trial. The Greeks, which follow Cyrus are, with
difficulty allured over Euphrates, etc. but being over, resolved to find out
Artaxerxes, who was retiring to the utmost Border of his Kingdom, had not
Teribazus, one of his Captains, dissuaded him.

. 4. Cyrus, with his Army of One hundred thousand, drawing toward his Brother,
who had Entrenched Forty Miles in Length, Thirty Foot broad, and Eighteen deep,
and yet left it; at length when he thought he had been fled, was forced
suddenly to Arm. The Greeks not used to encounter such Multitudes, began to
distrust their own Courage; yet upon the Onset, found they had to do with so
many contemptible Cowards, who fled without consideration. Cyrus, glad to see
it, and being thereupon adopted King, yet desires to appear worthy of it, put
himself with Six hundred Horse, upon a Squadron of Six thousand which fled
before him; and being left by his Followers which pursued the Enemy, he, again
spying the King in the midst of his Troops, brake in with a Jew, and pierced
the King's Curace, but was presently slain, and his Head and right Hand being
cut off, were showed on a Spear Point, recalled thy flying Persians, who before
were crying on Cyrus for Mercy. After this, the King and Tissaphernes met, and
followed the Greeks, which knew not of Cyrus's Death; who seeing the King
following, turned to him. And he, wheeling about, left them, and took an Hill,
from which they forced him, and then returned to their Quarters.

. 5. Artaxerxes could not rejoice in his Success, when he thought what Report
the Greeks would make of the baseness of his People, which might encourage the
Greeks to visit his Country with more Force than he would like. The next
Morning therefore, when they knew from Ariaeus of Cyrus's end, he sent Phalinus
a Greek unto them, to require their Arms, and to sue for Mercy; which they
scorned, etc.

. 6. The Greeks, next Night, came to Ariaeus, a principal Commander under
Cyrus, who tarried for them; but Four hundred Foot and 40 Horse, all
Thraconians, fled to the King Ariaeus, who being offered by them to make him
King, wanted the Courage to venture for it, but was glad to covenant with them
for mutual assistance in returning, which he directed. The next day they
lighted on the King's Army, which gave them way; yea the King sent to them
about a Peace, and appointed them a place where to have Victuals.

. 7. Tissaphernes comes to them like a Fox to entrap them, pretending his Love
to them, being Neighbor to Greece, and promising his Mediation to the King, if
they will send a mild Answer; and to Conduct them home. Hereupon a League is
sworn betweeen them, and he returned to the King, and after Twenty days came
back to them, and set forward. The Greeks grew jealous of his long stay, and
would not have stayed, had not Clearchus their General persuaded them, relying
too much on Tissaphernes's Oath. Tissaphernes, after some days March together,
found opportunity upon Clearchus, seeking to assure him of the Greeks good Will
to him (which he seemed to doubt) to draw all their Captains to his Camp,
promising to tell them which of them it was which sought secretly to raise
dissension between them. Thus having drawn them into his Snare, he sent
Clearchus, and other four Colonels to the King, but slew the rest; then he sent
Ariaeus as from the King, to require them to yield, but in vain.

. 8. The Greeks amused at the loss of their Leaders, neglected to consult what
Supplies to make, 'till Xenophon, whose Learning supplied the want of
Experience, awaked them; who thereupon is entreated to take the charge of
Proxenus's Regiment and those Captains; Xenophon made Slings, took Fifty Horses
out of the Carriages, and set Men on their backs; taught the Archers to shoot
compass, which they had not used; and thus kept off the Persian Archers. Thus
their Valor made them way through all difficulties; so that Tissaphernes fell
to his surest course, to distress them by burning all the Country before them.

. 9. The Greeks passing through the Carduchi, a Fierce Swift People, and
skilful Archers with the Sling, were much troubled with them seven days; and
came to Centriles, which runs between them and Armenia, where Forces were
laid to hinder their Passage; but finding a Ford, they chased away the Persian
Subjects, and left the Carduchi, which seem to have Inhabited the Mountain
Niphates, not far from Tygris Spring; contrary to Ptolomy, who places them far
East, upon the River Cyrus, in Medea.

. 10. The Greeks being come to Armenia, passed Sixty Miles to the heads of
Tygris, and as far beyond peaceably, 'till Teribazus encountered them at the
River Teleboa. He Governing for the Persians, pretended to favor the Greeks,
and made a Covenant with them; but in their security lying in wait for them,
was discovered by a Soldier, taken by the Greeks, who found him out on the
sudden, and made him leave his Rich Pavilion behind him. Thence they went to
the Northward, near the Fountains of Euphrates, where they found store of
Victuals, etc.

. 11. The Greeks came to the River Phasis, and passed those Nations, the
Phasians, and Chalybeans; the first fled with all Provision into strong Holds,
of which one was forced, and yielded store of Cattle. The Fierce Chalybeans
afflicted them much, and fought with them hand to hand; the Scythians used them
kindly at Ginias, whose Governor led them to Mount Moschici, whence they saw
the Euxine-Sea. Then they came to Trabisond, or Trapezus, a Colonie of Greeks
in Colchos, whose People used them with Hostility, which was well requited,
while they rested at Trapezus.

. 12. The Greeks at Trabisond desiring Shipping for their Men's easy Travel,
which the Lacedemonian Admiral who lay there promised to provide. But lying
long in expectation of Ships, and Victuals failing, they sent their Sick, with
Women, Children, and Baggage by Sea; and the Army being Eight Thousand Six
Hundred Men, went by Land to Cerasus, a Greek Town, as was Cotione their next
Lodging, both Colonies from Sinope, as was Trapezus. Here the Inhabitants
Discourtesie made the Soldiers to use violence, which the Sinopians took ill,
and threatened Revenge. Xenophon excused it by necessity, which if it would not
serve, he showed how little he feared them; upon which considerations they
yielded.

. 13. Xenophon, while Ships are preparing, intended to build a City
thereabouts; which being discovered, they most disliked the Design; and Sinope
and Heraclea much feared it; and to prevent it, promise both Ships, and Money.
The Ships are sent without Money, which made the Captains fear a Mutiny, having
held the Soldiers in hope of it; but upon coming of Cherisophus from the
Lacedemonian Admiral, with a few Galleys, and promise of Money at their arrival
in Greece, they set out from the Port of Sinope.

. 14. The Greeks drawing homeward, thought fit to choose an Absolute Commander,
desiring Xenophon to take it upon him, which he refused, knowing the trouble of
leading Voluntaries. Cherisophus accepts the offer, but was soon deposed, for
not favoring their intent to surprise Heraclea, which had been friendly to
them. For four Thousand four Hundred of them being Arcadians, and Achaeans,
chose new Leaders, and forsook the rest; but had been overthrown in Bithynia,
if Xenophon and his Company had not come in.

. 15. Xenophon forces the Persians and Thracians in Bithynia, and ravages that
part about Cape Calpas, and carries the Spoil to Chrysopolis near Chalcedon,
and Sold it. Tissaphernes doubting their coming into Phrygia, procured the
Admiral of Sparta to lead them out into Europe, and so ended that famous
Expedition, which opened the way for Greece to visit Persia the second time, to
the translating of the Empire.

CHAP. XI. Of the Greeks Affairs, under the Lacedaemonians Command.
. 1. GReece understanding the effeminate Baseness of the Asiaticks, desired an
undertaking of that huge unweildy Empire; but were hindered by home Distractions
through the Theban War; which called the Lacedemonian Power out of Asia.
Xenophon's retreat from Babylon, to Greece, four thousand two hundred and
eighty one Mile, in one Year and three Months, through Enemies Countries, I
know not whether any Age has paralleled; Conon the Briton with six Thousand
Men, came home through all the breadth of Italy, and length of France, in
despite of the Emperor Theodosius; which Retreat was like, rather than equal.

. 2. Timbro the Grecian General in Asia, receiving Xenophon's Men, took in
Towns which fell from Tissaphernes, but for his Oppressions is deposed, and
Dercillidas a Spartan succeeded; who bearing a grudge to Pharnabasus, and not
favored by Tissaphernes, the other Persian Governors in lower Asia, upon
appointment with Tissaphernes, entered Aeolis, and in few days subdued it;
wasted Bithynia, took Atarne, a strong City, and Cheronia, with Eleven Towns in
it. Then he was Commanded from Sparta, to attempt Caria, the Seat of
Tissaphernes. In defense whereof, Pharnabasus joined with Tissaphernes, by
which means the Greeks were over-match'd, being forsaken by the Ionians and
Islanders; yet Tissaphernes feared to Fight, well remembering Xenophon's
Retreat; and so contrary to Pharnabazus's Council, a Truce is concluded.

. 3. The Lacedaemonians being now at leisure, resolve to revenge some private
Wrongs done by the Eleans, who were Precedents of the Olympian Games, and
accordingly forced them to free the Cities which had been subject to them, and
overthrew their Walls. This pretense of Liberty, was their usual ground of
Wars; though after that, they made the same Towns little better than Vassals to
Sparta.

. 4. Agesilaus newly made King of Sparta, ambitious of the honor of Victory
against the Persians, with a great Army set forward to Aulis in Baeotia, to
Sacrifice there, as Agamemnon had done long before; but the Thebans, Lords of
that Country, interrupted him. Agesilaus resented this Contumely, pursued his
Enterprise, and landed at Ephesus, where Tissaphernes entertained him with a
Treaty of Peace; seeking only to gain time for the better supplying himself
with Men and Money; which being come, he sent to Agesilaus to be gone, or to
maintain his Post by force. Agesilaus answered, He was glad he had to deal with
an Enemy, which by Perjury deserved vengeance from Heaven. So seeming to
prepare for Caria, where Tissa^hernes was prepared for him, he went directly to
^^rygia, which he plundered, 'till Tissaphernes's Cavalry came up, whom he could
not well repel for want of Horses, and therefore returned to Ephesus to
furnish himself with them; and as soon as the Season served, he entered and took
Baeotis in Tissaphernes's Country, overthrew his Cavalry in the Plain of
Meander, for want of their Infantry, and took their Camp, which was very Rich.
The King his Master distrusting him, and seeing how odious he was to the
Greeks, thought fit for procuring Peace, to take off his Head by Tithraustes,
whom he sent to succeed him. Which being done, he sent to Agesilaus, to
certify the Author of the War was dead; and that the King was content that the
Greeks should enjoy their Liberty, paying his Tribute. The Answer is referred
to the Council of Sparta, and 'till it came, Agesilaus is content for Thirty
Talents, at his request, to transfer the War against Pharnabasus. Thus these
Lieutenants valued not the King's Affairs further than in their own Provinces;
the foolish Custom of those Kings being to be guided by Eunuchs, and
Concubines, Rewarding or Punishing the Provincials, as they got, or lost.

. 5. Agesilaus wastes Phrygia, took Pharnabasus's Palace, and drove him out of
his Camp, etc. Pharnabasus seeks some good Composition, representing the many
good Offices done to the State of Sparta in the Wars with Athens. Agesilaus
replieth, That having War with his Master, they were forced to offend him; but
if he would revolt from the King, they would Establish him a free King over his
Province. Pharnabasus answering plainly, That while his Master trusted him, he
would be their Enemy; but if the Charge were taken from him, he would shift
sides, and come over to them. So Agesilaus removes out of Phrygia, having made
a violent Enemy, of an honorable Friend.

. 6. Tithraustes perceiving Agesilaus designed not to leave Asia, took a wise
Course, and sent Fifty Talents to be dispersed among the Principal of Thebes,
and caused the Argives and Corinthians to raise War against Sparta, whom they
formerly hated. The Quarrel is framed, from the Locrians paying a Rent to the
Thebans, which the Phocians claimed, and for which they made a Distress by
violence; whereupon the Thebans invaded Phocis in Hostile manner, which flies
to Sparta for aid. The Spartans send Lysander to raise Men about Phocis, and to
attend Pausanias the other King, with Forces out of Peloponesus; but Corinth
refused to assist. Thebes knowing how many Succors Lacedemon should have, even
of those which affected them little, sent to Athens to beg assistance, and
obtained it by Thrasibulus's means; who in the time of the Thirty Tyrants,
being Banished, was courteously used at Thebes, while Pausanias stayed for the
Confederates. Lysander was slain at the Siege he laid to Halyartus; whither
after Pausanias came, and that the Athenian Aid was come to the Thebans, he
departed; for which he was Condemned, and fled to Tegea.

. 7. The Thebans upon this Success, had the Argives, Corinths, Eubaeans, and
others, come into Confederation; so that Sparta seeing the danger, sent for
Agesilaus. Pharnabasus considering how much the Greeks Division imported the
King his Master, as before he had advanced the Lacedaemonians Sea-Forces to the
Overthrow of the Athenians, so now he seeks to raise the Athenian, and break
the Lacedemonian, who for three Talents had sold his Favor: He therefore
furnished Conon, and the Athenians with Eight Ships, and gave him Command of a
great Navy, with which he destroyed the Spartan Fleet at Cnidus, in requital of
the loss of the Athenian Navy at Aegos Potamos, surpised by Lysander. Conon
thus returned to Athens, with a strong Navy, and much Gold.

. 8. The Lacedaemonians for some years support their Reputation by some
Victories gotten by Agesilaus, 'till Iphicrates the Athenian General, gained a
great Victory over them at Lechaeum, and that by Pharnabasus's persuasion;
promising them to Rule by their own Laws. The Cities in Asia expelled the
Spartan Governors, Abidos only excepted; and Thrasibulus the Athenian, with a
Fleet had taken Bizantium, Chalcedon, Lesbos, etc.

. 9. The Lacedaemonians not able to maintain War against Men as good as
themselves, assisted with Persian Treasure, crave Peace with Artaxerxes,
offering to leave the Greeks in Asia to him, and set the Islands and Towns in
Greece all free; so that Greece should never be able to molest the King. This
Offer was not accepted, so War is continued in Asia against Strutha, the King's
Lieutenant there, and in Greece among themselves; but by means of Antalcidas
the King, they made Peace.

. 10. Olynthus, a strong City in Thrace, grew formidable to their Neighbors,
having subjected diverse Cities, which made the rest, even in Macedon, to crave
aid of Lacedemon, which brought it under; and in their way Thebes is surprised
by Treason.

. 11. Thebes recovered by a Plot laid by certain Banished Citizens, and
Phylladas a Scribe of the Town; who, at a Feast promising to bring them the
Choice Women of the Town to the Embraces of the Attenders, brought the Banished
in Women's Attire, being come secretly, who slew them, and freed the City.

CHAP. XII. Thebes Flourished from the Battle of Leuctra, to that of Mantinaea.
. 1. THE Lacedaemonians were Stout and Grave in all Proceedings, but
dishonorable in neglecting all Respects, which hindered the Commodity of
Sparta, which often brought them shame and loss, when the execution was
committed to weak conceited Men. Thus Thebes began to hold them hard to it, and
Athens began to surround Peloponesus with their Navy. But Athens seeing Thebes
to incroach on her weak Neighbors, of which, some were Dependents on them,
whom yet they could not succor, being engaged in such Wars, resolve to make
Peace in Greece, according to the Form Antalcidas brought from Persia. The
Thebans being sent to, agree, and meet at Sparta with the rest; where being
required to subscribe to the freedom of the Boeotians, Epaminondas required
that Sparta should do the same for Laconia, being no more subject to Sparta,
than Boeotia to Thebes. Agesilaus hating Thebes, did thereupon, passionately
dash the name of Thebes out of the League; and in have sent Cleombrotus, one of
their Kings, with all his Power, who was slain at Leuctra, and the Flower of
the Army; after which loss, Sparta never recovered it self; but Thebes grew to
such Command, that in a short time, they brought Seventy Thousand strong to the
Gates of Sparta.

. 2. The Athenians taking upon them to manage the Peace, calling the Deputies
of all the Confederated Estates, conclude the general Liberty of all Towns
small and great. The Mantuans hereupon build their Town which Sparta had forced
them to demolish, and allie themselves with such Arcadian Towns as most hated
Sparta. But by a Faction among the Arcadians, the Lacedaemonians are called in,
and Agesilaus led them, but effected little. Epaminandos of Thebes assisted,
with diverse other Countries, which followed Thebes, joining with the Arcadians,
ravaged Laconia, where since the Dorians entered, Six Hundred past, where never
Enemies set foot, yet durst not the Lacedaemonians come out of Sparta to succor
it; so he rebuilt Messene, long ago destroyed by Sparta, calling home the old
Inhabitants.

. 3. Sparta after this, required no more the leading of the Army, or other
Precedence, only the Athenians yielded them the Leading by Land every Five Days
successively with them; a conclusion of vain Ambition, as the next Invasion of
Peloponesus showed. And this Example bred the like emulation in the Arcadians,
who thereupon will have their turn to lead with the Thebans; which Insolency
bred suspicion in the Thebans, and Hatred in the rest; so that in the next
Enterprise of the Spartans upon them, their Conceits overthrew them.

. 4. The Arcadians misfortune rejoiced the Thebans, as without whose aid
Enterprises proved ill, and by whom the Lacedaemonians were kept under; the
Thessalians were protected, and the Macedonian quarrels so moderated, that
Philip Son of Amyntas was committed to them as an Hostage. In this Reputation
(little short of a general Command of all Greece) they sent Famous Pelopidas to
Artaxerxes for his Alliance, which he granted, rejecting the contrary Suits of
the other Grecian States, who had been very incommodious to him, and his
Predecessors, where Thebes had always showed good affection to Persia. Besides,
as they were no Seamen, and so the less to be doubted in Asia, so their
strength might secure him against the rest, who now might much molest him in
the Revolt of all his Maritime Provinces, by sending them aid, without which he
easily reduced them; for the time set by Divine Providence for the Persians
Fall was not yet come. The Thebans thus made Protectors of the common Peace by
the King, yet got nothing, the other Estates refusing.

. 5. Thebes being grown by the mutual envy of Athens and Sparta, which being
brought low, are glad to combine against her; all the other Estates of Greece
are divided between them. The Arcadians had renounced the Lacedaemonians, their
old Leaders, and are become doubtful Adherents to the Thebans, without whose
consent they had made Peace with the Athenians. Epaminondas therefore with the
Thebans thought to invade Peloponesus, before the Arcadians turned Enemies, and
while Corinth in their way stood Neutral, and the Arcadians were yet in
disorder, and had sent to Thebes to complain of the Captains in Tegea. This
Complaint was answered, That their Peace with Athens was the Cause; but
Epaminondas would come by them, and prove their Fidelity by their aid in his
intended War. The Arcadians amazed at this Answer, send to Athens for help, and
to Sparta, offering to help against the Invasion; who kindly accepted it, not
standing upon point of Leading.

. 6. Epaminondas, besides great Forces raised out of other parts of Greece, had
all the strength the Argives and Messenians could make; and while he stayed at
Nemia, intercepted Intelligence that the Athenian Forces which he meant to
encounter, would come by Sea. Thereupon he decamped, and marched to Tegea, who
with the most of Arcadia declare themselves his. The common Opinion was, that
Epaminondas would first attempt the revolted Arcadians, therefore the
Lacedemonian Captains fortify Mantinaea, and send for Agesilaus from Sparta,
with the small Forces that were there; so that Epaminondas with speed and
secrecy marching to Sparta, had surpised it, had not Agesilaus returned with
precipitation, upon Intelligence by an unknown Fellow. Epaminondas disappointed
of this hope, is presented with another; conceiving the Mantineans now fearing
no danger, would disperse themselves abroad in the Fields about their Harvest;
and thereupon sent his Horsemen before to interrupt them. But the Athenians
coming thither, think to meet their Confederates, rescued the distressed
Mantineans in the Fields, and presently after came all the Boeotians Power, and
the Lacedaemonians and their Friends were at hand.

. 7. Epaminondas failing in both these Attempts, to prevent the decay of the
Terror of his Name in Peloponesus, resolved to check their Courage in the
first growth, and to leave a Memorable Character of this Expedition. Having
therefore warned his Men to prepare to fight for the Sovereignty of all Greece,
he made show to the Enemy by intrenching, to decline them, so to allay their
heat, and breed security, wherein he might suddenly strike amazement in them,
by breaking in, as it happened. The Thebans had the Honor of the Day, by forcing
all their Enemies out of the Field, but lost their incomparable Commander
Epaminondas, by the stroke of a Dart in his Breast, of which he died when the
Truncheon was pulled out; but first advised the Thebans to make Peace, as
wanting a General, when he heard that Lobidas and Diophantes, two Principal Men
of War were slain. Thus died the Worthiest Man that ever Greece bred, and
hardly matched in any Age or Country.

. 8. The Mantinean Battle was the greatest that had been ever in the Country of
Natives, in which all Greece were interessed, which never had better Soldiers,
or braver Commanders. The issue made all willing of a General Peace, wherein
was concluded every Estate should enjoy what it then held, and none forced to
depend on other; the Messenians being included in this League, for which the
Lacedaemonians refuse it. After this, Athens and Sparta had leisure to seek
Wealth in foreign Wars, as did Agesilaus, who sent to assist Tachos King of
Egypt, descended from Amyrtaeus, who rebelled against Darius Nothus. But
Agesilaus Traitorously fled from the King, to his Rebels, so that he was forced
to fly to Persia, and Nectanebus succeeded, who Rewarded Agesilaus with two
Hundred and Thirty Talent of Silver; with which, returning home, he died.

THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. BOOK IV. Part I. Of the Macedonian Kingdom, from
Philip, to the Race of Antigonus.
CHAP. I. Of Philip, Father to Alexander the Great.
. 1. MAcedon at this time was little valued by the Greeks, whose Glory in their
Persian Victory did so pamper them, that they neglected all Nations but
themselves, especially the Macedonians, lately weakened by Neighboring Princes,
in the time of Amyntas Father of Philip. But it fared with the Greeks, as it
commonly falls out with Men of Note in the World, that they often fall by the
hands which they least fear; and they considered not, that all great
Alterations are sudden and violent, in which it is ever late to repair decayed
Banks, when enraged Rivers are once swollen; Greece was far from care to repair
their Fences between them and this Inundation, that they rather brake them
down, by wasting each other; so that as Orosius said, the Cities of Greece lost
all Command, by striving each of them to Command all. Macedon, so called, from
Macedon Son of Osiris, bordereth on the North; whose Kings were from Temenus,
of the Race of Hercules, and Argives by Nation. Caranos of Argos Planted a
Colony there, upon surprise of Edessa, about six years after Arbaces became
King of Medea.

. 2. Philip the Second, the youngest Son of Amyntas II. Educated under
Epaminondas in Thebes, where he was in Hostage, escaped thence in the first
year of the Hundred and Fifth Olympiad, which was three Hundred Ninety and
Three years after the Building of Rome. Being returned to Macedon, environed
with many Enemies, he took upon him to Command, as a Protector of his young
Nephew, Son of Percidas his Brother, late King; but his fruitful Ambition soon
overgrew his Modesty, and was easily persuaded by the People, to take upon him
the Absolute Rule, as the necessity of the State required a King both Prudent
and Active; for as the King of Thrace sought to set Palesanias, and the
Athenians Argaeus, the Sons of Aeropus the late Usurper, so the Illyrians and
Pannonians made daily incursions on all sides. Philip to ease himself of these
heavy burdens, corrupted the Pannonian's Men of War with Money, and brought the
Thracian King from Pausania, and then made head against the Athenians, and
Argaeus, whom he overthrew, and forced the Athenians to desire Peace.

. 3. Philip had now leisure to look Northward, invaded his bordering Enemies,
and slew Bardilus King of Illyrium, recovering what he held in Macedon, and
forced the Pannonians to Tribute. Then hasting to Thessalia, his South
Neighbor, he took Larissa upon the River Peneus; but before he would proceed
with Thessaly, he made sure of the entrance out of Thrace, winning Amphipolis,
seated upon the bordering River; he also recovered Pydna, and Crenidus, which
he called Phillipi. He also entered League with the Olynthians, his Father's
mortal Enemies, and gave them Pydna, yet not designing they should hold it, or
their own.

. 4. Philip by the Phocian or Sacred War, in the second year of the hundred and
sixth Olympiad, was drawn into Greece. This War grew by occasion that the
Phocians having Plowed up one piece of ground belonging to Delphos's Temple,
were by the Thebans prosecution fined a great Sum at the General Council of
Greece, and for refusing, are Condemned to the Sword. The Phocians hereupon
plundered Apollo's Temple, which yielded them Ten thousand Talents; with which
they hired many Men, but after three Victories, were beaten by the Thebans,
Thessalians, etc. In the mean time, Philip at the Siege of Methon lost an Eye;
shortly after his Forces were overthrown in Thessaly, by the Phocians and
Thracians, whom in the next Battle he defeated, slew six thousand, and took
three thousand, and freed Thessaly of the Tyrant Lycophron, who had by force
taken the City of Pheres.

. 5. Philip after this quarreled with the Olynthians, a powerful People, who
had a contest with the Macedonians, for protecting two of his half Brethren
against his Sword; for his Quarrels were balanced by his Ambition, which made
all things lawful, that any way served his turn; whether Murder of Brethren,
breach of Faith, corrupting by Money, esteeming no place strong, where his Ass
laden with Gold could enter.

Therefore having overthrown them twice, and forced them to keep their City, he
corrupted two Citizens, which gave him entrance; where he slew his Brethren,
and sold the Citizens for Slaves. Thus he Conquered more by Corruption and
Fraud, than by Force; as did Philip of Spain.

. 6. Philip at the Request of the Boeotians, sent them aid against the
Phocians, sufficient to retard, but not to end the War, so to weaken the
strength of Greece. Artaxerxes Ochus also sent them One Hundred and Eighty
Thousand Crowns; but upon further request of his own presence, whom they
promise to give entrance into their Territory, he went with Power sufficient to
give Law to both Parties. Upon whose coming, Phatlecus the Phocian Leader,
fearing to shock with him, made his Peace with him, and with a Regiment of
Eight Thousand Men withdrew into Peloponesus, and left the Phocians to his
mercy, who made them Slaves.

. 7. Philip afer this slew many Thousands of the Illyrians and Dardanians,
brought Thrace to Tribute, but was forced to leave Perinthus and Bizantium
relieved by Athens, Chios, and Rhodes; and when he sought Peace with Athens,
they refuse it, upon Demosthenes's Eloquent persuasions. Putting up this
Affront, he supplied himself, by taking Seventy Merchants Ships; and with new
Forces entered Scythia, with Alexander his Son, but prospered not.

. 8. Philip after Eight Years spent Northward, was again called by the Greeks
against Amphissa, who refused to obey the Decree of the Amphyctians, or General
Council of Greece. To this Enterprise he needed no drawing on, but forthwith
entered Phocis, won Plataea, and subdued all the Region. Athens, by persuasion
of Demosthenes, drawing the Thebans to join, rejected Philip's reasonable
Conditions of Peace, and put their Freedom to the chance of one Battle at
Cheronia, wherein they were overthrown; yet Philip attempted not their City, as
he put a Garrison in Thebes, etc. Shortly after at Corinth he is chosen, and
styled first Commander of all Greece, by the general States; whereupon he
raised an Army of great strength against Persia, Commanded by Attalus and
Parmenio, who transported it into Asia, while he intended the Marriage of
Cleopatra his Daughter, to Alexander King of Epirus. At this Marriage Feast he
was slain by one Pausanias, of his Guard, for not doing him right upon Attalus,
who had made him drunk, and then procured his Carnal abusing, etc. Olympias
encouraged the Murder of her Husband. Just. l. 9.


. 9. Alexander's Greatness was so well founded by his Father, that the
finishing it with ease was more glorious to him, than the beginning was to
Philip; for besides his subduing that Famous Nation of Greece, he left him many
Choice Commanders, as worthy of Crowns as himself.

CHAP. II. Of Alexander the Great.
. 1. ALexander succeeded Philip his Father after Twenty Five Years Reign; being
a Prince no less Valiant by Nature, than by Education, enriched with all sorts
of good Learning. He entered upon his Reign Four Hundred and Seventeen Years
after Rome's Building, being Twenty Years Old; which young Years encouraged his
Neighboring Nations to consult about recovery of Liberty, which he prevented
with much Expedition. For after Revenge of his Father's death, and freeing his
own Nation from all Exactions, and Bodily Slavery, and winning with Clemency,
such as feared his Disposition to Cruelty, and using Austerity to such as
contemned his Youth, He made a Journey into Peloponesus, and so well exercised
his Spirits among them, that by the Council of the State of Greece, he was
Elected General- against the Persians, which Enterprise possessed all his
Thoughts. But the Persian Gold having guilt Demosthenes's Tongue, he persuaded
the Athenians, with the Thebans and Lacedaemonians, to stand for their Ancient
Liberty, and gave it out that Alexander was slain. Indeed Policy, as it is now
adays, defined by Fals^hood and Knavery, holding, that devised Rumors and
Lies, though they serve the turn but for a day or two, are greatly available; but
in all my Observations I have found the Success as ridiculous as the Invention;
for Men finding themselves abused by such Baits, at other times neglect true
Reports, which much concerns them to believe. Alexander much grieved to have
his Thoughts diverted, and time lost from his Persian Enterprise, made such
expedition, that he brought the first News himself of his preparation to
Athens, which, as upon a sudden fainting, presently submitted, and easily
pardoned, by persuasion of Alexander's desire to see Persia; as Wise Men are
not easily drawn from great Purposes, nor by occasion easily put off. Then he
subdued the Nations bordering North of Macedon; but yet could not get out of
Europe, 'till he had demolished Thebes, which attempted his Garrison in the
Citadel, and obstinately refused to yield up the Authors of their Rebellion.

. 2. Alexander having without cause given, put to death his Mother-in-Laws
Kinsmen, advanced by his Father, and some of his own, whom he suspected; took
also with him into Asia such Tributary Princes as he doubted, by unjust Cruelty
to secure all things; yet the End fell out contrary to the Policy which
Ambition commended to him; all his Planting was soon rooted up; whom he most
trusted, were the most Traitorous, and his Mother, Friends, and Children fell
by as merciless a Sword as his own, and Confusion left his dead Body in the
Grave. He passed into Asia with Thirty Two Thousand Foot, and Five Thousand
Horse, all Old Soldiers, which he landed near Troy; where at the River of
Granick, he was forced to climb up the deep Bank, guarded against him with many
Thousand Persians; of whom he slew Twenty Thousand Foot, and Two Thousand Five
Hundred Horse. But this slaughter must be taken rather on the Back than the
Breast; for had they stood to it, Alexander must needs have lost above Twenty
Thousand Foot, and Two Thousand Five Hundred Horse, especially if the Persian
Horsemen had fought fiercely; and the Grecians in Darius's Pay fought it out to
the last Man, as Plutarch Reports.

. 3. Alexander's Soldiers were greatly encouraged by winning this Passage; and
all the Country so terrified, that all the lesser Asia yielded without a Blow.
For in all Invasions, where the Invaded are beaten, upon great advantage of
place, they will easily be persuaded that such an Enemy upon equal terms can
hardly be resisted; the Assailant therefore in such Cases of defending Places,
is to be opposed with the ablest Forces; yet fewest Places of great circuit are
so fenced, wherein one Entrance or other is not to be forced by an able Enemy;
as the Alps, wherein Francis the French King found entrance to Milan, though
the Switzers guarded them; Xerxes forced the entrance at Thermopylae; Cyrus the
younger, and Alexander, found the Gates of Taurus open into Cilicia; Julius
Agricola found Fords into Anglesey, which made the amazed Britains submit, etc.
It was therefore well done of Alexander, to pass the River in the Face of their
Enemies, without seeking an easier Passage, beating off the Enemy in their
strength, leaving no hope of Succor to their Followers, in so unable
Protectors. After this, Sardis, Ephesus, Trallis, and Magnesia, yielded them
selves, and so enjoyed their own Laws; but he demolished Halicarnassus, for its
obstinate resistance. Then he entered Caria, and restored Ada the Queen,
expelled by Darius's Lieutenant, and Lycia, Pamphylia, Pisidia, and all the
Seacoasts of lesser Asia, and then entered Celenas on Meander, and so through
Phrygia toward the Euxine-Sea, and so to Gordium, where he cut the Gordian-Knot
asunder. He also expelled the Persians out of the Isles of Lesbos, Scio, and
Coas, which he committed to two of his Captains, to clear the Seacoast on his
back, and then removed to Ancira on the River Sangarius, as is Gordium, and so
to Paphlagonia. Here he heard of the death of Menon, Darius's Lieutenant, which
much heartened him, being the only Captain he respected of all his Enemies. For
so much has the Spirit of some one Man excelled, as it has undertaken and
effected the alteration of the greatest States, as the erection of Monarchs,
Conquest of Kingdoms, guiding handfuls of Men against Multitudes of equal
bodily strength, contriving Victories beyond all hope and Discourse of Reason,
converting the fearful Passions of his own Followers into Magnanimity, and the
Valor of his Enemies into Cowardice. Such Spirits have been stirred up in
sundry Ages to erect and cast down, and to bring all Things, Persons, and
States, to the same certain ends which that Infinite Spirit of the Universe,
Piercing, Moving, and Governing All Things has ordained, as which is seen in
this King's Undertaking, etc. who not meeting with a Spirit like his own, was
opposed only with difficulties of Passages, and tedious Journies; and certainly
the things performed by Xenophon, discover as brave a Spirit as Alexander's,
working no less exquisitely, though the effects were less material, as were the
Forces and Power of Commanders by which it wrought. But he who would find the
exact Pattern of a Noble Commander, must look upon such as Epaminondas, that in
courting Worthy Captains, better followed than themselves, have by their
singular Virtue over-top'd them, that would not have yielded one foot to
another. Such as these seldom obtain to great Empires, seeing it is harder to
master the equal Forces of one hardy well-ordered State, than an unweildy
Empire of many servile Nations; and that only Brave Roman Caesar is the
Example, whose exquisite managing attained the Greatness.

Alexander hastes to the Streights of Cilicia, to prevent Darius, which
Arsenes the Governor had left to a weak Guard, which abandoned it, when he
pretending to wast the Country, withdrew himself further off; so the Province
came easily into Alexander's Power.

. 4. Darius approached with his Army of more than Two Hundred and Ninety
Thousand of diverse Nations, says Curtius; Four Hundred Thousand after Iustine,
and Six Hundred Thousand in Plutarch. Curtius describes the manner of his
coming with such Pompous Riches, Gorgeous Apparel, a Pageant of his Gods, Train
of Ladies attending his Mother, Wife, Children, with their Nurses, Eunuchs,
Concubines, all sumptuously Apparel'd; with Six Hundred Mules, and Three
Hundred Camels laden with Treasure, etc. Such was the Train of this May Game
King; so unmarshalled, effeminate, unarmed, but with Gold and glittering
Garments, as would have encouraged the nakedest Nation in the World against
them. We find by common Experience, that no discourse of Magnanimity, National
Virtue, Religion, or Liberty, and whatsoever else is wont to encourage Virtuous
Men, has any force with the Common Soldier, in Comparison of Spoil and
Riches. Rich Ships are Boarded upon all disadvantages, Rich Towns furiously
assaulted, and plentiful Countries willingly invaded. War is willingly made,
and for the most part, with good success against the Richest Nations. For as
the needy are adventurous, so Plenty is wont to shun Peril; and Men which are
well to live, do rather study to live Wealthy, than care to dye Honorable; for
no Man hastes to the Market, where nothing is to be bought but Blows. This
Battle at Issus is no where well described; but we may guess what resistance
was made, if it be true that Curtius says, that of the Persians were slain Two
Hundred Thousand, and of the Macedonians but Two Hundred and Eighty; of which
number, Arianus and others cut off almost half; so that it seems these died
rather by over-labour, in killing, than being killed. Darius found it true now,
what Charedemus a Banished Athenian told him near Babylon, That his rich
delicate confused Multitude, would be more fearful to the Countries through
which they should pass, than to the Long-trained Macedonians, against whom it
were fitter to oppose a competent number of Grecians of equal Courage, having
such abundance of Treasure to do it; for which unpleasing Discourse, the poor
Greek was slain, etc. Desperate is that Princes safety, whose Ear judges what
is profitable, to be too sharp, and will entertain nothing that is unpleasant.
For Liberty in Council is the life of it, which vanishes if it be taken away.
The like Advice was given by the Grecians which served under him, which he set
light by, who entreated him not to fight in the Streights, but to retire into
the Plains of Mesopotamia, where he might environ all the Macedonians, and to
divide his Army into Parts, not committing the Whole to one stroke, etc. But
that Infinite Wisdom of God, which works diversely, does often in the
alteration of Kingdoms and States, take Understanding from Governors; not to
discern of Counsel. Alexander, by Advice of Parmenio, stayed in a place where
Darius could bring no more Hands to fight than he, and utterly overthrew him,
took his Treasure, Wife, Mother, Children, and Train of Ladies, which the
Grecians had advised to leave at Babylon; and Darius casting off his Crown,
hardly escaped. Yet, after this, he writ to Alexander about ransoming his
Women, and some proud Conditions of Peace, which he scorned. Alexander, after
the Victory, made Parmenio Governor of all Phoenicia, which presently
submitted; Zidon's Kingdom, committed to Hephestion, he gave to a Day Labourer
of the Royal Blood, who desired he might bear his Prosperity, as well as he had
done his Adversity.

. 5. Alexander coming near Tire, received from them a Crown of Gold, and store
of Victuals and other Presents; but could not be admitted into the City as he
desired, to offer Sacrifice to Hercules, 'till he erected a Cause-way from the
Main, Eight hundred Furlongs to it, which he did in Seven Months. He put Eight
Thousand to the Sword, Crucified two Thousand on the Shore, and made Thirteen
Thousand Slaves, for that they had barbarously drowned his Messengers. The
Government he gave to Philotus, Son of Parmenio.

. 6. Darius sends again to stay his passage on toward the East, laying down
the difficulties, threatening to compass him in the Plain Countries, and
offering him his Daughter and many Kingdoms for Dowry: Alexander answered, he
offered him what was his own; that he was to give, not to take Conditions; and
disdained all resistances at Rivers, having past the Sea. Parmenio, full of
Years, Honor and Wealth, told Alexander, if he were Alexander, he would accept
his Offer: So would I, said he, If I were Parmenio. Alexander proceeded to
Gaza, defended by Belis for Darius, with much Resolution, where he buried many
Macedonians in the Sands, and was wounded in the Breast; yet took the Town and
caused Belis to be drawn about it, being weak by many Wounds, defending that
Cruelty by Achilles's usage of Hector. From thence he went to Jerusalem, where
Iaddus the High Priest in his Robes met him, whom he fell down before,
remembering he had in Macedon seen such a Priest, which professed the same God,
and encouraged him in his purpose for Persia; so he gave the Jews what
Immunities they desired.

. 7. Alexander turned from thence toward Egypt, where Astaces, Lieutenant unto
Darius, delivered Memphis into his Hands, with 800 Talents of Treasure. There
doting after Deities, he took a desperate Journey to visit Jupiter Hamon,
through the dangerous Sands, that the lying Oracle, might acknowledge him
Jupiter's Son, and so to be Worshipped. Many prodigious Fables feigned
hereabout, look like those of the Spaniards in the West Indies. Curtius's
description of the place disproved. It is Two hundred Miles from any Sea in the
South of the Lybia, having the Nassamons on the West.

. 8. Alexander returns to Memphis, where he committed the Provinces of Egypt
to sundry Governors, according to his Master Aristotle's Rule, That great
Dominion be not committed to any one. Then he gave order for building of
Alexandria; heard Psammonis the Philosopher who brought the haughty King to
confess, That God is the Father of all Men, but acknowledges good Men for his
Children. From thence he led his Army toward Euphrates, where Mazeus abandoned
the defense of the Passage; from whence he Marched toward Tygris, so violent
in its Current and deep, that it had been easy to repel them, who could not
use Bows or Darts, wading together Arm in Arm to withstand the Current. Mazius
having cowardly forsaken the Advantage of the Ford, which no Valor of his
Enemy could have easily won, presents himself with some Companies of Horse,
setting Fire on the Provision of the Country, but too late, for Alexander's
Horsemen saved much.

. 9. Darius's Forces, by Curtius's Report, were Two hundred Thousand Foot, and
Fifty thousand Horse; Arrianus makes them Fourteen hundred thousand in all; it
is probable they were about four hundred thousand, with which Multitude they
thought to overpower their few Enemies in the Plains of Assyria; but Skill and
Practice do more toward Victory, than rude Multitude. Alexander's Army, upon
occasion of an Eclipse of the Moon, are affrighted, but are encouraged by
Egyptian Astrologers. For it had been contrary to all Rule, to have an Army
afraid to Fight. Darius offered great Conditions of Peace, in vain.

. 10. Alexander is advised by Parmenio, to Assault Darius's Camp by Night; that
the sight of the Multitude might breed no Terror; which Counsel is a good
ground of War, as often as few must fight with many; but Alexander will have
Daylight to witness his Valor. Then he gave his Army Rest and store of Food
before the Battle, according to the Rule of War, which says, Men well
refreshed will stand the better to it; for Hunger sights more eagerly within,
than Steel without. His Forces, according to Arrianus, were Forty thousand
Foot, and Seventy thousand Horse; which I take to be his European followers,
besides Egyptians, Syrians, Arabians, Scythians. Of these, Curtius says, three
hundred only were slain, and Forty thousand Persians; others differ. So that as
in the former two, so in this Battle what can we judge, but the Persians, upon
the first Charge, ran away; else had every one but cast a D^rt or a Stone, the
Macedonians could not have bought the Empire so cheap; neither could they have
past the River so easily, if Sixty thousand had been Armed with Spades only.

. 11. Darius after the Rout of his Army, recovered Arbela that Night, with his
Treasure, intends a retreat into Media, while the Macedonians, as he supposed
(but was deceived) would attempt Babylon, Susa, etc. Rich Cities. Alexander
pursues, and enters Arbela, and possesses the Treasure, while Darius flies,
and then took his way to Babylon, which Mazius and the Captain of the Castle,
rendered with the Treasure. Here he rested thirty four days, spent in such
Voluptuous Pleasure, as made the Macedonians forget the Hardness of their
Military Discipline. Here he erected Bands of One thousand, called Chiliarchs,
bestowed on such as in the late War had best deserved. This City and Territory
he left in Charge with Three of his own Captains, gracing Mazeus with the Title
of Lieutenant. Then he entered the Province Satrapen^, and so to Susa on the
River Euleus in Persia, which Abulites gave up with Fifty thousand Talents of
Silver Bullion, and Twelve Elopha's, which he committed to some Macedonians,
giving Abulites only the Title of Lieutenant; as he did after to Teridates of
Persepolis; observing well, That Traitors to their own Kings are never to be
trusted alone in great matters, wherein Falsehood may redeem their lost Estate.
Vassals of Fortune love only their Kings Prosperity, not Person.

. 12. Alexander advancing toward Persepolis, was much worsted by Ariobarzanes
at the Streights between the Mountains, which divide Susiana and Persia. But by
a Lycian which lived there, he found another way, and came suddenly upon
Ariobarzanes, and forced him; who not finding entrance into Persepolis,
returned with a second Charge upon the Macedonians, and was slain. Teridates,
another of Darius's trusty Grandees, sends to Alexander to make haste to
Persepolis before the People pillaged the Treasury, which at that day, was the
Richest in the World. This place Alexander committed to Nicarides, a Creature
of his own, and left the Body of his Army there, while he with a Thousand
Horse, and some choice Foot, not able to stand still, would in the Winter see
the parts of Persia covered with Snow; when his Footmen were impatient of that
extreme travail, he left his Horse to bear a part with them: But I rather
commend him who seeks wisely to prevent Extremities, than rash People which
vaunt what they have endured with Common Soldiers. Caesar's first care was for
Victuals; and he which will describe that Beast (War) must begin at his Belly,
said Coligni. Alexander returns to Persepolis, where he smothered all his
Reputation in Cups, and Familiarity with Harlots, of which, Thais caused him to
burn that sumptuous City Persepolis.

. 13. Darius, in Media, having about Forty thousand Soldiers, which he
designed to increase in Bactria; hearing of Alexander's Approach, resolves to
Fight, etc. Nabarzanes and Bessus, Governor of Bactria, Conspire against him,
and draw away Thirty thousand of his Soldiers, neither durst his Persian
Cowards (though offered the assistance of Four thousand Greeks, led by Patronus)
defend him from Bessus, who took and bound him, and put him in a Cart covered
with Hides, and set forward to Bactria, in hopes, either by delivering him to
Alexander, to make their Peace, or killing him to become King; but failed in
both, God not enduring so strange a Villainy. Alexander hasting after with Six
thousand Horse and other selected Companies, best Armed, and for speed, mounted
also on Horseback, hearing by such as daily forsook Bessus, what was done,
pursued as in Post; so that Bessus finding Darius unwilling to take Horse and
fly with him, wounded him to death, and the Beasts which drew him, and left him
alone. Polystratus, a Macedonian Priest, Thirsty with pursuing, while he stayed
at a Water discovered the Cart, and found Darius bathing in his own Blood, at
point of Death, and took Commendations from his Mouth to Alexander, to revenge
him; and refreshed him with Water, etc.

. 14. Alexander hearing of Darius's Death, persuaded the Macedonians to pursue
Bessus, and leaving some Forces in Parthia, enters Hyrcania, with some
resistance of the Mardons. He passed the River Zioberis, which begins in
Parthia, runs under the ledge of Mountains, which part Parthia and Hyrcania,
and after three hundred Furlongs, rises again, and falls into the Caspian
Sea. In Zadracarta, called Hyrcania by Ptolomy, he rested Fifteen days, where
Patapherne and other great Commanders of Darius, submitted to him, and were
restored; especially he graced Artabasus for his Fidelity to his old Master,
etc. he also, to his dishonor, accepted Nabarzanes the Traitor.

. 15. Thalestris or Minothea, Queen of the Amazons, visited Alexander, and made
suit to him for his Company, 'till she were with Child by him, which she
obtained and departed. Plutarch cites many for this Report, which yet is
rather a Tale than true, not being mentioned by Alexander in his Epistle to
Antipater, and laughed at by King Lysimachus of Thrace, a follower of
Alexander. Here in a digression, he cites Pomponius Mela, Solinus, Ptolomy,
Pliny, Claudian, Diodorus, Herodotus, Ammonius, Marcellinus, Plutarch, to prove
there were such Amazons of old. And to justify his own Report of such now in
the South part of America, he cites Fra. Lopez. his Indian History, p. 2. cap.
28. and Vlrichus Schnidel and Ed. Lopes in Disc.

. 16. Alexander having begun at Persepolis to fall into the Persian Luxury, now
took on him Persian Robes, and Greatness to be Adored, to esteem Clemency as
Baseness, Temperance, a poor humor, fitter for a Teacher of Youth than an
incomparable King. His Court and Camp grew full of shameless Courtisans and
Sodomy; Eunuchs and all other shameless Manners of the vanquished Persians,
which he had detested, but now exceeded that Monster Darius, from whose Tyranny
he vaunted, he had delivered many Nations by assistance of the Gods he served,
which detested the Persian Vices. His nearest Friends grew ashamed of him,
crying out he had more impoverished the Macedonians in their Virtues than
enriched them in their Victories, and made them more Slaves than the Conquered.
Alexander understanding hereof, sought to pacify the wiser sort with Gifts; and
gave out that Bessus had assumed the Title of King of Bactria, and raised a
great Army, so persuading them to go on. Coming to pass over an inaccessable
Rock, he forced away the Guarder by the Smoke of a Pile of Wood, taking the
advantage of the Winds; as in Guicciardine three hundred Spaniards, were
smothered by firing withered Grass.

. 17. Alexander at the entrance of Bactria, takes the way of Hyrcania, and
thence Northward toward the Mardi, on the Caspian, and so over the Mountain
Coranus into Aria, East of Bactria, where the City Artaconna yielded after some
resistance. Here upon a Treason of Dimnus and others, against Alexander,
Philotas is suspected for not acquainting Alexander with it, after that
Cebalius had discovered it unto him; but upon Examination, his error of
Concealment, for want of opportunity to tell the King, was for his Father
Parmenio's sake, and his own good Service, and his dead Brother Pardoned. But
upon Craterus his Enemies instigation, pretending piety for the King's
preservation, the Prince swallowed his Promise, and made his Enemies his
Judges. Alexander, the Evening of the same Night he had appointed for
Philotas's apprehension, called him to a Banquet, and discoursed familiarly
with him, as of old; but being in the dead of the Night apprehended and bound,
he cried out, O Alexander! the malice of mine Enemies surmounts thy Mercies,
and is more constant than the word of a King. Among other Circumstances urged
by Alexander, this was not the least; that in Answer to a Letter written to him
by the King, of the Honor given him by Jupiter Hamon, he said, He could but
joy that he was admitted into the Fellowship of the Gods; yet he could not but
grieve for those which should live under one which would exceed the Nature of a
Man. Hereby Alexander gathered he envied his Glory; for so the Monster Flattery
persuaded Princes, of the Men which cannot approve in them things to be
abhorred. Philotas the next day is brought bound like a Thief, to hear the
King's Oration against him; his Father the Greatest Captain in the World, and
his Brethren slain in his Service, which so oppressed him with Grief, that he
could utter nothing but Tears, Sorrow having wasted his Spirits. But when he
would have answered in the Persian Tongue, which all understood, the King
departed, saying, he disdained his own Country Language. Thus all are
encouraged to exceed in hatred against him, seeing the King's resolution, so
that his Defense availed not. Though none of the Conspirators upon torment
accused him; yet by resistless and unnatural Torments, devised by Craterus,
Cinus, Hephestion, and others, he accused himself, in hopes to be slain
outright; but was deceived, though he confessed not what he knew, but what
they best liked. Of this kind of judicial Proceeding De Civ. Lib. 19.
St. Augustine complains. * So Seneca speaking of Alexander's Cruelty, said,
Cruelty is no Humane Vice, it is unworthy so mild a Spirit; it is a beastly
Rage to delight in Blood, and changing a Man into a Salvage Monster. The like
End had all the accused: Only Parmenio yet lived, who with great Fidelity had
served both the Father and the Son, opened the way into Asia, depressed Attalus
the King's Enemy, in all hazards led the Vanguard, prudent in Council,
successful in Attempts, beloved of the Men of War, as he who had purchased of
the King the East Empire, and all his Glory. This Man being in Media, must be
dispatched by Polydamas his best beloved Friend, leaving Cleander and others
who murdered him, reading the King's Letter. Thus ended Parmenio, who had
performed many notable things without the King, who did nothing without him
worth praise.

Alexander after this subdued the Araspians, and Ara^^sians, and came to the
foot of Taurus, where he built another Alexandria, which he Peopled with Seven
Hundred ancient Macedonians. Bessus forsakes Bactria, of which Artabazus is
made Governor, and Alexander followed him over Oxus into Sogdiana, where he
lost more Men by drinking inordinately after great want, than in any Battle
with the Persians. At this River Bessus might easily have distressed him, being
forced to pass over his Army with Hides stuffed with Straw and sowed together;
but Spitamines, Dataphernes, Catanes, etc. Commanders of his Army remembering
how he had served Darius, laid Hands on him, bound him, and with a Chain about
his Neck, led him like a Mastiff Dog to Alexander, who gave him to Oxatres,
Darius's Brother to torment. Shortly after he came to Maracanda, which Petrus
Perondinus takes to be Samarchand Iamerlames, a Regal City, which was Seventy
Furlongs compass. But upon the Rebellion of the Bactrians and Sogdians, stirred
up by Spitamines and Catanes, he left the place, which they recovered, while he
was busy in subduing others, against whom he employed Menedemus. In the mean
time, Alexander Marched on to the River Iaxartes (not Tanais, as Curtius and
Trogus mistake it, being two thousand Miles from Sogdiana) upon which he Built
a City of his Name, sixty Furlongs in compass, which while the Citizens sought
to hinder, as prejudicial to their excursions, some Sixty Macedonians were
slain, and One thousand one hundred hurt in passing that great River to repel
them. Menedemus the mean while with 2000 Foot and 300 Horse are slain by
Spitamenes, who flies into Bactria, and leaves Sogdiana, where Alexander kills
and wastes without mercy. Here he received supply of Nineteen thousand out of
Greece, Syria and Lycia (as often before from thence and other parts) with which
he repassed Oxus, on whose South he built Six Towns near one another for mutual
Succor. But he is troubled with ^ new Rebel, Arimaxus a Sogdian, who with
Thirty thousand, maintained the Top of an Hill which Alexander could not Win,
'till three hundred choice young Men crept up to the Top thereof, upon promise
of Ten Talents to the first, Nine to the Second, and so to the rest in
proportion, of which Thirty two were lost; thus Wit effects what Force could
not.

. 19. Alexander having committed Maracanda, and the Countries about it to
Clytus, slew him soon after, for that in a drunken fit, he derided the Oracle
of Hamon, and objected to the King, the death of Parmenio. Thus in Cups, the
one forgot whom he offended, the other whom he slew; which when he was
recovered, he would have revenged on himself, but for Calisthenes's persuasion,
remembering too late, he had deserved as much as any, and had saved his Life:
Drunkenness both kindles and lays open every Vice; it removes Shame, which
gives impediment to bad Attempts, etc. Spitamenes, shortly after, was murdered
by his Wife, and Dataphernes is sent bound by the Dalians to Alexander; who
proceeded into Gabara, where he lost a Thousand in a Tempest, and the rest
suffered Hunger, Cold, Lightnings, etc. So he came to the Cohortans, which
welcomed him with Feasting, and a Present of Thirty fair Virgins, of which one
was Roxane, afterward his Wife. Here he tore Calisthenes asunder on a Rack,
without any proof, for Harmolaus's Treason: But indeed, for Reasoning at a
Drinking against Deifying Alexander, propounded by a Parasite, and heard by the
King, standing behind a Partition; Seneca calls this Act, his eternal Crime,
which no Virtue or Felicity can redeem; for whatsoever can be spoken to his
Praise, is not answerable to this Reproach; He slew Calisthenes.

. 20. Alexander with Twelve Thousand Foot and Horse, entered the Indian Borders,
where, after a few days, Nisa, built by Bacchus, was delivered; from whence he
went to Dedala, and so to Arcadera, abandoned by the Inhabitants, so that they
failed of Victuals, and were forced to divide the Army. Here he took Nora, etc.
and came to Indus, where Hephestion had prepared Boats, and had persuaded
Omphis King of the Country, who offered his Service to Alexander, and presented
him with Fifty Elephants. Abiasaris hearing thereof, made his peace with
Alexander, so that Porus only remained, the other Enemy of Omphis. Alexander
sent to command his Homage at the Border of his Kingdom: He answered he would
attend him there, but for other acknowledgment, he would take Counsel of his
Sword. Porus attends him on the Bank of Hydaspes with Thirty thousand Foot,
Nine hundred Elephants, Three hundred Armed Chariots, and a great Troop of
Horse. The River was Four Furlongs broad, and swift, and deep, with many
Islands, of which one was well shaded with Wood, where Alexander staid, and
sent Ptolomy up the River, with a great part of the Army, which Porus supposing
to be the Whole, removed, to oppose their coming over, while Alexander
recovered the further Shore without Resistance, and advances toward Porus,
who a while, took him to be Abiasares his Confederate, come over the River to
aid him. But finding it to the contrary, he sent his Brother with Four thousand
Men, and a hundred Armed Wagons, having four hundred Armed Men in them, but of
small use, by reason of late Rain, and the Scythians which Galled their Horses,
and made them overturn the Wagons. Perdicas charged the Indian Horses, and
made all to retire, which made Porus move forward with the gross of his Army,
that the scattered parts of his Vant-guard might recover his Rear, etc. The
Elephants much molested the Macedonians, 'till being enraged by the galling of
Arrows and Darts, they turned head upon their follower's Foot, etc. After a
long and doubtful Fight, Porus, fore wounded, and Abandoned by his Men, and
over-matched in Numbers, and skill of Leaders, fell into the Conquerors hands,
who restored and enlarged his Kingdoms.

. 21. Alexander having overthrown Porus, and hearing by these Indian Kings,
that one Agamenes, beyond Ganges, commanding many Nations, was the powerfullest
King of all these Regions, and able to bring into the Field, Two hundred
thousand Foot, three hundred Elephants, twenty thousand Horse, and two thousand
armed Chariots, was much inflamed to proceed, but all the Art he had, could not
persuade the Soldiers thereto; only they are content to follow him to the
South, having Indus for his guide.

So he returned to Acesines, intending to lay up his Fleet, where it
encountreth Hydaspes, by which two Rivers, he built two Cities, Nicae and
Bucephalon. Here he intended a fourth supply of six thousand Horsemen, and
seven thousand Foot out of Thrace, and twenty five thousand Rich Armor from
Babylon, which he distributed among the Soldiers. Hereabout he won many Towns,
received One hundred Ambassadors from an Indian King, with a Present of three
hundred Horses, one hundred thirty Wagons, and one thousand Targets. Sailing
Southward by many obscure Nations, among them he built another Alexandria, and
took, among many other places, one called Samus, whose Inhabitants fought with
poisoned Swords. Being come to the outlet of Indus, he sent to discover the
Coast along toward the Mouth of Euphrates. After part of Winter spent here, he
marched in Eighteen Days to Gedrosia, in which Passage, his Army suffered such
Misery for want of Food, that not the fourth part returned alive.

. 22. Alexander came to Carmania, and drawing near Persia, he fell to imitate
Bacchus's Triumphs in Cups, which Swinish hateful Vice, always inflamed him to
Cruelty. For the Hangman followed the Feast, says Curtius, and Apastes, a
Provincial Governor, was slain by his Commandment. Here Cleander, and his
Fellows employed in the Murder of Parmenio, brought him a supply of Five
thousand Foot, and one thousand Horse, but upon complaint of their Outrages,
Cleander and the rest, with six hundred Soldiers, were commended to the
Hangman, to the joy of all. Alexander removed and came to Pasargada, where
Cyrus was buried, and was presented with many rich Gifts by Orsines, a Prince
of the Race of Cyrus, whom Alexander put to Death, by the practice of Bagoas
one his of Eunuchs, because he was neglected of him; the Accusation that he had
robbed Cyrus's his Tomb, was from Two loose Fellows. Phrates also was slain
upon suspicion of his Greatness; so headlong was he become to shed Blood, and
believe false Reports. Calanus an Indian Philosopher, burnt himself, being
Seventy three years old, foretelling Alexander of his own Death shortly after.
Alexander removed to Susa, where he Married Statira, Darius's Eldest Daughter,
and her Sister he gave to Hephestion, and Eighty Persian Ladies to his
Captains; and at the Marriage he gave Six thousand Cups of Gold to so many
Guests. Harpalus his Treasurer in Babylon having been lavish of the Treasure,
fled away with five thousand Talents, and six thousand hired Soldiers, but was
taken and slain in Greece, to Alexander's great Joy. Great coffeehouse grew
in his Army, knowing his purpose to send his decayed Soldiers to Macedon, and
to detain the rest, whom he labored to pacify in vain, 'till their Passions
were evaporated; when the inconsiderate Multitude may be led as a Whale, with a
twined Thread, is drawn to Land after some tumbling. Craterus is sent with
those which were Licensed to return, and made Lieutenant of Macedon, Thrace and
Thessaly, which place Antipater, now sent for by the King, had held with great
Fidelity. Antipater could see no reason of his removal, but a disposition in
the King to send him after Parmenio. With this Antipater, the King, for all his
great courage, had no great Appetite to grapple; for Jealous Princes do not
always stand in doubt of every ill affected, though Valiant Man, but where
there is a Kingly Courage compounded of Hardiness and Understanding; this is
often so fearful to Kings, as they take leave, both of Law and Religion, to
free themselves of such. Alexander after this, went to Media to set things in
Order, where Hephestion, his greatest Favorite dyed; on whose Monument, he
bestowed Twelve thousand Talents. The King took Methods to make all Men weary
of his Government, seeing Cruelty is more fearful than any Adventure that can
be made against it. Antipater therefore came not, nor sent any Excuse, but
freed himself by his Sons, Cassander, Philip, and Lollaus, who waited on the
King's Cup. These, at a drinking Feast, in a Carouse in Hercules's Cup, gave
him a Draught of Drink stronger than Hercules himself; so he quitted the World
within a few days. Princes seldom find advantage by making their Ministers
overgreat, and thereby suspicious to themselves. For he which does not
acknowledge Fidelity to be a Debt, but that Kings ought to purchase it of their
Vassals, will never please himself with the Price given; only the Restorative
indeed that strengthens it, is the Goodness and Virtue of the Prince, and his
Liberality makes it more diligent. Antipater had Governed two or three Kingdoms
Twelve years, and peradventure knew not to play another part, as Caesar which
forgot the Art of Obedience, after long governing the Gauls.

. 23. Alexander's Cruelty and Pride is inexcusable; his Drunkenness no less.
Augustine justly derided his lamenting want of Employment, when he should have
no more to Conquer; as if well to Govern the Conquered, would not sufficiently
busy his Brain. His Valor, a Thousand in his Army Matched. His Liberality
Seneca Taxes, and his Speech about a Kings gift is Foolish. Compared with
other troublers of the World. Caesar, and others after more glorious; for he
never undertook Warlike Nations.

CHAP. III. Aridaeus, his Reign after Alexander.
ALexander in his stubborn Pride, refused to establish any Successor; esteeming
none Worthy; and the greatest Ambition of his Followers Learned of their Master
to endure no Equals; a Lesson soon taken out by Spirits reflecting upon their
own Worth, wanting the Reverence of a greater Object. Thus the Question of the
Succession became difficult. Alexander having no Issue but by Barsinoe a
Persian, and Roxane, of mean Condition, both excepted against as of Conquered
Nations. Ptolomy, the Son of Philip, who gave his Mother Barsinoe great with
Child to Lagus, is of opinion, the Rule should rest in the Captains, to order
it by Voices. Aristonus another Captain, propounded Perdicas, as designed
Successor by Alexander, who at the point of death, left his Kingdom to the
worthiest, and delivered his Ring to him; who had succeeded his Favorite
Hephestion in Favor and Place, he being urged by many, to take the Royal
Estate upon him, not content with the Soldiers acclamation, of a counterfeit
Modesty, put it off, looking that every one of the Princes would entreat him,
that so his Acceptance might be the less Envied. But as he which feigns a sleep
may be eaten with a Wolf; so Meleager his Enemy, took advantage of his
Irresolution, and acted against him; concluded, that whoever were Heir to the
Crown, the Soldiers ought to Inherit the Treasure, to that which he invited
them, who were nothing backward in sharing it.

. 2. Aridaeus, a Natural Brother of Alexander, in this Uproar, is named by some
one, liked by many, and produced, and commended by Meleager to the Army, which
changes his Name to Philip, investeth him in Alexander's Robes* and proclaims
him King, contrary to the Mind of many of the Nobles, who yet by the
intercession of the Ancient Captains, are reconciled, though neither side meant
faithfully. For Meleager now Governing the King, who was no wiser than
Alexander's Chair in which he fate; attempted to kill Perdicas, who
understanding of their coming which are sent to do it, rebuked them with such
Gravity, that they departed honester than they came. The Camp hearing of this
Attempt, fell into an Uproar, which the King their Creature could not appease,
'till offered to resign unto them; so upon the King's motion, after sundry
Embassies between him and his Nobles. Meleager is joined with Leonatus and
Perdicas in Government of the Army; so much Love is protested, where none is
meant. For presently after, upon Rumors against Perdicas, purposely raised, as
if they proceeded from Meleager, to make him guilty of seditious Rumors, if he
should give way thereto; He, to prevent the danger, persuades Perdicas to a
general Muster, for cleansing the Army by punishing seditious Persons and other
Offenders, not in the least intending his special Friends, and such as followed
him, when he disturbed the Election of a King, by calling away Soldiers to the
sharing of the Treasure. The manner of this Muster is solemn, having the
Horsemen, among whom the King must ride, the Elephants, the Macedonian Foot,
and Mercenaries set in Batalia in distinct parties, so as to skirmish by way of
Exercise. The Macedonian Pikes (called the Phalanx) led by Meleager, is placed
at disadvantage, and so charged by the Horsemen and Elephants, as afforded no
jesting; and the King being now in Perdicas's possession, must command to be
delivered to death, such of the Infantry as Perdicas required. Thus Three
hundred of Meleager's Friends and Followers, are cast to the Elephants to be
slain; and Meleager flying to a Temple for Sanctuary, having too late
discovered the Design, was there also slain. The Princes held a new Counsel,
divide the Provinces among themselves, leave Aridaeus the Office of a Visitor,
and Perdicas his Protector, and Commander of his Forces; and gave Aridaeus, a
Captain, the Charge to bury the Corpse of Alexander, at Alexandria in Egypt.

Alexander, in his life time, knowing the factious quality of the Greeks, had
commanded that all the banished should be restored, thinking, by them, to have
a sure Party in every City; but by that proud Injunction, contrary to their
Laws, lost the Hearts of the rest, who esteemed it a beginning of open Tyranny
The Athenians and Aetolians who opposed this Decree, upon Alexander's Death,
Proclaim War against the Macedonians, and by Leosthenes their Captain, who
called in the Aetolians, overthrew the Boeotians which sided with Antipater,
Lieutenant to Alexander. Antipater doubting his own strength, sent to Craterus
in Asia, whose coming into Macedon, had so troubled his Thoughts but a Month
before. So vain are the Hopes and Fears of Men, which decree all by mortal
Wisdom, shunning and persuing their Destiny afar off, even when it seems near
at hand. Craterus and the Captains in Asia, nearest to Europe, are solicited to
make haste; for Antipater could raise in Macedon but Thirteen Thousand raw
Soldiers, and six hundred Horse, besides the Thessalian brave Troops. Whereas
Leosthenes brought into the Field twenty two thousand Foot, and two thousand
five hundred Horse, besides many Auxilaries which came in. But before Craterus
came, Antipater ventred a Battle, which he lost, and was forced into Lamia, a
fortifyed and well provided Town to endure a Siege, which Leosthenes presented
him with*

. 4. Perdicas, Protector of Aridaeus, had no peculiar Province, but greater
Forces than any, with which, and his Marriage with Cleopatra, Alexander's
Sister, he hoped for greater Matters. He first subdued Cappadocia, which had
never submitted to Alexander, and committed it to Eumenes, whom he trusted
above all Men.

. 5. Antipater having in vain expected his Asian Succors, offered to yield
upon Terms of Reason, but Leosthenes will have an absolute yielding; which the
other, having been his Commander, refused; so the Siege is delayed 'till the
Aetolians grew weary and departed, so that the Trenches were thinly Manned.
Upon this advantage, Antipater sallied out, and slew many, and Leosthenes
himself; but yet was not relieved of the Siege. Leonatus, in the mean time, is
persuaded to hasten to it with twenty Thousand Foot, and Two thousand five
hundred Horse out of Phrygia the lesser, which he willingly undertook for
Cleopatra's sake, which sent for him to Pella in Macedon. But Antiphilus, who
succeeded Leosthenes, raised his Siege, and went to meet him before Antipater
and he joined, and obtained a great Victory, and the greater by Leonatus's
Death. The vanquished Macedonians, too proud to fly, and weak to renew the
Fight, betook them to high grounds, 'till the day following, when Antipater
came, who also kept the high ground as if he meant not to fight, which moved
many Greeks to depart. This instability (incorrigible in Volunteers) was the
more inexcusable. Craterus, with a strong Army, at length is come, and joineth
with Antipater, making between them Forty thousand heavy Armed, Three thousand
light, and Five thousand Horse; of which number, the Greeks wanted one thousand
five hundred Horse, and Eighteen thousand Foot, who lost he day, with the
slaughter only of Five hundred Men. So the Greeks, not subject to one General,
desiring to preserve their own Estates, betrayed their Country's liberty by a
careless defense, while Thessaly seeks her Peace.

. 6. Antipater's gentle Conditions to such as were forward to seek Peace, drew
on the rest; only Athens and Aetolia are plotting to prosecute the War, begun
by them more bravely than wisely, 'till Antipater is come to their Doors, when
wanting wherewith to resist, they seek Peace, absolutely submitting, as
Leosthenes had proudly required of Antipater, who now overthrew the Popular
Estate, raised a Democracy of Nine thousand of the most considerable Persons,
transmitted the tumultuous into Thrace, and slew Demosthenes.

. 7. Antipater gives his Daughter Phila to Craterus, and after the Marriage,
both go against the Aetolians, who had conveyed their impotent People and
Goods, into places of great safety, of which, that rough Mountainous Country
yields many, and the rest fortify their strong Cities. Here the two great
Commanders are kept in play, '^^ll News out of Asia made them desire very
earnestly to be gone, giving them what Conditions they pleased. This Asiatique
Expedition grew from Perdicas's Plot, to bring Aridaeus into Macedon, designing
by his presence to make void the Offices of his Viceroys, that so himself, who
Administered all under the Titular Majesty of Aridaeus, might obtain Cleopatra,
and thereby, both Greatness and a good Title. Antigonus, Governor of Phrygia,
whom he discerned no way proper for his purpose, is called in question for
Life, but escaped with his Son Demetrius, and came to Antipater.

. 8. Perdicas perceiving his intentions were laid open, resolves to make them
good with the Sword; and first he will begin with Ptolomy of Egypt, leaving
Eumenes upon the Asiatique Coast, to withstand Antipater and Craterus. Ptolomy
having won the Egyptians with his sweet behavior, and added the Dominion of
Cyrene, hearing of Perdicas's coming to the Camels Wall, a little town in
Egypt, put himself into it, and bravely kept it against him. Perdicas removes
to a place over against Memphis, where in vain attempting to pass over Nilus,
three thousand, of his Men were drowned and devoured by Crocodiles, and such as
fell into Ptolomy's hands, were saved alive, whom he used courteously, and
buried the dead, cast up by the River. The Captains hearing of this his
Humanity, fell to mutiny, thinking it unreasonable to make War on so Virtuous
and Honorable a Person, to fulfill the pleasure of a Lordly Ambitious Man,
using them like Slaves. Pithon, formerly made Governor of Medea, being
present, and hating Perdicas for a disgrace offered him by the other, (which
caused many Greeks to be slain, who had yielded to him upon his Promise) drew a
hundred Captains, and a good part of the Horse, entered upon Perdicas's Tent,
and slew him, who could endure no Greatness but his own. Ptolomy the next day,
came to the Camp, and was joyfully received, and offered the Protectorship,
which he modestly refused, and procured it for Pithon.

. 9. Eumenes, being left by Perdicas, to withstand Antipater, Alcetas, Brother
of Perdicas, refused to assist him as his Brother Commanded: Neoptolemus
pretended to be willing, but being Summoned, came in a Hostile manner, as he
promised Antipater, and was shamefully disappointed and put to flight, leaving
his Footmen, which upon Eumenes's Charge, submitted and took Oath to serve
him. Neoptolemus being come to Antipater, persuades Craterus to march against
Eumenes, assuring him, that upon his appearance, all the Macedonians with
Eumenes, would revolt. Eumenes fearing Craterus's presence might be of ill
consequence to him, peremptorily for bad the admitting either Messenger or
Trumpeter; and placed in his Battle against Craterus such as knew him not,
charging the Leaders to run on without giving leisure to speak. Craterus, to
encourage his Men, promises the Spoil, like him who sells the Bears Skin
before he is caught. Eumenes had the day, in which both Craterus and Neoptolemus
lost their Lives; but his own Macedonian Soldiers were incensed against him,
hearing of Craterus's death; which he also much resented.

. 10. Pithon, Protector of King Aridaeus, was so interrupted by Euridice, the
King's Wife, Daughter of Amyntas, Philip's Elder Brother, and of Cyna,
Alexander's Sister, (a Lady of a Masculine Spirit, well understanding her
place) that he gave over his Office, which she thought to supply, having been
trained up in the Art of War, by Cyna a Warlike Woman. The Soldiers disappoint
her and Pithon who hoped to have been entreated by them to hold, and chose
Antipater, who in a few days, arrived at the Camp with his Army, and took it
upon him, as the only powerful Man then living, of all Alexander's Captains,
whom all acknowledge their Superior. Antipater takes the King, Queen and
Princess into Macedon, leaving Antigonus General of the Royal Army, against
Eumenes, and Ruler of Asia, during the War, and besides his former Provinces,
gave him the Rule of Susiana.

. 11. Antigonus, Lieutenant of Asia, being to subdue Eumenes, Alcetus and
Attalus, began with Eumenes, seeking to Corrupt his Army by Letters, but failed
therein by Eumenes's cunning, who made show as if he writ them to try their
faith to him. Then Antigonus dealt with the Captains, of which one brake out
untimely; and another, called Apollonides, held close 'till the Battle, and
then turned to Antigonus, with such of the Horsemen as he could persuade,
being their General; but Eumenes overtook him, and cut him off, though he lost
the Battle. Eumenes not able to keep the Field, wished his Men to shift for
themselves, and retained only five hundred Horse and two hundred Foot, with
which he tired Antigonus in following. At last he entered Nora, a strong and
well provided Fort, bordering on Cappadocia, where they parted without
agreeing; so Antigonus leaves Nora besieged, and with his other Forces, entered
Pisidia, and overthrew Alcetus.

. 12. Ptolomy, while other Princes were quiet in their Government, sent an Army
and won Syria, and Phaenicia, and took Laomedon the Governor thereof Prisoner.
Antipater being Eighty Years Old, reposing great Confidence in Polyspercon, one
of Alexanders most Ancient Captains, committed to him the Protectorship and
Government of Macedon, doubting his Son Cassander's sufficiency; he also gave
charge that no Woman should be admitted into the Administration of the Empire,
and so dyed.

. 13. Polys^ercon's skill was greater in War, than in the high Office he now
undertook; being a man of an Inferior Wit, fitter to assist than command in
Chief. The better to Countenance his Injunctions to the Governors of
Provinces, he and his Council thought fit to call the Queen of Olympias to
Court, whom Antipater suffered not in Macedon. But Cassander, Son of Antipater,
(who thought himself the better Man) was not satisfied with the Captainship of
a Thousand; his Ambition soared high, when he considered the Love of those
which commanded the Garrisons, and all the Rulers in the Cities so of Greece,
so placed by his Father. Besides, he had that Interest in Queen Euridice, that
was due only to her Husband, all which would not serve to bear out an open
Rebellion. Cassander therefore finding what Ptolomy had done in Syria, and what
Antigonus aimed at since Antipater's death (for whose sake he presumed upon
them) and seeing their occasions needed a Civil War, he went to Antigonus in
Asia, and writ to Ptolomy.

. 14. Polyspercon* upon Cassander's departure, to disappoint him of his hopes
from Greece, decreed in Council, to restore the popular Government in their
Cities, and discharge the Garrisons, and Banish or kill the Governors placed
by Antipater. Thus he dishonours the Man that raised him; overthrew worthy Men,
placed as Friends to the State of Macedon; and gives away Macedon's Command of
Greece, if he means as he pretends, etc.

. 15. Athens by this Decree, in all haste, cast out their Governors, Phocion
and others, who fly for their Lives; but cannot remove the Garrison, commanded
by Nicanor, a trusty Friend to Cassander. He possessing one of the Havens,
found means to take the other, called Paraeus, to their great discouragement;
but by Alexander the Son of Polyspercon, coming with an Army, are wholly
misled, as if he came to aid them, whereas he came to get what Nicanor held, if
he could persuade him thereto. Phocion and his Fellows fly to Polyspercon for
Patronage, but he finding he could not get the Key of Athens, as he fought,
without offending the other Towns of Greece; to cover his intent, as meaning
well to Athens, he sent Phocion back into Athens, who wickedly put him to
death, being above Eighty Years old; who had been chosen forty five times
Governor, without seeking it; whose Integrity was approved, whose Counsel the
City never repented, nor private Man for trusting him: Philip and Alexander
honored him; but could fasten no Gifts upon him: Athens never after bred a
worthy Man.

. 16. Cassander with such Forces as Antigonus lent him, entered Pireus, which
drew Polyspercon headlong into Attica with an Army, but for want of Victuals
departed, leaving Alexander with some Forces to hinde^ Nicanor, 'till he in
Peloponesus attempted Megalopolis, which affected Cassander. But the Town
furnished with Fifteen thousand able Men, was so defended, and his Elephants so
galled in their Feet with Nails driven through Boards laid, and lightly covered
in the Way, that he prevailed not; and wanting Provision to stay long, he
forsook the Siege. After this, his Admiral Clitus after an Overthrow given to
Nicanor in Propontis, is in the second Encounter ( Antigonus having furnished
Nicanor) utterly defeated, which made Athens submit to Cassander, as did other
Cities.

. 17. Antigonus lying before the Fort Nora, when he heard of Antipater's death;
knowing Eumenes's sufficiency, and fidelity to Perdicas, thought no Man fitter
to be employed in his designs. He sent therefore a Friend to them both, to deal
with him to take an Oath of Fidelity to Antigonus, which he refused, except
Olympias and the Children of Alexander were put in, which was yielded to; so he
departed. Antigonus had before this taken on him (as Lieutenant of Asia) to
remove Governors of Provinces, as Aridaeus of Phrygia, and Clitus of Lydia,
which repaired to the Court for Relief, but all failed in Clitus's overthrow at
Sea.

. 18. Antigonus now commanding the most of the Lesser Asia, was able to enter
Macedon, and seize the Court, but doubted the Reconciliation of Cassander and
Polyspercon thereby; he also knew Eumenes's fidelity to the Royal Blood.
Against him therefore he bent with Twenty thousand Foot and Four thousand
Horse, hoping to surprise him in Cilicia. Eumenes a Thracian, of all the old
Soldiers, was only faithful to the Royal Blood; the Court therefore gave him
Commission to raise an Army against Antigonus, requiring the Provincials to
assist, and the old Silver-shield-bands to follow him.

. 19. Olympias, the Old Queen, intending to remove Aridaeus, and place
Alexander, Son of Roxane, joining with Polyspercon, enters Macedon, takes
Euridice and Aridaeus, forsaken of all that followed her at the sight of
Olympias; both are Murdered, and a hundred of Cassander's Friends, with Nicanor
his Brother.

. 20. Cassander lying at the Siege of Tegea in Peloponesus, hearing these ill
Tidings, compounded with Tegea and shipped his Army into Thessaly; the Aetolians
keeping the Streights of Thermopylae by Land, in favor of the Queen. Cassander
leaves Callas with part of his Forces to divert Polyspercon, carrying the rest
to Besiege Pidna, a strong Sea-Town, where Olympias lay with the Court.
Aeacides, King of Epyrus, her Cousin, hasted to her Succor, but upon
Difficulties of passages, held by Cassander's Men, his Subjects refuse to
proceed, and upon his seeking to enforce them, banish him and join with
Cassander. Polyspercon now is the Queen's only hope, which also failed; for by
Callas's means, corrupting of the Soldiers, he was glad to make a swift
Retreat for want of Men. The Miseries of the Besieged by Famine and Mortality
was so great, that she is forced to yield to Cassander, upon promise of Life;
and procured Aristonus, to whom she had committed Amphypolis, to yield up the
Town, which he did, and was killed by private Enemies procured to it by
Cassander. Olympias is then called into public question in an Assembly of the
Macedonians, and condemned for the Murders committed by her under Title of
Justice, and shortly after put to death. Cassander after his death, Celebrated
Funerals for Aridaeus and Euridice; Married Thessalonica, Daughter of King
Philip, taken in Pidna; built the City Cassandria; committed Roxane and
Alexander to close Prison; Re-edified Thebes, and restored it, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of Antigonus's growth in Asia.
. 1. EVmenes, with the Argyraspides or Silver-Bands, took his March toward the
East, with his Commission to take Possession of those Countries, having small
Assurance of his Silver Shields, whose Captains scorned his direction: Yet
Ptolomy and Antigonus could not withdraw them. Python and Seleuchus, who
governed Medea and Babylon, as he went, refused to let him pass, 'till they
were forced to fly; so he came to the East, where Peucestes and other Lords
receive him; yet through Opinion of Self-worthiness, contended for Superiority;
but by his Wisdom and Command of the Kings Treasure, he gained many of the most
powerful.

. 2. Antigonus followed, taking Python and Seleucus with him, to force the
Enemies further off from the King's Treasure in Susa; but passing over Coprates
by small Vessels, when the greater part was over, Eumenes, who kept a Bridge on
Tygris, came with a Thousand Horse, and four Thousand Foot, and finding them
disordered, forced most of them into the River, and drowned them, and slew the
rest, except four Thousand which yielded in the sight of Antigonus, who with
Python turned to Media, leaving Seleuchus to Besiege Susa Castle.

. 3. Eumenes desired to lead the Army into the Province left by Antigonus; but
Peucestes, Governor of Persia, drew them thither, using all means to win the
Soldiers, which Eumenes prevented by a feigned Letter from Orontes, Governor
of Armenia, reporting Olympias had slain Cassander, and sent Polyspercon with a
great Army to join with Eumenes; which News bred much fruitless joy. Antigonus
brings his Army out of Media, to all their amazements; yet Eumenes then sick in
an Horse-Litter, set his in a good form of Battle; and though he were inferior
to Antigonus by a third part, except Elephants, he held it out, and Antigonus
was glad the next Night, to steal away into Media.

. 4. Antigonus, in the dead of Winter, being within Nine Days Journey of his
Enemy, passed through a difficult Wilderness, forbidding all use of Fire by
Night, to prevent his being discovered, which was observed for some time, but
broken at last, and so discerned. Peucestes and the rest, as Men amazed, fly;
Eumenes stays them, promising to protract Antigonus, 'till their Forces be
drawn up. Then taking some choice Captains, he disposed them on Tops of Hills,
looking toward Antigonus, keeping many Fires thereon. Antigonus thinking he
was discovered, and fearing to be forced while his Men were tired, turned aside
to places convenient for Refreshment; but upon Advice, finding that he was
deluded, he sent, thinking to be revenged on them who were gone. All the
Eastern Army was come, except the Elephants, which he sent to cut off, forcing
the Horsemen which came with them, and had overthrown the Elephants, if brave
Troops sent by Eumenes to look after them, had not come in unexpectedly.

. 5. Eumenes having obtained the honor of an Expert General, got therewith the
hatred of Peucestes and the other Commanders, which conspire his death; but
conclude to spare him 'till after the Battle with Antigonus; which argued their
Malice against his mere Virtue. Eudamus, who had charge of the Elephants, whom
he had obliged, and others of whom he used to borrow Money when he needed not,
to make them the more careful of his Life, certifyed him of the Treason.
Hereupon he made his Will, and burnt his Writings of Secrets, and considered
what he should do. To make his Peace with Antigonus, were contrary to his Faith
given to Olympias, and the Princes, etc. He therefore resolved to withstand the
Enemy, and after to look to himself, etc.

. 6. Eumenes's Soldiers not knowing the cause of his Perplexity, encouraged
him, only desiring him to draw'em up in Battalia, and they would play the Men.
Antigonus had the advantage in Horse, but his Footmen advanced heavily, being
to encounter the old Silver Shields, who had beaten them so often, as now also
they slew five thousand of them without the loss of a Man. Antigonus's Horse
and Elephants had the better; the rather by Peucestes, who drew off one
thousand five hundred Horse, and departed. But while all the charge lay on
Eumenes, Antigonus sent Companies of Horse about unto Eumenes's Carriages,
unseen by reason of the Dust, and surprised them; for the Night growing on,
they returned to their Camps.

. 7. Eumenes finding the Silver Shields discontented for the loss of their
Carriages, comforted them with hopes of Recovery, the Enemy being weakened by
their Valor, and unable to draw the Carts through the Wilderness of Mountains.
This availed not, for Peucestes was gone, and other Captains would fight no
more; Teutamus, one of the Silver-shield Captains, to win the Love of the
Bands, dealt secretly with Antigonus, entreated the restoring of the Booty,
which was all the Old Soldiers had for many Years service. The crafty Man
answered, that if they will deliver Eumenes, he will do more for them; which
they presently performed, and villanously betrayed their worthy General, whom
his Ambitious Adversary, despairing to win, slew. This was the end of the
Wisdom, Fidelity, Valor, and Patience of him whose Courage no Adversity could
lessen, nor Prosperity his Circumspection: But his Virtue, Wit and Industry,
were all cast away, by l^ading an Army without power to command; besides, God's
purpose to cast down that Family he sought to uphold. Antigonus buried him
honorably, burnt one of the Captains alive that betrayed him, and committed
all the Silver Shields to a Leader, to carry them into far Countries, with
charge to Conjure such perjured Wretches, n^v^r to come near Greece.

. 8. Antigonus and Python return to Media, where while Pithon by Gifts sought
to win the Soldiers, which he only wanted, to become chief; Antigonus
discerning it, took him in his security, condemned and slew him. Goes into
Persia, Peucestes entertained him obsequiously, but lost his place.

. 9. Antigonus visiting Seleuchus in Babylon, has Kingly Entertainment, and
Susa's Castle with the Persian Treasure and Riches; yet calls for a further
Account. Seleuchus doubts the meaning of his Friend, of whom he never deserved
well, and so fled to Ptolomy in Egypt.

CHAP. V. Civil Wars between Alexander's Captains.
. 1. ANtigonus's Riches and Power made him formidable, and caused Ptolomy,
Cassander, and Lysimachus to combine against him, notwithstanding his
Ambassadors, by whom he entreated the continuance of their Amity. In their
Answer they require a share of the Eastern Treasure, increase of Cassander and
Lysimachus's Dominions, and restoring of Seleuchus. He roundly replied, that he
would share his Victories with them who afforded him no succor, and enjoyed
what they had thereby, being by his Arms freed from Polyspercon.

. 2. Antigonus prepares for War, Guards the Sea Coast to hinder Cassander, and
invaded Syria, setting Workmen on Lybanus to build a Navy, takes Ioppa and
Gaza, and forces Tyrus by Famine to yield, upon Condition, that Ptolomy's
Soldiers might depart with their Armies. Ptolomy kept close in his Country,
not being able to Encounter the other in the Field; but sent a Fleet of One
Hundred Sail with S^leuchus to strengthen Cyprus, by which also Caria, held by
another Cassander, took a Resolution to hold out.

. 3. Greece was desired on both sides, as an aid of much Importance, where
Antigonus by his Treasures gained the Lacedaemonians, and others of Peloponesus.
He also sought to make Cassander odious for the Death of Olympias, and
Imprisoneth Roxane and her Son; forcing Thessalonica, building Cassandria, and
re-edifying Thebes in spite of Philip and Alexander. Upon these Reasons he
required the Army to declare Cassander a Traitor, except he restored Roxane and
her Son, and submitted to the Lieutenant General (himself) and that all the
Cities of Greece should be set free. His regard of the Royal Blood was not soon
to be abated, but 'twas the Liberty of Greece which induced Ptolomy to decree
the like. Antigonus to make sure work, gave Alexander, Son of Polyspercon, Five
Hundred Talents to make War in Peloponesus: But he at the persuasion of one
sent from Cassander, kept the Treasure, and had the Lordship of Peloponesus put
into his hand, making a League with Ptolomy and Cassander. But this Honor he
enjoyed not long, being slain by the Treason of the Sycionians, hoping thereby
to become free, but were subdued by Cr^tisipolis his Wife, etc.

. 4. Antigonus with his Five Hundred Talents having bought an Enemy, stirred up
the Factious Aetolians; but Cassander curbed them, and won from them Ptolomy's
Fleet, Commanded by Polyclitus, who upon Alexander's defect from Antigonus,
left Peloponesus, and returned homewards; hearing of the Rhodian Fleet, led by
Theodatus, Admiral to Antigonus, he cunningly surprised it, not one escaping.
This ill News brought Antigonus and Ptolomy to meet about some composition, but
to no effect.

. 5. Lysimachus Overthrew Seuthes, a King of the wild Thracians, with the
Cities which Rebelled, and slew Pausanias, and took his Army sent by Antigonus.
Philip also, Lieutenant of Cassander, wasted the Aetolians, and drove most out
of their Country, and slew Aeacides, King of Epirus, lately Restored. Antigonus
in the mean time won Caria: sent Armies into Peloponesus, and other parts of
Gr^ec^, bestowing Liberty on whom he took; and making show to come over into
Macedon, forced Cassander to have thereto, and to leave many places weakly
Guarded, which his Army freed.

. 6. Antigonus's Presence in lesser Asia, gave life to his Affairs there and in
Greece; but Ptolomy took advantage of his Absence in Syria, visited Cyprus,
recovered it, and left a Lieutenant in it, and in return made Ravage in Caria,
and Cilicia, and drew Demetrius Policartes, Son of Antigonus to the rescue, and
departed to Egypt; where, with Seleuchus, he raised a Royal Army for recovery
of Syria. Demetrius being returned, and hearing of Ptolomy's coming, is advised
to give way, and not to Encounter two such Generals; but he rejects the Council
as a cold Temper of aged Men, and will needs stand them at Gaza. Ptolomy has
the odds, but wanted Elephants, which ^e supplied with a Palisade sharpened to
gall the Beasts, and Overthrew Demetrius, who fled to Azotus Thirty Miles off:
Won Gaza, and the best part of Syria.

. 7. Seleuchus Nicanor now took leave of Ptolomy with Eight Hundred Foot, and
Two Hundred Horse, too small a Garrison to keep, much less to win one of those
great Cities in the East; but Men enough to enter where the Hearts of the
Inhabitants are already gained. Seleuchus's Name, whose Government the
Babylonians had found so good, was sufficient to them to put all the resistance
upon Antigonus Men, wishing them ill to speed. The defection grew so general,
that the Antigonians durst stay in no strong Town; only they held a Castle full
of Hostages, and Prisoners which Seleuchus took, and so the Possession of
Mesopotamia, and Babel. Nicanor left in Media by Antigonus with an Army, came
with Ten Thousand Foot, and Seven Thousand Horse. Seleuchus having but Four
Hundred Horse, and above Three Thousand Foot, drew them into a Marsh near
Tygris, which Nicanor thinking to be a flight, grew less careful to Forti^ie
his Camp, and so was surprised the first Night, and lost all, with Susiana and
Media. Now began the Era, or Date, of the Greeks, used by the Jews, Chaldeans
and Syrians, whose first Complete Year at Babylon, was accounted from the end
of the 438th of Nabonasser, says Gauricus.

. 8. Ptolomy having taken Gaza, sent Demetrius all his Goods, Pages and
Servants freely, with a courteous Message, that their War was upon Terms of
Honor, not Personal hatred. This inflamed Demetrius's earnest desire of
Requital, which made him gather all the Force he could, and send to his Father
for supply; against which, Ptolomy sent Cilles with part of his Army, which was
suddenly Surpised by Demetrius, through Cilles's careless Marching, as against
a beaten remnant. Thus Demetrius repaired his Honor, and requited his Enemy,
by restoring Cilles, and many other Friends with rich Presents. Antigonus
hastes into Syria to embrace his Son, and perfect the recovering of it upon
his Son's Foundation; but Ptolomy now at leisure returns to Egypt, Dismantling
the Principal Cities as he went; thus all fell to Antigonus presently: So
easily did the Provinces accept strange Lords, as Sheep and Oxen change
Masters, having no Title to their own Heads. These People of Syria, Egypt,
Babylon, Assyria, Persia, were of no such manly Temper, as at this time the
States of Greece were, who took all occasion to recover Liberty, which these
little esteemed: So that the Persian Nobles never strove to recover Liberty
after Alexander's Death, but tamely submitted to the Captains and Officers of
the Army. The Reason hereof Machivel gives from the Form of Government: For
where the Subjects are kept as Slaves, as in Turkey, a Conquest is easily
obtained: But where ^^cient Nobility are in due esteem, it is hard to ge^ ^ll,
and harder to keep, as in France. In the Persian Empire all the Princes
depended upon the mere Favor of the King, so that even his Brethren are his
Slaves, as are all the Bassaes in Turkey. Adding hereto want of Convenient
Liberty in the People, who like Esops Ass, think Enemies cannot load him more
heavily than his Master, and if they find the Conquerours Yoke more easy, they
will not hastily shake it off; as the Gaseoigns under the Government of
England, heartily affected our Kings.

Antigonus sent Forces into Arabia, which at a Mart, surpr^z'd the Nabotheans;
but in their return with the Body, were all slain, except Fifty Horse out of
Six Hundred, and not a Footman of Four Thousand escaped. Demetrius sent to
revenge it, but was glad to make Peace; and returned, and then was sent against
Seleucus with Fifteen Thousand Foot, and Three Thousand Horse, but did nothing
but Ravage about Babylon, Seleucus being in Media: Neither durst Antigonus
carry the War beyond Euphrates, le^t Syria and Asia the less should be lost,
having ill-affected Neighbors.

. 9. These Ambitious Heads, upon a slow advancement of their hopes grew dull
and willing to breath, till occasion might better serve, and agreed for the
present, First, That each should retain what he had in present possession.
Secondly, That Alexander's Son by Roxane, coming to Age, should be made King,
^hirdly, All Greece to be set free. The Second Article most concerned
Cass^nd^r, who was sure by it to lose all, whatever shift the other made, who
meant not to lose by it: But he by Murdering Roxane, and her Son, to make
himself an odious Security, did thereby free them also from all account to any
Superior Lord. Antigonus pretended the Liberty of Greece; but Ptolomy to
provoke the Greeks to stir in it, sent a Fleet along the Coast of Asia to
molest Antigonus, and seeing them not much concerned at it, he entered
Peloponesus to embolden them to take Courage. But long Servitude had well never
extinguished the Ancient Valor of the Nation, and their many former
^nfortunate Attempts, had so spent their Spirits, as that they sat still,
expecting it should fall in their mouths; yet Cratisipolis yielded Si^yon and
Corinth into his hand. When he saw the Greeks witheld the promised supply of
Money and Victuals, he renewed his former Friendship with Cassander. Now
Polyspercon had in his hands another Son of Alexander's, by Barsine a Persian,
called Hercules, whom he designed to bring into Macedo^, against whom ^as^ander
prepared an Army, which yet he could not trust against the only Child of
Alexander, and therefore attempted the treacherous old Villain, who for the
Lor^ship of Peloponesus murdered his Pupil. Antigonus in the mean time slept
no^, but was working upon a business which would give a specio^s T^tle to the
Empire; this was by matching with Cleopatra the Sister of Alexander, then lying
in Sardis; But Ptolomy for all his many Wives, which was his Do^age, had
prevented him in her Affection, which had induced her to take a journey into
Egypt, but the mischievous practice with the Governor prevented it by her
secret Murder. Thus was the whole Race of Philip and of Antigonus Alexander
extinguished by the justice of God for the Cruelty of those bloody Princes; and
the ambitious Designs of those Tyrants founded in innocent Blood, were soon
after cast down, overwhelming themselves and their Children in the Ruins
thereof.

. 10. Royalty is now extinguished by Antigonus's last infamous Murder, which he
thought to over-shadow with the Glory of the freedom of Greece; for effecting
whereof, he sent D^metrius with a strong Army of Two Hundred and Fifty Sail,
and Five Thousand Talents, with Charge to begin at Athens, which he did; as
also to Megera, for which the Athenians, who had forgot to employ their Hands,
adulterate the Eloquence of their Tongues to base Flattery; decree the Titles
of Kings and Gods, the the Saviors of Athens to Antigonus and Demetrius; chose
a Priest, and cause the Ambassadors, to be sent to them as to Jupiter, Th^ori,
or Consulters with the Gods.

. 12. Antigonus calls his own Garrison from Imbros, and set it free, and called
Demetrius to Cyprus, kept by Menelaus, Brother of Ptolomy, whom he worsted, and
forced him to Salamis, to whose relief Ptolomy hasted with One Hundred and
Forty Galleys, and Two Hundred Ships, with an Army; Demetrius Encounters them
with One Hundred and Eighteen, but better furnished, with which he overthrew
and put Ptolomy to flight with Eight only; so Cyprus was yielded. After this,
Antigonus and Demetrius made themselves Kings, as did Ptolomy, Lysimachus, and
Seleucus.

CHAP. VI. The Wars between the New Kings, 'till all were consumed.
. 1. ANtigonus hoping to swallow up all these New Kings, chose to begin with
Ptolomy, the strongest, against whom he prepared Eighteen Thousand Foot, and
Eight Thousand Horse, with Eighty Three Elephants, all which he led in Person,
and a Navy of One Hundred and Fifty Galleys, and One Hundred Ships under
D^metrius. He departed from Antigonia in Syria, Built by himself; and passing
the Desert with no small danger, at Mount Cassius by Nilus, he saw his Navy in
distress, ^ore beaten, and many lost and driven back to Gaza. Being come to
Nilus, he found all Passages so forti^ied, as by no means, though with great
loss he could force them; besides the falling away of his Soldiers, which
passed over to Ptolomy; so that had he not r^solved to return, Ptolomy had
driven him o^t of Egypt with small Attendance. To save his Credit, all these
misfortunes were laid on his Council.

. 2. Antigonus for the future, will follow his Affairs after another manner, by
cutting the Branches, before he hew down the Tree; he will begin with the
Dependents of his Enemies, whom the Confederates must either forsake, or come
into the Field for their relief, where Military Power and the advantage of
Provisions promised him Victory. The City of Rhodes had stood Neuter, and was
grown Rich by Trade, and kept a good Fleet by Sea, but in this troublesome time
their Affection was to Egypt, this Antigonus made an Argum^nt of his Quarrel,
which he began with some petty Injuri^s, 'till he prepared for an Enterprise
upon them, which he committed to Demetrius; who so terrified the Citizens, that
they offered him their assistance against all Persons. Demetrius knowing this
offer proceeded not from Love, required a Hundred Hostages, and command of
their Haven, with Conditions fitter for a Conquered State, than an assisting
Neighbor, this restored the Rhodians to their lost Courage, who resolve to
defend their Liberty to the last Man; to which end they Enfranchize their able
Bondmen, wisely making them Free-Fellows, rather than themselves would become
their Fellow-Slaves. Thus they endured a whole Years assaults, besides Famine,
wherein Ptolomy with hazard relieved them often; but by the Greeks Ambassador's
entreating Aid against Cassander, he is persuaded to give over, and took an
Hundred private Hostages. The Rhodians presently erect Statues for Lysimachus,
and Cassander, and make a God of Ptolomy.

. 3. Demetrius chaseth Cassander beyond the Straits of Thermopilae, and
recovered all that Cassander held there; the like he did in Peloponesus,
setting all Free, and translateth Sicyon to another place, and called it
Demetrius. Then he was proclaimed General of all Greece, and Athens decreed all
his Commandments should be held Sacred, and just, with God and Men Cassander's
Case now obliged him to seek Peace for Macedon, but Antigonus will have
absolute submission, which made Cassander solicit the Confederates,
Lysimachus, Ptolomy, and Seleucus, who apprehending the common danger, agree to
join Forces against a common Enemy. Lysimachus with part of Cassander's Forces
begins and passes the Hellespont, makes hot War in Asia, which Antigonus
hastes to oppose, but cannot force Lysimachus home, who stayed for Seleucus's
coming, and made him send for Demetrius, etc.

. 4. Seleucus is come, and joined with Ptolomy's Forces and Lysimachus, making
Sixty four Thousand Foot, Ten Thousand Five Hundred Horse, Four Hundred
Elephants, and One Hundred a^med Carts. Antigonus had Seventy Thousand Foot,
Ten Thousand Horse, and Seventy Five Elephants; they met at Ipsus near Ephesus,
where the only memorable Thing was, that Demetrius encountered young Antiochus,
Son of Seleucus, and so pursued him in flight, that Seleucus interposeth his
Elephants between Demetrius and Antigonus's Phalanx, and with his Troops of
Horse so forced it, that many soon revolted, and left him to death. Thus
Princes commonly succeed, who are more feared by their Enemies, than loved by
Friends.

. 5. Demetrius finding all lost, made a speedy retreat to Ephesus, with Four
Thousand Horse, and Five Thousand Foot, thinking long to be at Athens, the
Worshippers of his Godhead, not knowing they had repealed his Deity, 'till he
met their Messengers, not as Theories, to Consult at their Oracle, but as
Officers to prohibit his entering their City; which shameless Ingratitude more
afflicted him than all the rest; yet he spoke them fair, 'till he recovered his
Ships out of their Haven. In the mean time the Confederates are dividing his
Father's Provinces, of which Seleucus seized on Syria, and part of Asia the
less, whereat the rest repined, and consulted to oppose his Greatness in time,
whereof he was not ignorant, knowing the Law of S^^te ought not to permit the
over-growing of Neighbors. Therefore to serve his turn of Demetrius against
Lysimachus, he Married his Daughter Stratonica; but to save the life of his Son
Antiochus, who was passionately in love with her, he gave her to him. The like
Alliance was between Ptolomy and Lysimachus, Demetrius and Cassander, Demetrius
and Ptolomy, yet not bound to each other, but for the present, as it has been
with Christian Kings, whom neither Bed nor Book can make faithful in their
Covenants. Yet Demetrius had this advantage by Seleucus's Affinity, that he got
Cilicia from Plistarchus Brother to Cassander, who yet was pacified by Phila
their Sister, Wife to Demetrius, who also about that time married Ptolomy's
Daughter; yet Seleucus had rather have Demetrius further off, having a mind to
Cilicia (as Ptolomy had to Cyprus) and offered ready money for it, but in vain,
for Demetrius had already found there Twelve Thousand Talents of his Fathers.

. 6. Demetrius with Three Hundred good Ships enters Attica, besieges the City
of Athens, which Ptolomy sought to relieve, but could not; so by extreme Famine
it was yielded, but was spared notwithstanding all their unthankfulness; yet he
put a Garrison in it to keep them honest by force. Then he went to Peloponesus,
against Lacedemon, but was hastily called away into Asia, where Lysimachus had
won many Towns from him, and Ptolomy besieged Salamis in Cyprus, where his
Mother and Childr^n re^ained. Yet hearing of Cassander's death, and that his
Sons Antipater and Alexander fought for the Kingdom, and that Antipater had
furiously slain their Mother Thessalonica for affecting his Brother, he chose
rather to go to assist Alexander, who desired aid of him, and Pyrr^us King of
Epirus.

. 7. Pyrrhus Son of Aeacides an Infant, at his Father's death, was conveyed
unto Glaucias King of Illyria, who at Twelve Years old set him in his Kingdom;
out of which six years after he was forced, and went to serve Demetrius, who
married his Sister, and after the Overthrow at Ipsus, became Hostage to
Ptolomy, upon his reconciliation with Demetrius. In Egypt he got the favor of
Berenice, Ptolomy's principal Wife, and Married her Daughter, and was restored
to Epirus. He being requested of Alexander to aid him against Antipater, for
reward took Ambracia by force, Acarnania, and much more, leaving the united
Brethren to divide the rest. Demetrius also b^ing come after all was done, is
discontented, and pretending Alexander had plotted his death, slew him at a
Feast, and seized on his part of the Kingdom. At which Antipater, who had
Married Lysimachus's Daughter, was so enraged, that his Father-in-Law to quiet
him took away his troublesome life. Thus the House which Cassander had raised
with so much Treachery and Royal-Blood, fell on his own Grave before the Earth
was thoroughly settled. Demetrius after this access of Dominion, grew to such
dissoluteness in Wine, Women, and Idleness, that he would not endure the
trouble of Petitions, and doing justice, so that the People grew weary of his
idleness, and the Soldiers of his vanity. Having lost all he had in Asia and
Cyprus, but his Mother and Children, which Ptolomy honorably sent him home, he
went against Thebes, and won it twice; then he went against Pyrrhus with two
great Armies, of which one led by Pentauchus was overthrown, and he beaten by
Pyrrhus, upon Challenge hand to hand; which loss offended not the Macedonians
so much as the young Princes behavior pleased them, seeming to see a lively
figure of Alexander in his best qualities. This esteem of Pyrrhus was increased
by the dislike which he had of Demetrius, for his Insolency, and Cruelty to his
Soldiers, of whom he said, The more of them died, the fewer he had to pay. In
the end he grew sensible of their general hatred, which to prevent, he intended
a War in Asia with a Royal Army of almost One Hundred Thousand Foot, and Twelve
Thousand Horse, and a Navy of Five Hundred Sail, of which many exceeded all
former greatness. Seleucus and Ptolomy doubting the issue, are earnest with
Lysimachus and Pyrrhus to join against him, who accordingly invade Macedon,
Lysimachus entering that part next him; and when Demetrius went against him,
Pyrrhus broke in on his side, and took Berrhaea, which News put all the Camp in
a consternation, few forbearing seditious Speeches, and many desiring to return
home. But he perceiving their design to go to Lysimachus their Countryman, led
them against Pyrrhus a Stranger, thinking so to pacify them, wherein he was
deceived. For though they were as hasty as he to meet with Pyrrhus, yet was it
not to fight with him, but to submit to him; insomuch that many ran over to his
Camp, and persuaded him to show himself to the Macedonians, who would Salute
him King. To try this, he rode forth in view of the Camp bare-headed, but was
persuaded to put on his Helmet, whereon he wore two Goats Horns, by which he
was known; whereupon all thronged about him, some wishing Demetrius to be gone,
who in disguise stole away. So Pyrrhus entered Macedon with Triumph, where
Lysimachus met him, and shared the Kingdom with him, each hoping upon better
opportunity to work his Fellow out of all.

. 8 Demetrius had left Antigonus his Son in Greece, with a great part of his
Forces: with these he Besieged Athens, but was pacified by Crates the
Philosopher, and so went into Asia with Eleven Thousand Soldiers to attempt
Lydia and Caria, held by Lysimachus, where he was successful till Agathocles,
Son of Lysimachus, forced him to seek a Kingdom in higher Asia, and yet left
him not so, but pursued him over Lycus, where he lost so many, that he was
forced to fly with the rest into Cilicia, from whence he writ Mournful Letters
to Seleucus, who durst not trust him, till after some inconsiderable Victories,
he is left with a few Friends, who persuaded him to yield to Seleucus, by whom
he is put into a foggy Island under sure Guard, where he spent Three Years
merrily, and there Dyed.

. 9. Ptolomy about the same time Died also, who beside other Princely Virtues
was mindful of his word, which in those times was a rare Commendation. Ptolomy
Philadelphus, who had Reigned with him Two or Three Years, succeeded: Ptolomy
Ceraunus offended, and fled to Seleucus. The Macedonians after Seven Months
revolt from Pyrrhus to Lysimachus, who Reigned alone Five Years, when the City
Lysimacha fell by an Earthquake, after which himself having Poisoned Agathocles
his Son, by instigation of a Mother in Law, in a War with Seleucus in Asia was
slain. Seleucus surviving all Alexanders Hero's, as Heir of all the Conquered
World, passed over into Maccedon, and took possession of Europe, where within
Seven Months Ptolomy Ceraunus Treacherously slew him, being Seventy Seven Years
Old. Pyrrhus the Epirot, was now become equal to any of those Old Commanders in
the Art of War, yea Hanibal preferred him before them all. Supra,. 7.

CHAP. VII. Romes growth, and settling of the Eastern State.
. 1. ROMES Greatness beginning now to encounter Greece, it is convenient here
to make a compendious relation of her growth from Tullus Hostilius, who having
Reigned Thirty Two Year was burnt, together with his House, by Lightning. Ancus
Martius Grandchild to Numa succeeded, who Walled the City, and built a Bridge
over Tybris, and after Twenty Four Years dyed, leaving his Children in Charge
with Incumon a Corinthian, his Favorite, who had fled from Cypselus King of
Corinth, and dwelt in Tarquinii, from whence he was called Tarquinius. He
Reigned Thirty Eight Years, and was slain by Ancus Martius's Sons; but by the
coming of Tarquin's Wife, Servius Tullus, her Daughters Husband, was made
Governor for a time, under pretense her Husband was Sick; in which Government
he continued by force Forty Four Years, and then was slain. Tarquinius Superbus
is Proclaimed King by Tullia his Wife, Daughter to Servius, who forced her
Coach over her Father's dead Corpse. He took Oriculum, Susa, Pometia, and the
Gabii; but for the Rape of Lucretia by Sextus Tarquinius his Brother, he and
all his Family were expelled by Iunius Brutus, and Collatinus her Husband; that
manner of Government was changed from a King to two yearly Consuls, or
Providers for the City, wherein these two began. Their first War was with
Porsennus King of Hetruria, who came to Rome by force, to restore Tarquinius;
but was so long resisted by Horatius Cocles, upon the Bridge, 'till being
overpowered by Numbers, he was forced to leap into the River Tibris with his
Armor on, and so terrified by Mutius Scaevola's resolution, burning his own
hand for killing the Secretary instead of the King, that he entered into League
with Rome. Brutus being slain in this War was mourned for a whole year by the
Ladies, as the Champion of their Chastity. Mamilius Tusculanus, Son-in-Law to
Tarquinius, with his Latins, renewed the War; against whom, Aulus Posthumus in
a new Office of Dictator was sent, who overthrew them. After Sixteen Years of
Consuls, upon a tumult of the People, the Office of Tribunes was enacted, to
follow the Peoples Causes as Solicitors. Then follow the Wars with the Volsci
and Aequi, in which, T. Martius got the Surname Coriolanus, for winning the
City Corioli; but was after Banished, for raising the rate of Corn too high.
Coriolanus flies to the Volsci, whom he incensed, and was with Attius Tullus
employed against Rome, and so far prevailed, that when neither force nor
entreaty would serve, his Wife and Mother were sent, whose sorrowful
deprecations prevailed. Not long after, Three Hundred and Six Fabii's
undertaking the War against the Veii in Hetruria, were slain, and left but one
Infant of the whole Family; of whom (it is said) came Fabius Maximus. In
process of time, the Consuls and other Magistrates are abrogated, and Ten Men
ordained, who Enacted Laws, and Two Years after, are forced to resign to
Consuls. After that, they subdued the Veients and Falisci yielded to Camillus
in reverence to his Justice upon the Schoolmaster of their Town, who having
decoyed out many Principal Men's Children, yielded them up to him for Hostages,
whom he sent back bound, with his Scholars whipping him. He also won the City
of Veij, after Ten Years Siege; but upon unequal division of the Spoil,
ungratefully they Banished him. While he lived at Ardea, the Gauls invading
Hetruria, as they roved over the Country, being offended with the Roman
Ambassadors, went to Rome, which was abandoned before their coming; and set it
on fire, and had taken the Capitol, defended by M. Manlius, but for the gagling
of Geese. After Seven Months Siege Brennus agreed to depart for One Thousand
Weight of Gold, which while they were weighing, Camillus with an Army came upon
them, and forced them away. At this time they had Military Tribunes.

. 2. Rome Three Hundred Sixty Five years after its Building, re-established
Consuls, Enacting that one should always be a Plebean, when she began War with
the Samnites, dwelling between Apulia, and Campania, whom they invaded, and
forced to submit to Rome for protection. This War continued Fifty Years, and
drew the Hetrurians into it, in which time the Latins claimed freedom in Rome,
which bred a quarrel, wherein the Latins were overthrown. The Sabines were
after subdued, and won Tarentinus, after which the Apulians, Lucanians,
Messapians, and Brutians, who drew the Samnites to rebel, sent for Pyrrhus out
of Epirus to assist them.

. 3. Pyrrhus, forsaken by the Macedonians, impatient of Peace, accepted the
Conditions of these Confederates, hoping to enlarge his Empire toward the West,
as Alexander had to the East, and then to live Magnificently, as he answered
his Counselor Cynea, who replied, He might do so, if he could be content with
his own. Pyrrhus carries an Army of almost Thirty Thousand choice Soldiers to
the Tarentines, who were nothing forward in provision for War; which while he
was employed about, Levinus the Roman Consul drew near, wasting the Lucans; so
that Pyrrhus was forced with his own and some weak assistance of the
Tarentines, to try the Roman Valor. But seeing them come on so bravely, he
offered to arbitrate a Peace between them and the Tarentines; but was answered,
They neither chose him their Judge, nor feared him their Enemy. Pyrrhus upon
view of their Camp, perceiving he had to deal with Men well-trained, set a
strong Corpse du Guard upon the passage of the River, which when he saw them
force, he thought it time to bring on his whole Forces before all the Army was
come over, and all little enough, while Spear and Sword were used. But when his
Elephants came in, the Roman Horse quickly turned head, and the Foot at the
sight and first impression of those strange Beasts fled with such
consternation, that they left their Camp to the Enemy. Yet Pyrrhus by this
trial finding the Romans could better endure many such Losses, than he such
Victories, sent Cyneas to persuade an Agreement with the Romans, which they
refused, as long as he was in Italy. This Answer inflamed Pyrrhus with desire
to enter into League with that gallant City, which refused to treat of Peace,
except he first left Italy. They come therefore to a second Battle, which he
obtained by his Elephants, but with such loss of the Flower of his Army, that
he desired any occasion to be gone with Honor.

. 4. Pyrrhus waiting an opportunity to leave Italy, has two occasions offered;
and first from Madecon, where Ptolomy Ceraunus (who had murdered Seleucus his
Protector) was slain by the Gauls, who came out of the Country with those who
took Rome, and passing through many Countries, and making long abode in
Pannonia, at length came to Macedon, under one Belgius; after whom came Brennus
another Captain, with One Hundred and Eighteen Thousand Foot, and Fifteen
Thousand Horse, which Sosthenes with the Macedonians avoided, by shutting up
the Cities. At the same time also the Cicilians sent to Pyrrhus for aid against
the Carthaginians, which occasion he took, and with Thirty Thousand Foot, and
Two Thousand Five Hundred Horse entered Sicily, expelled the Carthaginians, won
Erex the strong City, and in Syracusa began to play the Tyrant. But being again
called into Italy by the Tarentines against the Romans, he was beaten by the
Carthaginians Galleys, and after that forced out of Italy to Epirus, by M.
Curious the Roman.

. 5. Antigonus Son of Demetrius Poliorcetes, with an Army, Navy, and Treasure
came into Macedon, while Brennus with most of his Gauls was gone to plunder the
Temple of Delp^os, leaving Fifteen Thousand Foot, and Three Thousand Horse.
These went to Antigonus, requiring him to buy his Peace; to whose Ambassadors
he showed his Riches, Navy, Camp, and Camels. This being reported at their
return, inflamed the Gauls to hasten thither; of whose coming Antigonus having
intelligence, left his Camp, and put himself and all his Men into a Wood, so
the Gauls finding him gone, hasted to the Seaside, supposing him fled. Part of
Antigonus's Army having recovered their Ships, espying the Gauls presumptuous
disorder, taking their time, suddenly went on shore, and set upon them with
such Resolution, that after the slaughter of many, the rest yielded to
Antigonus. This Success bred in the Barbarians a great reputation of Antigonus,
but his own Men had no better opinion of him than of one who crept into Woods
at sight of the Enemy.

This appeared shortly after, when Pyrrhus being returned to Epirus with a
small Army of Eight Thousand Foot, and Five Hundred Horse, came to make
Devastations in Macedon, in hope to force Antigonus to compound with him for
his Peace. At his entrance Two Thousand of Antigonus's Soldiers Revolted to
him, and many Cities yielded, by which good beginning, he took Courage to
attempt Antigonus and his Army for the Kingdom. Antigonus had no inclination to
fight with him, but to weary him with protracting time; but Pyrrhus so forced a
Straight, in which he overtook him, that he slew most of the Gauls, Antigonus
not taking any care to relieve them; which the Captains of the Elephants
fearing to be their own case, yielded. Then Pyrrhus went to the Phalanx, which
could not be Charged but in Front, which was very dangerous; but perceiving
they had no desire to fight, he drew near to them in Person, persuading them to
yield, which they presently did; so Antigonus with a few Horse fled to
Thessalonica, but is forced by Ptolomy Son of Pyrrhus, who pursued him, to fly
to Peloponesus.

. 6. Pyrrhus having gotten the Kingdom of Macedon, beaten Antigonus and the
Gauls, he thought himself without match in any of the Kingdoms of Alexander's
Conquests. He therefore raised an Army of Twenty Five Thousand Foot, Two
Thousand Horse, and Twenty Four Elephants, as against Antigonus in Peloponesus,
to free such Cities as he held there, but indeed to restore King Cleonymus to
Lacedemon, but made show of all Friendship to them. This dissimulation the
Lacedaemonians had used 'till none would trust them; and yet now they were not
hurt by Pyrrhus's use of it, by reason of his deferring the assaults, 'till
they had fortified the Town, which was never done before. He assailed the Town
three days together, and had won it the second day, but for a Fall his wounded
Horse gave him, and the third day relief came unto them; so that despairing to
carry it, he was content to go to Argos, whither one Faction of the City called
him, promising to render it, as the other Faction called Antigonus; but both
sides repented it when they were come, and desired their departure, which
Antigonus assured them by Hostages; Pyrrhus promised, but designed it not; for
by Night his Accomplices opened him a Gate at which his Army entered, 'till the
Elephants came, which stopped up the Gates, from whence grew the Alarm; the
Citizens arm, and put the Soldiers in the dark to great confusion, they being
ignorant of the Streets; yet Pyrrhus gained the Marketplace. Antigonus came to
their rescue, and Pyrrhus is slain by a Slate cast from an House, by a Woman,
whose Son was fighting with him.

THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. BOOK V. Part I. From the settled Rule of Alexander's
Successors, 'till the Romans Conquered Asia, and Macedon.
CHAP. I. Of the First Punick War.
. 1. CArthage had stood above Six Hundred Years, when she contended with Rome
for Sicily; it surpassed Rome in Antiquity One Hundred and Fifty Years, as well
as in Dominion, which extended from the West part of Cyrene, to Hercules's-
Streights, Fifteen Hundred Miles; wherein stood Three Hundred Cities. It
commanded Spain, and all the Islands in the Mediterranean, South-West from
Sicily; it had Flourished about Seven Hundred and Thirty Years when Scipio took
it, who carried off One Million Four Hundred and Ten Thousand Pounds, besides
the Soldiers part. It was often Rebuilt, and Invincible while it Commanded the
Sea, which almost compassed it; 'twas Twenty Miles in Circuit, and a treble
Wall. Without the Walls, and between them, were Streets with Vaults for Three
Hundred Elephants, and Stables for Four Thousand Horse, with room for Provender
and Lodging for the Horsemen, and Twenty Thousand Foot, which never troubled
the City, as it is at this day in China. The Castle of Beyrsa in the
South Side, was two Miles and a half in compass, with an Arsenal, under which
the Ships and Galleys did Ride. The Form of the Commonwealth was like that of
Sparta, having Titular Kings, and Aristocratical Senators; but in latter times
the People usurpt too much; which confusion in Government, with their too great
trust to Mercenaries, together with Avarice and Cruelty, occasioned their
ruin. They exacted from their Vassals one half of the Fruits of the Earth,
besides Tributes; made merciless Officers by exactions to augment the Treasure,
and put to death, without Mercy, him who offended ignorantly, nay even their
Captains upon ill Success, which made them often desperately to hazard all. The
Year after Tarquin's expulsion, Rome sought a League with Carthage, agreed the
Romans should Trade in no part of Africa; but no Haven in Italy to be shut
against Carthage, etc. Their Care was to keep the Romans in continual War in
Italy, that Sicily destitute of aid from thence, might more easily be brought
under by them. This made them offer Succors to Rome against Pyrrhus, to
prevent his interrupting their attempts in Sicily; at which time the League was
renewed, especially against Pyrrhus, who then defeated the purposes of Carthage
for that time. Some time before, a Troop of Campanian Soldiers, who had served
under Agath^cles, and were entertained in Messana as Friends, with persidious
Cruelty slew those that had trusted them, and possessed their Cities, Wives,
Lands, and Goods, and called themselves Mamertines, who afterward molested the
Neighbors, but were opposed by the Syracusians, and Besieged. But unable to
hold out, and being divided, one side resolves to give themselves to Carthage,
the other to Rome. The Carthaginians readily lay hold of the Offer, send
Forces, and had the Castle surrendered. But the contrary Faction drawing that
side to agreement, expelled the Captain, for which he was Crucified at home as
a Coward and Traitor. Carthage hereupon besieges Messana, and the Syracusians
join with them by Sea and Land; while Appius Claudius the Roman Consul, with an
Army passing the Streights of Sicily by Night, put himself into Messana,
sending to the Carthaginians, and Hierom King of Syracuse, requiring them to
depart from their Confederacy; which Message being slighted, occasioned the
Punick War.

. 2. Rome's undertaking the defense of Rhegium with a Legion of Four Thousand
Roman Soldiers, whom they had requested for their defense against Pyrrhus and
the Carthaginians, proved basely treacherous; for these Confederating with the
Mamertines, plunder the City, even as the Mamertines had formerly done at
Messana. The Romans upon Complaint hereof, sent Forces which vanquished them,
and put all to death, restoring Rhegium to its former Liberty, to the high
commendation of their Justice; but when the Mamertines came to be considered,
though they had given example and aid to their Legion at Rhegium, yet Profit
prevailed against Justice, which they used to pretend, and their care to hinder
Carthages further footing in Sicily, persuaded them to defer the punishment of
the Villains, whose Fellows they had destroyed. Appius Claudius being sent unto
them of Messana, sallied out on that side Hierom kept, and worsted him, and the
Syracusians, who had foolishly joined with Carthage, against whom they must
have sought aid at Rome if Messana had been won. Hierom knowing such another
Bargain would have made him Bankrupt, departed, and the next day the
Carthaginians succeeded so ill, that they left Camp and Country to the Romans,
who Confederated with this Nest of Thieves and Murderers, with whom no League
was just.

. 3. Sicily's Dominion is now become the Prize for which Rome and Carthage
contend; concerning which Island the general Opinion of Antiquity is, that it
was a Demi Island adjoining to Italy, near Rhegium, and separated by Tempests,
others say by Earthquakes, others by Tides. It excells all the Islands of the
Midland Sea in bigness and fertility, and is formed like the Greek D Delta, or
a Triangle. For Fertility Cicero calls it the Granary of the Commonwealth, and
Nurse of the vulgar sort, furnishing their greatest Armies with Leather,
Apparel, and Corn. About Leordium and other parts Wheat grows of it self. It
had Six Colonies, and Sixty Cities; it bred Archimedes, the Mathematician,
Euclid the Geometrician, Empedocles the Philosopher, and Diodorus the
Historian. It was Peopled by Sicans out of Spain, after the first Inhabitants
which were Giants, and the Sicans were cast out by the Siculi from Italy,
driven out from the place in which Rome stands, by the Pelasgi; from these
Siculi it bears the name. After them came the Morgetes out of Italy, who were
expelled by the Oznotrians, etc. The Trojans came after, and then the
Phenicians, which built Parormus, or Palmero. The report of Giants which first
Inhabited the Island, I could reject, did not Moses make us know that such were
the first Planters of the Countries about Israel; and did not other Authors
confirm it, as Augustine, Tertullian, Procopius, Isidore, Nicephorus, Pliny,
Diodorus, etc. yea Vespusius in his second Navigation into America, saw the
like there. And I wonder at this the less, seeing the same is written of all
Nations that is written of one, touching their simplicity of Life, mean
Sustenance, poor Cottages, Clothing of Skins, Hunting, Arms, manner of Boats;
in all which, as we are altered from the first Simplicity, to extreme
Curiosity, and excess in Building, Diet, Apparel, so have we as monstrous
Persons for Oppression and all Vices; all which as Time bred and increased, so
shall it overthrow all Flesh at last.

The Greeks Plantation in Sicily was by Theocles, who being driven upon it by
an East Wind, at his return reported to the Athenians the excellency of the
place, and upon their neglect, persuaded the Chalcidians that were needy and
industrious, who sent a Colony of Eubaeans, which built Naxus. Archias with his
Corinthians followed, and built a part of that which was after called Syracuse,
adding three other parts as they increased; and possessing most of the
Seacoast, forced the Siculi into the Mountains at Trinacia. The Chalcidians
also got Leontium, Catana, and Hybla, which they called Megara, as the Rhodians
and Cretians did Gala, and their Postedid built Agrigentum. The Syracusans also
built Arra, Casemeria, Camerina, Enna, etc. as the Messanians took Zancle,
changing the Name.

Agrigentium from popular Government, was by Phaleris brought to Tyranny, who
after Thirty One Years was stoned to death, and their liberty was recovered,
'till Thoro long after Usurped Gela, forced Naxos, Zancle, and Leontium, and
giving aid to the Magistrates of Syracuse against the People, was chosen Prince
in the Second Year of the Seventy Second Olympiad. He aiding Thoro his
Father-in-Law, of Agrigentum, against Terillus, of Himera, slew One Hundred and
Fifty Thousand, led by Amilcar, in defense of Terillus. The Carthaginians well
beaten seek his Peace, which is granted, on Condition no more to Sacrifice
Children to Saturn, but to pay Two Thousand Talents, and Two Armed Ships,
whereto they added a Crown of Gold worth One Hundred Talents of Gold; so much
are some Natures improved by hardship. His Subjects loved him exceedingly, yea
his Dog burnt himself, with his Body at his Funeral. Hierom his Brother
succeeded, a Cruel Rude Covetous Man, but improved by Simonides, became a
Studier of good Arts. His Brother Thrasibulus succeeded, who after Ten Months
Tyranny, was forced by the Citizens to restore their Liberty, and was Banished;
so Syracuse kept her Liberty almost Sixty Years; and was in some manner
acknowledged of all the Greek Cities, by freeing them from Ducetius King of the
Sicilians, except Trinacia. But Leontium being oppressed by Syracuse, sought
aid from Athens the Sixth year of the Peloponesian War, which sent One Hundred
Galleys, and other Forces, which invaded Syracuse, winning and losing, 'till
both sides wearied agree, and Leontium is admitted into equal Fellowship, and
the Athenian Captains sent home, whom their City banish for gaining nothing in
Sicily as they expected. Shortly after fell out the most memorable War that
ever Greece made; there Athens aided Egesta, oppressed by Seleucus, and
Leontium and Catana wronged by Syracusa, whom the Lacedaemonians succored.
Alcibiades, Nicias, and Lamachus are sent from Athens, but did little the first
Summer, and Alcibiades is discharged, and new Supplies on both sides are sent
the next Spring; but Syracuse is almost blocked up, yet with Lamachus's death,
before the Succors from Sparta and Corinth, led by Glippus and Pitbon, came.

But after their coming Nicias was broken, and forced to write for new
Supplies; which were sent with Euremedon and Demosthenes, who the same day
invaded the Syracusians with more have than Success; having such loss, as they
determined to return to succor Athens then in distress. Nicias on the contrary
persuaded them to stay, upon intelligence the Town could not hold out long; but
had not the Moon been Eclipsed, the suspicion whereof caused them to defer it,
they had departed. But their Superstition cost them dear, even the utter loss
of all in two Sea Fights in the great Haven, and in their retreat by Land
toward Camerina, in which Forty Thousand are overthrown, Nicias and Demosthenes
taken, and miserably murdered; for contrary to the Endeavors of Glippus and
Hermocrates the Syracusian Commander, to save them, they were barbarously
murdered by the cruel Multitude, etc. The Egestanes now fearing the
Syracusians, apply themselves to Carthage, to whom they of^er their City; and
Hannibal with Thirty Thousand Men is sent, who in revenge of his Father's and
Uncle's Death won and sacked Himera and Seleucus, and buried Three Thousand
Himerans where Amilcar was slain. Hermocrates after his good Service is by
malice of his Enemies, Exiled by the ungrateful Multitude, being in Greece, who
being returned, began to repair Silenus, but upon persuasion of his Friends in
Syracuse, attempting to take a Gate, was slain.

Dionysius, Son-in-Law to Hermocrates, being made Praetor, and Commander of the
Syracusian Armies, behaved himself so well, that he got the good will of the
People and Men of War; and began early, being but Twenty Five Years Old, that
he might play the Tyrant long. He obtained his first Favor by accusing the
Noblemen, whom the baser sort desire to reign over; then he got of them Six
Hundred Men to guard his Person, as Pisistratus at Athens had done, against the
malice of his Enemies; and to gain the Soldiers, he gave them double Pay, and
procured the restoring of many Banished Men, who thereby were made his own.
Then he made himself absolute Lord by possession of the Citadel, in which was
great Provision, and under which the Galleys Moored; what he designed by this
the Chief Citizens discerned it, though the People would not see. Yet after a
Foil given at Gela by the Carthaginians (which the Men at Arms thought he was
willing to) they left him, and hasting to Syracuse, in hope to free the City of
him, they forced his Palace, ransaked his Treasure, and abused his Wife; all
which he revenged, being at their heels, sparing none that he suspected. Then
he grew so doubtful, being the greatest Robber that ever State had, that he
trusted not a Brother to enter his Chamber unsearched; yet being at the War,
the Citizens rebel at home, so that with much difficulty he recovered the
Citadel, and so the Command of the City; and when the multitude were gathering
in Harvest he disarmed the Citizens. Afterward he went into the Field with
Eighty Thousand Foot, and Three Thousand Horse, and sent his Brother Leptines
with Two Hundred Galleys to Sea, and Five Hundred Ships of Burden, which
overthrew Fifty Ships of War, Five Thousand Soldiers, and many Ships of
burden brought by Himilco from Carthage, while many Cities also yielded to
Dionysius, who yet lost a great part of his Army at Egesta. Himilco finds half
his Army with Mago by Sea, which met again with Leptines, and slew Twenty
Thousand, and took One Hundred Galleys, which made Dionysius hasten home, whom
Himilco follows with speed, besieging him by Sea and Land; but the Plague
having taken away One Hundred Thousand of his Men, and other numbers slain by
the City with the Lacedemonian aid, he craved Peace, which the other sold for a
great Sum, and on Condition to leave such as were not Carthaginians; but when
he was out at Sea the Tyrant followed, and slew many. Mago, who stayed behind
to strengthen the Carthaginians in Sicily, received Supplies of Eighty Thousand
Men, which did nothing but make Peace with Dionysius; who marched into Italy,
where he took Rhegium, and used much Cruelty therein.

Afterward in another Battle with Mago he slew him, and Ten Thousand Africans;
but Mago's Son slew his Brother Leptines, and Fourteen Thousand Men, which made
him now buy his Peace: Shortly after he died, after Thirty Eight Years Tyranny,
and his Son Dionysius succeeded, with his Father's disposition; though to gain
favor he dissembled, freed many Prisoners, and remitted many Taxes; but slew
his Brethren by another Mother, the Sister of Dionysius a Valiant Just Man.
This Man had so prevailed with him as to hear Plato, whom he had sent for, by
whose Wisdom he began to be reformed, but continued it not. After this, his
Flatterers procure Dionysius's Banishment, persuading the King, Dionysius
sought to weaken his Mind by Philosophy, and by offer which he had made to
furnish the King with Fifty Galleys, to make himself Master of the Kingdom.
Dionysius was well beloved in Greece, where he gathered Eight Hundred brave
Followers, whom he carried to Syracuse; while the Tyrant was in Italy, he
entered without resistance, and recovered the Cities Liberty, though the Tyrant
held the Castle. After this the Worthy Man had the Reward which popular Estates
use to give, and was forced to abandon the City, but returned twice from
Leontium to assist them against the Castle, which galled them; and at last
recovered the Castle, and was after murdered by Cratippus, who shortly after
was slain by the same Dagger. Dionysius after this recovered the City, and made
many fiye to Icetes, Tyrant of Leontium, who, with the Carthaginians, force
Dionysius into the Castle, and besieged him. After comes Timolion with Forces
from Corinth to free the City, who with the Carthaginians forsake Icetes, wins
the City, and has the Castle rendered by Dionysius, which he beats down,
calling it the Nest of Tyrants. Syracuse wasted by former Wars, is new Peopled
with Ten Thousand Greeks by Timolion's means, who also overthrew Asdrubal, but
Amilcar coming with Seventy Thousand Africans, with Two Galleys, and One
Thousand Ships of burden, vanquished Icetes, and slew him and his Followers;
suppres'd all the Tyrants in Sicily, and died in Peace and Honor. Sicily after
Twenty Years Peace from Timolion's death, falls under the Tyranny of
Agathocles, who rising by degrees in the Field, came from a Beggar to be
Praetor, and after Tyrant of Syracuse. Being Praetor, and in League with
Amilcar the Carthaginian, he entertained Five Thousand Africans, and many old
Soldiers, pretending to besiege Herbita, but indeed sets upon the Senators,
the Rich, and all his Enemies, dividing the Spoil among the Poor, and giving
liberty to the Soldiers to Plunder, Murder, and Ravish, calling it a violent
Remedy for the violent Disease of the Commonwealth, pretending now to reduce
the Oligarchy to the ancient and indifferent Democracy. But having left none
fit for Magistracy, he knew that those whom he assisted in their Murders and
Outrages would need his aid to protect them, and therefore would make him King,
which accordingly they did. This Amilcar was content with, in hope that upon
his wasting the Island all would fall into the Carthaginians hands; but the
Carthaginians upon complaint send another Amilcar; upon which, the former chose
rather to destroy himself, than to give an account to Carthage. Agathocles
before the Carthaginians came, had made the better part of Sicily his own, and
defeating the first Supplies that they returned, and so encountered the second,
brought by Amilcar, by which he grew presumptuous of that which failed him. One
misfortune is enough to overthrow a Tyrant, without great circumspection; as it
was with him, who after one great Defeat was glad to retire home, and being
there besieged with that wicked Rabble which had been Executioners of his
Tyrannous Entrance, he to prevent the Famine which was like to follow, Shipped
himself with as many as he thought convenient, leaving the City. Antander his
Brother went to Sea when the Carthaginian Fleet was going out to seize on
certain Ships coming with Provision; these seeing Agathocles, made toward him,
who hasted toward Africa, while the Provision got into the City; but before he
got to Land the Carthaginians Fleet is fatigued by endeavoring to overtake him
and was beaten and routed by him. Being landed, after many plausible Speeches
to his Company, as if he were Master of all the Riches in Africa, he burnt all
their Ships, except one or two, to use for Messengers. In this heat of
resolution he wins two Cities, and demolished them, to the great amazement
of Carthage, who sent out against him Hanno and Bomilcar, which were his
professed Enemies, of whom Agathocles cut Hanno and his Followers in pieces,
the other looking on. This Success drew an African King to join with him, as
did Ophellas King of the Cyrenians, to whom he promised to deliver what he wan
in Africa, but indeed treacherously murdered him, and entertained his Army.
After this he made a start to Sicily, and appeased some Eruptions, returned to
Africa, pacified his Soldiers in mutiny for want of Pay, and might have
brought Carthage to buy Peace, and give over all in Sicily, if his thoughts of
the Conquest of Carthage had not deceived him, by an impression, which as light
an accident as a flash of fire caused to vanish; for upon two Fires in the
Night, kindled by accident, both Armies fled, each afraid of other. Agathocles
in the dark, falling on his African Soldiers, which he took for Enemies, lost
four Thousand, which so discouraged him, that he endeavored secretly to steal
away; which being understood of the Army, they slew his two Sons, and made
their Peace with Carthage. Agathocles returning to Sicily, grew more cruel,
exceeding Phalaris, but in the end is driven to seek Aid of the Carthaginians
against those that he had banished, which took Arms against him, whom he
subdued by their help, for which he restored to them all the Phoenician Towns
he held in Sicily, and they supplied him with Corn and four hundred Talents of
Gold and Silver. After this he went into Italy, subdued the Brutians, made the
Isle Lipara buy Peace for a hundred Talents of Gold; but in his return with
Eleven Ships laden with Gold, all was lost, and all the Fleet but his own
Galley, which brought him to a more miserable end, by grievous torment in his
Sinews and Veins, over all his Body, in which he was forsaken of all, and dyed
basely as he began. His fellow Soldiers after that, Traitorously possessed
themselves of Messana.

. 4. Hierom, Tyrant of Syracuse, is followed home with the Wars by Appias
Claudius, but thought it Wisdom to buy Peace for a hundred or two hundred
Talents; neither could Carthage be justly offended, seeing they made no haste
to his Relief, knowing the City not able to hold out now, as in their
attempting it; besides, that Rome sought only their Friendship, whereas
Carthage strove for a command of them.

. 6. Hierom, a just and good Prince, beloved of his Subjects, as he sought
their good, sided with Rome. Lucius Posthumus and Q. Mamisius, remove the Army
to Agrigentum, which Carthage had stored with all manner of Ammunition, and
Fifty Thousand Soldiers, between whom, upon a Sally made by the Besieged, was
a Fight, which made the one side keep in, and the other strongly to Entrench
before and behind. Hanibal in the City sends for Succor to Carthage, which
imbarks an Army under the Command of Hanno, with certain Elephants, who landing
at Hiraclea, surprised Erberus, where lay the Roman Provision, which loss had
distressed the Romans, but that Hierom supplied them. Hanno, after that,
assails them, and by pretending flight of his Horsemen, drew them further to
the place where he lay covered, and so slaughtered many: But in his second
Assault, he lost the day, and fled to Heraclia, whither shortly after, Hanibal,
with the remainder of his Army, breaking in the Night through the Romans Camp
escaped. The Romans who came into Sicily with no other intent but to Succor
the Mamils, and keep the Carthaginians from their own Doors, now aspire to the
Command of Sicily, and peradventure to visit Carthage. This is the Disease of
Mortal Men, to covet the greatest things, and not to enjoy the least; the
desire of what we neither have nor need, taking from us the fruition and use of
what we have already. The Romans send two new Consuls, Lucius Verus, and Titus
Octacilius, so the Inland Town became theirs, and as many Maritime places were
Commanded by Carthage; which was the cause the Romans determined to raise a
Fleet, which before this, knew not how to move an Oar. Having now built one
hundred and twenty Galleys, and trained Men to row: C. Cornelius, one of that
Years Consuls, with Seventeen of them past over to Messena, and taking Pleasure
therein, went to Zippara, whereof Hannibal, Governor of Panormus, having
Intelligence, sent and surprised the Consul and his Galleys; and flushed with
this success, himself, with Fifty, went to surprise the rest, but came off with
great loss. Cornelius is redeemed, and Duillius his Fellow, is made Admiral;
who, considering the Advantage of the Carthaginian light Galleys, in rowing
away from the heavy ones of the Romans, devised an Iron to grapple when they
met, and so got the Advantage, which an heavy strong broader Vessel has of
weaker and lighter, which are in danger of splitting; neither are they so
steady, which is no small help in Fight, wherein the best use of the Hand is in
them which best keep their Feet.

. 7. Rome proceeds in War by Sea, sends a Fleet to Sardinia; and Hannibal had
obtained a Fleet a^ Carthage, which now Anchored in Sardinia Haven, which the
Romans, coming suddenly, surprised, and Hannibal escaping hardly, was hanged at
his return; For in War it is too much to offend twice. But Amilcar lying in
Panormus, sent Hanno, upon Intelligence of the Roman disorder in Sicily, who,
unlooked for, slew four thousand of them. Panormus was the next which the
Consul Besieged, but could not draw the Carthaginians into the Field, nor force
the great City so strongly guarded; so they left it, and took the Land Towns.
C. Attilius, Consul next Year, was beaten and lost Nine Galleys of Ten, but by
coming up of the rest of his Fleet, the Carthaginians lost Eighteen. Upon this,
Rome built a Fleet of three hundred and Thirty Ships, and Carthage another of
Three hundred and fifty, to try who should Command the Seas; the Romans one
hundred forty thousand, and the Carthaginians one hundred and fifty thousand
Men aboard. Both Navies met, but Attilius had the better, taking sixty three
and sinking Thirty, with loss of twenty Four, which fell out by Amilcar's
ordering his Galleys, so as that himself being forced and not able to recover
to join with his other Squadrons, that Squadron of the Romans which forced him,
fell back and helped their Fellows.

. 8. The Romans repair their Fleet, set forward to Africa, landing at Clypea, a
Port Town, which yielded, and so gave them an Haven, without which all
Invasions are foolish. Amilcar is also come to Carthage, and defense is
prepared, while Mantius, one of the Consuls, with all the Navy, is called home,
with two thousand Captive Africans, leaving but fifteen thousand Foot, five
hundred Horse, and forty Galleys with Atilius. He Besieged Adis, where, to
hinder him, Amilcar, Hanno, and Bester, are sent with an Army, who designing to
weary him with lingering, place themselves on the top of an Hill. Regulus
discovering the advantage that neither the Carthaginian Horse nor Elephants
could do service there, set stoutly upon them, and forced them to leave their
Camp to the Spoil, after which they proceed to Tunis, sixteen Miles from
Carthage, to the great Terror of that City, which being encumbered with
Multitudes, fled into it from the Romans, could not long keep Famine out, which
would let in the Romans. Atilius finds this Advantage, but doubting they will
hold out 'till his Year expire, and so the next Consuls shall have the Honor,
he treats of Peace with Carthage, that he may reap his own Fruit; Ambition
seeking only to gratify it self; but Atilius's Conditions were so unworthy,
that the Carthaginians disdained 'em, changing Fear into a Courageous
Resolution to defend their Liberty to the last Man. To strengthen their
Resolution, Xantippus, a Spartan, a very expert Soldier, with a great Troop of
Greeks formerly sent for, came, who showing the Errors of the Commanders in
the former Overthrow, to the Senate, is made General of Twelve thousand Foot,
four thousand Horse, and one hundred Elephants, which were all the Forces which
Carthage could raise at home, to fight for Liberty, Lives and all. But such as
use Mercenaries, as they did, are stronger abroad than at home, as we see in
their other Armies of one hundred and forty thousand, and one hundred and fifty
thousand at Sea, etc. Xantippus so ordered this Army in a Level Ground, that he
utterly overthrew the Romans, took Atilius and five hundred others, and slew
all the rest but two thousand, etc. Thus one wise head overmatch many Hands.
Atilius, upon his word, went to Rome to treat about Exchange and Ransom of
Prisoners, which he dissuaded, considering the loss Rome should take thereby;
and returning to Carthage, dyed by Torture, as a Malicious obstinate Enemy,
whose vainglorious Frowardness rather than necessity of State, the Romans
afterward slighted, and made the Exchange; losing all he had gotten, and more;
as did the Flanderkins at Gaunt.

. 9. Carthage, by this Victory, recovered all in Africa, but Clypea, kept by
the Romans, to whose Succor three hundred and fifty Galleys are sent, which
being encountered by two hundred from Carthage, they took one hundred and
fourteen of them, and taking on board their Besieged Men at Clypea, return from
Sicily, hoping to get all there that Carthage held. The Pilots persuade them to
put into Harbor, the Season threatening a Storm, urging that the South of
Sicily has no good Ports; but these Men being Conquerors, desperately oppose
the Elements, and near Cameria, all their Fleet but Eighty three were cast
away, which was the remainder of their late Victory. The Carthaginians hoping
to recover command at Sea, send Asdrubal with two hundred Galleys, with all the
old Soldiers, and one hundred and forty Elephants, which land at Lilybaeum;
while the Romans make a hundred and twenty Ships, which, with the remainder of
their Wrack, they sent to Panormus, and surrounded it by Sea and Land, and take
it. Then they visit Africa again, make some Spoil, but in return between
Panormus and Italy, Neptune spoiled them of all that Mars had given, with the
loss of a hundred and fifty Ships; so that now the Sea has devoured four
hundred and six Ships and Galleys, and made them resolve to keep the Land; and
upon Experience of Atilius's loss by Elephants, they dread fighting in Champain
Countries. But finding how impossible possible it was to succor the places
they held in Sicily by Land-Marches, against the speedy Passage of the
Carthaginians by Sea, they change their minds.

. 10. Coetilius with half of the Roman Army in Panormus, is attempted by
Asdrubal and his Forces, from Lilybaeum, who sending his Elephants before
against a Legion which came by Appointment, to draw them on under color of
retireing, 'till they came to a Trench which they could not pass; where being
repelled by the Soldiers in it, enraged, they turn on their own Foot and
disorder them. Caecilius seeing the advantage, brake out, ^lew many and took
the Elephants. Rome hereupon, hoping at once to end the Fourteen Years War of
Sicily, prepare a new Fleet of two hundred Sail, which is sent to Lilybaeum,
the only place of Importance in the Cartbaginians Hands. This Himilco, with a
Garrison of ten thousand, held against them; and Hannibal, Son of Amilcar, is
sent with ten thousand more, which he led into the City in despite of all
resistance. During this Siege, a Rhodian undertook, with a very swift Gally, to
enter the Town through the Roman Fleet, and performed it, coming back again to
Carthage; after the Rhodian, others performed as much, which made the Romans
sink so many Ships with Stones, that the Passage was blocked up, so that at his
next coming he was taken, with another Carthaginian Gally. Lilybaeum begins to
be distressed by continual watching and labor; but in this Despair, some of
the Roman Engines are thrown down by a violent Storm, and burnt by a Greek
Soldier; which the Romans would not repair, but resolve to starve the
Defendants. M. Claudius a Consul, arrives with ten thousand, and reinforced
the Army, and propounds the Surprise of Drepanum, a City on the other side of
the Bay, which all embrace, and being embarked, Arrive. Adherbal, a Valiant and
prudent Warrior, exh^rting his Men to Fight abroad rather than to be shut up
at home, puts to Sea; the Consul's Fleet being more in haste to surprise than
in order to defend, is forced into a Bay in which he wants room to range
himself. In this straight he forces his way out with Thirty Galleys, and fled,
leaving Ninety four Ships to his Enemies Entertainment. L. Iunius a Consul, is
sent from Rome with sixty Galleys to take the Charge, who met the remainder of
the Fleet at Messana, except some in Lilybaeum Port, and made up a hundred and
twenty Galleys, and eight hundred Ships of Burden, and at Syracuse, sent the
Questors or Treasurers with half the Provision of some Galleys for Convoy.
Adberbal, upon this Victory, not being secure, sends Carthalo with a hundred
Galleys to try what he can do in Lilybaeum Port, who surprised, took and burnt
all the Galleys in it; and Coasting along the South, met with Consul Iunius's
Victuallers, forced them into a Road full of Rocks, where Carthalo took some of
them, waiting for the rest who could not stay long in so dangerous a place.
Whilst he is thus waiting for them the Consul is discovered, against whom he
went out, who is also glad to take into a dangerous Creek. Carthalo takes a
station, sit to watch which will stir first; but discerning a Storm at hand, he
made haste to double the Cape of Pachinus, and left the Consul to the
boisterous South Wind, which utterly wrackt all his Galleys, etc. Rome at the
Report hereof again renounces the Sea, resolving rather to trust to their
Legions upon firm Land.

. 11. Iunius the Consul to regain the Honor he had lost at Sea, resolves to
attempt Erix on the Mount, which he took, and Fortified as being fit for a
Garrison between Lilybaeum and Panormus. Shortly after in the Eighteenth Year
of this War, Amilcar, surnamed Barcas* Father of G. Hannibal, is sent with a
Fleet and Army, with which he so wasted the Locrians and Brutians, that he
repayed the Roman Spoils. In Sicily he settles himself between Panormus and
Erix, and three Years molested the Romans; and after found way into Erix before
the Guards, either at the bottom or on the top of the Hill, knew it, and there
he kept them in play almost two Years. Rome now knows no way to be rid of this
obstinate Warrior, 'till they command the Sea, which requires a Fleet, and
(they having wasted the common Treasure) the private Citizens must make it
good. It is decreed, and two hundred Galleys are by the Rhodian Pattern raised
and committed to C. Luctatius Catullus. Hanno, Admiral of the Carthaginian
Fleet, well furnished as he thought, for them at Erix, but neither with fit
Mariners nor stout Fellows, as soon appeared. For Catullus the Consul having
well exercised his Men in rowing, he lightened his Galleys, and stored all of
them with choice Land Soldiers, which Hanno was so deficient in, that at the
first Encounter he had fifty stem'd, seventy taken, and ten thousand made
Prisoners* Carthage thus utterly discouraged, sends to Amilcar, referring it
wholly to his Wisdom what to do, who considering the present necessity, sent to
Luctatius to treat of Peace, who, upon the same consideration of Romes present
Poverty, agreed on Conditions, which were sent to Rome, who sent Commissioners
to conclude the Peace. Carthage is expelled out of Sicily, restores Prisoners,
and paid three thousand two hundred Talents in Twenty Years.

CHAP. II. What passed between the First and Second Punick Wars.
. 1. THE Carthaginians thus quit of Sicily and the Islands about it, have now
leisure to think how to help themselves in a following War, rather than to be
content with the present Peace; for that the Conquerors give and the Conquered
receive Laws. But Rome forgot in this Affair what had been answered a Senator,
demanding what Peace Rome may hope for, or be assured of, if they quitted the
present Advantage over them? It was Answered, if the Peace you give us be good
and faithful, it will hold; if it be ill, it will not. The Senate approved the
Answer as manly and free; for who will believe that any People will endure an
over-hard Condition longer than Necessity compells. They therefore grossly
flatter themselves, to think that the Carthaginians, inferior neither in Power
or Pride, will sit down with loss and dishonor any longer than they are
deprived of the means and opportunity of Revenge. But when the Army of the
Carthaginians was to be transported home, which Amilcar committed to Gesco, who
considering the great Sums Carthage did owe the Soldiers, more than the City
was able to pay, they sent them over in small Numbers, to be dispatched and sent
away before the Arrival of others of their Fellows. The Governors on the
contrary put them off, 'till all were come; and to avoid the disorders of such
lawless Guest, sent them to Sicca to prevent their coming to Carthage. Then
Hanno^ is sent to persuade them to be content with part of their Pay,
considering the Poverty of the City. They which had expected the uttermost
Farthing with some donative, hearing this, are enraged, and resolving to demand
their due nearer home, remove to Tunis, not far from Carthage, which now began
to see her Errors against that old Rule, Have special care that valiant
Poverty,
Be not oppressed with too great Injury.


Many other Errors, besides the first gathering together so many in Arms whom
they went to wrong, were committed, as thrusting out their Wives and Children,
who might have been Hostages, and to send Senators, daily promising to satisfy
all demands. By these shiftings, the Soldiers perceive the City's fear, and
thereupon raise other demands besides Pay. The Commotion increased, and they
are requested to refer all to any that had commanded in Sicily; and they chose
Gesco, who had made a quiet end but for two seditious Persons, Spendius and
Matho, who prevail with the African Soldiers, putting all in uproar; neither
could Gesco's, offering to pay the whole stipend, pacify them, who now seek a
Quarrel rather than Money. They therefore chose Spendius and Matho Captains,
and upon further Speech which Gesco made, which discontented them, they cast
him and those that came with him into Bonds, and lay violent Hands upon the
Treasure he brought for them. Matho and Spendius send Ambassadors to solicit
all Africa, easily stirred up against Carthage, which now must hear of their
Oppressions, in exacting half their Corn, Tribute, and were extreme in
punishing small Offenses: For Adversity has been told of her Errors. Now all
that are able fly to Arms, and the very Women bring forth their Jewels, so that
besides seventy Thousand Africans which came in, their Treasure vastly
increased.

. 2. Tyranny must use the help of Mercenaries, which commonly are as false, as
the War against Tyrants is Cruel. Tyranny is a violent Form of Government;
respecting the Commanders pleasure, and not the good of Subjects. Violent it
is, seeing no Man can yield willing Obedience, where his Life and Welfare is
not regarded. Tyrants which are most Cruel seem mild sometimes to some for
their own advantage; but in large Dominions, where they cannot take such
particular knowledge of Men, he who cannot endure the face of one so honest, as
will put him in mind of moderation, will not bound his desires. The sweetness
of Oppression from a few, inflames his appetite to spare none, seeing there is
no cause to respect one more than other; and Covetousness is never satisfied.
Having squeezed from all, yet believing every one could have spared more, and
he knows many pretend want without cause; and therefore devises new tricks of
Robbery, which please him as much as the gain, devouring the recreation of his
Spirit: He knows he is hated for it, and therefore seeks to turn hatred into
fear, by cruelty against the suspected, whether justly or no, so that the
Conspirator can be no more fearful of his Tyranny than the Inocent. Wherefore
thinking upon his own security, he must disarm all, fortify himself in some
strong place, and take a guard of lusty Soldiers, not of Subjects, lest any
one grow to the feeling of the common misery; but of Strangers, which neither
have Wealth nor Credit at home. To make the^^ his own, they shall be permitted
to do as he does, to Rob, Ravish, Murder, and satisfy their own Appetites.

. 3. Carthage c^lls us back to proceed with her Mercena^ies (...) Arms against
her, at the Siege of Vtica and Hippag^^^a, ^^ted on the Western Haven of
Carthage, the rest of (...) Forces encamped at Tunis. Hanno is sent with ^ower
against them from Carthage; whose sudden (...) made them forsake their Tents,
to fly to a r^^gh high ground to avoid his Hundred Elephants; ^ut perceiving
he was entered the City, they return, force his Camp with great slaughter, took
his Provision, and possessed all Passages from Carthage. The Carthaginians upon
this loss send Amilcar with Ten Thousand Men and Seventy Elephants more, whose
Passage over the Bridge of Macra or Bagradas the Mercenaries having taken by
Hanno's oversight, Amilcar was forced to take his opportunity formerly observed
by him, when the Rivers mouth used to be stopped with Sand and Gravel, and so
passed over, to the Enemies amazement, which yet took heart by the coming of
Fifteen Thousand Men from Vtica, besides Ten Thousand which guarded the Bridge.
Their Army now far exceeded his; they wait their advantage, but with some
disorder, which Amilcar espying, made haste in his March as if he had fled,
which drew the Enemy to follow confusedly, as to a Victory; but by his wheeling
about upon them Six Thousand of them were slain, and Two Thousand taken. After
this, Narvasus who led Two Thousand Numidian Horse, sent to the Mercenaries,
and came over to Amilcar, as being a Man of Honor; with whose assistance
Amilcar set upon Spendius, and slew Ten Thousand, and took Four Thousand
Prisoners, whom he kindly treated. Matho, Spendius, and other Leaders, to
prevent the falling away of their Men by allurement of Amilcar's lenity to
such, procure a general consent to put Gesco and his Fellows to death, so to
make them odious to Carthage; and decree further to kill all Carthaginian
Prisoners; which execrable fury and desperation, was like the Council of
Achitophel. Vtica and Hippagreta now fall from Carthage, and slew their
Garrison, so that Hanno comes to join with Amilcar, but by reason of the
animosity between them, the common Cause is little promoted; so by judgment of
the Army Hanno was sent home, and Hannibal succeeded him.

The Mercenaries with Fifty Thousand Men are come near Carthage, but too weak
to assault it or famish it, having the Sea open, by which it received Succor
from Syracuse, and Rome made overtures of like assistance. Amilcar is at their
backs, keeping them in; and when they durst not leave their higher ground for
fear of Amilcar's Elephants, and Narvasus's Horses, Amilcar to prevent what
Desperation might put them to, shut them up with Trench and Rampart; so while
they expect aid from Matho at Tunis, Famine forced them to eat their Prisoners,
and then one another. In this extremity they force Spendius and Two others to
go to Amilcar to seek Peace, which was granted, upon condition he shall choose
any Ten, and the rest to depart in their Shirts. Amilcar chose Spendius, and
the two with him, and with his Army goes to choose the rest; which the
Mercenaries thinking to be to assault them, ran the two Armies in confusion,
and were all slain to the number of Four Thousand. Amilcar proceeds to Tunis,
in the Siege whereof Hannibal is taken by Matho, and Crucified as Spendius had
been; upon which loss, Hanno is sent upon a feigned reconciliation with
Amilcar, which shortly after overthrew Matho, and ended that War of two Years
and four Months:

. 4. Carthage being endangered by her Sicilian Mercena^ies at home, was also
troubled with Mercenaries in Sardinia, which murdered the Governor; against
whom another Hanno was sent, with as many Mercenaries as Carthage could spare;
who also ^lew Hanno, and joined with the first, and expelled all the
Carthaginians. Then looking to succeed in Command of the Island, the
Inhabitants withstood them, and expelled them; neither would the Romans,
invited by them, undertake it; as they likewise refused to accept Vtica
offering it self. This might have served for an example of Roman Faith to
Posterity, if they had not thrust themselves into it after Carthage had ended
her home Wars, and prepared for Sardinia, which the Romans pretending to be
against Rome it self, made the Quarrel to proclaim War; which forced Carthage
in her present weakness to renounce her Right in Sardinia.

. 5. Carthage having found her own Punick Faith and Dealing at the hands of
Rome, learned how necessary it was to make her self strong, or resolve to
submit to Rome; and because the Roman jealousy forbad them to attempt any
thing in the Midland-Sea, they resolve upon an Expedition to Spain, which they
commit to Amilcar, who in Nine Years subdued most of the Country, and was then
slain in Battle with the People which then inhabited Portugal. Asdrubal his
Son-in-Law succeeded, enlarged their Dominions, and built Carthagena in the
Kingdom of Granado. Rome grew jealous, but knows not how to ground a quarrel,
having no acquaintance in Spain. They send to Asdrubal, requiring him not to
pass over Iberus, hoping his Resolute Spirit would give them a ground to work
upon, but are deceived, by his appearance to conform to their will. The
Saguntines on the South of Iberus perceiving how Carthage gave way to Rome,
entered Confederation with her; which the Carthaginians, now grown strong,
thought to be an ill example, and to their prejudice, and remembering old
injuries, prepare against the Saguntines.

. 6. Greece during the first Punick War after Pyrrhus's Death, had somewhat
recovered her Liberty through the dissentions in Macedon, which after Pyrrhus,
was established in Antigonus the Son of Demetrius, and his Issue, as Egypt was
in Ptolomy's, and Asia and Syria in Seleucus. Antigonus being after Pyrrhus
driven out by Alexander the Son of Pyrrhus, was restored by his own Son
Demetrius, who also expelled Alexander the Epirot out of Epirus. Demetrius also
got his Father possession of the Citadel of Corinth, which was the entrance by
Land into Peloponnesus. Demetrius succeeded Antigonus in Macedon Ten Years, and
left Philip a young Son, his Uncle Antigonus being Protector, who held it for
life, and by the dissentions of Greece got no less Authority therein than old
Philip had done by the same means. The Achaians in his time were grown the most
powerful People of Greece, unto whom many other Cities united themselves, by
means of Aratus a Sicyonian, who having freed Sicyon from the Tyrant which held
it, for fear of Antigonus, entered the League. He also surprised the Citadel of
Corinth, and the Magarians fell from him, and joined with Achaia, as did other
States. Aratus freed Argos, Megapons, and Hermion from their Tyrants, and by
Money gained the Captains of the Garrison in Athens. Now also the Aetolians grew
powerful, but after Devastations made in Peloponnesus, they were glad to beg
assistance of Achaia against Demetrius, yet ungratefully they sought to ^et the
Lacedaemonians against them, and drew in Antigous. Lacedemon at that time was in
a weak Condition, but by Cleomenes one of their Kings, was raised to such
hopes, that he was so bold as to claim the Principality of Greece. Aratus
seeing the danger of Achaia by the Lacedaemonians rising, which he knew not how
to stop, used means to Antigonus, giving him hopes of the Achaians submitting
to him. But it had been more honorable if Aratus had ended the War,
withdrawing Achaia to yield to Cleomenes, seeing he had s^ freed his Country of
further trouble, and the Macedonian Command. But as disdain at the
Lacedaemonians rising over them carried them to Antigonus, so Aratus that
wrought it, lost his Honor and Life by the Macedonians, who might have been
Fellows, with Cleomenes, with whom Ptolomy joined, and left the Achaians, with
whom he had been in League. After this, Cleomenes gave them such an overthrow,
that they sought Peace, which was willingly yielded upon fair Conditions, that
Lacedemon should lead in the Wars, and will restore all Persons and Places
taken. Aratus opposed this all he could, so that Cleomenes proceeded with his
War, and many Cities became his; whereupon Aratus hasteneth Antigonus, who
promises help, if he may be put in possession of the Corinthian Citadel, which
Aratus promised, and sent his Son for Hostage. The Corinthians importune
Cleomenes to prevent this, which he sought to do by all fair offers to Aratus,
which he rejected, surrounding it with Trenches, but all in vain, for upon the
danger of losing Argos, Cleomenes went to rescue his Garrison there, and in the
mean time Corinth yielded to Antigonus, who following Cleomenes, disappointed
him at Argos also, and after took in many other Places, so that Sparta shortly
lost all again to Antigonus, whom Aratus honored even as a God, offering
Sacrifice to him at his being at Sicyon, which Example the other Cities of
Achaia followed. For though Cleomenes performed many brave Services, and put
many Affronts upon Antigonus, yet at length in a Battle at Selasia he was
overthrown, and all his Forces broken, and himself returning to Sparta,
persuaded the little remainder to yield to Antigonus, and so departed from
them, embarking for Egypt, where Ptolomy lovingly entertained him. Thus ended
the Glory of Lacedemon, which as a Light ready to go out, had with a great, but
no long blaze, shined more brightly of late than in some Ages past; and
Cleomenes a generous Prince, but his Son Leoniaus, who had wretchedly brought
worthy King Agis his Fellow, with his Mother and Grandmother unto a bloody end,
^lew himself in Egypt, and had his own Wife and Grand Children murdered by the
vicious young Prince Ptolomy Philopater. Antigonus after this entered Sparta,
whereinto the force of the Enemies could never make way before, where he kindly
treated the Citizens, and left them to their own Laws; but he could not stay,
the Illyrians wasting Macedon, whom he overcame; but by straining a Vein died
soon after. Philip the Son of Demetrius, a Boy succeeded in Macedon, as did
Antiochus the Great in Asia, and Ptolomy Philopater in Egypt, who was young
also, etc.

. 7. Rome subdued Sardinia, and Corsica, and the Illyrians, while Carthage is
Conquering Spain. The Illyrians Inhabited the Country now called Slavonia, whom
Demetrius King of Macedon hired to rescue the Macedonians so distressed by the
Aetolians, yet strive for dividing the Booty before the Town was won, as did
the French at Poictiers, and Agin-Court. But the Illyrians ended the
Controversy, slew many, and took more, and divided their Baggage. The
Illyrians proud of worsting the stoutest of the Greeks, Tuta their Queen gave
them liberty to rob at Sea whom they could, Friend or Foe, and sent an Army by
Sea and Land, which invaded Epirus, and took Phaenice by the Treachery of Eight
Hundred Gauls entertained there, being driven out of Sicily by the Romans for
the like Treachery. Lying here, they made prize of many Italian Merchants, and
being called home take a Ransom of the Epirots for the Town and Prisoners, and
returned home. Rome sent to Teuta requiring satisfaction for the Italian
Merchants; but she refused, and answered, Kings use not to forbid their
Subjects to get by Sea what they can. And when one of the Roman Ambassadors
replied, That their manner was to revenge such private injuries, and would
teach her to reform her Kingly manner, without all regard of the common Law of
Nations, she slew him. The Romans to revenge this injury, who can take no
satisfaction but with the Sword, sent an Army by Sea, and another by Land.
Touching the Law of Nations concerning Ambassadors, it seems grounded on this;
that seeing without Mediation there would never be an end of War, it was
thought equal to all Nations by light of Nature, that Ambassadors should pass
safely between Enemies; yet if any State lay hand upon their Enemies Ambassador
not sent to them, but to solicit a third Nation against them; or shall
practice against the Person of the Prince, to whom he is sent, this Law will
fail him. Teuta sends out a great Fleet, Commanded by Demetrius Pharos, of
which, part took Corcyra, an Island in the Adriatique, the other Besieged
Dyrracticum, when the Queen called home Demetrius, I know not why; but so as he
chose rather to yield Corcyra to the Roman Consul, and the Illyrian Garrison,
and went with him to Appolonia, not far off, which Pintus calls Sissopolis;
where the other Consul, with Land Forces, met, and went to Durazzo and raised
the Siege. From thence they enter Illyrium, and put the Queen to flight to
Rison and prosecute the War, force her to seek for Peace, to quit the better
part of Illyrium, which they commit to Demetrius, and to pay Tribute for the
rest to Rome.

. 8. Rome took the next Arms against the Gauls in Lumbardy, a fierce unadvised
People; more then Men at the first onset, but less than Women after; by whom
Italy had many Alarms, but few Wars; especially when Rome had to do with other
great Enemies, as Pyrrhus or Carthage, when they might have said little to it.
The Romans, three Years before Pyrrhus had set upon the Gauls at home, upon a
slaughter in the Senones, a Tribe of Gauls made of Lucius Coecilus and his Army
at Arretium in Hetruria, and had expelled the Senones and placed a Colony of
Romans. This made all the Tribes of the Gauls, with those which dwelt on both
sides of the Alps, to enter into League, to prevent their own expulsion; the
Insubrians Inhabited the Duchy of Milan, etc. who also hired the Gessates on
Rodanus, and made an Army of fifty Thousand Foot, and twenty Thousand, Horse,
all choice Men, besides the Seno-Galli before expelled. The Cenonians and
Venetians adhere to Rome, and which, upon that occasion, caused a view of all
their own and Allies Forces to be taken, set down by Polybius, where may be
seen the Power of Rome in those days; Seven hundred Thousand Foot, and seventy
Thousand Horse: But all Heads are not fit for Helmets. The one Consul with his
part of the Army, which was four Legions, and thirty thousand Foot of the
Allies, and two thousand Horse, met them in Tuscany, where, by a plain
stratagem of show, to flag the Gauls, they slew six thousand; but upon the
coming of Lucius Emilius the other Consul, they resolve upon Retreats. This had
been Advantageous before the Enemy had been in Sight, but extreme dangerous in
head of the Enemy, and all in Fear; as the French found at Naples, and the
Gauls now, who being followed by one Consul, and met by another; is forced and
lost forty thousand and their Courage, and in a short time all they had in
Italy. Thus the Romans spent twenty Three Years Peace with Carthage.

CHAP. III. Of the Second Punick War.
. 1. HAnnibal about twenty six Years old, chosen General of the Carthaginian
Forces in Spain, is envied by Hanno and his Party, neither being able to Tax
the Virtue of their Enemies, nor recommend themselves by any Service to the
Commonwealth; except in dissuading from War, and cautious Advice not to
provoke the Romans. But the Senate and People, who knew the Romans Oath was no
Security to Carthage, unless she would become their Subject, did the more
highly esteem him, as A^ilcar his Father who had saved them. Knowing therefore
the Peace continued but 'till Rome could find Advantage, they wished the
beginning of the War rather while their State was in good Condition, than to
stay 'till being fallen into distress, the Enemy should begin it. Hannibal well
understood this, as also the advantage in getting the start, and therefore
thought long 'till he was dealing with them, before they should have notice of
his purpose, which could not be concealed if once he came to Action; besides
the hinderance by slow and timorous proceeding therein. Before therefore he
would provoke the Romans by attempting Saguntum, he wisely ended the Conquest
of all that lay between, as the Olcades near Tagus, and Vaccai in Old Castile,
where they took Salamanca, and Arbu^ala. But the Spring following, all that had
escaped, joining with the Toletans, to the number of One Hundred Thousand able
Men, stayed Hannibal on the Banks of Tagus, which runs by Lysbourn,
supposing his accustomed Courage would now neglect discretion, as he seemed to
do at other times. But he that is as a Crystal for every Eye to see through,
makes himself an Ass for every Man to ride or drive; whereas wise and honest
Men, in that which is Just and Virtuous, are like Coffers with double Bottoms,
which show not all at once. Before he was General, he was of all Men the most
venturous, which does not always become a General; and therefore he now
dissembles Fear, and draws back from the River, as fearing to ford it, by
that means to draw his Enemies into it. But when he saw them pushing disorderly
into the swift Stream, he turned his Camels to entertain their Landing, and
pressing in with his Horse above and beneath upon them, made a great slaughter,
which amazed the Spaniards on that side the River of Iberus. The Saguntines
post their Ambassadors to Rome, who pr^ceed Roman like, with deliberation,
sending Ambassadors to and fro, while Hannibal prepares, and found out also a
pretense like that which the Romans made use of with the Mamertines, for the
Turdetani injured by the Saguntines, implored his help. The Romans were as glad
of the Quarrel, but were not yet ready, and therefore temporize 'till they
could raise an Army to remove the Seat of War to Saguntum. In the mean time
Demetrius Pharius whom the Romans had made their Illyrian King, rebelled;
against whom Aemilius was sent, but before his Landing in Illyria, Hannibal sat
down before Saguntum; where by a Sallie made by the Citizens, he was
dangerously wounded, but before it was long he put them all to the Sword; many
shut themselves in their Houses, and then ^ired them. See Cap. 4.. 8.
Rome storms at the News, and will be revenged. She sends to Carthage to know
whether Hannibal had their allowance; which question Carthage calls insolent,
and gives them an impertinent answer; forgetting, as Polybius thinks, to charge
Rome with breach of Oath in taking Sardinia from them: But in the end both
sides resolve upon War, as that which both desire. This is plain dealing, and
no wrangling about breach of Covenants, which they only stand about, who are
unwilling to fight. For Kings understand the obligation of a Treaty by the
Condition of their own advantage, and commonly the best advised begin with the
Sword, and then with the Trumpet, as the Arrogonois with the French in Naples,
and Philip the Second of Spain with England, taking all our Ships in his Ports.
Hannibal besides the forwardness of Carthage, had also been sworn by his Father
to pursue Rome with immortal hatred, being but Nine Years old, which I doubt
not but some Kings not at peace with us, were charged with by their
Predecessors, to declare themselves our Enemies when their Coffers were full.

. 2. Hannibal upon this resolves to visit Rome, instructing Asdrubal his
Brother about the Government of Spain; and sends as many Troops of Spa^^^^^^
into Africa, as there were Africans in Spain, to be Pledges each Nation for
other, viz. Thirteen Thousand Eight Hundred and Fifty Foot, and One Thousand
Two Hundred Horse, with Four Thousand young Men of Quality out of the best
Cities, to be Garrisoned in Carthage, and with his Brother he left Fifty Seven
Galleys, Twelve Thousand Africans, and of other Foreigners Two Thousand, and
Twenty One Elephants. Then he sends to the Pirene Mountaineers and Gauls for a
quiet passage, and in the Spring passes over Iberus Ninety Thousand Foot, and
Twelve Thousand Horse, with which he Conquered Spain on the East of that River,
and left one Hanno with Ten Thousand Foot, and One Thousand Horse to Govern it.
At the Borders he dismissed the Spaniards that desired it, and so with Fifty
Thousand Foot, and Nine Thousand Horse, he entered Gaul, and by fair words and
gifts passed to Rhodanus, where the Vivaretz to be rid of them gave way and
directed him; yet he was put to some trouble on the other side, and in passing
over his Elephants on Boughs of Trees covered with Turffs, and towed over. Then
the Cisalpine Gauls in Piemont and Milan, lately revolted from Rome, and came
over to him, and gave him Guides over the Alps; yet was he exceedingly molested
by the Savoiards, and put to loss both of Carriages and Men, besides Fifteen
Days tedious March over the Mountains in the beginning of Winter.

. 3. The Cisalpine Gauls before Hannibal's coming had revolted from Rome, and
besieged the Roman Commissioners in Modena, when they could not force Cremona
and Placentia, two Roman Colonies; but seeming weary, and desirous of Peace,
Rome sent Ambassadors, whom they detain. Manlius the Praetor, who lay in those
parts with an Army, coming to relieve the Besieged, is overthrown by the Gaul's
Ambush in a Wood, and Atilius his fellow Praetor sent with another supply was
beaten, etc. Rome not dreaming that the Carthaginians after so many indignities
slavishly endured, would grow so brave as to look into Italy, had sent Titus
Sempronius, one of their Consuls, with an Army, and Two Hundred and Sixty
Quinqueremes into Africa, and P. Cornelius Scipio the other Consul, with an
Army into Spain, hoping to find Hannibal there. But he hearing at Massilia that
Hannibal was past over Rhodanus, sent his Brother Curious Cornelius Scipio with
the greatest part of the Forces to try Asdrubal; and himself with some choice
Men hastened after Hannibal by Sea to Pisa, and so to Lumbardy, where he
gathered together the broken Troops of the beaten Praetor.

. 4. Hannibal after Five Months tedious Journey, and having past the Alps, has
but Twenty Thousand Foot and Six Hundred Horse left of those he mustered at
Rhodanus, as the Monument he raised in Juno's Temple witnesses, besides the
Gauls, Lycurgians, etc. lately joined. In Piemont he forced the City Turine,
which had refused his Alliance, which drew many Gauls and others to join with
him, and prepared others which yet held off, hearing of the Consul Scipio's
coming; which wavering made both Generals to hasten the Trial. Ticinum was the
place where they exhort their Armies, and where Hannibal set before his "the
desperate sight of his Savoy Captives which he had used so miserably, that he
who was slain by his Fellow thought he succeeded well, though he which overcame
had Liberty, with an Horse and Money. This he showed his Soldiers was their
case, whose Life without Victory will be a bondage worse than Death, but with
Victory will be well rewarded." Scipio encouraged his Men by the Victories of
their Ancestors even over the Carthaginians; that these were but a declining
Troop of Rebels, feeble by hard travel, and many wants. In the Battle Scipio
was dangerously wounded, and left in the place, if his Son (after Surnamed
Africanus had not brought him off. The Consul seeing his Horsemen beaten, and
the rest discouraged, made his retreat to Placentia. Hannibal after two Days
got over Ticinum, and presented himself before Placentia, but no Man looks out;
whereupon the Consul's Gauls fell from him to Hannibal, who sent them home with
kind usage, the better to persuade their Nation to confederacy. The Consul
steals away in the Night, but had been overtaken by the Numidian Horsemen, if
they had not stayed to plunder his Camp, while he recovered the Bank of Trebia,
where he fortified himself, expecting his Fellow Consul. The Gauls come over
daily to Hannibal, who is in want of Victuals, but relieved himself by taking
Chastidium, in which all the Roman Store and Ammunition lay, which was betrayed
to him. Rome hearing of these Disasters, will revenge it by Sempronius the
other Consul, with his Armies at Ariminum, which being brought to Trebia, where
Scipio lay of his Wounds, Sempronius will have the honor of the day before the
other recovers, or his Office now almost out should expire; neither can he be
dissuaded. Hannibal by the Gauls in their Camp understanding it, concealed his
Brother Mago within an Ambush in a low place overgrown with Reeds, who pressing
the Enemy in the Rear, while the other charged them in Front and Flank, Twenty
Six Thousand of the Romans were slain. Sempronius erred, First, Fighting in a
Champion Country, to the advantage of Hannibal's Elephants. Secondly, in not
discovering the Ground. Thirdly, In leading his weary hungry Men through the
River, immediately to fight with fresh and well-fed Men.

. 5. Winter is welcome to the beaten Romans, who kept themselves warm in
Cremona and Placentia, whom yet Hannibal kept waking, etc. The Lygurians join
with Hannibal, and put into his hand two Roman Quaestors, or Treasurers, two
Colonels, and five Sons of the Senators, of which he kept the Romans in
miserable Bondage, but sent home their followers. Having wearied those Gauls
where he wintred, when the Year was well advanced he passed the Appenine
Mountains with such difficulty, that he chose to take through the Fenns, in
which he lost his Elephants, and the use of one Eye with the severity of his
March, and so came to Aretium, where wasting all the Countries, about Sixteen
of which he set on fire just by Flaminius the Consul, an hotheaded popular
Orator, who intending to quench it with Carthaginian Blood, fell unadvisedly
into Hannibal's Troops, between Cortona, and the Lake Thrasamene, where he and
Fifteen Thousand of the Romans were slain, and Six Thousand escaped to the
M^untains; where being discovered, they stayed not, but yet were overtaken by
Maharbal, to whom they yielded upon promise of Liberty, which Condition
Hannibal would not allow, being made without him; a trick learned of the Romans
to break Covenants. Now he had Fifteen Thousand Italian Prisoners, of which the
Romans he kept to hard meats, but freed the rest, in hopes to make the Italians
his Allies; but an ancient Reputation is not so soon lost. Servilius the other
Consul not knowing what was done, sent Centronius with Four Thousand Men to
increase the Army; but Maherbal intercepted them, slew half, and the rest
yielded, the News whereof made Servilius hasten to the defense of Rome. Thus we
discern the fruits of popular Jealousy in changing the Commanders in War
yearly, which endangereth the growth of the Empire. For the best Wit in the
World cannot inform it self in the compass of one year of all the good helps
requisite to the prosecution of War to the best effect, as Caesar did in Gaul
by Ten Years continuance.

. 6. Rome amazed at this success, and the immin^nt danger, fly to an old
Remedy long out of use, and create a Dictator, whose Office was above a Consul,
and scarcely subject to any control. The People as having Supreme Authority,
chose Fabius Maximus, the best Man of War in the City, who chose M. Minutius
Rufus Master of the Horse, which is as his Lieutenant. Fabius began with
Reformation in Religion, a commendable beginning if the Religion had been good.
The Sybil's Books were herein consulted, which directed Vows to Mars, a
Sacrifice to Jupiter, and a Temple to Venus, which Trumperies prove the Books
written by an ill Spirit. Fabius sets out with four Legions, and received
Servilius's Army, and sent him to Sea to pursue the Carthaginian Fleet, which
had intercepted the Supply sent to Scipio in Spain. Hannibal in the mean time
refreshed his Men, armed the Africans after the Roman manner, and so Coasted
toward Apulia, not to take any City by long Siege, which breaks the force of a
great Army; but seeking to weaken the Romans reputation, desired to be Master
of the Field, which would soon open the Gates of Cities. Therefore he presented
Fabius Battle as soon as he saw him, but he would not bite; knowing the
difference between old Victorious Soldiers and Novices, whom he would acquaint
with dangers, and to look upon the Lion afar off, before they set foot upon his
Tail. Minutius had a contrary disposition, fiery, like Flaminius, taxing Fabius
with Cowardice; but that moved not this well-advised Commander, who knew the
danger of pursuing misfortune, which wastes it self by Suffering, sooner than
by Opposition. It is the Invading Army that desires Battle, and Hannibal's was
also Victorious, therefore Fabius suffered him to fall upon the Rich Territory
of Campania, himself keeping the Hills, being much weaker in Horse. But Winter
drawing on, Hannibal cannot stay in the wasted Country, and could not get into
a fresh, but must pass by the Dictator, who presumed he now had him fast, but
was deceived; for Hannibal in a dark Night tying Faggots to the Horns of Two
Thousand Ki^e, and setting them on fire, drove them over the Hills; which
terrible sight caused Fabius to keep his Trenches, lest he should be
circumvented, so Hannibal passed by. Fabius is called home about some matter of
Religion, leaving the Army with Minutius, yet with peremptory Charge not to
fight; but Minutius finding the Army of one mind, resolved to fight, though it
were death to transgress the Dictator's Charge. His Success in the Encounter
was good, having taken such advantage that he dared Hannibal in his Camp, and
came off with the better. The Army applauds Minutius, but the People of Rome
more, and by motion of Metellus a Tribune, seconded by Terentius Varro a
Popular Fellow, Enemy to the Nobility, and who had been Praetor the last year,
Minutius is joined in equal Authority with Fabius: When they met Fabius divided
the Army with Minutius by Lot, which the other likes not so well as to Command
the whose by Course, but took his Lot, and encamped a mile and a half from the
Dictator, as desirous to have occasion to Fight, as Fabius to the contrary.
Hannibal designed to try Minutius's Courage the next day, and in the Night
concealed an Ambush of Horse and Foot in spacious Caves in the Vallie, and
early in the Morning gave occasion to Minutius like the former, which he gladly
took, but succeeded worse, and had lost all, if Fabius had not come to rescue
him.

. 7. Fabius is commended by the principal Citizens; but the inferior sort cry
out against his cold protracting the War, doing nothing of Consequence all his
year. Terentius Varro took advantage to put in for the Consulship, which far
exceeded his own worth, without the favor of the Multitude, which supply all
his wants, especially having Bibilus Herenneus a Kinsman, Tribune of the
People, who by his Place might speak what he pleased to assist him. This bold
Orator inveighed against the Nobility, as the Causes which drew Hannibal into
Italy, who now could not be expelled without a Plebeian Consul* The Fathers
labor to hinder this, first by choice of a Dictator, which held not; and by an
Inter-Regnum, which was a Government of Ten of the Fathers for Five Days; in
which the heat of the Multitude might be assuaged, and all begin again; but
after five Days no other but Terentius will be heard of; so that to bridle this
violent Person, Lucius Paulus Aemilius a Worthy Honorable Man is chosen the
second Consul, and a great levy of Men, which made up the Army under the old
Consuls Eighty Thousand Foot, and Six Thousand Horse. While this preparation
and other businesses are ordering at Rome, Hannibal who Wintred at Geryon in
Apulia, took the Castle of Can, where much of the Roman Provision lay, but
Servilius the old Consul could do nothing 'till the new came. At their
departing, Fabius gravely exhorted Aemilius not only to play the Man against
the Carthaginians, but also in bridling the rashness of his Colleague; who
answered, He would do his utmost for his Country, but would rather adventure
upon the Enemie's Sword, than the Citizens malice.

. 8. Aemilius with his Colleague being come to the Camp, took occasion to
encourage the Soldiers by the Consideration of old Victories against the
Carthaginians, and other more warlike Nations, the present great numbers, even
all that Rome could make. Hannibal's Success was by Slight, not Valor; and
they saw how destitute he was of the helps they had. They conceive all this,
and the happiness of following such a Leader as they knew him to be; but
mistook him, as if they should lose the Patience of waiting a Convenient
Season, and only presume upon their advantage. But indeed there happened an
inconvenience, than which few are more dangerous, when they consider not the
dissension of their Chief Commanders, while Varro upbraideth Aemilius's Advise
to decline such an Opportunity, to savor too much of Q. Fabius; and Varro's
have by Aemilius is compared to Flaminius. Varro in his Day of Command removed
into the Plains chose by Hannibal; Aemilius the next Day intrencheth, and will
not stir, and sent part of the Army to the East of the River Aufidus,
intrenching them. The want of skill in Varro, and his obstinate Resolution
against his Fellow Consuls prudent Counsel, was great in suffering the Roman
Army to be drawn along by Hannibal to fight in a place of the Enemies most
advantage for his Horse, and in ranging his Army in form, good against
Elephants, which the Enemy had not, but unprofitable against Horse, in which
the Enemies had the advantage. The Battle began by Asdrubal upon Aemilius,
whose Roman Gentlemen were over-matched in number and Horsemanship by the
boisterous Gauls and Spaniards, who forced them to give back, so that Aemilius
put himself on foot among the Legions, while Asdrubal pursued, and slew almost
all his broken Troops; the Equites riding about him, who rescued him, did also
alight with him to help their distressed Foot, which Hannibal esteemed a
yielding. Terentius Varro his Colleague in the Left Wing, is troubled with Hanno
or Maharbal, when Five Hundred Numidian Horse came in and threw down their Arms
in token of yielding, whom he ordered to rest behind the Army 'till all were
done. But these crafty Adventurers Armed under their Clothes with short Swords,
spying their time, fell on the hindermost of the Romans to their great terror,
which, Asdrubal having slain the Roman Troops, highly increased, by joining
with these Numidians, and so forced Terentius to trust to his Horses heels. The
Numidian Light-Horsmen pursue him, while Asdrubal with the Gauls and Spanish
Horse fall upon the backs of the Roman Foot, disordered by Hannibal, who had
environed them on three sides; they being in a manner surrounded, a miserable
slaughter was made of them, wherein it is probable that Aemilius dyed, and not
that he got out wounded, as Livy reports; he was found with Lentulus in his
flight, offering him his Horse, which he refused. All the Roman Army, except
Four Thousand Foot and Two Thousand Horse, fell in this Slaughter with
Aemilius; as for Terentius, he escaped to Venusia, with Seventy Foot almost,
and about Two Thousand became Prisoners to the Numidians. The Roman Camps were
a while defended, but in the end yielded, Eight Thousand of which became
Prisoners, though Livy tells us but of Three Thousand Foot, and Three Hundred
Horse taken Prisoners. Hannibal lost but Five Thousand Five Hundred Foot, and
Two Hundred Horse; and had he pursued his Victory, as Maharbal persuaded, and
forthwith marched to Rome, it is little doubted but the War had ended, as he
was told, He knew how to get, but not to use a Victory.

. Hannibal having plundered the Roman Camp, made head toward Samnium, where
many Towns seemed to favor Carthage, of which Cossa opened to him, where he
laid up his Baggage, and left Mago to take in other places, while himself
hasted into Campania; where, as in all Cities of Italy, so especially there,
the multitude generally affected him, for his sending home all their Citizens,
whom he had taken with much Civility. This Fruitful Country of Campania, and
Capua the Head, had designed to open to him in Fabius the Dictator's days, if
his nearness had not hindered it, which after the Victory at Cannae was taken
away; yet having Three Hundred principal Gentlemen serving at Sicily under the
Romans, whom they desire to recover before they fall off, they sent Ambassadors
to Consul Terentius to sound him, formerly offering their Service. But he
little bewailing the Romans misfortune, which had now lost all, said, Campania
must now not help Rome only, but also make good the War against the
Carthaginians. The Campanians hearing this of their Ambassadors, presently make
a League with Hannibal, only Decius Magius opposed it to Capua where Hannibal
came, and Condemned him as a Traitor; but to prevent the envy of his Execution,
sent him to Carthage. Other Towns depending upon this, ran the same course;
though the next Cities, as Nola, Nuceria, and Naples stood out for Rome, which
yet was at this time in extreme fear of Hannibal's coming, so that Terentius
was called home to name a Dictator. At his coming it was wisely done to give a
good welcome, to cover their fear, and prevent the lamentations of the
multitude, which would have bred contempt of the Governors, and not out of
Greatness of Spirit, as Livy would have it. M. Iunius is named Dictator, and T.
Sempronius Master of the Horse, who presently raised four Legions, and One
Thousand Horse, being forced to press Boys. To these were added Eight Thousand
sturdy Slaves, encouraged with promise of Liberty upon deserts; Men also in
Debt, and others in danger of Death for Capital Offenses, are freed, if they
will serve in this War. To Arm these, they took down the Spoils of Enemies
heretofore hung up in their Temples and Porches. About this time Ten Agents
sent by the Prisoners to Treat with the Senate about their Redemption, came,
with whom Carthalo is sent by Hannibal to sound their disposition to Peace,
whom they will not see, neither will redeem their Prisoners; pretending their
Folly in not escaping by flight as others did, but their wants was the true
Cause; for when such as escaped came, they condemned them to serve in Sicily,
^ill the War ended, because they had fled. The Dictator takes the Field with
twenty five Thousand Men, with whom he spent his time in Campania I know not
how, while Hannibal made many idle Journeys between Nola and Naples; but Nola
was forced to call for Marcellus a Praetor, with his Legion to hinder the
Multitude from opening to Hannibal. Failing thus of Nola he got Nucera by
composition; and returning to Nola, knowing the Affection of the Multitude, he
sought to draw Marcellus out, but was outwitted by him. After this, hearing
the Dictator was about Casiline, he went to seek him, not liking his being so
near Capua, where he designed to Winter; there he attempted Casilines, and won
it by composition, and upon the Inhabitants departure, put in seven hundred
Carthaginians for defense of the Campaign, and went to Winter at Capua.

. 10. Mago, Son of Amilcar, is sent to Carthage, to make report of Hannibal's
proceedings and Victories, and demand Supplies, which Hanno, his old Enemy
hindered what he could; yet it was agreed to send him Forty Thousand Numidians,
forty Elephants, and a great store of Silver; and in Spain to levy twenty
thousand Foot and four Thousand Horse; which Aid was not so well completed;
for only the Elephants and some of the Money was sent. So Asdrubal's Journey
out of Spain into Italy was much talked of, but not performed 'till many Years
after, when Rome had recovered her self. Thus Hanno's contrivance to remove the
War out of Italy into Spain, to force Emporiae and expel the Romans, was but to
oppose Hannibal, in retarding the Supply agreed upon, to which the sparing
Carthaginians were easily persuaded, but repented it too late; not seeing now
that the safety of Carthage and Spain lay upon the Success in Italy.

. 11. The Roman Victories in Spain by Scipio against Asdrubal, reported by
Roman History proved improbable; and the Actions of Scipio there briefly run
over; among other Arguments of improbability, that Scipio vanquished Asdrubal
is that Objection of Fabius, cited and unanswered by Livy; if Asdrubal were
Vanquished, how could he invade Italy with more than sixty Thousand? In running
over the particular Actions of Scipio in Spain, I will not insist upon any that
are uncertain. After Curious Scipio had done Wonders by Sea and Land, and taken
in one hundred and twenty Estates, and driven Asdrubal into a Corner to hide
himself; and that the Celtiberians had slain fifteen Thousand, and taken four
Thousand, Publius Scipio came in with Supplies to help his Brother. These again
beat Asdrubal by Sea and Land; so that he is forced to write to Carthage for
Succors; but without any he is commanded to lead his Army forth into Italy,
which Journey he prepared for, by great Impositions upon the Spaniard, raising
much Treasure. But he cannot so pass, for at Ibera the Romans beat him, take
and pillage his Camp, and upon this event, all Spain falls off from him, so
that he has small hopes of safety in Spain, and much less of Travailing into
Italy. Of these Exploits, Advertisements are sent to Rome, and Letters to the
Senate, that they have neither Money, Apparel nor Bread for Fleet or Army; so
that for want they must leave the Province. These Contents of the Letters suit
not well with the Advertisements of such Exploits; and came unseasonably to
Rome, scarce able, after the loss at Cannae, to help it self at home. Yet
forsooth, they are supplied, and again beat Asdrubal twice, though he had sixty
Thousand Men, and with sixteen Thousand, slew forty six Thousand. But according
to Livy, the next Year, though all Spain had been twice gotten from the
Carthaginians, and that they lost so many thousands, and plundered of the
Treasure gathered by Asdrubal, yet is he able to pursue Publius Scipio, and set
down by him at Mons Victoriae, and after removes to Illiturgis, which he
Besieges but is again beaten by Curious. Scipio, who, with one Legion of five
Thousand enters the Town, and slew the next day twelve Thousand Carthaginians
more, and took three Thousand Prisoners; and at Auringes slew eight Thousand.
After all this, the Romans take Saguntum, and destroy the Turdetans, which
argues the Carthaginians were too weak to disturb them, or rather, the Romans
took it by surprise; for as the many Sieges made by the Carthaginians, argue
them Masters of the Field, so the Romans consuming a whole Year after, in
gaining the Celtiberians, and that by express Condition of a great Sum of
Money, to make War against the Carthaginians; yet if we will believe it, these
Celtiberians had some Years before given Hostages to Scipio. With the access of
thirty Thousand Celtiberians, the two Scipio's seek out the so often beaten
Carthaginians (if all former Reports were true) not far off nor so broken,
having three Armies led by Asdrubal, Son of Amilcar, Mago, and Asdrubal Son of
Gesco; Curious Scipio undertakes the first; Publius Scipio makes haste to the
other two, being Five Days March off, lest they should run away upon the Report
of their Fellows overthrow. But Publius Scipio, with two parts of the Roman
Army, is met with, and forced to keep his Trenches; and yet not safe in them,
steals out by Night, leaving Fonteius his Lieutenant with a few to keep the
Camp, while he hoped to intercept seven Thousand five hundred Suessetans, but
being pursued by the Numidian Horse, was slain. His Brother, twenty seven days
after, meeting with Asdrubal, is forsaken of his Celtiberian Mercenaries, after
a violent Flight in which he is overtaken, lost his Life, some few escaping to
T. Fonteius, if it may be believed, considering the plainness of the Country.
After this, L. Martius, a Roman Gentleman, gathers together the scattered
Soldiers, and some Companies out of Garrisons, making up a pretty Army, with
which he wrought Wonders, by report of Valerius Antias, etc. Martius magnifieth
his Service by News at Rome, and styles himself Propretor, at which the Senate
is offended, and send Claudius Nero with twelve thousand Foot, and one thousand
one hundred Horse, where he found almost all the Spanish Friends fa'ln off: But
we must believe that he boldly advanced toward Asdrubal, Brother of Hannibal,
and took him in such a straight, as that he offered to quit Spain if he might
do it peaceably; yet was he called home, and Publius, Son of Publius Scipio
sent Pro-consul into Spain. This Publius Scipio was a Man of a Noble Presence,
singularly well Conditioned, especially in Temper, Continence, Bounty, and all
Virtues which procure Love. To pass by the several Accounts of this Man given
by Historians; if this one were true, that in all Rome no Man was found which
durst desire the place 'till this Cornelius Scipio, but that twenty four stood
up at the same time, then were not the Wonders reported of L. Martius like to
be true. This Proconsul with Iunius Sillanus Propretor, lands at Emporiae with
ten Thousand Foot and one Thou^and Horse, and Marches to Tarracon, and as soon
as Winter was ended, attempted N. Carthage, which he surprised, and therein
many Hostages of Spain, which he kindly sent home, and so drew many to his
Friendship. Yet Asdrubal stayed not his Journey to his Brother in Italy,
leaving Mago and the other Asdrubal in Spain. The Roman Historians tell us,
that Scipio beat him into Italy, with many incoherent relations of the Spanish
Affairs.

. 12. Hannibal, as we heard, after the Battle at Cannae wintred at Capua, not
attempting Rome, lest not carrying it without a long Siege, he should be
forced, for want of Victuals, to rise; which might dishearten his Men and the
States of Italy which had joined him. His expected Supplies from Carthage came
all to a few Elephants, with some excuse for the rest, especially for want of a
convenient Haven to Land in: Yet he took the Field, designing to gain some good
Haven Town; to which end he sent Hanno to the Lucans but with ill success,
losing Two Thousand Men, yet Hammilco with the Locrians, assisted with the
Brutians, wan Pretilia by force, and Cosentia: Croton was left them, and Locri
yielded, but Rhegium held out. Rome at this time was brought so low, that when
the Messengers from Petilium upon their Knees sought succor, the Senate willed
them to provide for their own safety. At the same time their Praetor Posthumus
Atomus with Twenty Five Thousand, was cut in pieces by the Gauls in a Wood
through which they must pass, whose Trees before their coming were so cunningly
sawed, that a little force would throw them down: So that after they were in,
the Gauls about the Wood beginning, one Tree cast down another, and overwhelmed
the Romans* About the same time Philip King of Macedon entered into League with
Hannibal, of mutual and Personal assisting; the one in Conquest of Italy for
the Carthaginian, the other of Greece for Philip: But predisposing of Kingdoms
is justly controuled by the Divine Providence. The Romans understanding this
League, sent M. Valerius the Praetor to employ Philip, more in Greece than
would give him leave to visit Italy; which he so well effected by stirring up
the Aetolians, old Enemies to Macedon, that he was chosen Consul at Rome, and
Sulpitius sent in his stead. Philip being thus encumbered in Greece, and seeing
Carthage was careless of supplying him with a Fleet, which he wanted, after he
had forced the Aetolians to submit, he hearkened to the Romans, who desired his
Friendship, which he esteemed much to his Honor.

. 13. The Carthaginians undertaking so many Enterprises at once, and following
them by halves, was ^n error; but their neglect of supplying Hannibal, when he
had as great an opportunity as a Conqueror could desire, argued his Enemies at
home, durst not trust him with the Power which might injure themselves.
Hannibal therefore is forced by necessity to feed his Italian Friends with
Hopes, trifling about Nola, Naples, and Cuma, about which latter Gracchus a
Consul overreached the Magistrates of C^pua, who had Conspired to take the
Senators of Cumae at a Sacrifice, but was himself surprised by Gracchus, who
slew above Two Thousand, and immediately after One Thousand Four Hundred more
of Hannibal's Men, at this Siege of Cumae. Hannibal no^ able to make good all
his Garrison Towns, and continue strong in Field, was forced to pass from place
to place, waiting occasions till his supply came. In the mean time Hanno in a
Journey against Beneventum, with Seventeen Thousand Foot, and Twelve Hundred
Horse, is met by the Consul Gracchus with an Army, consisting of Slaves, who
upon promise of Manumission, fought so valiantly that they forced Hanno to fly
but with Two Thousand. Thus Rome began to repair her breach made at Cannae; yet
her Treasury was empty: For all the Fruits her Ground could yield, were hardly
able to feed their own Armies: No not Sicily, and Sardinia. Now Asdrubal is
expected out of Spain: Macedon is feared, which mortal dangers could not be
avoided, but with expense of Treasure. Hereupon the People are Assem^led, and
Quintus Fabius the Praetor, opened to them the public Wants, and how to supply
them; which the People undertook. Then followed the two Censors, who Censured
all disorders in the City, or about the Wars past; and thus by Pruning the
Branches the decayed Root recovered.

. 14. Fabius Maximus, one of the Consuls, having Besieged Casseline in
Campania, after Marcellus, the other Consul was come, who finding it so
obstinately defended, would have left it, as no great E^terprise, if Marcellus
had not replied, that Things undertaken by a great Commander, ought to be
prosecuted. So the Siege being continued, he forced them within to seek Peace.
But as the Besieged were going forth according to Covenant, Marcellus takes a
Gate, enters, and puts to the Sword, or takes all but Fifty, which ran to
Fabius for Protection: This needed a Roman Equivocation to justify it. Many
other small Towns of the Samnites, and some of the Lucans, and Apulians, were
recovered, and Twenty Five Thousand of the Enemies put to the Sword. The new
Consul next was Quintus Fabius, Son to Maximus Gracchus, who was Consul the
other Year: Thus the Father became Lieutenant to his Son. Fabius entered Arpi,
by Scalade in a stormy Night; yet was so resisted by a Carthaginian Garrison,
that they left the Town by Composition: Diverse other places returned to the
Roman obedience: But Tarentum in the mean time was betrayed to Hannibal who
entered the Town; but the Citadel was held by the Romans. The next Year the City
of Rome Armed Twenty Three Legions, of which many were Boys, under Seventeen
Years Old, and Fulvius Flaccus, with Appius Claudius Consuls, Besiege Capua,
who send to Hannibal to relieve them, which Charge was committed to Hanno, who
made good Provision which the Peasants should have carried to Capua, but by
their negligence, Fulvius took it with Two Thousand Wagons in Hanno's Camp, in
his absence, where were Six Thousand slain, and Seven Thousand taken. In the
mean time the Metapontines, and Thurines, yielded to Hannibal: And Gracchus
late Consul was slain, being appointed to keep Beneventum, for securing the
Consuls at the Siege of Capua. But Hannibal dislodged them, followed Claudius,
and upon his return fell upon Penula with almost Sixteen Thousand Men, of which
scarce Two Thousand escaped; and Fulvius a Praetor with Eight Thousand in
Appulia, was so surprised by Mago, that he carried away but Two Thousand. The
Consuls renew the Siege of Capua, which sends to Hannibal, then at
Brundusium, and have a comfortable Answer, but came not till Want began to
pinch them. But being come, he took one of their Forts, and fell upon the Camp;
the Citizens also issue out, and Claudius has his Deaths wound, yet can he not
raise the Siege. Then enraged with himself, he resolves to Attempt Rome, hoping
so to raise it; which the Senate understanding, refer it to the Generals,
whether to stay or come home; and they agree that Fulvius with Fifteen Thousand
Foot, and One Thousand Horse should go to Rome. Hannibal hastes with Ten Days
Provision, and Fulvius is not long after him; but when his Provision was spent,
he made as much haste away, having only frighted the timorous multitude.
Fulvius also returns to Capua* where Belstar and Hanno are closely Besieged,
and can by no means draw on Hannibal, whose Spirits were spent more by
Domestic Treachery than Roman Force. Capua in desperate Case, having twice
rejected mercy, after Twenty Seven chief Senators had purposely Poisoned
themselves at a Supper, open the Gates to the Romans, who took severe revenge
on all but Two poor Women, who were found not guilty, the rest were either
slain, fold, or banished. Other Capuan People that submitted sped not better,
Capua was new Peopled, but never incorporated, but Governed by a Magistrate
sent yearly from Rome.

. 15. Sardinia during the Wars in Italy, was drawn to a Rebellion by the
Carthaginians, who encourage Harsicoras and Hostius his Son, Popular in the
Island, promising them aid against Mutius the Praetor. The Romans hearing
thereof, sent T. Manlius, who in his Consulship had won the Island, with Twenty
Two Thousand Foot, and Twelve Hundred Horse, as their commendable manner was to
suport in their Provinces those Men and their Families, which had first subdued
them. Manlius soon after his Arrival, in one Day overthrew Hyostius, who in his
Father^s absence would needs venture upon the old Soldiers, who slew above
Thirty Thousand Men. Asdrubal the bold, and other Carthaginians came soon
after, and made Manlius leave Cornus, which he had Besieged, and go to Calaris,
where in a Battle he slew Twelve Thousand, and took Three Thousand. Hyostus,
Asd^ubal, and the rest died, and the Rebellion ended. Sicily also grew
troublesome after the Battle at Cannae, when old Hierom King Siracuse dying,
left his Kingdom to Hyeronismus a Grandchild, fifteen Years Old, under tuition
of fifteen Principal Men, of which Andronodorus that Married Demarata, Daughter
of Hiero, designing how to be the only Man, applied himself to the King,
pushing him on to assume the Government, wherein he quickly exceeded and turned
Tyrant. He affected not the Romans as his Father had done, despising the
present weakness of Rome, and casting an Eye upon the prevailing Fortune of
Carthage, entered League with them upon Condition, that Sicily should be his.
But while he was busy herein, his Tyranny produced Treason against his Person,
which took effect at Leontium, where he was slain. Andronodorus, pushed no by
his Wife, endeavored to become Tyrant; but finding it yet too ^ard to compass,
applauded the Peoples liberty, and so by them is chosen chief Praetor. He
^inding Themistius who Married the Sister of Hieronymus, affected as himself,
(as he was also Wiv'd) dealt with him, and drew him to take his part: But being
too free in communicating their design, 'twas discovered to the Senate; so that
entering into the Senate, both were slain, and their Wives also, for affecting
Royalty. Then new Praetors are chosen in their place, called Epicides and
Hippocrates, Born in Carthage, but of Syracusan Parents; both which Hannibal
had used in the League with Hieronymus; who being in Office, opposed the Roman
League. But finding the People afraid of Marcellus, who also required the City
to expel them, they stirred up the Leontines to take their Liberty as Syracuse
had done; for seeing the Tyrant was slain there, it was no reason they should
remain Subject to Syracuse. When Marcellus heard that Leontium revolted from
Syracuse, he offered his help, and won the Town in a day: So the two
Ringleaders fled to Hebersus, but the Citizens were pardo^ed; though the contrary
Report bred a mutiny against the Roman Praetors Cruelty among the Syracusan
Mercenaries. These being led by their Praetors to Herbesus, Epicides and
Hyppocrates came out with Olive Branches to the Army, wherein Six Hundred
Creets, whom Hannibal had used well, took Protection of them, and at Megara by
a counterfeit Letter of Hyppocrates to Marcellus, from Syracuse, entreating him
to make away their troublesome Mercenaries, the Army was in such Uproar that
the Praetors fled for Life. So the Army was led by Hyppocrates to Syracuse, who
let him in; where he slew whom he lifted, set Slaves and Prisoners free, as is
usually done by Tyrants, and thus the two Brethren became Lords of Syracuse.
Marcellus hearing of the alterations, hoping by his success at Leontium, to
make short work at Syracuse, presently Besieged it by Sea and Land, omitting no
violence and terror in two or three Assaults; but was beaten off, not so much
by virtue of the Defendents, as by the skill of that Noble Mathematician
Archimedes, who at Hiero, at the late King's request, framed such Engines of
War as did the Romans more mischief than could have been done by Cannon, either
by Sea, or Land; for they cast among them great Stones and Timber, and by an
Iron Graple would take up a Galley by the Prow and shake out all the Men, etc.
Marcellus not knowing which way to turn, and loath to give over, resolved to
famish the Town, which was a desperate piece of work, considering the large
Haven and their Carthaginian Friends, who even then had sent Himilco with
twenty five Thousand Foot, three Thousand Horse, and twelve Elephants, and
Bomilcar with a Fleet had Victualled the City. Upon Himilco's Landing, many
Towns yielded, which forced Marcellus to rise with a great part of his Army to
prevent him of other places, as he did, but came too late to Agrigentum, which
Himilco had gotten. Winter coming on, Marcellus leaving sufficient Force before
Syracuse, went to Leontium, where Studying how to save his Honor, which his
leaving the Enterprise would impeach, he falls on another Point of Dishonor,
to prevail by Treason; which yet succeeded not. In the end a Fugitive out of
the City informed him of a Feast to be held to Diana, for which there was
plenty of Wine: Upon this, in the Night he scaled the Walls, and took some part
of the City, which was divided by Walls, like four or five Cities. The
Soldiers and Citizens after this offer to compound, which Marcellus likes,
but once or twice it is interrupted, and being at a stand, Marcellus in the
time of the Treaty corrupted one of the Captains of the Town, which was a
Mercenary Spaniard, by whose Treason he entered the Town, and had a Booty no
less than that of Carthage. In this surprise Archimedes was slain, whose death
Marcellus lamenteth, and Buried him Honorably. This under-dealing of Marcellus
was not approved at Rome, considering Hiero's benefits; and that the Citizens
when at Liberty favored Rome, but were now overruled by Tyrants and
Mercena^ries: Yet the Senate thought not good to restore the Booty, nor give
over the the Dominion: Nevertheless, it was not so well with Syracuse before as
after, considering their Factions, Conspirators, Tyrants, Murders, Banishments,
etc. which yet Justifies not Rome's injustice more than him which stole the
Cup from a sick Person, because he was always drinking in it. After this all
Sicily yielded, except Agrigentum, etc. held by Epicides, Hanno, and Mutines a
Numidan, a Wise and Valiant Man, by whom Marcellus was much interrupted; yet
was his Virtue so envied by Hanno, that he took his Charge from him. The
Numidians were so Incensed with this Indignity to their Country Man, that they
left Hanno, and committed themselves to Mutines disposition, who entering into
Intelligence with Valentine Levinus the Roman Consul, newly come, delivered
Agrigentum into his hands, and assisted in the Conquest of all the rest.

. 16. Rome wanting Money to pay off the Soldiers, and to manage the War
against Hannibal, and that in Sicily, when Marcellus and Livinus were chosen
Consuls; they proposed that the Consuls should bring in all the Money they had,
that the Senators do the like, reserving of Gold or other Plate only a
Salt-seller, a Cup, a Ring, and some pieces of Art, as Toys for their Wives and
Children. This example the Gentlemen and Commonality followed cheerfully; all
holding it equal, that every private Condition should run the Fortune of the
Commonwealth; which if once ruined, in vain could any particulur Man hope to
enjoy the benefit of his proper substance. Upon this Marcellus was sent against
Hannibal, and Livinus into Sicily, where he finished what Marcellus left.
Hannibal by long hard Service and wanting Supplies from Carthage, grew unable
to keep the Field, and sufficiently to Garrison his Towns, this made him
Demolish the places he could not Defend; which aleniated many, so that Salapia
yielded to Marcellus, and betrayed a Regiment of Hannibal's best Numidian
Horse. Hannibal in this strait hears of Masanissa with five Thousand Numidians
sent to Spain, and Asdrubal's coming to Italy, which News made Hannibal then
keep what he could, and the Romans to recover that they can. Hannibal by great
Marches came unlooked for to Fulvius, a Roman Praetor at Hardonia, slew him,
Twelve Tribunes or Colonels, and seven Thousand more; others say thirteen
Thousand, burnt the Town, and removed the Inhabitants. Afterward Marcellus,
who thought himself the only Roman fit to Encounter Hannibal, met with him, and
lost six Ensigns and three Thousand Men; but the next day Marcellus slew eight
Thousand Carthaginians, lost three Thousand, and had so many wounded, that he
could follow Hannibal no further. Quintus Fabius Maximus now Consul, besieged
Tarentum Garrisoned with Brutians, whose Captain in Love with a Woman in the
Town, was drawn by a Brother of the Woman's to betray it; so all were put to
the Sword, even the Brutians, contrary to his word, that it might be thought he
won the Town by Assault, not by Treason: But it saved not his Reputation.
Claudius Marcellus and C. Crispinus Consuls the next Year, whom Hannibal
entertained with many Skirmishes, declined a set Battle, till he might join
with his Brother Asdrubal; but watching all advantage, he took them in his
Ambuscade, as they came to view a place with small Forces, where they intended
to Incamp. Here Hannibal had placed in Covert some Companies of Numidians, who
encompassed them, slew Marcellus, wounded Crispine to Death, and giving
honorable Funerals to Marcellus, sent his Ashes in a Silver Pot to young
Marcellus. Crispine considering that Hannibal had Marcellus's Ring, with which
he might deceive some Cities, sent warning all about thereof; even as a Letter
in Marcellus's Name came to Salapia to prepare for his coming thither, which
Hannibal followed with Romen Fugitives, which spoke Latin to the Watch, and bad
them open to the Consul. The Gate was opened, and when six Hundred Men were
entered, the Port-Cullis were let down, and Hannibal outwitted in his own
Stratagem. After Crispinus death, Claudius Nero, and M. Livius succeeded
Consuls: Of which two, Livius had been many Years before condemned and expelled
by the People; for which indignity he refused the place, till with much
imporunity he was overcome. Thus as Men in fair Weather break the Branches of
the Palm Tree, under which they shelter themselves in Storms; so do the
ungrateful with Men of Merit, (as Themistocles reproved the Athenians.) The two
Consuls take their way, Livius to meet Asdrubal, Nero to follow Hannibal, to
hinder their Marches; knowing the mischievous effects of a Conjunction of two
Malevolent Planets. It seemed that Livius was too weak to oppose Asdrubal, and
therefore Nero took six Hundred Foot, and one Thousand Horse, and in six Days
long Marches came to him: But Asdrubal perceiving the increase, thought to
decline a Battle by removing over the River Metaneus, had not Nero followed and
forced him to it, in which Asdrubal was slain, and fifty six Thousand with him,
says Livy; but Polybius numbers but ten Thousand. After this Victory Nero
hasted to his Camp with Asdrubal's Head, which he threw before the
Carthaginians, and freed some Prisoners which might make Report of the Victory
in Hannibal's Camp, so to strike a terror into it. Here the Tide began to turn
on the Romans side, and so increased that no Bounds could contain it; and
Hannibal's hopes decayed daily. From this thirteenth Year of the second Punick
War unto the eighteenth, in which it ended, little is delivered worthy of
Memory.

. 17. Publius Cornelius Scipio, after Asdrubal's departure into Italy, had to
do with Hanno, lately sent to succeed Asdrubal, whom M. Syllanus shortly after
took Prisoner: Asdrubal Son of Gesco, and Mago, left by Asdrubal Son of
Amilcar, remained to make head, who prepared seventy Thousand Foot, four
Thousand Horse, and thirty two Elephants to keep the Field. Scipio makes up his
Legions with some Auxiliary Spaniards, and seeks out the Enemy with forty five
Thousand Foot, and three Thousand Horse, whom he fed well the day before, and
early next Morn provoked the empty Carthaginians to Battle, as Hannibal had
served his Father at Trebia. Asdrubal wholly depended upon this Battle, in
which he was worsted, whereupon Artanes with his Turdetans fell to the Romans;
and the other Spaniards being confirmed in the Report of the Carthaginians ill
success at Metaurus in Italy, never did them good service after. Asdrubal
perceiving this, hastes toward the Sea, but is overtaken by Scipio, and
charged so furiously, that he with seven Thousand took themselves to a strong
piece of Ground, from whence himself stole by Night to the Gades, whither Mago
and Masanissa followed, and their Army dispersed: So all the Towns, except
three, submitted to Scipio, who the Year after took them; only Astapa was burnt
with all the Riches therein by the Inhabitants, who slew themselves, except
such as desperately broke out upon the Romans Camp and so were slain. Asdrubal
leaves Mago at Gades, and Saileth to Syphax King of the Masaesili, a People of
the Numidians, hoping to persuade him to be a Friend to Carthage; but Scipio
meeting him there drew him to the Roman side, which he soon forsook. Scipio
returns to Spain, and having taken Revenge of the three Cities which held out,
he celebrated Funeral Games at New Carthage for his Father and Uncle, which was
performed by Duels of Slaves; as also such as had Quarrels for Title of Land,
which Friends could not compose.

Scipio being dangerously sick, is reported Dead; whereupon Mandonius, and
Indibilis, two Spanish petty Kings rebel, hoping to make themselves great: and
part of the Roman Army discontented with the little benefit they had got by the
Roman Conquest fell to spoil, drive away their Colonels, choosing two base
Leaders. Scipio sent new Colonels, which with fair words and promise of Pay
brought them to Carthagenia, where exemplary Justice is done upon the two
Leaders and their Accomplices; the rest having sworn, Obedient receive Pay.
Mandonius and Indibilis pursued by Scipio, submit, and are pardoned, but their
former Power lessened. Masanissa promises to serve the Romans; and Mago by
direction from Carthage, leaves Gades, when he had Robbed it, to go to
Hannibal in Italy, having Treasure sent to raise an Army: So Gades presently
yielded to the Romans, and Scipio gives up the Province to a Successor, and is
chosen Consul.

. 18. Publius Cornelius Scipio, and Publius Licinius Crassus are chosen
Consuls. Scipio had Sicily decreed for his Province, with leave to make War in
Africa if he thought fit: Which Quintus Fabius Maximus opposed; nevertheless
Scipio proceeds; But was not allowed to Press Soldiers for Africa, but what
Fabius and other Ancient Senators should allow of. Besides his Roman Forces,
Italy sent him seven Thousand Volunteers and all manner of needful Provision*
In Sicily he found two Legions sent thither from the Battle at Canna, and
Pressed three Hundred Horse. Notwithstanding all which he had like to have been
hindered in this Expedition upon complaint of the Locrians, whose Town he had
gotten from the Carthaginians by their assistance, who were much oppressed by
the Governors put in by him. But the Commissioners sending into Sicily to
examine matters, found him so well prepared for Carthage, that they quickened
his March. He sent Laelius into Asrick to make discoveries, who met with
Masanissa revolted from the Carthaginian side to the Roman, for an injury they
did him about Asdrubal's Daughters being Betrothed to him, but by them given to
Syphax a more mighty Numidian Prince. Laelius understood the State of Africa by
Masanissa, whom ^^phax had driven out of his Country, and by persuasion of
Sophonisba renounced the Alliance of Rome to join with the Carthaginians her
Countrymen. This troubled Scipio and made him hasten to Africa, lest the
Senate hearing thereof should stay his Journey, to which he had been induced
upon hopes of his assistance. He Lands in Africa, is met by Masanissa and
Encamped before Vtica. Asdrubal was with Syphax his Son in Law, to whom the
Carthaginians send to call him Home, being chosen their General, and to entreat
Syphax against Scipio, who lay before Vtica. Asdrubal makes a Levy of thirty
Thousand Foot, and three Thousand Horse; and Syphax brings fifty Thousand Foot,
and ten Thousand Horse, with which they March toward Scipio, who dislodged to a
place fit for his Navy, where he designed to Winter, and there Fortified his
Camp. Asdrubal and Syphax Incamp near to him, but carelessly, presuming upon
their Numbers. While they lay thus, Scipio endeavors to draw Syphax from the
Carthaginians, and he tries to persuade Scipio to a Peace; this is in debate
while Scipio, learns how weak the Enemies Camp was, and how it might be set on
fire; whereupon he breaks off the Treaty of Peace, pretending his Counsel would
not agree to it. Setting therefore all things in order for such a business, he
sent Laelius, and Masanissa, to begin with Syphax who lay farthest off; and
when he saw the Flame, he drew on to Asdrubal's Camp, which was in confusion,
running to help Syphax; but immediately they found the like Flame in their own
Camp. Great was the slaughter, in which but few escaped, with Syphax and
Asdrubal. After this new Levies are made, and a second Battle fought, and the
Romans obtain a second Victory. Asdrubal flying to Carthage, and Syphax home,
whither Masanissa and Laelius pursue him.

Scipio takes in many Towns, some by force, others by surrender, for all the
Subjects of Carthage wavered: and Carthage it self durst not exact Taxes of
them whom they had so often overburthened. It is therefore decreed to Fortify
the City, to send for Hannibal, and to set out the Fleet against that of Scipio
before Vtica; who perceiving it, hastened thither from Tunis to defend them; so
they returned, having gotten only six empty Hulks from the Romans. In the mean
time Masanissa recovers his Kingdom, and with Laelius proceeds against Syphax,
who quickly raised as great an Army as his first, which he also lost as soon,
with himself and his Kingdom. For being taken, Masanissa carried him bound to
Cirta, his chief City, which presently opened, where Sophonisba yielded her
self, entreating she might not be delivered to the Romans; which suit her Youth
and excellent Beauty so recommended, that Masanissa Married her presently.
Laelius and Scipio were afterward offended with this Marriage, and persuaded
Masanissa to give her over, for fear she should draw him into the same courses
she had drawn Syphax. Masanissa to prevent her falling into the Romans hands,
sent her a Cup of Poison with which she ended her Days: And he presently after
to prevent the effects of Melancholy for that fact, is comforted by Scipio with
a Crown, and Proclaimed King.

. 19. Carthage hearing this bad News, and seeing Scipio returned to Tunis, are
so astonished, that they send Thirty of the Princes which were of the Privy
Council of the City unto Scipio, to beg Peace prostrate, kissing his and his
Councils Feet, humbly acknowledging their fault in breaking the former Peace.
Scipio considering the poor case that Rome was in, and the Wealth and Strength
of Carthage, accepted the submission, on Condition Carthage should call home
her Forces in Italy, relinquish all the Islands, deliver up all their Ships of
War but Twenty, all Prisoners and Fugitives, meddle no more with Spain, pay a
great Sum of Money, and certain Hundred Thousand Bushels of Corn. These Articles
are approved, a Truce granted, 'till they send to Rome, and Masanissa sent home
to his new Kingdom, as if all were ended; but it appeared after their
Ambassadors were come to Rome, they only sought to gain time 'till Hannibal
were come, by whom at least they hope to get a better Peace; the Senate
therefore refer all to Scipio: But before their return, Carthage had seized on
the Roman Ships, with Provision from Sicily, scattered by storm, and sought to
surprise Scipio's Ambassadors in their return from Carthage.

. 20. Hannibal after his loss at Metaurus remained among the Brutains,
expecting aid from Carthage, and his Brother Mago with Forces raised in Gaul
and Liguria, who also solicited the Hetrurians, which caused the Romans to
employ Three Armies in those Three Countries. Mago near Milan met with the
Roman Forces, with which he fought, like a Son of Amilcar, but with the
Carthaginian Fortune, losing Five Thousand, and himself wounded to death, was
forced to retire to Liguria, where he found Ambassadors to call him home
immediately, which he obeyed, but died by the way. Hannibal received the like
Message of return, which he heard with such impatience, that he gnash'd his
Teeth, and hardly refraining from Tears, he cried out, that not Scipio, but
Hanno had overthrown the Barchines with the ruin of Carthage; so he departed,
as if it had been to Exile. Rome being certain of his departure, appoint an
Holy Day for Thanks to the Gods; but Quintus Fabius rejoiced little, being in
doubt of the issue in Africa.

. 21. Hannibal Landed in Africa at Leptis, almost an Hundred Miles from
Carthage, that marching along he might gather Horses, which he wanted; and
Scipio sends to Masanissa and the Roman Company with him to make speed to him,
who brought Four Thousand Horse, and Six Thousand Foot. Laelius also is
returned with the Carthaginian Ambassadors from Rome, at which time M. Baebius
kept the Camp in Scipio's absence. He laid hands on the Ambassadors, and sent
word to Scipio, who orders their good usage, and sends them home; to show that
the Carthaginians were less honorable than the Romans: Yet he made more cruel
War upon them than before, Sacking the Towns he took, refusing all
Compositions. Carthage hearing this, hasted Hannibal to fight; who thereupon
Encamped at Zama, sent Spies into Scipio's Camp, who being taken, were carried
up and down to see what they would, and so sent back. Hannibal at this, admired
his Enemie's brave Courage, and sent to desire an Interview, which Scipio
granted; but being met, refused to yield to the Peace which Hannibal
propounded, seeing the Conditions of it were gainful to them, who had so lately
broke a Peace made upon other Conditions. So they brake off, and prepare for
Battle, which was the next day to try both Skill and Courage, especially of
these brave Commanders. They are both in the Field early, set their People in
order, and exhort them to Fight; a Noble Match, and seldom seen, whether we
regard the two Generals, their Cities, the import of the Battle, and the
Armies; though Hannibal was over-matched in number, and goodness of Horses, and
had only his Rereward of trained Men, which were those brave Soldiers which
had followed him in Italy; all the rest being untrained boisterous Barbarians,
except Four Thousand Macedonians. The issue was the overthrow of the
Carthaginians, of whom Twenty Thousand were slain, and as many taken, with the
loss of Fifteen Thousand Romans and upwards: Yet the singular Skill that
Hannibal showed in this his last Fight, is highly commended by Polybius, and
was acknowledged by Scipio, as Livy reports. Hannibal with a few Horse came to
Asdrumentum, whence being sent for, he went to Carthage, where he tells them
plainly, there was no way left but such Peace as could be gotten. Presently
after, Vermina Son of Syphax, who held a good part of his Father's Kingdom,
coming to help when all was lost, was encountered by part of the Roman Army,
which slew Fifteen Thousand, and took Twelve Hundred. Scipio being come to
Tunis, is Adored by Thirty Carthaginian Ambassadors, in more pitiful manner
than before, but less pitied for their former Treachery. Nevertheless Scipio
considering the tedious Siege of so strong and large a City, and the desires of
the other Consuls to get the Honor of ending what remained, he was content to
hear them, and to propound such Conditions as he thought good: As delivery of
Prisoners, Fugitives, and Renegadoes, all their Galleys but Ten, and all
Elephants; make no War without License from Rome, restore to Masanissa what
they held from him, or his Ancestors; find Corn for the Army, and pay for
Auxiliaries 'till the Peace was Concluded; pay Two Hundred Talents yearly, for
Fifty year, and One Hundred Hostages of Choice Men for observance of
Conditions. The Conditions were declaimed against at Carthage, but upon
Hannibal's Speech, Necessity forced them to yield, and send to Rome, who sent
Ten Commissioners to join with Scipio to Conclude the Peace, though the Consul
Lentulus opposed, desiring to follow the War in Africa. At their coming to
Carthage all is agreed upon, and the first Two Hundred Talents to be paid out
of private Men's Purses. This was grievous to them, and made some Senators weep,
whereat Hannibal laughed, as being no cause to weep, in consideration of other
Conditions, which touched their Freedom more, though less felt by them, and would
make them hereafter confess that it was the least part of their Misery for
which they now shed Tears. Scipio having concluded at Carthage, and brought
Masanissa into the Army, and Honored him, he consigned over to him all the
Towns of King Syphax which the Romans held, and so left Africa* and Landed in
Sicily, from whence he went through Italy with part of his Army, in Glory no
less than Triumph, with the greatest joy that ever any did, and had the Title
of African given; which kind of Honor from a Conquered Province, grew
afterward in use for less Merit.

CHAP. IV. Of Philip King of Macedon, Father of Perseus, subdued by the Romans.
. 1. SImilitude in Worldly Events, arises from limitation of Matter, to which
Nature is confined, which being finite, cannot always produce variable effects,
especially in Actions which seem to depend on the Will of Man, which is
overruled with the same Affections. The Assyrians invading the Medes, and not
prevailing, within a while were subdued by them; thus it fell out between the
Persians, and Greeks, and the Romans. For after Pyrrhus the Epirot had braved
the Romans, and that they found their Virtue was a Richer Metal than the
shining Valor of Greece, it was not long before they durst venture upon
Greece, having beaten him, which in a Year made himself Lord of it, and of
Macedon. Teuta the Illyriana Queen wasting Greece, without the least
provocation, gave the first occasion, that Rome sought acquaintance with
Greece, offering to Protect it. Philip King of Macedon, set up Philip Son of
Demetrius, about Seventeen Years Old, who succeeded King of Macedon, and
Protector of Achaea, and most part of Greece, two Years before the second
Punick War began. In the beginning of his Reign, the Aetolians addicted only to
War, Invaded the Messenians and other parts, and Peloponesus twice; of which
complaint was made to Philip, then at Corinth, and the Lacedaemonians are
accused as favoring it in spite of the Achaeans and Macedonians. The Aetolians
declining to appear, War is decreed against them; and the Lacedaemonians seem to
be excused, but are not trusted. Philip prepares, and draws those Illyrians
from the Aetolians, which aided the Invasion: The Achaeans Proclaim the War,
and send to other States to do the like: But the Epirots, Lacedaemonians, and
Messenians put it off; and in the end the Lacedaemonians, who had long Conspired
to shake off the Macedonians, concluded a League with the Aetolians, and chose
new Kings, which they had not done since Cleomenes Departed; of these, Lycurgus
was one, who bribed the Ephori to Elect him. He Invades the Argives, takes two
Cities from them; and gains upon the Arcadians. Philip, while the Aetolians are
busy in Peloponesus, brings his Army to their Borders with the Epirots, where
to procure a Peace, which the Epirots desire, he spent so long a time as broke
the Force of his Army, with which he might have ended the War. While he was
busy in Aetolia, the Aetolian Praetor Scopos overran Thessaly, broke into
Macedonia as far as Dium, which he rased; the Dardanians also Bordering on the
North of Macedon, hearing of his absence in Peloponesus, brake into Spoil, as
their manner was, which drew him Home. Demetrius Pharius chased out of his
Kingdom by the Romans, met him, and was entertained as his Chief Counselor:
After which, he stole a Journey into Peloponesus in Winter, while the Aetolians
and Eleans were abroad, and Surprised Two Thousand, took many Towns from the
Eleans, and Aetolians, and their Confederates, and so went to Argos.

. 2. Philip is drawn by Apelles a Counselor, left by his Uncle Antigonus, to
incroach upon the Liberties of the Achaeans, who finding it opposed by Aratus,
he contrives to bring him into disgrace with Philip. The King, by the grave
admonition of Aratus, and the example of Amphitamus, an Elean Captain,
discovers Appelles's Malice, who failing of his desire, designs to be King
himself, as the Spider made a Web to take the Swallow which drove the Flies out
of the Chimney. He enters upon a Plot against the King how to check the good
Success of his Proceedings, and draws Leontius one of the Targenteers, and
Megale the King's chief Secretary, into the Conspiracy: But the Reward of their
Treason was their own Ruin. After this a Peace is Solicited by several
Ambassadors, to which Philip condescended by persuasion of Demetrius Pharius;
who also persuaded him to a League with Hannibal.

. 3. Philip, upon the Peace of Greece, prepares for Italy to assist Hannibal
against the Romans, whom Pharius hated for expelling him out of his Kingdom,
which they had forgiven him.

. 4. Philip before his Italian Expedition, thought fit in Policy to bring the
Greeks Associates under a more absolute Form of Subjection, as Apelles had
formerly advised; but Demetrius Pharius could better observe the Kings humors,
and without Contention supplanted Aratus with the least Appearance, which
Apelles could never do by more forceable means. In a Faction between the Nobles
and Commons of the Messenians, Philip was entreated to compose the difference,
of which occasion he was glad, designing to assume the Government into his own
hands. But being discovered, he pretended a Sacrifice in the Castle of Ithome,
and purposed to seize upon it, which Demetrius called a Kingly point not to be
neglected, for so he should hold the Ox by both his Horns; meaning that Ithome
and Acrocorinthus were the two Horns of Peloponesus. Yet Philip asking Aratus
his Judgment, he was told by him, that in taking that Castle he should lose his
strongest Castle, which was his Credit; upon which he gave over his purpose;
but with secret disgust of Aratus and his Son. Next he seized on Oricum, a Town
of the Epirots, his followers, and besieged Apolonia, and so instead of settling
the Country, he kindled that Fire which could never be extinguished till it
l^id hold on his own Palace. After that, he Invaded the Messenians with open
Force, but in vain; in which Attempt he lost Demetrius; and afterward out of a
Tyrannical humor, the worse he sped, the more angry he grew against those who
seemed not to favor his injurious doings, as particularly against Old Aratus
and his Son, whose Poisoning he procured. This was the recompense Aratus got
for bringing the Macedonians into Peloponesus in spite of Cleomenes his
Countryman, and a Temperate Prince.

. 5. The Achaeans upon Aratus's Death choose Philopoemen Praetor: By whom they
were persuaded to cut off their Expenses in Bravery of Apparel, Household Stuff,
and dainty Fare, and bestowed it upon Armies: As also he altered their Weapons
and manner of Fighting, and fitted them for Hand-service. At this time
Machanidas Lycurgus Tyrant of Lacedemon, who entered the Country of the
Mantinaeans, was Courageously received by Philopoemen, and slain with his own
hand, and four Thousand with him, and as many taken Prisoners.

. 6. Philip having made Peace with the Romans and Aetolians, prepares to invade
Attalus King of Pergamus, Son of Attalus, the younger Brother of Philetarus the
Eunuch, the Treasurer of Lysimachus King of Thrace, from whom he fled for fear
of his Tyranny, and seized upon Pergamus and nine Thousand Talents of
Lysimachus's, and Reigned twenty Years, as Eumenes his Brothers Son did after
him twenty two Years, and Attalus after him, an active Prince, Bountiful and
Valiant. He made use of the Gauls, then settled in Asia, in that part which is
called Galatia; and Quarrels with Prusias King of Bithynia, whose Ancestors
began to Reign some Generations before the Great Alexander.

. 7. Prusias having Married the Daughter of Philip, intreated-him to come over
into Asia to Conquer Cios for him; and not having any cause of Quarrel, he
besieged the Town, took it, omitting no Cruelty to the Inhabitants, contrary to
his promise made to diverse Ambassadors from the Rhodians and other Estates, to
whom he became odious. Attalus considering to what end Philip's violent
Ambition tended, joining to the Rhodians, fought with him at Sea, where he
sustained far greater loss than they, and in the end was forced Home, they
pursuing him.

. 8. Attalus and the Rhodians solicit Rome against Philip: So did Aurelius
their Agent in Greece; but Rome was not in Condition till Hannibal was
Vanquished, when the River of Styx was dried up, that is, when the necessity of
Peace with Philip was taken away. Attalus, and the Rhodians meet the Roman
Ambassador, while Philip wins Abidos in Asia.

. 9. Rome hearing the Calamity of Abidos resembling that of Saguntum, could not
ground a Quarrel thereon, but thinking of another Saguntum at Athens a
Confederate, formerly wronged by Philip, and imploring their aid, which yet the
People denied, till P. Sulpicius the Consul told them that Philip's preparation
was indeed for Italy, if he could win Athens. This feigned pretense prevailed,
and the Consul is sent; who took not the way to Macedon, but Landed at the
River Apsus, between Dyrrachium and Apolonia, where he began the War, and sent
C. Claudius with Twenty Galleys and Soldiers to relieve Athens, against
certain Pirates, or Robbers by Sea and Land.

. 10. Claudius grows weary of standing like a Scarecrow to save all the
Athenian Fields from Spoil, and understanding that Chalcis in Eubaea was
negligently Guarded, Sailed thither in the Night, and took it by Scalado,
Plundered it, and set it on Fire, Consuming the Kings Magazines of Corn and
other Provision of War. Philip hearing the News at Demetrias, twenty Miles off,
marches speedily; but finding them gone, he Posteth to Athens in hope to
surprise it in the Night, but they had Intelligence of his coming: So after a
Skirmish before the return of Claudius, he departed to Corinth; and thence to
an Assembly at Argos, called against Nabis Tyrant of Lacedemon, which had
Invaded them after Philopoemen was out of Office and gone to Crete. Here Philip
by coming, would have drawn the Achaeans to break with the Romans, but was
discovered, and so parting made no other Attempt against Athens, having failed,
except in demolishing some Temples of admirable Workmanship in Attica.
Sulpicius Encamped near Apsus, sent his Lieutenant Apistius to the Borders of
Macedon, who took Antripatria, and put it to the Sword and Fire, and other
Towns, and returned to their Camp; by which Success, diverse of the Neighbors
which affected not Philip, offered Friendship to the Romans. The Aetolian
Parliament was at hand, whither the Macedonians, Romans, Athenians, etc. send
to persuade them to their Party: The Macedonians set out the true scope of the
Romans pretensions of Friendship, by their Subjecting of Messana and Syracuse;
the Athenians make a sorrowful rehearsal of the outrages done them by Philip;
the Romans plead their former League with Aetolia, and threaten those that join
with Philip: Which shows their meaning, however they pretend to assist their
Friends: Which in the Conclusion is referred to Dorymachus their Praetor.

. 11. Philip and the Consul met in the Borders of Maeedon toward Illyria, and
had diverse Skirmishes, in which the Romans by an Ambush had a great loss at
first, but by Philip's stay to pick up straglers, he was overtaken by the Roman
Legions, which forced him to fly, and he hardly escaped, his Horse being
slain, and he forced to accept his Subjects Horse, who was after slain. The
King recovers his Camp in the Night, taking his way Home: But was overtaken,
and put to a loss before he could recover Macedon, which was Invaded by the
Borderers. The Aetolians hearing of Philip's ill success, Invade Th^ss^ly, and
cruelly Plundered a few Towns; but Philip finding them dispersed, slew many of
them.

. 12. Rome thinking her self safe at Home by keeping War abroad, found more
trouble than they expected by the Gauls, Governed by one Amilcar a
Carthaginian, who took their Colony of Placentia, a good strong Town, which
neither Hannibal, nor Asdrubal could force. Upon this, they sent to Carthage,
but the Carthaginians disclaim Amilcar and Banish him, and sent Corn to Rome,
and to the Army in Macedon: King Masanissa would also have lent them Two
Thousand Numidian Horse, but they were content with half the Number. The Gauls
at the Siege of Cremona are Overthrown, L. Iunius and Amilcar slain, and the
Work against the Gauls made easy for them which follow.

. 13. Rome was not wont to trifle, but to bid the Enemy Battle, or force them
to it as soon as they could, but now they learn of Greece to War by
Negotiations. Their Treasure was yet empty, and they in Debt to the Citizens;
yet weary of making slow Proceedings by Confederates, they increase the
Macedonian Army at least eight Thousand Foot, and eight Hundred Horse, which
they committed to Quintus Flaminius the new Consul. This augmentation was
requisite, for that Attalus desired to be spared, being Invaded at Home by
Antiochus; which they condescended to promise to, and Mediate Peace between
them, both being Loving Friends: But all this show of Friendship with
Antiochus, was but till they had made safe way through Macedon, as after
appeared. Quintus being come, finds Philip and Villius the old Consul, Encamped
one against the other in the Straits of Epirus, by the River Apsus, where he
stayed long, seeking passage over the Mountain Guarded by Philip. During this
delay, the King and Consul Treat of Peace, but in vain; for that the Consul
required the freeing all Greece, and Namely Thessaly, which had been Subject to
Macedon ever since Philip, Father of Alexander. Ater this, the Consul was
guided by an Herdsman, sent by a Prince of the Epirots which loved the Romans,
so that Philip with the loss of two Thousand Men is forced Home through
Thessaly, which he wasted as he went; as did the Aetolians, and the Consul made
a gleaning and took some Cities, and for want of Provision returned by Phocis,
an Allie of Macedon. In the mean time the Consuls Brother, Admiral of the Navy
with Attalus, and the Rhodians, wan two Cities of Eubaea, and besiege Cenchrea
the Haven and Arsenal of Corinth. This quickened the Achaeans desire to forsake
Philip, having had so many motives by his injuries done them, and their having
so brave a Leader of Philopoemen. In the end they hold an Assembly at Sicyon,
whither their Ambassadors on both sides come with their Adherents, where at
last they decree to forsake Philip, and join with their Enemies. After this
Philip's Lieutenant lying in Corinth, was drawn by the multitude in Argos to
assist them, so they cast out the Achaean Guard, and accepted Philip for
Patron; who thereupon had some hopes of a good end upon a Treaty. The Consul
also considering his Office would Expire before he could end the War, is
willing to enter into it, that he might have the Honor of the Peace. After two
or three meetings, demands and offers being made, Philip refers himself to the
Senate of Rome, which the Consul liked; and Ambassadors from all parts meet;
but upon Philip's Ambassadors denial to have warrant to yield Corinth,
Dolchis, and Demetria, all was dashed. Philip to be revenged of the Achaeans,
made League with the Tyrant Nabis of Lacedemon, and to oblige him, he gave
Argos into his hands, which so lately had given it self to him from the
Achaeans. The Tyrant the next day Pillaged all the rich Men; and to please the
Multitude, he made equal division of the Land, as Tyrants use to do: and
presently made a League with Quintius, who continued General against Philip.

. 14. T. Quintius being continued General of the Macedonian War, with twenty
six Thousand seeks out Philip, who had a proportionable Number, and found him
in Thessaly, near the City Pherae, where though Philip designed not that day to
put all to the Fortune of Battle, yet being drawn on by the good Success of a
Skirmish, and the advantage of the Hill Cynoscephalae, or Dogs-heads, he chose
his Ground. But by reason the Mountain was full of Knobs like Dogs heads, he
could Marshal but one part of the Army, leaving the rest to follow in order as
they could. By this roughness they could keep no order fit to make any
Impression, or good resistance, and so were broken by Quintius's right Wing
sent to them up the Hill: Of which Wing a Tribune and twenty Ensigns, or about
two Thousand Men turning down the Hill on the left hand, fell on Philip's
Phalanx, or square Battle with Pikes in the Rear, and put all to flight, when
Philip thought the day his own. So he lost eight Thousand slain, and five
Thousand Prisoners.

. 15. Quintius made haste to Larissa a City in Italy, which opened to him; so
all the Warlike Archarnamians left Philip, and gave themselves to the Romans:
The Poereans also rise against Dinocrates the Kings Lieutenant, and recovered
the Province. Philip considering his present necessity, thought it Wisdom to
yield to it, and first sent, and then went to Quintius to Treat about a Peace,
for which a day was appointed for all the Associates, in which, as the insolent
Aetolians too much insulted over Philip, and sought his utter Subversion, so
Quintius as generously opposed them. Philip yielded to all that Quintius
required, and four Months Truce is agreed to by all but the Insolent Aetolians;
and the determination referred to the Senate of Rome. The new Consuls oppose
the Peace as fraudulent; which made the Senate wave it; but the Tribunes refer
it to the People, by whose Sovereign Authority it was concluded. The Conditions
were to remove all Garrisons out of Greece by a set day; yield up Captives,
Renegados, Ships of War, except five lesser and one great one; and pay a
Thousand Talents; and for performance he had already given his Son Demetrius an
Hostage, and four Hundred Talents. Great was the joy at the conclusion; but the
Aetolians are dissatisfied, and the Baeotians still favor the Macedonians:
Some also fear the Romans will prove the worse Neighbors; not knowing the
Romans design against Antiochus. But to prevent all bad Rumors, Quintius at
the Istinian Games Proclaimed freedom from Garrisons, and Liberty of their own
Laws, to the Corinthians, Phocians, Locrians, Eubaeans, Achaeans of Pithiotis,
Magnetians, Thessalians and Perrhubians, which the Greeks applauded with
exceeding Thanks. He also sent to Antiochus by his Ambassador then present,
requiring him to keep from the free Cities of Asia, and restore to Ptolomy and
Philip what he held of theirs, and not to pass into Europe with an Army.

CHAP. V. Of the Roman Wars with Antiochus, and his Adherents.
. 1. SEleucus Nicanor slain by Ptolomy Cerannus, Anno 4. Clymp. 124. Antiochus
Soter his Son succeeded Nineteen Years, to whom Berosus the Chaldaean Dedicated
his Assyrian-History, which is notoriously falsified by Friar Annius. He
neglected revenging his Fathers Death, who had so loved him that he gave him
Stratonica his own Wife, being sick for her. Antiochus the God, as the
flattering Melesians called him for freeing them from Timarchus the Tyrant,
succeeded Fifteen Year. His first Wife was Laodice, to whom he took also
Bernice the Daughter of Ptolomy Philadelphus, King of Egypt, and so compounded
the War between them; but falling into the hatred of Laodice, she Poisoned him
for it, when her Son Seleucus Callinicus was ready to Reign: She also murdered
Bernice, and her Son, two or three Years after Ptolomy's Death, but the Brother
revenged it.

Ptolomy Philodelphus, Son of Ptolomy the first King of Egypt, after Alexander,
began to Reign with his Father, and continued Forty Years: He was first derived
from Alexander's Successors which made League with Rome, and his Offspring,
the last of those Royal Families they rooted out. He set at Liberty all the
Jews which his Father made Slaves in Egypt, and sent rich Gifts to God's Temple
in Jerusalem, and requested of Eleazer the Books of Holy Scripture, and seventy
two Learned Hebrews to Translate them into Greek, to furnish his Library in
Alexandria, of which Genebrard thinks Jesus, Sirach was one, whom Iansenius
proves then living. Josephus Antiq. li. 12. c. 2. reports one Aristaeus writ
the History thereof.

Seleucus Callinicus began his Reign with his Father's Murder, which cost his
Mothers Life, she being slain by Ptolomaeus Evergetes in revenge of his Sister
who Invaded Seleucus, but was called Home by Domestic Troubles. Seleucus
perceiving himself not beloved of his Subjects sought not to gain them by
merit, but by force prepares a great Fleet against them, whereon all his hope
relied, which God overwhelmed in the Sea, and himself hardly escaped. His
Subjects hoping he would become a new Man, in Commiseration offer him their
Service, which so revived him, that he raised an Army against Ptolomy, who
overthrew him; which made him send for aid to his Brother Antiochus Hierax, or
Hawk (for he cared not on whom he Preyed,) who was but fourteen Years Old, and
was extreme Ambitious. Before he came, Seleuchus made Peace with Ptolomaeus,
but had no Peace of his Brother, who overthrew him: But shortly after
overthrown himself by Eumenes King of Pergamus, Son of Attalus, and forced to
fly away, was taken up in Capadocia by Artamenes, who designed to betray him,
which made him take his Wings to Egypt, where Ptolomy, knowing his persidious
Nature, imprisoned him; whence escaping by means of a Harlot, he fell into the
hands of Thieves, who murdered him. Seleuchus at this time going to subdue the
Bactrians and Parthians, was taken Prisoner by Arsaces Founder of the Parthian
Kingdom, who yet released him; but returning Home, he broke his Neck by a fall
from his Horse, after twenty Years Reign. Seleuchus Ceraunus succeeded his
Father Three Years, and was slain by Treason, leaving Antiochus his Brother to
succeed; and Achaeus to Govern the Army.

. 2. Ptolomaeus Evergetes, who suceeded Philadelphus, yet Reigned, having
Married Berenice, Daughter of Magas King of Cyrene, added it to his Kingdom,
and as he thought, the Countries of Co^losyria, Palestine, etc. His, and his
Successors Wars with the Seleucidae, were Prophesied of by Daniel. Onias the
High Priest had provoked him, by detaining covetously twenty Talents Tribute,
but was pacified by Josephus a Jew; and having Reigned Twenty six Years, Dyed
in the 139 Olympiad.

Antiochus, scarce Fifteen Years Old when he began his Reign, which lasted
Thirty six Years, in his Minority was wholly Governed by one Hermias an
Ambitions Man, who incited him unseasonably to War against Ptolomaeus, for
recovery of Coelosyria, etc. while Molo the Kings Lieutenant in Media Rebelled.
Xenaetas is sent with Forces into Media, which are overthrown, while Antiochus
lay in the Valley of Marsyas, between Libanus and Antilibanus, seeking to pass
into Coelosyria. Hearing therefore the News of Xenaetas, he hastens into Media,
which he recovered from Molo, whose left Wing Revolting to the King, Molo with
diverse of his Friends, to shorten the work, killed themselves, and so prevented
the Hangman with their own Swords. After this came the joyful News of his
Queen's being Delivered of a Son. Fortune being thus bountiful, Antigonus
Marches against Artabanes King of the Atropians, who being very Old and
Timorous yielded to whatever he Proposed. Antiochus in the East* thought good
to visit his Borders between the Caspian and Euxine Sea, in which Journey his
Physician informed him against Hermits, of whom himself was grown Jealous, and
therefore consented to his killing. About these times Achaeus rebelled, in hope
the King would perish in his Expedition; yet Antiochus more intending the
recovery of Coelosyria, neglected him till he had gotten Seleucia, first called
Antigonia, founded by Antigonus, and after won by Seleuchus, and then by
Ptolomy. Such is the vanity of Men, who think to eternize their Names, not by
works of Virtue, but of Greatness, which never lasts long. Theodotus the
Aetolian, Ptolomy's Mercenary, which formerl^ d^fended Caelosyria against
Antioc^us, now weary of his former Faithfulness (Mercenary like) sells it to
him, who took possession of Tirus and Ptolomais, with the Egyptian Fleet
there. Antiochus, herewith emboldned, aims at Egypt it self, ruled by
Agathocles and Sosibius, whilst Ptolomy himself minds only his Pleasure. These
two make secret preparation, but openly solicit Peace by themselves and
several of their Allies; and Antiochus willing to rest this Winter, agrees on
a Truce for four Months to Treat of Peace, which he designed only to lull his
Enemies asleep, who watched him better than he did them. During the Truce,
Ambassadors from Egypt are heard, and both sides plead their right to
Coelosyria, and propound Covenants, but both would have it, or nothing. The
Truce ended, Antiochus takes the Field, presuming his ordinary Power will serve
against his unprovided Enemies; but was deceived, and well beaten for it at
Raphia, losing Ten Thousand Foot out of Seventy Thousand, and Four Hundred
Horse out of Six Thousand, ^n which Ptolomy exceeded, as Antiochus did in
Elephants: After which he seeks Peace, though what he had gotten in Syria was
fallen from him. Antiochus after this, followed the suppression of Achaeus,
whom he soon penned up in Sardis, which yet he could not take in two Years,
till a Cretian, observed by Ravens which continually pitched upon part of the
Wall where Carrion wa^ cast into the Ditch, that there it was unguarded; as
indeed it was, being thought unapproachable; yet here, though with difficulty,
the Town was won, and he driven into the Castle, out of which, also he was
drawn by a Cretian trick of one Bolis a Cretian, which knew all the difficult
passages of the Rocks, on which the Castle stood. Ptolomy desiring to deliver
Achaeus out of his danger, hired this Cretian, who undertook it with Cambysus
his Countryman, as very a Cretian as himself (that is, as false a Knave) and
brought him out, but betrayed him to Antiochus; who seeing him, could not
refrain Tears, considering the Calamities incident to great Fortunes, but
Condemned him to a cruel Death.

Antiochus some Years after, made an Expedition against the Hircanians and
Parthians, a little Nation, subject to the Median Government, which was now in
the hand of Antiochus's Lieutenant, whose Insolency provoked Arsaces a
Nobleman to Rebel, and made himself King. He succeeded so well, that he
withstood Seleucus Callinicus, and took him Prisoner, but entertained him
nobly, and released him; his Posterity increased the Dominion. Arsaces the
Second now Reigned, against whom Antiochus led such an Army as he could not
encounter, till Antiochus had passed through the Country, and won Tambrace in
Hyrcania, by which time he had gathered such Forces as enabled him to try
Battle. After this he sought Peace, which Antiochus granted, making him a
Friend whom he could not force to be a Subject. The like Expedition made
against the Bactrians Governed by Euthydemus, with whom also he made Peace; and
went over Caucasus to review the Old League with the Indians.

. 3. Ptolomoeus Philopa^er, so called by derision, as having made away Father
and Mother, as it is thought, though he began to Reign young after the Batt^l
at Raphia, gave himself over to Sensuality; and by the instigation of
Agathoclea his Strumpet, Sister to Agathocles, murdered his Wife, set his
Sister, which was Arsinoe, by whom he had Ptolomaeus Epiphanes, which he left
but five Years Old, unto the tuition of Agathocles. He Assembled the
Macedonians, which were the Kings ordinary Forces in Pay. (Not all Born in
Macedon, but of the Posterity of them which Planted in Egypt with Ptolomaeus
Lagus, and would not be called Egyptians, as neither would the Kings,) To these
he made an Oration with Tears, entreating their Fidelity to the King, whom he
showed in his Sister's Arms, and accused one Tlepolemus of Treason; but finding
himself deceived, he departed; and upon his taking one of them upon suspicion
of Treason against himself, they rose in Arms, took away the King, slew him,
dragged the Strumpet his Sister naked through the Streets of Alexandria, as
also her Mother the Bawd, and tore them in pieces. Antiochus, and Philip of
Macedon, thought to make advantage of these troubles in Egypt, and to divide
the Orphans Estate between them. But the Romans whom Philopater had obliged in
the Punick War, being Solicited, were easily persuaded to protect the Child.
The Macedonian was employed at Home. Antiochus having recovered his losses in
Syria, the Jews were civilly treated by him: And he suffered himself to be
persuaded by the Romans, to forbear the Egyptians. He also sent to make League
with the Romans, who applied themselves to give him all satisfaction, though
they secretly intended otherwise, till they had effected their design for
Macedon. Antiochus dealt after the same manner with Philip, and with Eumenes,
Son of Attalus, King of Pergamus, offering either of them a Daughter, and yet
endeavored to destroy them. Eumenes excuses his refusal, and tells his
Brethren (who wondered at it) that in taking the Offer he should fall into the
Quarrel against the Romans, who would surely make War upon him. The Rhodians
also had the prudence to foresee that Storm, when they threatened to set upon
his Fleet, if it did pass a certain Promontory in Cilicia: Thus seeking to keep
him from joining with Philip their Enemy, and molesting the South of Asia
belonging to P^olomy, the next Spring he passed over Hellespont into Europe,
and re-edified, and peopled Lysimachia.

. 4. Rome having temporized with Antiochus, till the War in Macedon was ended,
and most of Greece become little better than Clyents, L. Cornelius is sent unto
Antiochus in more plain Terms, urging his restoring to Ptolomy what he had
lately taken from him, and the like also to Philip, and to let the free Cities
in Asia rest quiet, and requiring a Reason for his bringing such an Army into
Europe. Antiochus wonders the Romans should trouble themselves with Asian
matters, more than he with Italian, and answers the rest so as Cornelius
replied not; but upon false rumors of Ptolomy's Death he hastes thither,
having Commission for that purpose. Antiochus also hastes thither, with all
his Sea-Forces, to take possession; but hearing Ptolomy was alive, he took
another way; and after a dangerous Shipwreck recovered Seleucia, and so went to
Antiochia, where he was secure for that Winter. Rome in the mean time is
careful to secure Greece and Macedon, against the Asian War, the Fame whereof
coming to Carthage, gave Hannibal's Enemies occasion to contrive his Expulsion.
He had of late put on the long Robe, being chosen Praetor, and reformed the
Treasurers who Robbed the Treasury, and brought the Judges to be Annual, who
had been for Life, which inflamed their Envy. Rome is informed his Faction was
strong, and will be in Arms suddenly; for preventing whereof three
Ambassadors, are sent, pretending his well-wishe^s, as also other business
about Masanissa; for Rome is glad of such an occasion against him, though P.
Scipio dissuaded that dishonorable course; and Hannibal, for all the pretense,
knew their meaning, and having showed himself in the Assembly, and in the
Evening walking out with two Friends, took Horse where he had appointed them,
and that Night came to a Tower of his own, where he had a Ship always furnished
for such purpose, and so Sailed to Tire, and thence to Antiochus at Ephesus,
who is exceedingly rejoiced at his coming. But what could this great General do
in the Asiatique War? He could not make such Soldiers of base Asiatiques, as
of hardy Spaniards, Gauls and Africans, etc. N^y, could he do it, yet the Pride
of Antiochus's Court, the Baseness of his Flatteries, and a Thousand Vexations
would make his Virtues unprofitable, being a banished Desolate Man, wanting his
Brethren to assist him. But Antiochus was more careful of Peace with Rome,
sending to Quintius, to require the Faithful keeping of it, though the Romans
intended nothing less, as the common talk at Rome, and Quintius's stay in
Greece, and seeking pretenses not to Depart, did Argue. For being secure of
Philip, Greece being at Peace, Antiochus still Solicites Peace. But the
Aetolians are much convinced, that Quintius should still keep Possession of
C^alcis, Demetrias, and Acrocorinthus. Nabis, Tyrant of Lacedemon kept Argos in
Bondage, which concerns the Romans in Honor to make free, says Quintius,
which the Aetolians will undertake. Yet in a common Assembly of all the States,
Quintius is entreated to do it, as being easy, when all the Confedrates were
joined with him. After this, the Romans depart out of Greece, and Titus
Quintius Triumphs at Rome. Quintius and his Associates from Rome, and
Antiochus his Ambassadors make many Treaties to no purpose, but to give
Antiochus leisure of two Years to prepare for War The Roman Conditions were not
less dishonorable for him to yield to, than unreasonable for them to Demand.
For though, they which have been at War, and gotten no great advantage of each
other, may demand restitution of things gotten, or lost; Yet between them, who
never fell out, for wrong done, or received, there can no such Conditions for
establishing Friendship be proposed: Seeing it is reasonable, that each should
enjoy their own; and neither take Superiority over the other to prescribe
Conditions, as Conquerours may do.

. 5. Rome, after Hannibal's departure out of Italy, was continually Infested
with Insurrections of the Insubrians, Boijans, and other Cisalpine Gauls, with
the Ligurians; who having served together under Mago, and Amilcar, became such
Friendly partakers of each others Fortune, that they seldom undertook any
Enterprise, but together. The Cisalpine Gauls, or Lumbards, had been kept under
by Rome, from the second Punick War, until Hannibal invaded Italy, and held out
after by the assistance of the Ligurians; a stout, subtle, hardy, poor People,
enduring hardness, and not discouraged by losses; obstinate in War, without
respect of keeping Covenant, and continued Enemies and Friends more by Custom,
as Savages do, than by Judgment. The Roman War with them, served to train their
Men to Hardness, and Military patience. Spain also, after Scipio's departure,
put Rome to continual employment, slew a Proconsul. Porcius Cato Consul, had
almost as much work there, as the Re-conquest of Spain: He began to disarm
them, which made them desperate; he cast down all their Walls, and brought the
Country to that pass, that it was in no danger to be lost long after.

Hannibal being forced to leave Carthage, his Enemies promise themselves and
their City all the happiness which obedience to Rome could afford; but coming
to try the Controversy before the Senate with King Masanissa, who had taken
from them some Land, which he claimed anciently belonging to his Forefathers,
they found how little regard they had to Carthage.

. 6. The Aetolians discontented with the Peace made by the Romans, as finding
their Merit undervalued, invite Philip, Antiochus, and Nabis, against the
Romans. Nabis begins and besieges Gytheum, and wastes Achaea. P^ilopoemen
was now Praetor of Achaea, to whose discretion all being referred, he began
with a Sea Fight, wherein his skill failed; then he fell to his own Element to
prove the Enemy at Land, where his skill in discerning the advantages of
Ground, was excellent, and by an Ambush intrapped his Enemy and slew many. So
likewise, he deceived Nabis by a counterfeit Fugitive, which told him
Philopoemen designed to get between him and Lacedemon, which made him hasten
Homeward, leaving some Troops to Guard his Camp, which was presently fired, and
he pursued so hard that his People ^led into a Wood, thinking to get Home in
the Night; but the Ways being laid, hardly a quarter of them got into Sparta.
While the Romans are busy in Greece to prepare War with Antiochus, their
Ambassadors with Antiochus Treat of Peace; and there meeting with Hannibal,
and conferring often with him, Antiochus grew jealous, till he was informed by
him of the Oath his Father had made him take, never to be Friends with the
Romans. Antiochus rejecting the dear rated Peace offered by Rome, complies with
the Aetolians, who thereupon in their Panaetolium, or common Assembly of the
Nation, decree to call Antiochus into Greece, to decide their Controversy with
the Romans. The execution of the Decree was referred to the Apocleti, or
Privy Council, who suddenly surprised Demetrias, but failed of Chalcis; yet
they got Lacedemon by killing Nabis their Friend, under pretense to give him
aid in his weakness, after his Overthrow by Philopoemen; but while they were
busy in rifling his Palace, the Citizens took Arms and slew them. Philopoemen,
while Lacedemon was in this doubtful Estate, went to it, and called out the
chief Citizens, persuading them to inco^porate the City unto Achaea, which they
yielded unto.

. 7. Antiochus, upon Thoas, the Aetolians Counsel, changed his purpose of
sending Hannibal with a Fleet against the Romans in Africa, and ordered him
presently to pass over to Greece, which he performed, but with no such numbers
as were expected, having only Forty serviceable Ships, Six Elephants, Ten
Thousand Foot, and Five Hundred Horse; which smalness of number he excused,
promising shortly to fill all Greece. Being chosen their General, he went first
against Chalcis, thinking to gain them with words, but could not till he
returned with greater Power; upon this, the rest of the Island of Eubaea
yielded. Then Ambassadors are sent to all Quarters to persuade them to join
with King Antiochus, who came to procure their Freedom; they answer as had the
Chalicidians, Their Freedom could not be bettered. They meet with Quintius at
an Achaean Council, where the Aetolians and Antiocheans extol one another, by
which Quintius took opportunity to show their vanity, and the Kings weakness
both in Judgment and Power, and that he and the Aetolians did but delude each
other: So War was Proclaimed against them. Thus as the turbulent Aetolians were
only forward with Antiochus against the Romans, so the Achaeans do at last
declare for them; all the rest stand doubtful, except Elamis, who loved the
Aetolians, and the Eubaeans and Boeotians forced by Antiochus, with the
Magnetians and Athamanians. Antiochus confers with these, and Hannibal long
neglected, by reason of the bragging Aetolians, is consulted, who spoke plainly
his mind: That as for these Confederates, their weakness and fear made them
uncertain Friends, whereas if the Macedonian had been engaged, he was strong
and could not start, having once fallen off from Rome; but if he dare not, let
him keep at Work at Home; and let the Gauls be provoked, and a strong Power
sent into Italy, while the King proceeds at Greece. They are pleased with the
brave Speech of this great Spirit; but nothing is done, except forcing
Thessaly, where yet Larissa withstood his Army, and was relieved by the Romans,
at whose sight he rose and went to Chalcis, to promote the Love of a
trappanning Woman.

M. Acilius, Consul, comes into Greece with Ten Thousand Foot, Two Thousand
Horse, and Fifteen Elephants, to whom Ptolomy, Philip, Carthage and Masanissa
offer their assistance, but only Philip is accepted, and recompensed with
Athamania, Aminander the King being expelled. All Thessaly willingly yielded,
and Antiochus is perplexed, crying out he was betrayed, and called upon the
Aetolians, who sent in some small Forces, with which and his own, he took the
Passage of the Straits of Thermopylae, out of which nevertheless he was beaten
by the Consul Porcius Cato's indefatigable labor, in finding out an unknown
Passage up, where the Aetolians had six Hundred to keep the Place, whom he put
to flight, and following them was led to Antiochus's Camp, upon sight of whom
all ran away, and Antiochus forsakes Greece. In few days all that Antiochus
had got was recovered, and Heraclia won from the Aetolians to their great
Terror, they having sent Post to Antiochus for Aid before they had been
subdued by the Romans, who now left no Enemy behind against their Invading
Asia. Antiochus upon that consideration, sent Nicanor with Money and promise of
Forces; but upon loss of Heraclia they sue humbly to the Consul, who will
scarcely hear them. In the end offering to yield to the Romans, upon
discretion, he required such Conditions as they thought slavish; whereupon he
offered to lay Chains upon them, but was over persuaded. So he went to besiege
Naupactus while Quintius was settling Peloponesus, from whence he came to the
Consul when the earnest Suit of the Aetolians had procured Truce, while they
might send to Rome, which they did to no purpose* whereupon they Sue for
Pardon. The Consul suddenly attempeth Lamia, and won it, while they prepare
against him at Naupactus, and then goes to Amphysia.

. 8. Cornelius Scipio is chosen Consul, and upon Publius Scipio Africanus's
offer to be his Lieutenant, is appointed to Asia; who having Thirteen Thousand
Foot, and an Hundred Horse, came into Greece, and took charge of that Army at
Amphysia, which presently was forsaken; but the Castle held out and was thought
impregnable, which made Publius Scipio procure a Years Truce for them, much
desiring to be in Asia. So that the Scipio's set forward, and in Macedon find
all desired assistance, and Philip to accompany them to the Hellespont, where
they stay till the Navy to Transport them be ready. At the Sea this Spring
Polixenidas banished Rhodia, but Antioc^us's faithful Admiral desiring to be
revenged, hearing the Rhodian Fleet lay at Samos, sent the Admiral private
Intelligence, that if his Banishment might be repealed, he would betray the
Kings Fleet. After agreement between them, the Rhodian grew secure, so that
Polixenidas coming suddenly upon him, took or sunk all but five. Seleucus Son
of Antiochus besieged Pergamus, which was defended by Attalus, Brother of King
Eumenes, who was assisted by Diophanes, b^ed up by Philopoemen with a Thousand
Foot, and an Hundred Horse; He observing from the Walls how careless the Enemy
was, went out with his Achaeans, and encamped near the Enemy, who derided his
boldness, and seeing him so quiet, became secure, but were soon surprised, and
many slain: So that after such another defeat, Seleucus was forced to quit the
Siege. Antiochus shortly after lost Forty Galleys near Myonesus, a Promontory
in Asia, being Overthrown by the Romans and Rhodians, so that he had but Forty
nine left. Upon this he called Home the Garrison from Lysimachia, and Mustred
all his Forces, intending only his own defense, to which he desired a Supply of
his Father in Law, the King of Cappadocia: But he hearing the Consul was Landed
in Asia, sent to entreat Peace, offering to free what Towns he would name upon
the Coast, yea to part Asia with them, and bear half their Charge. All this the
Consul thought too little; he will have all the Charges, and all the lesser
Asia freed, and him confined over Mount Taurus; to which Publius Scipio
advises the Kings Ambassador to persuade his Master, when he privately
solicited his mediation to the Consul. His King esteeming these demands no less
than if he had been Conquered, would not listen to them, having Seventy
Thousand Foot, and Twelve Thousand Horse, Ninety two Elephants, and many Armed
Chariots after the Eastern manner, with Sithes; nor did he fear him. For
hearing Publius Scipio was sick, he sent him his Son, whom he had taken
Prisoner and used honorably; which comforted the Father, who for requital
wished him not to fight till he heard of his coming to the Camp. The King
hereupon removed to Magnesia on Sypylus, and Fortified himself, being followed
by the Consul, who offered him Battle, which he would not accept; till at last
fearing to dishearten his Men, when the Consul took the Field and set his Men
in order, he also did the like, which made an admirable Show for numbers and
variety, through the different manner every Nation used. It is shameful to
relate, and incredible to believe, how little resistance this brave Show of
Asiatiques made, suffering themselves to be slain like so many Beasts, to the
Number of Fifty Thousand Foot, and Four Thousand Horse, besides Prisoners, with
only the loss of three Hundred Roman Foot, Twenty four Horse, and Twenty five
of Eumenes's Men. Antiochus sends from Apamea, whither he was fled, an
Ambassador with full Power to submit to what the Consul would require, to
which Publius Scipio obtained leave to Answer, because it should be moderate*
He requires Fifteen Thousand Talents to be paid at set times; That Antiochus
shall abandon all on this side Taurus, pay Eumenes four Hundred Talents, and a
proportion of Corn; put in Twenty Hostages, and deliver Hannibal, and Thoas the
Aetolian, unto the Romans. Antiochus's Ambassador comes to Rome, accompanied
with King Eumenes and the Rhodians; and the Peace is Confirmed with the
division of the Conquests among the Roman Allies to their full satisfaction.
Cornelius Scipio returning, has a Triumph exceeding any Ten before, and had
the Surname Asiatique for his Title, as the Merits of his Victory, though the
Virtue requisite was short of that in Publius Scipio.

. 9. Marcus Fulvius, and Curious Manlius the Consuls, have Greece and Asia
divided between them, being more than one could look after at once, having the
Aetolians to reduce unto the acknowledgment of the Romans, and their new
Conquests in Asia to be regulated. In the interim of the Aetolians Truce,
Aminander (whose Kingdom of Athamania the Romans had permitted Philip to
Possess) found means to recover it, as the Aetolians did the Amphilochians and
Aperantians. Fulvius being come into Greece, besieged the noble City Ambracia,
which much imported the Aetolians not to lose, and yet were not able to relieve
it: So that the Athenians and Rhodians interceed for Peace, which the Consul
(finding the difficulty of winning the Town) condescended to. To Rome they go,
and agree to diverse Articles, which make them more obnoxious to Rome than any
people of Greece. Consul Manlius in Asia, visited all that Antiochus had lost
on this side Taurus, and loaded himself with the Booty, and at length came to
the Gallo-Grecians upon the River Halis; who took all they had, and went up to
the Mountains Olympus and Margaena, hoping the Consul either would not follow,
or be easily repelled. But in both they were deceived, being unfurnished with
Arrows or Slings, or defensive Armor, and so in the end were forced to throw
themselves off the Rocks, leaving to the Romans all that Wealth which they had
gotten by long robbing their Neighbors. He forced Ararathes and others to
submit, from whom he also drew, what he could get. Finally, having sworn the
Peace of Antiochus, and taken an Oath of his Ambassadors for him, to take his
way Home by Hellespont, laden with rich Spoils; and accordingly passing
through Thrace, he was eased of the carriage of no small part, not without the
instigation of Philip, grown very uneasy with the Romans for not respecting
him according to his Deserts, as he thought. But the Consuls at their return to
Rome, triumphed; and Manlius was charged with sending his Armies over Taurus,
the fatal Bounds of Rome, according to the Sybills Prophecy: Yet Lucullus and
Pompey led the Roman Army over those Hills with Manlius, when he deferred
Triumph, there being an hot Inquisition in the City, by the Tribunes against
the Scipio's, as not having brought into the Treasury, what was gotten in their
Victories. This indignity so offended Publius Scipio, that he left the City,
and never returned, redeemed his Brethren, and his Goods were all confiscated.
After this, Manlius brought into the Treasury as much as made the last Payment
of the Money borrowed of Private Men in the Punick War. Thus began the Civil
War, of the Tongue in the Roman pleading; Security from danger abroad, and
sufficient employment kindling this fire at Home, which caught hold upon that
great Worthy, to whose Virtue Rome was so much indebted. But these Factions did
not long contain themselves within the hea^ of words; but when Men found
themselves over-matched at the Weapon of the Tongue, whose Art in leading the
multitude was grown to perfection, they turned to open Hands by Prays in
Streets, and after by Battles in open Fields, which in three Generations after,
overthrew the insolent Rule both of Senate and People.

CHAP. VI. Of the second Macedonian War.
ANtiochus being Overthrown, Philip, Eumenes, and all Greece seemed to be Free
Men, and Govern by their own Laws; but indeed were absolute Vassals to Rome,
which of the five Prerogatives of an absolute Monarch, or Sovereign Power, viz.
To make Laws, Magistrates, Peace and War, Coin Money, and receive Appeals, the
Romans had assumed four, especially the greatest, which is Appeals, and in the
other three, interposed her self at Pleasure. Yet Eumenes living far off, and
the Neighbor Nations not well subdued, and obedient to Rome, he was long
unquestioned of any thing; as was also Masanissa. Philip's Temper was more
noble, as he which had not forgot his own former Greatness, Honor of his
Family, and the high Reputation of his Kingdom. His Magnanimity is construed
Want of Reverence to the Roman Greatness: so that upon the complaint of Eumenes
and the States of Thessaly, he must depart, leaving even those places he had
Conquered, by the Consent of Rome. Lisimachia the chief City in Thrace, having
been assistant in Philip's Usurpation, was destroyed by the Thracians, and
Reedified by Antiochus, after he had won Chersonesus, both which the Romans
bestowed upon Eumenes: To these Aenus and Maronea had belonged, both gotten by
Philip, and Fortified for Guard of his Kingdom against the Barbarous Thracians,
which now Eumenes beggeth; but the People of these places endeavor their own
Freedom from both. This design of the Maronites so provoked Philip, that by
Cassander, one of his Men in Maronea, directed by Onomastus his Warden of the
Sea Coast, the Thracians were let into the Town, which was sacked by them: And
when Cassander at the Romans demand, was to be sent to Rome to be examined
about it, he was Poisoned by the Way, according to Machivel's Rule. Philip
hereby grew further into question at Rome, but sent Demetrius his Son, who had
been Hostage there, and obtained the favor for him to answer. In the mean time
the Roman Ambassador which had judged between him and his Neighbors, passing
through Greece, hears of a Controversy between the Achaeans and Lacedaemonians,
which Lycortus the Achaean Praetor, told Appius Claudius boldly, that it was
strange, that the Romans should call their faithful Allies to account, as if
they were Vassals. Appius answered like a Roman Lord, and threatened to force
them, and shortly after, the Senate made void all Judgments of Death, or
Banishment given by the Achaeans against the Lacedaemonians: And made it a
question whether Lacedemon should not be made a free State, as of Old: Into
this Slavery, had the Romans brought all the States near them, which had
desired their Patronage, and made them groan under the Yoke. Demetrius returned
to his Father with desired Peace; more for his own sake than his Fathers, as
they wrote to Philip, which made the Son insolent, and the Father to hate both
them and him.

. 2. Messene, which had been annexed to the Achaean Commonwealth against their
Wills, grew bold upon the Romans Peremptory dealing with the Achaeans designing
to fall off, in hope to become a free State again: Philopoemen Praetor of
Achaea, Levied Forces in haste to meet Dinocrates the Messenian Captain, and
forced him to retire, till a fresh Supply coming from Messene, compelled him to
retreat, in which laboring to make Way for his Horsemen, himself weak with
former Sickness was dismounted, taken, and carried to Messene, where Dinocrates
seeing him so generally affected, hastened his Death by an Hangman, which
brought him a Cup of Poison. Hannibal about the same time was with Prusias King
of Bythinia, to whom T. Quintius was sent to demand him, as the most spiteful
Enemy of Rome; wherein the wretched King intending to give the Romans
satisfaction, set a Guard about Hannibal's Lodgings, who seeing himself beset,
took a Poison, which he always carried about him, and so Died; exclaiming
against the Romans, degenerating from the Virtue of their Ancestors, who would
not consent to the Poisoning of Pyrrhus their Enemy, and against the Treachery
of Prusias, betraying his Guest, contrary to the Honor of a King, and the Laws
of Hospitality, and Faith given. Publius Scipio died the same Year, to
accompany Philopoemen and Hannibal: Being as great Generals as ever the World
had; but as Unfortunate as Famous. Had Hannibal, whose Tragedy we have
endeavored only some hints of, been Prince of Carthage, able to command such
supplies as the War he took in hand required, it is probable he had torn up the
Roman Empire by the Roots. But the strong Cowardly Factions of Enemies at Home,
made his great Virtue (wanting Public Force to sustain it) to dissolve it self
in his own and Countries Calamity.

From such Envy of Equals, or jealousy of our Masters, whether Kings, or
Commonwealths, it is, that no Profession is more unprosperous than that of
Generals; besides the Rapes, Slaughters, Devastations, etc. which are so
hateful to God, That were not the Mercies of God infinite (as Monluc Marshal of
France confessed) it were in vain for those of his profession to hope for any
portion thereof, such Cruelties being permitted, or committed by them. And true
it is, that as the Victories obtained by so many of the greatest Commanders,
are commonly ascribed either to Fortune, or to their Followers, or Cowardice of
the vanquished, so the most, whose Virtues have raised them above all Envy,
have in the end been rewarded either with Disgrace, Banishment, or Death; as
Examples, both of the Romans, and Grecians Witness.

. 3. Philip well perceiving the Romans aimed at his Kingdom, repented himself
of his Obsequiousness to them. Yet was in ill Condition to help himself, having
been beaten by them; his People unwilling to deal with them, and no Friends to
assist him. Ye^ Necessity, the Mother of Invention, made him resolved to remove
the Inhabitants of his Maritime Towns to Emathia, and people them with
Thracians that feared not the Romans. He also designed to draw the Bacternae,
an hardy Nation, beyond Danubius, into Dardania, and to root out the
Dardanians, always troublesome to Macedon: But this device took slow effect,
and was hindered diverse ways. His Subjects removed against their Will, broke
into words, which his cruel Nature seeking to repress by putting many unto
Death, increased to exclamation, which inflamed him barbarously to Massacre
their Children. After this, the Furies enter his own House, and Vengeance was
poured upon him from Heaven in his own Children, as was thought by the
jealousy he had of Demetrius his Younger Son, and the fear Prusius had of him
for his Interest in the Romans Affections. Wicked Instruments are not wanting,
who counterfeit a Letter from Quintius to Philip, entreating for Demetrius,
with an intimation of his ambitious Desire against his Brother Prusius: One
Didas also, to whom he was committed by Philip, pretending Friendship to him,
sounded him, and told the King that he meant to fly to the Romans, who would
not fail him: So the Father, without any examination, commanded his unhappy Son
to be Murdered; and after, upon his Cousin Antigonus his searching, found out
the Contrivance too late. Hereupon he intended to confer the Kingdom upon
Antigonus, but Death prevented it.

. 4. Perseus succeeded his Father, who had Reigned Forty two Years; he thought
it not expedient to imbroil himself so soon with the Roman War, but to settle
his Dominions, and therefore to prevent danger, slew Antigonus. Then to get his
Subjects Affections, he sat in Judgment, and made them many public Shows; and
to win the Romans, he sent and renewed the League.

Masanissa, had heretofore taken the Country of Emporia from Carthage, and
about this time he took other Land from them by force, about Seventy Towns and
Castles, of which, when the Carthaginians complained by their Ambassadors,
prostrate with Tears before the Senate, desiring Right, or Liberty to defend
themselves against him, or at least to know how far Masanissa should be allowed
to proceed: And if none of these would be granted, that then the Senate it self
would inflict upon them what they thought meet, rather than to keep them in
continual fear of this Numidian Hangman. See the fruits of their Envy against
that valiant Family of the Barchines, and of the Roman Peace desired by Hanno;
which has made them Slaves to the Servants of the Numidian, whose Fathers they
had used to sell over Africa and Greece. Their Answer was gentle, but without
effect, and Masanissa has a mild rebuke. Perseus is not yet brought into such
a Yoke, but must be, for he is questioned for taking up Arms without their
leave, though to subdue his own Rebels. After the same manner they dealt with
Greece: And of all others, with the Achaeans, who presumed most on their
Favor: So that all saw, that the Roman Patronage tended to nothing, but the
bondage of Greece. This gave Perseus hopes to find a Party there, as indeed he
did, though it little availed him.

. 5. Eumenes King of Pergamus hated Perseus exceedingly, not only for an
Hereditary quarrel with Macedon, but for that, he perceived the Greeks began to
favor him more than himself, whom they seemed to neglect, for being over
serviceable to Rome. For Redress hereof, he thought it not hard to induce the
Romans, utterly to overthrow the Macedonian Kingdom, which the Greeks now
adored; to which end, he took a second Journey to Rome, where he labored to
provoke the Fathers against Perseus; which needed not, though yet they heard
him willingly, that their Pretense of War might have the fairer show, as
proceeding from the information of such a King, come on purpose so far as out
of Asia. The Rhodians also were there with the Macedonian Ambassadors, to
answer, with matter of recrimination, that Eumenes had provoked the Lycians to
Rebel against the Rhodians. Careless Audience was given to the Rhodians, for
their Friendly Office in conveying Laodice the Daughter of Antiochus to
Perseus; and their Answer is, that the Lycians were assigned to Rhodes, not as
Vassals, but Associates: Thus their Subjects are become their Fellows.
Masanissa and the Aetolians, whose Subjects were not increased by the Romans,
or by the Cities and Peo,+ple bestowed upon them after Antiochus's Overthrow,
but their Friends, had cause to resent this Decree. The Macedonian Ambassadors
were heard, not so carelessly as angerly, being glad that Harpatus, the chief
Ambassador, had by violent Speeches given them cause of anger. And though
Perseus his faint Heart was not sit to threaten; Yet now he might think to get
more by a little Bravery than submission, seeing the Eyes of all Greece were
set upon him for a Delivery from the Roman Servitude. And it seems Perseus was
not very cautious of offending them, when he hired three or four Ru^^ians to
Murder Eumenes, in his return from Worshipping at Delphos, whom they had left
for Dead, though he recovered. The Report of his Death made Attalus his Brother
to take upon him as King, and would have taken Stratonica his Wife (as a matter
of State) had not Eumenes's coming home, put a stop to it: All which Eumenes
only checked, with wishing him not to Marry with the Queen, till he was sure
the King was Dead, who then bequeathed her to him. The Senate upon these
occasions, Decree War, and send Ambassadors to require satisfaction, or to
denounce it, which Perseus slights, calling the Romans greedy, and insolent;
commanding them to depart. This present heat was too much, he wanting constant
resolution, which he neglected in hope of Peace.

* 6. Rome had now fair occasion of War with Macedon, which though it had been
long sought, yet the preparation for War was to seek, and the want of it helped
to sound the disposition of Greece, which they solicit by Ambassadors with
better terms than Threatenings, though they durst not but promise aid to them,
whose Ruin they desired. The fear of Greece, grew from the timorous demeanor
of Perseus, whom they secretly affected, but saw his want of resolution would
betray them all that declared for them, if he could make his Peace, which even
then he sought, when he was in the Field, and his Enemy not in sight. His
Ambassadors were scarce come Home, when Licinius the Roman Consul was at
Apollonia; and yet Perseus is still in deliberation, though at last the
stoutest and wisest Counsel prevailed, if it had been as well followed after he
had brought his Forces together, which were Thirty nine Thousand Foot, and four
Thousand Horse. Being come into Thessaly, which was the Enemies way, some Towns
yield, and some he forced, and so came to Sicurium. Licinius is also come into
Thessaly, with only two Legions, tired in his passage through Athamania; and
rests by the River Peneus, Incamping there, and intending not to Fight till
his Auxiliaries were come; that so he might strongly force through Tempe, of
whose Straits Perseus was Master, to his great advantage, and might have had
more in taking the Straits of Aous. Eumenes, and Attalus his Brother, are come
to the Consul with four Thousand Foot, and one Thousand Horse. Yet the Consul
keeps in his Trenches, and is content to be insulted* day by day, by Perseus,
till at last, he was forced to send out Eumenes, Attalus, and his own Brother.
In this Skirmish Perseus slew two Hundred, and took as many, with little loss,
and might have distressed the Consuls Camp, if his fear had not baffled his
Encouragement by this Success: For the Consul was glad to Decamp at Midnight,
to a stronger Place beyond the River. Of all the advantages he had, this weak
spirited Man made no other use, than to hope for Peace; though Licinius
peremptorily told him he should look for none, without an absolute yielding
both Person and Kingdom. Not long after, attempting to force the Consuls Camp,
he had the worst, and thereupon leaving a weak Guard in Tempe, he returned to
Macedon. Licinius the Consul, and Lucretius the Admiral, ended their Year with
cruel Oppression of the Confederates; as did this Successors, Hostilius, and
Hortensis the Admiral, who more intended quarrelling with Friends, than warring
with Enemies; of the Oppressions by the two Admirals, Complaint was made at
Rome, and Lucretius deeply fined, and a Decree sent to Greece, Ordering him to
refuse all Impositions not warranted by the Senate.

. 7. Perseus in the two first Years of the War, was grown stronger, being
enlarged on the Illyrian side, and his Grecian Friends grown bolder; and many
of the Roman Friends keep out their Admiral by force, for his Oppression; and
the Glory of the Enterprise against Macedon, defaced as their Army lessened
greatly. P. Martius a new Consul, comes to help all, if he knew how; yet he
began hotly, and indeed the right way to pass through the Straits, not by Force
against the Guard that kept them, but by seeking untrodden Ways over such steep
Mountains, as if Nature had determined Armies should never pass them,
especially with Elephants. Perseus could not be ignorant of the Romans coming
toward him, and might have distressed them, if his Heart had served; but he
only Guarded the ordinary Passages into Tempe; and when he saw the Romans
entered, he was so far from forcing them upon their extreme Weariness, that he
fled, crying All was lost without a Fight. So in haste he left Dium, being the
strong Passage into Macedon, and sent Post to set Fire on his Arsenal at
Thessalonica, and cast his Treasure at Pella into the Sea, and called the
Captains which kept the Straits; but after his Fear was past, he put the two
First to Death, to cover his Fear, as if they had acted without his Command.
Martius presently took Dium, yet after one days March into Macedon, want of
Food forced him back to Thessaly, so unable was he to hold out, if he had kept
the Straits: So he forsook Dium, and took the Way to Phila, to meet his desired
Provision, and foolishly gave over the Enterprise, either for want to Courage,
or Skill; which so Encouraged Perseus, that he Fortified Dium again, and so
frustrated all the Consuls proceeding that Summer, who only took Heraclea, five
Miles off. The like Success had the Admiral at Sea in Attempting Thessalonica,
Cassandria, and Demetrias, though assisted by Eumenes. While the Consul lay at
Heraclea, he persuaded the Rhodian Ambassadors to Mediate for a Peace, which
might argue his Fear, though Polybius thinks it was to endanger the Rhodians.
Here also Polybius brought him word of Supplies Decreed for him out of Achaea,
which he refused, and also dissuaded sending any to Appius Claudius, as not
needful, though Claudius on the Frontier of Illyria was in danger, and sent for
it, and for want of it, was highly displeased with Polybius. Eumenes at this
time grew cold in Affection to Rome, upon what occasion is dou^tful; though it
was generally thought, that upon disgust of some usage of Martius he went Home,
from whence Perseus sent to invite him by some hope of Gain, and upon
consideration of that, the Fire was like to take his own House, next after
Perseus's House was burnt. The like course Perseus took with Gentius King of
Illyria, and gained him, and both send to the Rhodians, desiring them to
Mediate between Perseus and Rome, which they promised, thinking Martius also
desired it: But when their Ambassador moved for that Mediation, they were so
disdainfully taken up, that in all Humility they were glad to submit. Gentius
having received Ten Talents, and more being coming, laid hands on the Roman
Ambassadors, and committed them, whereupon Perseus recalled his last Treasure,
seeing Gentius so far engaged. About that time came Clondi^us with Ten Thousand
Horse, and Ten Thousand Foot of Gauls, or Bastarnes, procured by Perseus; but
for want of Covenanted Pay, presently returned toward Danubius.

. 8. Lucius Aemilius Paulus Consul the second time, had Macedon for his
Province, but refused to propound any thing for that Service to the Senate,
till a view were taken of the State of the Army there, and how it stood with
the Macedonian; so Supplies are made accordingly for him, and the Admiral, and
L. Anicius to succeed Appius Claudius the Praetor. Aemilius at his departing, in
his grave Oration, Requested them which thought themselves wise enough to
manage those Wars, either to go with him for his assistance, or govern their
Tongues at Home, and not Censure upon hearsay: For he would frame his Actions
to the advantage of the State; not to the expectation of the Multitude.

He was Honorably attended out of the City, and in five Days came to the Camp,
when Perseus lay in Dium, and Fortified the Fords of Enipeus; between which,
and Tempe, for Ten Miles, which is along the Seashore and Olympus, is no fresh
Water; but Aemilius knew no Shore wants fresh Water after a little digging; for
want whereof Martius was glad to go to Heraclea. Yet the Passage over Olympus
was as difficult now as then: So that Aemilius fell to enquire, and found a
Passage over Olympus, but narrow, leading to Perrabia, difficult of Ascent, but
slenderly Guarded; either not found, or not attempted by Martius; whose Men
being tried in getting over Ossa, would hardly adventure such another. But
Paulus was a far more able Commander, and had Taught them better than to
question a Generals Command, and made choice of five Thousand for the
Enterprise, whom he committed to his two Adopted Sons, Scipio Aemilianus, and
Quintus Fabius Maximus. These two, the better to conceal their Journey over the
Mountains, Marched out another way, till Night came; and the Consul made show
as if he would have set upon Perseus, and gain a Passage over Enipeus to divert
him from the business intended; so that Scipio and Fabius having forced the
small Guard, got in three Days over, and were not discovered till the Guard,
which fled, were come to the Camp. Then was all in a Tumult, and the King, most
of all amazed, hastes to Pydna, where he consults whether he should Fortify
some Town, or put all to the hazard of a Battle; which latter, though the
worst, is resolved upon, and that which the Consul wished. The King chose the
place near Pydna, whither the Consul came; but made a stand, till a place for
the Camp were Entrenched, and the Soldiers refreshed after Marching, though
both sides thought it long, especially the Romans feared, lest the King should
remove further off. That Evening was the Consul told by a Tribune, of an
Eclipse of the Moon that Night, and the Natural cause of it, who was contented
it should be Published in the Camp, to prevent their Fear. Superstition
captivates the Wise, where the help of true Religion is wanting. Aemilius, as
soon as the Moon recovered her Light, Congratulated her with a Sacrifice; for
which Plutarch calls him a Godly Man: And the next Morning he made another to
Hercules, about which, much of the Day was spent before the Grecian partial God
gave a good sign to the Entrals of the Sacrifice; so that on Day neither side
had any great desire to Fight. Yet after ten of the Clock, upon a light
occasion of watring of Horses, two or three of each side fell to Blows, and
Parties came in so fast, that both the Generals were forced to put their Men in
order of Battle, and after an Oration, set them together: But Perseus used the
shift of a Coward, to leave his Men, and withdraw himself to Pydna, pretending
Sacrifice, which being unseasonable, proved him an Hypocritical Coward. He sped
accordingly, for returning he found it little better than lost, but got the
Honor to be present, that he might run away with his Men, leaving Twenty
Thousand Foot slain in the Field, while he recovered Pella; from which he fled
in ^he Night for fear of his own People, and came to Amphipolis; but was glad
to be^ gone by Sea with his Treasure to Samothrace. The Head having forsaken the
Body, little Sense was left, or Strength to stand; all the Kingdom fell
presently into the Conquerours hand, ^^ile the King takes Sanctuary with his
Treasure, Wife and Children, in Samothrace, and after base Suit to the Consul,
endeavors to escape in a Cretian Ship; which having taken in much of his
Treasure, set Sail, and left him in the lurch; in the end he was forced to
yield himself, and all into the Consuls hand, and so made the Conquest
complete: Being before the Consul, he meanly prostrated himself, so that he
seemed to dishonor the Victory, as obtained upon a Man of so base a Condition.
Thus ended the Macedonian Kingdom, after a War of Four Years, and the Glory of
the World was Translated to Rome.

. 9. Gentius King of Illyria with fifteen Thousand Men at Lyssus, ready to
assist Perseus upon Receipt of the Money promised, was attacked by Anicius the
Roman Praetor, who drove him into Scodra or Sutary, where after a while he
yielded himself and all his Men to the Roman Praetor, who ended that War in
Thirty days.

. 10. Rome swelling with the Pride of her Fortune, called the Rhodian
Ambassadors, whom they threaten as Parties with Macedon, whose Cause they had
presumed to undertake: And though they Congratulated the Victory, Deprecated
their Folly, and their Citizens had put to Death, or sent Prisoners to Rome all
the chief Men of the Macedonian Faction; yet War had been Proclaimed against
them but for Cato, who said it would be judged rather a Quarrel at their
Wealth, than any just cause; considering also what Friends they had been to
Rome in former Wars. Macedon was divided into four Quarters, and each
prohibited Commerce with other. Their Laws abrogated, new given, and all the
Nobles sent into Italy, and the Tribute lessened by half, which was the best
part of the Liberty Rome used to give. Greece must now bear her Yoke; and all
that can be found, not only Associates with Perseus, but good Patriots which
were not held serviceable to Rome, were sent to Rome and there clapped up, of
which sort a Thousand were sent out of Achaea, and Polybius among them. This
was the Virtue of the Roman Oath and League. Epirus was more barbarously dealt
with, and given to the Soldiers to Plunder for their Pay, to save the
Macedonian Treasure whole: So in one day seventy Cities of the Roman
Confederates were Plundered by the Companies put into them in Peace, only to
Quarter; and One Hundred and Fifty Thousand made Slaves, which act of Aemilius
stained his other Virtues.

. 11. Antiochus the Great dyed in the Thirty sixth Year of his Reign; Seleuchus
his Eldest Son, succeeded Twelve Years, whom Daniel described Three Hundred
Years before, Onias being then High Priest. Mac. 3. The First Book of Maccabees
ends An. 167 of the Syrian Kings; the Second Book ends the 151 Year. Antiochus
Epiphanes succeedes his Brother in Syria, An. 137; whose death he procured.
Ptolomeus Epiphanes after twenty four Years left Egypt to his Son Ptolomeus
Philometor, so called by the Rule of contraries; for Murdering his Mother, he
was hated by his Subjects, and rebelled against by his Brother Ptolomy Phiscon,
who got possession of Alexandria, upon which contention Antiochus Epiphanes his
Uncle thought to possess that Kingdom, under pretense of protecting the Young
Prince. Antiochus's proceedings herein and at Jerusalem are Recorded, 1. Mac.
1. About the beginning of the Macedonian War, when besides the Spoil of Egypt,
he took all Coelosyria, and sold the High Priests place to Jason, thrust out
Onias, and after sold it to Manelaus, who procured Onias, being fled into the
Sanctuary at Daphus by Antioch, to be Murdered. 2 Mac. 4. Onias his taking
protection of Apollo and Diana, seemed allowed by the Author, which argues the
Book to be Apocryphal. His Second Expedition into Egypt, 2 Mac. 1. was
foreshewn by prodigious Signs in the Air for forty days together, and was
occasioned by the unexpected agreement of the Brethren, which incensed him, he
designing they should destroy one another. So he entered Egypt, though the Young
King entreated the contrary by Ambassadors, of whom he demanded Cyprus and
Pelusium, and took Memphis and other places. The Egyptians seek help from Rome,
but in vain, they being now deep in with the Macedonian War; the like they
desire of the Greeks, especially the Achaeans, whose forwardness was hindered by
the Roman Faction; yet at length the Senate being moved with compassion of the
Ambassadors lamentable behavior and supplication, sent C. Popilius and
others, with Command that Antiochus should leave Egypt; to which he submitted
according to the Prophet Daniel, or rather the History of Daniel.

. 12. Rome we see is grown terrible: When the greatest Kings must how to her
Majesty, how shall inferior Kings and States carry themselves to be assured of
Favor? Eumenes had been very officious, and helped to kindle the Fire which
has burnt up the Kingdom of Macedon. He therefore sends Attalus his Brother to
Congratulate the Victory, and crave Aid against the Gallo-Greeks: But Attalus
had succeeded better, if he had requested his Brothers Kingdom; which because
he did not as they expected, the Fathers went from what they had promised of
his having Enus and Maronia; as for the GalloGreeks they have a Message sent
them, rather to encourage than dissuade them. The displeasure of the Senate
being so manifest, Eumenes will again visit them, but the Fathers will not
receive him, it being decreed that no King shall come within Rome. Yet Prusius
King of Bythinia, a little before had been welcomed after a better manner; as
he who gave these Mortal Gods the Title and Worship done to them, kissing the
Threshold, and calling them his Gods and Saviors, commending his Son Nicomedes
to their Tuition. Cotys the Thracian excused his helping Perseus, and entreats
the discharge of his Son, taken with Perseus's Children, which is granted, with
admonition of his good behavior to Rome.

Masanissa only kept his Reputation with these great Masters, who stand by him
in all Quarrels with Carthage, whose Ruin he must help forward, before his own
turn be served: His Congratulations are well accepted.

Perseus and Gentius the unhappy Kings, have the last Act to play at Rome, in
the Triumphs of Aemilius and Anicius, being led in Chains before their Chariot.
Perseus made application to Aemilius, not to be put to the disgrace, and was
scornfully answered that he might prevent it, meaning he might kill himself;
his end is uncertain, whether starved or by over-watching. Alexander his
Youngest Son became a Turner in Rome; what conceit soever his Father had of
him, when he gave him that Name in wantonness of Sovereignity, in which he
commanded poor Men to be slain for getting up his Treasure out of the Sea by
Diving. He considered not, that the greatest Oppressors and the most abject
Wretches are all subject to one high Power, governing all alike with absolute
Command. But such is our Unhappiness, that instead of that blessed Counsel, to
do as we would be done to, which teaches Moderation, w^ ^^tertain that
arrogant Thought, I will be like the (...); that is, I will do what pleases my
self. The very desire of ability to do Evil without control, is a dangerous
Temptation to the performance; God has granted it to few, and very few they
are which use it not to their own damage; as Princes, who rack their
Sovereignity to the uttermost extent, teach others by the like strain to root
out their own Progeny. Nay, excellent Princes are often forced to flatter some
base Minion or Harlot which Governs some unworthy Fellow, that Governs all, of
which there are too many Examples. Aemilius's Triumph so glorious by reason of
a Kings Person, brought also such Riches into the Roman Treasury, that till
Julius Caesar's Death the State never needed to burden it self with Tribute.
The joy of this Triumph God abated with the loss of his Two Sons, one Five days
before, another Five days after it.

We have seen the beginning and end of the three First Monarchies of the World,
whose Founders thought they should never end: And the Fourth, of the Romans, is
already at the highest; where we left it in the Field, wherein nothing is left
to shadow it from the Eyes of the World: But after some time the Storms of
Ambition shall tear her Branches, her Leaves shall fall, her Limbs wither, and
a Rabble of barbarous Nations shall cut her down. These great Conquerours have
been the Subject of our Ancient Histories, and Tragical Poets; showing us their
great undertakings, not so much desiring Rule over others, which is so full of
Care, as hunting after Fame, which Ploweth up the (...) and Sows in the Wind.
And certainly as Fa^^ has often been dangerous to the Living, so is it of no
use to the Dead; who if they did understand what is Reported of them, they
would wish they had stolen out of the World without ^oise, rather than to hear
the Report of their Treacheries, Murders, Rapines, giving the spoil of Innocent
laboring Souls, to the idle and insolent.

Since the Fall of the Roman Empire (omitting the Germans, neither great, nor
of long continuance) there has been no State formidable in the East, but the
Turk; nor in the West, except the Spaniard, who by so many Attempts has sought
to make himself Master of all Europe: As one who is powerful both by his Indian
Treasure, and many Kingdoms he possessed in Europe: But as the Turk is now
Counterpoised by the Persian; So if, for so many Millions spent by English,
French, and Netherlands, in defensive War, and diversions against them, Two
Hundred Sixty Thousand Pound were employed for Two or Three Years, it is easy
to demonstrate how they may be brought to live in Peace, and their swelling
Streams be brought within the Banks. These are the only Nations of Eminency to
be regarded of us; the one seeking to root out the Christian Religion, the
other the sincere Profession of it.

If farther Reason be required of the continuance of this boundless Ambition of
Mortal Men, than desire of Fame, we may say, That the Kings and Princes of the
World have always laid before them the Actions, not the Ends of those great
ones, the Glory of the one Transporting them, never minding the Misery of the
other till it seized upon him. They neglect the Advice of God, while they hope
to live; but when Death comes, then they believe what it tells them. Death
without speaking a word, persuades what God with promises and threats cannot
do, though the one hates and destroys Man, whereas the other made and loves
him. I have considered (says Solo^^n) all Works that are under the Sun, and
behold all is Vanity and vexation of Spirit: Who believes this till Death beats
it into us? It was Death which forced the Conscience of Charles 5th. and made
him enjoin Philip his Son, to restore Navarre; and Francis the First, King of
France, to command justice to be done upon the Murderers of the Protestants in
Merindol and Calabries, till then neglected. Death alone can make Man know
himself; the proud and insolent, that he is but abject, and can make him hate
his forepast Happiness: The rich Man he proves a naked Beggar, which has
interest in nothing but in the Gravel that fills his Mouth; and when he holds
the Glass before the Eyes of the most Beautiful, they see and acknowledge their
Deformity and Rotteness. O eloquent, just and mighty Death! whom none could
advise, thou have persuaded; what none has presumed, thou have done; whom all
the World have flattered, thou have cast out of the World and despised: Thou
have drawn together all the extravagant Greatness, all the Pride, Cruelty and
Ambition of Man, and covered it all over with two narrow Words, Hic jacet.

Lastly, Whereas this Book bearing this Title, The First Part of the general,
etc. implying a Second, and a Third, which I intended, and have hewn out;
besides many other Discouragements persuading my Silence, it has pleased God
to take that glorious Prince out of the World, for whom they were designed:
Whose unspeakable and never enough lamented loss, has taught me to say with
Job, Versa est in luctum cithara mea, and organum meum in vocem flentium.

FINIS.

