TO THE MAGISTRATES, Governors and Rulers Concerned in ENGLAND.
FRIENDS;
WE who are in scorn called Quakers, have been a Suffering People this many
Years, under all Governments, since we were a People; and we may truly say, as
once did David concerning Israel old, If the Lord had not been on our side,
when men rose up against us, they had then swallowed us up quick; when their
Wrath was kindled against us, then the Waters had drowned us, and the Streams
had gone over our Souls, Psalm. 124. 1, 2, 3, 4. yet were we never known to
avenge our own Cause, nor to render Evil for Evil to the worst of our Enemies:
It is not our Nature, our Principle nor Practice, to take Vengeance on the
meanest of our Enemies, because Mercy and Forgiveness is seated in our hearts;
and when our Enemies have hungered, we have fed them; naked, we have clothed
them; sick and in Prison, we have visited them, and ministered unto them. This
we speak without Boasting, in an humble Mind, knowing to whom we must render an
Account of our Words and Deeds; as a People, we have all our lives long studied
to be quiet, and to follow Peace with all men; neither have we eaten any man's
Bread for naught, but have labored with our hands in the thing that is good,
that we might have to give to him that needs, desiring nothing more in this
World than to keep our Consciences void of Dffence, both toward God and all
men. This (not our words, but) the whole course of our Lives has manifested in
every place and Parish where we have dwelt amongst you.

And as to the Government under which God has placed us, We have, and hope
ever shall readily yield all lawful and reasonable Subjection in Civil things,
between Man and Man, onlydesiring that we may not be forced to violate our
Consciences in things relating to another World, which has no bad aspect on
the Affairs of this. For CONSCIENCE is Christ's Prerogative, in which he ought
to sit absolute King, Governor and Lawgiver, as we have cause to believe; and
no mortal Man (though never so great) ought to say, Why do thou thus? What
mortal Man on Earth can (with safety) sit Judge over another man's Conscience in
things for which (he alone who acts them) must be accountable to the great God?
Ought not every man to be fully persuaded in his own Mind in things of the
highest concern? Can any man pay a Ransom for his Brother, or be a Pledge for
his Neighbor to the great Judge of Heaven and Earth? Or who will or can acquit
a man before his great Tribunal, who (in temporal or spiritual things) acts
contrary to the Witness of God in his own Conscience, which is (and ever was)
greater than the Witness of Man? Yet such is the blindness of your chief
Priests, and the madness of their Rage against all who will not put into their
Mouths, that they immediately prepare War against them, without ever
examining, whether their cause is good or bad, or seeking to convince them by
sound Argument, but presently, upon any turning from them [though upon never so
weighty Reasons] they fly to you to fight their Quarrel with your Prisons,
Fines Eccommunications, etc. and few of them dare engage themselves in a fair
Debate, with those they count ignorant and deluded, etc. with their spiritual
Weapons, though they have been often invited thereto, which plainly
demonstrates a bad Cause or a faint Heart, and that the Weapons of their
Warfare are Carnal, not Spiritual, quite contrary to the Weapons of the holy
Men of God recorded in the Scripture of Truth, who said, Though we walk in the
flesh, yet we war not after the flesh; for the Wapons of our Warfare are not
Carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong Holds, casting
down the Imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted against the
knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. Surely they have more Confidence in a Goal
or Gibbet to overcome us, than in that they call the Word of God, or they judge
you to be either stronger or more valiant than themselves, and have more
Confidence in your Sword to destroy us, than in their own convincing Arguments,
to recover us; but the Prophet said, Cursed is Man who trusts in Man, and
makes Flesh his Arm, and withdraws his Heart from the Lord, Jer. 17. 5. And
let them remember, that the first Persecutor about Religion was Cain, Genesis 4.
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. in whose steps they tread who seek the Destruction of their
Fellow Creatures about Religion and Worship; and it is an Infallible token,
that their Offerings are rejected of God, as Cain's was: But to salve all, they
tell you, That the Church is in danger, and therefore you must stand up for its
desence, and pluck up the Weeds of Schism and Herefie, which the Devil has
sown amongst you. A fair pretense indeed! yet herein they are manifest more to
all who have an Eye to see; for if theirs were the true Church, the Gates of
Hell could not prevail against it, Mat. 16. 18. And they who are the Sheep of
Christ, and given to him, no man can pluck them out of his hand, John 10. 28,
29. But I suppose they mean their Tithes and great Benesices are in danger to
be lost; the very Mistress of their Religion, and the moving cause of all their
undertakings in it, as is notoriously evident to all whose Eyes God has opened.

And if they were the true Wheat, and others the Tares, which they represent to
you to be such, they needed not be afraid of our growing together to the
Harvest (i. e. the end of the World;) for thus the great Master of the Field
(i. e. the World) said to his Servant, who brought him word, that the Enemy had
sown Tares in the Field among his good Seed, and would in his forward zeal have
plucked them up, but his wise Master would not suffer him, lest he should root
up the Wheat also, Mat. 13. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. but ordered them both
to grow together to the end of World; and fully explained the Parable, and
said, He that sowed the Seed was the Son of Man, the Field was the World, and
the good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom of God, and the Tares the
Children of the Devil; the Enemy that sowed them is the Devil; the Harvest is
the end of the World, and the Reapers are the Angels: So shall it he in the end
of the World, the Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and shall gather out
of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do Iniquity, and cast
them into the Furnace of Fire, there shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth,
Mat. 13. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. Can you believe them to be your Friends, who
would have you so forward in plucking up all but themselves? If you were as
forward to execute as they are to spur you on, you and they might have cause to
repent of it, when it were too late; for as I said before, that Prerogative is
only peculiar to the Son of God, to give Infallible Judgment of Truth and
Error, and to render to every man a Reward according to his Deeds, be they good
or bad; and whosoever assumes this Prerogative cannot be innocent, for
Vengeance is mine, says the Lord, and I will repay it, Romans 12. 30. Heb. 10.
30. Romans 3. 5. And how can the Natural man perceive the things of the Spirit of
God, to whom, the Apostle says, they are foolishness? 1 Cor. 2. 14 Can Fines,
Imprisonments or Tortures upon the Bodies of men expiate their Offenses to God,
or satisfy the Displeasure of Heaven, for their committing or omitting any
thing or duty? Or is poor fallen man a fit Judge in the weighty matters of Gods
Kingdom? Oh! weigh and consider these things well, and be not high-minded, but
fear and dread the living God, unto whom you must give an Account of that
Stewardship committed to you, and God Almighty give you to see both your
Priests and Us; for there is little hopes of their seeing either Truth or
Error, while your great Benefices, Gifts and Rewards stand so much in their
Eyes; such things always blinded the Eyes of the false Prophets of Israel,
whom the true Prophets cried Woe against, Isa. 56. 10, 11. Jer. 23. Ezekiel 34.
Mic. 3. 11, 12. and against the Judges also that Judged for Rewards, as well as
against the Priests which preached for Hire, and said, Therefore should Zion be
plowed as a Field, and Jerusalem should become on Heaps, etc. And is not the
cause now in England? And how can it but produce the same Effects? What will be
the end of these Covetous Practices, which the Priests and Lawyers are daily
found in? Are they not the proper Marks of those cursed Children which Peter
spoke of, 2 Pet. 2. 14? And who are they that are walking in the Way of Cain,
and running greedily after the Error of Balaam, which Jude spoke of, verse. 11?
I do entreat you in all Humility to consider these things in this your day, and
see who carry the Marks aforesaid, for they are the false Prophets which Christ
warned his Disciples of, Mat. 7. 15, 16. who are known by their Fruits: And let
all People alone in matters of Faith and Worship toward God; it is dangerous
for you to sit Judges over men's Faith and Consciences in matters for which they
(and they alone) are only responsible to God, and not to any Earthly Man: You
your selves cannot Infallibly say, that the Way and Worship in which you now
walk and worship, is the Way and Worship of God; and how then can you enjoin
others thereunto, and that under severe Penalties? Who does not believe it is
either the Way or Worship of God? Is not Faith toward God his own Gift? And
who can persuade the Heart but he? And all Offerings and Sacrifices without it
are as the cutting off a Dogs neck, and offering Swines Blood, which is
Abomination before him; therefore take heed what you do concerning this great
and weighty matter; for GOd will not be mocked with Lip-service, nor a
voluntary Humility, but faith at this day, as in the days of old, My Son, give
me they Heart, Prove. 23. 26. This is the Rock upon which many of our
Forefathers have suffered Shipwreck.

So in tender Bowels of Love I entreat you beware of it, and trust God with
your Church, if it be of him, he will defend it, and no weapon formed against
it shall prosper; but if it be of man he will overthrow it, and all your
Wisdom, Strength and Policy cannot uphold nor defend it: And judge
Righteously between a Man and his Neighbor in temporal things; for that is
your place and business, and the end for which you were ordained of God; and
herein as you are a Terror to Evildoers, and a Praise to them who do well, you
shall thrive and prosper, and in this shall your Posterity be happy, when your
Heads are in the Dust. But let the Ark of God alone, for by his Power alone he
will support that: Remember when Uzzah put forth his hand to hold the Ark of
God when the Oxen shook it, how the Wrath of God rose against him, and he
smote him for his fault, so that he dyed by the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6. 6, 7. 1 Chronicles. 13. 10. These things were written for our Learning, that we should not
tempt God, as some of them tempted him, and were destroyed. And we pray you
take Gamaliels counsel concerning all Dissenting Parties, who live peaceably
under the Government, and let us alone; If we be of God, ye cannot overthrow
us, Acts 5. 34. But if this work be of man, it will fall, and come to naught,
verse. 38, 39, 40. To this advice the Jews hearkened, though they were in great
Rage against the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus, Acts 5. 40. and for a time
let them go; but the Highpriests rage would not suffer that long to continue,
but again and again stirred up the Rulers to persecute Christ and his
Disciples, till they had stain them, and thereby drew down the Wrath of God
upon themselves and their Posterity: And they judged themselves as safe then in
their work, and thought they had as good Law for their proceedings, as you now
think you now have to prosecute us by; nay, their Confidence led them to say,
His Blood be upon us and upon our Children, Mat. 25. 25. which came to pass, to
their Misery and Condemnation. Examine all Histories since the Creation, did
ever any long prosper, who prosecuted any merely for their Consciences toward
God? How can any Mortal uncertain fallible man with safety prescribe a way of
Worship to his Fellow Creature, in which he can assure him Acceptance with God?
Did Christ (who had all Power in Heaven and Earth committed to him) enjoin any
Man or People to any Way or Worship under any outward Penalty in Body or Purse?
What Example have you for such Proceedings in all the Gospel Day or
Ministration? If the Scripture be your Priests Rule (as they pretend) let them
show a president for their Proceedings in this matter from any who either
believed or followed Christ: Nay, when there arose a difference amongst the
Disciples about Eating, etc. the Apostle said, Let every man be fully persuaded
in his own Mind; and commanded him who eats, not to despise him who eats
not; neither him who eats not, him who eats, for God has received him, Romans
14. 2, 3, 4, 5. And writing to the Phillipians he said, Let us therefore, as
many as be Perfect, be thus minded; and if any thing ye otherwise minded, God
shall reveal even the same to you, Phil. 3. 15. He did not force them under
Fines and Penalties into his Belief or Mind in things appertaining to the
Kingdom of God. And writing to the Corinthians, he exhorted them to follow him
as he followed Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. and no otherwise: And to Timothy he
describes those Fruits by which Christ told his Disciples ( Mat. 7. 16.) they
should know the false Prophets, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and commanded them
To turn from such. And this is the reason why many turn from such now, whose
fruits proclaim them rather Sons of Beliel, than Ministers of the Gospel. And
Peter writing to the Saints, fully describes the false Teachers and their
fruits, 2 Pet. chap. 2. And then John writing to the little Children, said, It
is the last times, as ye have heard, that Antichrist shall come; even now there
are many Antichrists, whereby we know it is the last times, 1 John 2. 18. And
again, he said, Little Children, let no man deceive you; he that does
Righteousness is Righteous, even as he is Righteous; but he that commits Sin
is of the Devil, for the Devil sinned from the beginning: And for this purpose
was the Son of God made manifest, that he might destroy the works of the Devil.
In this are the Children of God manifest, and the Children of the Devil;
whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God, 1 John 3. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Now
the God of Mercy give you Understanding more and more to discern between the
Righteous and the Wicked, and between them who serve God, and they who serve
him not: Amen.

I am A Friend to all the Upright in heart, without Respect of Persons, Ambros
Rigge.
Gatton in Surrey, the 2d of the 4th Month, 1682.
THE END.

