A Horrible thing committed in this LAND
HEre follows a Description of the frui^s of one of the false prophets of
Kent, who has gone ^^^er the name of a Minister of Christ, but by his fruits
you may see that he amongst the rest is such a one as is greedy, and teaches
for hire, and bears rule by his means, and all the true Prophets have given in
their testimony in all ages against such practices as he is found in; Job says
They spied out a house in the day time. And has not this man done so in which
he has made all this spoil, but they know not the Light; and such Teachers as
he is are they that say the light is natural, and natural conscience, but this
man has made himself manifest that he knows not the light, and that his
conscience is corrupt and seared, and he is without natural affection, and as a
natural bruit beast which pusheth with his side and shoulder, so has he made
manifest himself to be; who has not loved his neighbor, neither the innocent,
and so he has not fulfilled the Law and the Prophets, neither has he loved
his brother whom he has seen, and therefore does not love God whom he cannot
see; and therefore let him and all such for ever cease to speak in his Name,
who hates to be reformed, they hate the right way of the Lord who sends forth
freely, and this is Balaams way which they are in, nay worse, for he loved the
wages of unrighteousness, but durst not take it, but this man has taken the
unrighteous wages at large, who is a shame to the Ministers in these days, who
have said they were sent of God, but have brought us these fruits to make them
manifest, that they ran, and the Lord never sent them, and therefore they do
not profit the people at all, and he is such a one who is a shame to his
Country, and unto the fountain from whence he proceeded which has brought
forth such bitter water, and the blessings of such has the Lord cursed, yea
even already says the Lord, and dung does he spread upon their faces, and
Christ says, by their fruits the false Prophets are known, he came not to
destroy men's lives but to save them. And he said unto Peter, put up thy sword,
and he did not destroy peoples estates, neither any that he sent forth, but
they were as examples, and if any did detain any thing from them which was
their due, they for so doing did not render evil, for evil or railing, for
railing, they were far from making havoc, but says the Apostle after my
departure shall grievous Wolves arise which will not spare the flock and such
drew away Disciples after them, and these grievous Wolves, how do they destroy,
how do they raven as the Preiest of the Parish of Elmestone has done? who is a
fierce despiser of them that are good, and all the Wolves that we read on ever
since the days of the Apostles, that has been grievous did never make such a
spoil neither such a havoc as he has done, who without pity or bowels of
compassion, has exceeded them in this thing, showing out his enmity against
Robert Minter, his Wife and family to destroy them, but also she as a tender
Mother, who with natural care and tenderness, did provide things honest both
for her self, and also for her house, in the sight of God and all people, and
also for her child which as yet was in her womb, unbrought forth, that when
the time appointed of her deliverance should come, she and it might be
preserved by such things and necessaries as God had enabled her to provide; And
travel coming suddenly upon a woman with child, she had linen clothes and
clouts provided suitable for it; and before it was brought forth, this havoc
was made without pity either to the Child or yet to the tender Mother, which
might have caused great grief of heart, and sudden labor, if the Lord had not
supported her, so that she and the child too might have gone near to have been
lost if not both together, and those days her last days, laying down her head
in sorrow, taking away their corn, pannes, and other things as is hereafter
mentioned that she could not have that relief for her self neither, for it as
in that case is required. Oh horrible and wonderful, if Jeremiah had been in
these days, here had been a wonderful horrible, and a filthy thing to have
cried against, nay all the false Prophets, he has outstript, and gone beyond
them all; what could he require of the child in the womb, or of that man who
did not hear him nor did receive any spiritual thing from him, is not this such
a one as did oppress a man and his house, and if Isay had lived in these
days, would he not have declared him to be a greedy dog, and such a shepherd
that could not understand, that looks to their own way, and seeks for their
gain from their quarter as you may see in Isa. 56. 10, 11. And if Ezekiel had
lived in these days, might not he have prophesied against this shepherd and
have cried woe against him, as he did against those shepherds? in Ezekiel 34. 2, 3,
4, the diseased he has not strengthened he has not healed that which was sick,
neither has he bound up that which is broken, neither has he brought again
that which is driven away, but on the contrary, he has rather made sick, rather
diseased, rather made weak, even where there was no sickness, and where there
was noe disease, and so has made the heart of the Righteous sad, whom the Lord
has not made sad, but he has ruled with force and with cruelty, and does eat
the fat, and cloth with the wool, but the beast fed are slain. Now consider
should not the shepherds, feed the flocks, as you may see in the second verse,
and should not he that plants a vineyard eat of the fruit thereof? now the
shepherds are first to feed the flock, and sow unto them Spiritual things, then
it were a small matter if they did reap their carnals, a little meat and drink
as the Ministers of Christ have, and had, and if Hosea had been in these days
who did hear the Word of the Lord, might he not well have cried out, As a troop
of Robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder in the way by
consent? Hosea, 6. 9. And if Micah who was truly full of that spirit, would he
not have said of him, as he said of them that caused the Lords people to err,
and did bite with their teeth, and cry peace to them that put into their
mouths, but them that did not, they prepare war against them? as Micah 3. and
5. And such a one who hates the good and loves the evil, who pluck off their
skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones, and who eat the flesh
of my people, and flay their skin from off them, and they break their bones,
and chops them as for the pot and cauldron. But throughout all the Prophets
search and see unto whom ye can compare him, for Job says in the 24, and 10.
they cause him to go naked without clothing, they take the sheaf from the
hungry; and so all the true Prophets have borne witness against such practices
as these, though for so doing, they were sawn in sunder, imprisoned, whipped,
tormented and afflicted, in trials of cruel mockings, scourgings, imprisonments
and bonds; Let all the Saints and Children of light try him, and judge of him
or any who has any savor in themselves, if he be good and savory among
Christians to be called a Minister of Christ, I am sure true Christians can
give him no such name being he is in an another nature, but will turn away from
him as from a proud man and a covetous man, as the Apostle exhorts in 2 Timothy 3.
1, 2, 3, 4. and from such a one as has the form of Godliness, and not the
power, and so we do turn away from such and from them that binds heavy burdens
upon people, grievous to be born, which Christ cried woe against, and is not
this grievous to be borne, to be thus spoiled, to be thus bitten? let him bring
us one Scripture either from the false Prophets or yet from the true, where any
of them did such things to the height, as he has done even to clouts and pins,
not leaving them a change to their backs but what they had on, how woefully is
this man run on in the apostasy; for the Apostles and Saints they had bowels of
compassion of love, and them that gainsaid the truth and withstood them, they
waited in patience and all long sussering, that if it pleased God they might
have repentance unto life, and they had their conversation honest amongst the
Gentiles, and such as did become the Gospel of Christ, and of God, and the
Ministers of Christ exhorted to these things, and they were no strikers nor
brawlers, nor covetous, but said such could not inherit the Kingdom of God*
and covetousness was not once to be mentioned amongst them, nor idle words and
jesting, but as becomes saints to put it away, for they that did such things,
which were false brethren and false Apostles, they received the recompense of
reward in themselves as was meet, for the wrath of God comes upon the children
of disobedience and they received this for their error as was meet. And the
Apostle exhorted to all goodness, and to use hospitality without grudging, and
he did so that labored in the word and doctrine unto whom a dispensation of
the Gospel of Christ was committed, as ye may see where he says these hands
have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that are with me: And he says
in the first of Thessalon. 4. and the 6. that no man go beyond his brother in
any matter, because that the Lord is the avenger of all such as we also have
forewarned you and testified. Now you may see the Apostle a Minister of Christ,
he could bring in his Testimony, he could testify that he had not gone beyond
his brother in any matter, and he labored with his hands that the Gospel might
be without charge, this was a good Testimony, and away to win people to God,
for it was for that end that the Apostle preached to bring people unto God, to
turn them from the darkness to the light, from evil unto good, and the servant
of the Lord, says he must not strive but be apt to teach to be gentle
endureing in much patience, in affliction; Come, are ye here? nay you afflict,
many of you, and are in Cains way, as this man who beyond the bond or limit of
charity has extended, and he is not in Christ, but has brought forth the
fruits of the flesh, and not of the Spirit; for did ever any Minister of Christ
who was in the Spirit, bring forth such fruits? nay they were ashamed of such,
and cried against them that they were in Cains way, Kores and Balaams,
following and loving the wages of unrighteousness, and these were as wels
without water, and clouds without rain, carried about with a tempest: do you
not see how fiercely they go on, and what a tempest they come withal, that
they that receive the light must endure great afflictions, bonds and
imprisonments, but it is but that their folly may be made manifest, and they
shall proceed no further, but as natural brute beasts are made to be taken and
destroyed, and shall perish in their own corruptions, and the servants of the
Lord that endures to the end shall be saved, and his jewels will he bind up,
and so all ye that are in the light, and who for receiving has suffered loss
of goods and liberty, yet ye dwelling in the light, will see your reward and
your crown of rejoicing, and God on your part will be glorified and well spoken
of, but of your enemies evil, its because they know not God that they know not
you, neither do they know the light, they know not that which exercises the
conscience toward God and man, and this man is not fit to teach others who is
not taught of God, and is not in the practice of the Godly, let them that are
in authority try him if he be not insufficient, and has taken a yoke of
bondage upon his neck, and is not he entangled with these things? And again, is
he not scandalous, and an evil example to the flock that he is set over? And
consider with what he can feed them, or what benefit can they receive from him?
And to inform you, it is for conscience sake that we cannot pay tithes, and
because the priesthood is changed which did receive tithes; and so for bearing
witness to this Priest who is a Priest for ever made after the power of an
endless life, is this spoil made by him who professes him in words, but in
works has denied him, whom we in all our sufferings bear testimony to, even
unto him who endured the Cross, and despised the shame for the glory that was
set before him; and so the servant must not be greater then his Lord, this we
know, and if it were not for him, we could not endure with patience, but he
has appointed his that through many tribulations they shall enter the Kingdom
of God; but woe is to the troublers, and to Sions oppressors, for the Lord will
not cast off his people, neither shall they be clean forsaken, but the
destroyer for their sakes shall be rebuked, and he has said vengeance is mine
and I will repay, And so we are not careful in this thing (it being for
conscience sake, and not for saving of the earth) to answer any in this matter,
but the God whom we serve will in his time deliver us, and if not, be it known
unto you that we shall not uphold such falseprophets, neither worship their God
in the Idols Temple, but God who is a Spirit, him we will worship, and him will
we obey, and will not fear what man can do, man that can but kill the body, and
can do no more, but rather we will fear him that after he has killed the body,
can cast both body and soul into Hell; and we are turned away from such as he
is, for from the least of them even unto the greatest, they are all given to
covetousness and to deal falsely, crying peace where there was no peace, were
they ashamed when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not ashamed,
neither could they blush, though as a fountain casts out her waters, so did
they cast out their wickedness; violence and spoil is heard in her, before me
continually is grief and wounds, as you may see in Jeremiah 6. 7. to 16. Now
can we call those the Ministers of Christ, which are in these things, that are
not ashamed and cannot blush, or how can we hold them up any longer? or why
should any be displeased that we declare them to be false Prophets, deceivers
and Antichrists, seeing such fruits is found among them, and his fruit is laid
before you to be read? and if he blush and be ashamed, and make restitution,
according to Gods Law, unto whom he has wronged, then it may go well with him,
if not, he will fall among them that fall in the day when the Lord visits him.

And now is he warned and exhorted to prize his time, and the rest of you that
are found in these practices. And unto whom this shall come, if you will
justify such practices as you are in to be according to the Ministers of
Christ, come forth openly to those people that are called Quakers, and you
shall be heard, or else for ever cease to back-bite, or rail upon them when
they are not there.

Thomas Robertson.

Taken from Robert Minter Farmer the fourth day of the fourth month, in the
year 1658. for Tithes, by the Priest Alexander Bradley in the Parish of
Elmstone in the County of Kent.
First, Two feather-beds. Three feather-bolsters. One pillow. One flock-bed.
One flock-bolster. One bead-stead. Two pair of curtains. Two pair of valens.
Iron rods for two beds. Cords for two beds. Four blankets. Two cover clothes.
One rug. Ten pair of sheets. Two pair of pillow-bears. Six towels. Five
table-cloathes. Twenty one pieces of pewter. Three spoons. Four brass kettles.
A brewing-furnace. One warning-pan. One skillet. Four chists. One trunk. One
dozen of trenchers. Three forms. Two tables. One frame. Three milking-pails.
One spade. One mattock. One dung-fork. Five horse-harnesse. One pillion and
covering. Eleven quarters and an half of Wheat. Thirteen sacks. Three bushels
of barley. One hundred and an half of Hops. Twenty and one Lambs. Three sheep.
Five calves. Thirty hogs and pigs. Ninteen changes for men and Women. Forty
five double clouts for a young child. Twelve beds. Five double neck-cloaths.
Four pair of sleeves. Six caps for a woman. Two neck-cloaths. Thirty two small
pieces of fine linen for a child. Seven chin-staies. Four blankets. One
mantle. Three shirts. Three biggins. Four double crosse-cloaths for a Woman.
One first suit for a child. One swaddle-band. One back-band. Two double bibs.
One vail. One dressing. Three pin-cushins and pins. Beside a thousand of pins.
One night-waste-coat. Half a cheese.
And the Priests company broached a vessel of strong bear of which they drank
so excessively, that they left the tap droping out all the rest.

The value of the goods taken was judged to be worth ninty three pounds sixteen
shillings and eight pence.

Robert Minter.

This is but one of many hundreds that have been spoiled of their goods (and
some of their lives) by this troop of Robbers and Murderers; more of their
cruelty may be read in a book Entitled A Record of sufferings for Tithes in
England.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1658.


