A WARNING TO THE INHABITANTS Of the whole Earth: And perticulerly, or more
Especially, to the Inhabitants of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Islands and places to the same belonging and Adjoining, as appearing to be now
under the more present and Imediate concern hereof: And to the rest in their
order and time.

R. R.

Eze. 3.18. When I say unto the Wicked thou shall surely die and thou give
him not warning nor Speak to warn the wicked, from his wicked way, to save
his life, the same wicked man shall die in his Iniquity but his Blood will I
require at thy hand.

ver. 19. Yet if thou warn the wicked and he turn not from his wickedness,
nor from his wicked way he shall die in his Iniquity, But thou have delivered
thy soul.

Printed in the Year. 167^.

TO all the Nations Countries, Kingdoms, Tongues Peoples and Languages that
are upon the face of the whole earth, And perticularly and more nearly, to the
Inhabitants of England and the Kingdoms, Countries, and Islands, to the same
belonging, and adjoining, and of all the Citys Towns, Villages, Hamblets, and
Places thereof; unto you all and every one of you, high and low, Rich and Poor,
bond and free, male, and female, Priest, and People, Professors, and profaine,
even from the King that sits upon his Throne, unto the Beggar upon the Dunghill;
This is the word and Invitation of the Lord God, and a warning unto you by my
mouth, that you all and every one of you who are found in unrighteousness
unholinesse, or uncleanness, of any kind, do speedily repent and return every
man from the evil of his ways, and from the violence that is in his hands, and
by a due repentance, have to meet the Lord God in all holiness of life and
uprightness of conversation, if so be that you may escape, and that you perish
not; and be ye cleansed, and purged, and cleanse, and purge, all your streets
broad places, and high ways, and all your Markets, Chanells, watersewers, and
gutters; as in the outward; so in the inward, your very hearts, from all those
filthy nastie stinking noisome ill savours of sin iniquty, uncleanness,
persecution, oppression, and unholinesse; with which as with a filthy nastie
noysom ill savor your said streets, Towns, Steeplehouses, and other places
abounds: that so an high way in holiness may be made for our God (who is a
consumeing fire; and whose eyes is purer then to behold iniquity) to come down
amongst you; and make his progress through you, to take possession of his own
Inheritance (to wit) the heart of man, which should be filled with
righteousness, and be made the habitation of his holiness, and to see what
this is, that the Children of men is a doing; and what it is, that this great
Busle, and Stir that is amongst them is about; for there has been for a long
time much profession made amongst the sons and daughters of men, some
prepareing and inventing, or setting up one way, or form of worship to come to
the Father by, (as they pretended, and by which they might escape the wrath to
come) and some an other; and every of the said several sorts of professors,
killing rending, tearing, riveing and distroying another, about what they have
so set up and invented, because they will not be of the same way or cannot be
of the same persuasion with them. Symenting what they have so set up, with one
another blood, and not only with one an others blood, but even every sort of
them (as it were with open mouth) have run against the heritage of the Lord, if
possible to distroy them, one building a wall and another daubing it with
untempered mortar; and thus like the Babell builders of old, has every
persuasion, or several sort of professors, endeavored to set up a Tower, and
build something whose top, should reach unto heaven, and be a deliverance unto
them: And great stir havoc spoil destruction and bloodshed, has there been
made, about the several ways, worships, and professions so set up and
invented; But now the Lord God of life and power (as in the days of old when
the Babell builders aforesaid was at their Confused work) is come and a comeing
down amongst you, to see what this is, that the Children of men is a doing, and
will certainly, not only break down and confound the work, but also scatter
and destroy the workmen, And confound that Language, in which you do pretend to
worship him; For though you amongst your selves may differ something in the form
and manner of your professions and pretense of worshipping God, yet in the root
and ground of evil (to wit) pride, persecution, unholinesse, and
unrighteousness, you are one; And therefore now all people, that are upon the
face of the whole earth, I dearly desire you seriously to consider, if This
Message or warning which now comes to you, in the name of the Lord God, (to
call you to repentance and to forewarne you to fly, from the wrath that is
likely with speed to come upon you, who are found in unrighteousness, Except
you repent and return and be reconsiled and meet the Lord by a holy life and
conversation); Were the message and request of your outward King, by his
Messenger or harbenger unto you to give you notice of his approach unto you,
And intended progress through your Towns Villages, and ways, with request to
make provision and entertainment for him, or otherwise, that he would be
offended with you, and do some injury to you? Oh with what promtnesse and
readiness [consider] would you bestirr your selves, to prepare for his
approach and to give reception unto him: how would you dress and cleanse your
streets Pavements, and channells, and scour and make clean your high ways,
Gutters, Watersewers, and sinks, (by which he should pass) and remove and purge
out, all the dirt filth stinck and noisome ill savours out, all the same? and
how would you deck and adorn your selves in your most clean and Sumptious
apparel, to meet and give entertainment unto him, and sweep, dress, and
perfume, your best Rooms for his reception, and with what Obsequiousnes and
humility would you come before him and present your selves unto him, and do
what else you thought might please him: and if you would do all this and much
more (if it were possible) for the entertainment of your outward King, In how
much more humble, holy, lowly, Prostrate, heavenly, and Obedient Manner, ought
you to be prepared, to stand before and give entertainment to so Glorious a
King as is the heavenly God, whose eyes is purer then to behold Iniquity and no
unclean thing can stand before him, Who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
and before whom all the Nations of the earth is but as the drop of a Bucket,
who (as was said before) is now come or a coming amongst you, and will make his
progress through you, that he may render to every man, according as his works
shall be, Tribulation and anguish, to every soul that does not righteously,
and therefore, how clean ought your garments (even the coverings of your
spirits or spiritual coverings) in all holiness to be, and how becomeing and
needful it is for you [consider] to have your hearts (which should be the
habitation of God) purged and made clean, from all those foul running inward
evils; and filthy, nastie, noisome, ill savours; of sin and uncleanness, with
which you are polluted; and your whole man redeemed out of and from, all those
your vain conversations and evil practices [to wit] Pride, lying,
drunkenness, swearing, curseing, whoring, gaming, wantonness, and all those
other abominations with which (notwithstanding your several professions) your
said Countries, Citys, Towns, Villages, Streets, Steeple Houses, and places, in
too large a measure abounds; for is it not a shame unto you and to your
several professions, nay to the very name of Chirstianity, to see, what pride
and gaudinesse, lying, swearing, cursing, drinking, whoring, carrowsing
debaucherys, and all manner of evils, and abominations, are to be found, seen,
and heard amongst you, and in your said Countries, Citys, Towns, streets,
Steeple Houses, and places, so that it may be truly said of these and the like
evils, as the prophet Jeremiah said of swearing Jer: 23. that because of these
things the Land mournes; and therefore as a warning and Message from the Lord
God, I cannot or dare not, but give you notice, And warn and Charge you as you
love your Eternal good, that with all speed you fly these things before spoken
of; and all other the crying sins and abominations, with which God is
displeased, and of which in too large a measure, you are too deeply Guilty; For
my Friends, mind but your selves, and look back upon your conversations and
practices; and that with a serious eye, and you shall see, that the old world
and Sodom, nor any other of the evil generations that have gone before you,
and whom the Lord God condemned and out of, for their Iniquities; was never
more unrighteous or did abound with more abominations, then this generation
even your selves does: For oh! the Lying, Swearing, Whordomes, Debaucheryes,
and Prophamness of all sorts that is to be found among you, are almost
Innumerable, therefore wash you make you clean; put away the evil of your
doings, from before the Lord, be afflicted and mourn, let your laughter be
turned into mourning, and your Joy into heaviness; for the Lord God has a
controversy with the Inhabitants of the earth, because of Lying, and Swearing,
and comitting of Adultery, and blood touches blood; and therefore come out of
them, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance and that with speed, and think
not that your professions, (which stands in the unrighteousness) will save you;
But let righteousness run down your streets as streams, and uprightness and
truth as mighty rivers, that so the refuge of lies (and of all other
abominations, of which you are guilty,) may be swept away, and mind that of God
in your own consciences which shows you sin and evil and be obedient
thereunto, that if possible you may escape the Lords wrath, that you perish
not, for I testify unto you that if you do not fly these things before spoken
of, and all other the crying evils, and abominations of which you are and have
been too deeply guilty, and because of which the wrath of God comes upon upon
the children of disobedience; and which makes you and your professions, even to
stinck and become abominable before the Lord; and get under the hollow of his
hand, and shadow of his wings by a due repentance, and cease to do evil and
learn to do well, and break the bonds of wickedness, and let the oppressed go
free, and break every yoke; the Lord God will even come against you, and will
even sweep you with the Besom of destruction, and that speedly, except you
repent; and he will even deliver his People out of your mouths, that they may
be a prey and spoil to you no longer: And therefore dear people of all sorts,
especially within this my native country of England, And the Countries Places,
and Isles thereto belonging, and Adjoining, Consider, and whilst you have a
time lay it to heart; for the Lord God (concerning many of you last before
named) has even sworn by his holiness and has said he will not repent; that
it shall surely come to pass; And that though Noah, Abraham, David, Daniel, and
Job, were amongst you or in the midst of you, and did offer themselves to stand
in the Gap, yet they should deliver no more by their righteousness save every
one his own soul; so be warned and whilst you have time Prize it, this is a
visitation to you therefore slight it not.

And now my dear friends unto you, in all nations, who in obedience to the
principle of life and righteousness made manifest in you have forsaken, and
are a forsakeing, the broad way and paths that leads to destruction, and those
many and gross abominations before mentioned, which causes the wrath of God to
come upon the children of disobedience, even to you, who are in Scorn called
Quakers; who have heard and do hear the voice of the true Shepherd and has
followed the same, in coming out of the many ways and professions into the one
way Christ Jesus; Keep in the same even way and Path, I dearly desire you, (for
unto you also this Message reaches,) that none of you may be found scattered
abroad from under the true shelter, even the Lord Jesus Christ, or out of the
Sheep-coat and fold of rest, but that you may with all speed (even as Sheep
runs after their shepherd, when they hear his voice and Call,) Get under the
Shadow of the Lords wings and under the hollow of his hand, and fly thither
even as Bees does to their hive, and as traveling men does under the shadow
of a great Tree or other covert, when they perceive, the approach of an
ensueing great Storm, or Shower, that they may find safety: Even so fly ye;
unto him in whom safety is found. And have, have I dearly desire every one,
that is abroad (if any such there be) from out of the open Fields and places,
and from off the high Mountains and hills, where there is no Shelter, and come
into the low Valleys and under the Roof of God even the shelter and shadow of
his holiness, that you may be safe when the destroying Angel passes over; For
you know, or may be persuaded, that they who are under a good Roof or Covert,
and there abides, may be and are often safe, from abiding the extremity of that
Storm or Shower, which they that are abroad in the open Fields and without
shelter must sustain: And therefore let none be strayed from their Habitation
(I dearly desire) but all keep within their Tents, having the Lintall and side
posts of their homes, stricken with the blood of Sprinkling, That when he who
smote the first born of Egypt goes forth, you may be safe; And not only safe
but also ready, having your Loins girded, your Staff in your hand and your
shoes on your feet, that you may go on with him, into whatsoever State,
Condition or Service of Holiness the Lord God shall call you to, being clothed
in righteousness and having your Garments made clean in the blood of the Lamb,
even such, as in which it may be lawful for you, to behold your King the Lord
God of hosts; being purged from all spots and staynes, and made white, having
your Lamps trimed and lights burning, that when the Cry comes, you may enter
in, And none be shut out of the Bride Chamber.

And my Dear Friends, It lies further weightily upon me to signify unto you,
That the Lord God of Eternal life and power, does intend and is about, to make
his great, and Glorious, heavenly progress, throughout, and to the uttmost ends
of all the Earth, And has Chosen or Elected you, before all the Nations of
Them that dwell upon the face of the same earth, to be his Attendants, and to
wait upon him, in his so great and glorious, and heavenly a progress, And has
or does further lay it upon me, in his living everlasting power and by the arm
of his Eternal Authority, to warn and Charge and Cite, and Summon you all, and
every one of you, high and low, Rich and poor, bond and free, Male and Female,
That you and every one of you, (according to your several measures and gifts,
and according to every ones several Condition and Calling, whereunto the Lord
God has called and begifted you) be, and personally appear in Spirit before
him, and give your Spiritual Attendance upon him, and that in such an holy,
upright and undesiled way, and after such an humble, lowly, prostrate,
dilligent, heavenly, and obedient manner, as is suitable to your duty, and does
become the dignity Majesty and purity of so holy and heavenly, a God, as he is
with whom we have to do, That so the everlasting God, in all things may be
glorified by you, and his truth and great name, be by, or through none
disgraced, that so he may delight to do you good, and call you up higher, and
make you further pertakers of his manifold graces, which are yet behind, and
which he has yet laid up in store in Christ Jesus, for all them that love him,
and who are the called According to his purpose, And who do follow him in the
Regeneration, having their garments washed in the Blood of the Lamb, For (as
it is written,) it does not yet appear what we shall be, But when he shall
appear, then shall we also appear with him in Glory; So mind to keep in, and to
that which is pure, And which you have known from the beginning, that when he
comes whose Reward is with him, to give to every man according as his work
shall be, you may none of you come short, but every one (if it be possible)
Enter into the Joy of his Lord: For consider if an outward King do but Summon
his Servants, or Subjects, to give their attendance upon him in his outward
progress, with what readiness, and willingness, will they appear before him,
and in how Reverent and accomplished manner, will they endeavor to wait upon
him that they may receive acceptance with him and (if possible) gain
preferment from him: And if it be so done in the outward by the Servants, or
Subjects of an external Prince, let not us who are the servants, and who should
be the Subjects of a Heavenly King, come short of our inward Duty, and
obedience to the holy God, whose eyes is purer then to behold iniquity, and who
is a liberal rewarder of all them that come unto him, and that wait upon him
in truth and with an upright heart: And therefore my dear Friends, if any thing
of the old stuff, nature, or leaven yet remain in any, to hinder in this
behalf, and if the Room (which is the heart, where the Lord should lodge, and
find entertainment in this his Spiritual progress, be not yet thoroughly swept,
cleansed, purged, garnished, and perfumed, for the reception and entertainment,
of so holy and heavenly a guest, now while we have the Light to see, and the
besom (which is the power of God) to sweep, let us have to dress the same, that
if it be possible (my dear friends) we may none of us come short (according to
our several measures) of doing our duty to, and waiting upon so holy a God as
him with whom we have to do, and who is now calling and Inviteing unto a most
near and heavenly attendance upon him:

And my friends though the storm may appear to be great, and the tempest that
is likely to overtake the wicked (except they repent) exceeding terrible, yet
be not dismayed, for it is not intended to scatter the wheat but to refine it,
and to blow away the Chaff, and sever that which is intended for the wrath,
from the pure grain; Dear Friends this comes to give warning and discharge a
Duty, and not to reflect on any; And therefore have have I dearly desire, And
let none think light of what is said, or look on it as being not of their
Concern, but every one up, get upon your watchtower. That when the Lord comes
you may be ready, and when he speaks you may hear.

And now there is another sort of People amongst the Sons and daughters or men,
unto whom also this Message and Invitation of the Lord reaches, and those are
they, who (not out of hatred to the Lords truth, or envy to his people,)
stands a far off, from the same, yet are not so bad as the worst, neither runs
with them to the same exccess of riot, nor are of the like persecuting spirit
with this generation, and do many of them, even in their hearts wish well to
the Israel of God, and desire that their latter end might be like his, And have
sometimes, even in heart mourned over the afflictions and hard useage of the
Lords People, and Simpathized with them in their Sufferings, and yet have not
been willing to come under the Cross of Christ, and to suffer Afflictions with
the people of God, but have rather chosen to Embrace this present evil world,
and continue in the Fashions and Customs thereof, though many of them has not
been without reproves and often Alarmed, with something that has sounded from
under the Alter in their ears, whereby their peace, has been many times
broken, And they forced to look back, from off the Mountains upon which they
have been gone up: And unto all those and every other amongst the Sons and
Daughters of men, who Breaths and Thirsts after Righteousness and longs after an
acquaintance with the Lord and with his ways; unto you I say, and it is the
Invitation of the Lord, that you come away and follow the breathings of that in
you, which Longs and Thusts after Righteousness, And stay no longer in the
Vanities, Follyes, Fashions, and Customs of the world, or any of the
professions thereof, But be ye Separate says the Lord God, touch not the
unclean thing, but follow the leadings, guidings, and directions, of that of
God in their own Consciences, which shows you sin and evil, and the vanities
and emptiness of all things below him; And the Lord God will receive you; But
if you stay any longer in this Generation, and will not be reclamed from their
vain conversations, and redeemed from the evils, and gathered from out of the
Fashions, Customs, Uncleanness, and unrighteousness of which they are
guilty, you must be content to share with them in their punishments; for he
that will partake with them in their sins, Must partake with them in their
Plagues for the hour of their Judgments is come, And the Lamb the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, has made himself ready, therefore fly for your lives (I
dearly desire you) and get you out of Sodom even this Wicked Generation, And
from of the high Mountains of Conceitednes upon which any of you are gone up,
And get from under every green Tree, and false Rest, into which you are gone,
and under which you have sought shadow, And come, out fly unto the Zoar of
God, the Mounttaine of his holiness, to his little flock, and that with speed;
Get out of the way of his Indignation and come under the mercy seat of God, for
you are they, that yet stands in the Gap, and stops the stroke of Gods wrath,
from falling upon the wicked, not because the Lord has beheld more holiness or
seen more uprightness in you, then in any of the sons of men, But because he
has a desire to gather you, and to extend mercy unto you, for the breathing
seed's sake that is in you, And because of the good, and kindness, forbearance,
pity, and Compassion, that some of you (like Rahah) has showed to his People,
even his little Flock, in scorn called Quakers, in the times of their
sufferings, which he does hereby proffer to Requite you for, (if you hear and
obey,) by giving you Eternal Life, And by plucking you as brands out of that
fire which is likely to fall upon the wicked: But then my friends you must come
speedily, and not stay lingering, Gods Spirit will not always strive with
flesh, Remember Lots wife. And you must not only make haste, but you must also
come in the right way, even by the footsteps of the Flock, in the self denial,
and taking up the Cross of Christ to your own wills, And to all those desires,
Customs, and Fashions, (which are contrary to him,) And come to the plain
Language [thou and the] to a single person, at which many of you have stumbled,
And in all other things you must follow the footsteps of the flock, unto the
Tent of the true shepherd, under whose roof there is only safety; Therefore
fly thither I dearly desire, and that with speed, let none stay behind or think
light of what is said: Remember Lot Sons in Law, who though they were warned,
yet would not they obey and therefore, escaped not the wrath, that was poured
upon the wicked: But be ye not like the Horse and Mule, that has no
understanding, but come away and that with speed, and by the Right way: Fly for
your lives, and now while you have time, and that a hand of Mercy is held out
and extended unto you, Take the oppertunity, and Slight it not: But if you
will not obey, In hasting out of that, Aganst which the wrath of God shall be
revealed, yet Remember, that you have been warned, and know that your
Destruction is of you selves, So while you have a time prize it, This is the
day of your Visitation.

And thus dear people of all sorts, and of all Nations, Especially of this my
Native Country of England, I hope I have Cleared my self of that which the
Lord God in this behalf laid upon me, in warning the wicked to fly from their
wickedness, least the wrath of God come speedily upon them.

And also in warning the flock of God, to keep in their fold and under the roof
of their sheep-coate, and that without straying, that they may escape that
Stormy shower which is likely to overtake such as are abroad, or do abide in
the open fields without shelter.

And also in warning such as seems to halt between two opinions, and such as
breath after the Lord, and have not been so Cruel, but more kind then others,
to the people of God, that they in and through obedience, to that of God in
their Consciences, which shows them sin and evil, may follow after the
footsteps of the Lords flock, to feed with them and find harbor under the Tent
of the trur Shepherd, that they may escape, and that they perish not, I desire
that every one hereby Advised may be fully warned, and take the Oppertunity
offered, and bring forth the fruits desired, that they may escape (if possible)
the Judgment threatened, that they Perish not,

From my Prison near Richmond the 23 of the Second Month, 1679. From your Real
Friend and A well wisher to all men. Richard Robinson.
I desire Friends to read this in their Meetings, and also disperse the same
abroad (if possible) amongst all Nations and to all People for my discharge.



Errors that have escaped, the Press the Reader is desired to amend.
page 2. l 2. for, they pretended. r they have pretended p. 3. l 15. for all r
o^. p 6. l 29. and 30. r a traveling man. p 10. l 28. for their r your. p 11.
l 11. r and come fly. l 24. r if you will hear. p 12. l 16. r is to be revealed.


