THE SINNERS Warning-piece, OR, Heavens Messenger.

Instructing poor sinners in the way of Repentance in these dangerous times;
with many good Instructions to every true Christian to take heed of seducing
people, meaning such as will call themselves Christ.

But if any body shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or lo there is Christ,
believe them not, for false Christ's and false Prophets shall arise, and shall
show signs and wonders, to seduce, if it were possible, the very Elect; but
take heed, behold I have told you all things, Mark 15. 21, 22, 23.

By THO. ROBINS, B. of D.

Take heed therefore to your selves, and to all the flock, for I know this,
that after my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing
the flock, Acts 20. 28, 29. Printed for S. Tyus, at the sign of the three
Bibles on the middle of London Bridge.

THE Sinners Warning-piece, OR, Heavens Messenger.


By THO. ROBINS, B. of D.

Ezekiel 12. 1, 2, 3. ver. The word of the Lord also came unto me, saying, Son
of man thou dwell in the midst of a rebellious house, who have eyes to see
and see not, and have ears to hear and hear not, for they are a rebellious
house, therefore thou Son of man prepare thou stuff for removing, and remove
by day in their sight, and thou shall remove from this place to another in
their sight, it may be they may consider, although they be a rebellious house.
MY Beloved Brethren, I desire you all that be here present, to take notice of
these words that were sent from the LORD, for the instruction of poor miserable
sinners: For you may assure your selves, that it did not come forth of as the
mouth of any false Prophet, but they came from the mouth of the Lord, as you
may read in the former verse of the Text. And indeed, my brethren, we never
stood in more need of good Messengers then we do at this time, for certainly a
more rebellious people never lived in the world then there is now a days, I and
in many kind of ways which I shall here lay open unto you.

In the first place, we have seen here the Father rebel against the Son, and
the Son against the Father, and the Mother against her Daughter, and the
Daughter against her Mother, and one neighbor against another, which you
cannot say but it is a most miserable case to see. I but here is a worse
Rebellion then all this, which is able to rent the heart of any Christian that
fears God, when I have related, and here laid it open unto you; therefore I
desire all those that be here present to take notice and have a care of such
people. And in the first place, I desire you to take notice of the words that
our blessed Lord and Savior speaks in the 24 chapter of Matthew, and the 4 ver.
and there you shall see whether there be not a greater rebellion among us then
any that I have named. For when the Disciples asked our Savior, How they
should know when the end of the world should come? Then our Savior made them
this answer.

Then Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you, for
many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many, Mat.
24. 4, 5.

We may see a great many such people now adays, and certainly there cannot be a
greater rebellion against God, then to seek to rob him of his power* I pray
look into the 20 chap. of Exodus, at the beginning of that chapt. and there you
shall see the Lord said, Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

And we all know, who have any understanding, that Christ and God is all one.
Then how can any man say, but it is a rebellious condition for any man to call
him Christ, but indeed I would desire every true Christian to have a care of
such people.

But I pray you take notice. I would not have you despise them, for certainly
they be the very same people that our Savior said would come in the latter
days. Therefore I rather exhort you to pray for them. For as the Apostle Paul
said to the people in these words;

I exhort you brethren, that first of all supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men, 1 Timothy chap. 2. ver. 1.

Indeed we do not know but the Lord may convert them. For look in Jam. 5. 16.
and there you shall see that we should pray for one another. For the Text there
says, Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that you
may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man shall be heard,
Jam. 5. 16.

But alas my Brethren, Prayer is quite out of date with a great many now adays;
but you may hear in many places a great many that are given to swear and to
curse, and to lying and dissembling both with God and man, if it were possible.
But I would have such as these to have a care; for to be sure there is a day
that every poor soul must give account, for to be sure the Lord will not be
mocked. No, no, to be sure, as he is a God of mercy and truth, so he is a God
of justice. And when he does come, to be sure he will give every man according
to his works.

But my Brethren, I desire you to give me leave to mode one question to you,
and that is this.

In case the day of judgment was this day or this night, and the Angels were
sounding their Trumpets for all sinners to come unto judgment, and the Lord of
Hosts standing upon the judgment seat with the sword of justice in his hand.
Then who is he that is able to stand in his presence, I, or look him in the
face? Nay, then happy would that sinner be that were able to make answer for
one sin of a thousand; yet there be many now adays will say they have no sin;
but let such as they have a care what they do, for to be sure they will find
one day, that they be as great sinners as any: indeed you may read in many
places of Scripture, of many that were sinners, but you shall read of few that
were so righteous that they never sinned.

I desire you to look into Romans 3. and there you may perceive, that in those
days all sinned: What then? are we better then they? No in no wise, for what we
have before proved, both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin, as it
is written, There is none righteous, no not one.

Nay look into the 8 chapter of the 1 book of Kings, about the 46 verse, and
there you shall see how Solomon prayed unto the Lord for sinners.

If they sin against thee, for there is no man that sins not, and if thou be
angry with them, and deliver them to their enemies, so that they carry them
away Captives into the Land of their Enemies. Yet if they shall bethink
themselves in the Land where they were carried Captives, and repent and make
their supplications unto thee, then hear thou their prayers and supplications
in Heaven thy dwelling place, and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people
that have sinned against thee, 1 Kings 8. 46.

Indeed my Brethren, you may here see by these parts of Scripture, and many
more, that the people and the holy Prophets confessed themselves sinners. Then
how dare we be so bold, as to say we have no sin. Indeed I do not accuse any
man with it, but indeed I would desire every christian to have a care that they
be not seduced by such people; for certainly there be too many of them abroad
now adays, for just as the Fox lies in wait to devour the innocent Lamb, even
so do these people seek day and night to deceive (as the Scripture says) even
the very Elect if it were possible. But I desire you all that be here present
to have a care of them, for certainly they be the same people that the Apostle
speaks of in 2 Timothy 3. chap.

For the time will come when they will not not endure sound Doctrine, but after
their own lust shall they heap unto themselves Teachers, having itching ears,
and they turn away their ears from the truth, and be turned into Fables.

Indeed we may see too many such abroad now that cannot endure sound Doctrine;
but they will have Teachers of their own, although they can scarce read the
Primer, yet they must be teachers of others, when alas poor souls little do
they know what a piece of work they have in hand.

Indeed, my brethren, I cannot perceive but this coms to them out of a high
stubborn mind, thinking to themselves that there is none so pure and so holy as
they. All learning one of another; but you shall seldom see them come to any
Church. No, no, such as those had rather be creeping into some house by ye warm
fire deceiving one another. Indeed I desire you that be here present, to look
into the 2 Timothy chapter 3. ver. 4, 5, 6. and there you shall find it plainly laid
open unto you; for Timothy tells us plainly the condition of them: For in
verse 4. says he. They are traitors, heady, light-minded, lovers of pleasure
more then lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof, from such turn away.

And in the next verse he tells us why we should turn away from them. For of
this sort are they that creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden
with sins, and led away captive with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy chap. 3. ver. 4, 5,
6, 7.

Indeed methinks this should be enough to satisfy you for to have a care of
these seducing people; for certainly, if that they do but once catch you in
their snare, you will not find it so easy to get out again: Indeed if you but
please to look into the two following verses of this Chapter, I hope it will
give you a great deal more satisfaction concerning these people.

Now as Jannes and Jambres did withstand Moses, so do these also resist the
truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobates concerning the Faith. I but here in the
next verse you may hear a great deal of sweet comfort in these words.

But they shall proceed no further, but their folly shall be made manifest to
all men; as you may find in the 8, 9.

Indeed we may see their folly every day in one place or another. I desire you
to leek in the 8. chap. of Jeremiah, about the 18, 19. ^. and see there what
the Prophet says.

Therefore hear ye Nations, and now O Congregations what is among them, hear, O
Earth, behold I will bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of their
thoughts, because they have not hearkened to my words, nor to my law, but
rejected it.

Indeed the Lord gives us a fairer warning-piece if we would but consider of
it; but alas how many is there that regards it? I pray you hearken to the voice
of the Lords Messenger, Jer. 5. 21, 22.

Hear this O foolish people, and without understanding, which have eyes and see
not, ears and hear not, Fear ye not me? says the Lord, will ye not tremble at
my presence?

O let us have a care of provoking the Lord too much to wrath, but let us
strive with one another to serve the Lord our God* for he is a righteous God,
full of mercy and love to all poor sinners? If we would not receive his love
and blessings with a thankful heart, and be content with what he sends, then we
might very well cause the Lord to speak as comfortable to us as he speaks to
the people in Isaiah 41. ver. 9, 10. Indeed it is a place worth your
observation, and happy is that man or woman whatsoever they be, rich or poor,
that does deserve to have the same words spoken unto them, and these are they,
I pray you that be here present give your attention to them. Thou whom I have
taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof,
and said unto thee, thou art my servant, I have chosen thee, and not cast thee
away.

Fear thou not, for I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God, I will
strengthen thee, I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right hand
of my righteousness.

O my Brethren, what a great blessing had those people, to hear the Lord speak
these comfortable speeches unto them, as to say He would uphold them with the
right hand of Righteousness. Alas, which of you all that is here present, but
if it please God to strike you with sickness, so that you fainted, and were
ready to fall at every step, then he that would be always ready to hold and
support you up, then you would think your self much beholding to him. O happy
are they that have such a graciaus upholder as this, that can uphold every poor
soul with the right hand of his Righteousness.

O therefore let every one of us strive to get the favor of so gracious a God
as we have; therefore let us all with one heart and voice say as Job said, chapter
50. v. 3, 4, 5, 6. Who is he that hides counsel without knowledge? Therefore
have I uttered that I understood, not things too wonderful for me, which I knew
not. Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak, I will demand of thee, and declare
thou unto me, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now my eyes
sees thee, therefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

Here you may see the humble beart of Job, to repent in dust and ashes, we now
adays, instead of repenting in dust and ashes, we repent in silks and satins;
but we may assure our selves, that there is a day to come that we must give an
account, then happy is he that could say as David did, in Psalm 131. 12. ver.
Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor my eyes lofty, nor do I exercise my self in
great matters, or in things too high for me, surely I have behaved and guided
my self as a child that is weaned of his mother, my soul is even as a weaned
child.

O what a happy condition was this man in, that he could say, his soul was like
a weaned child! Indeed my brethren, I could wish that every poor soul in the
world could say so, but alas, we are given too much to pride, hatred, malice
and envy, and seeking one to undo another by one means or other; but alas, that
is quite contrary to that saying of James, that I told you but now, for he
says, We must love one another. And Isaiah says, VVo unto them that decree
unrighteous decrees to turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the
right from the poor of my people, that widows may be their prey, and that they
rob the fatherless.

I pray God there be not too many such in England now adays; but I am afraid
there be too many such abroad, but I pray God give them grace to refrain it;
for Solomon says, Pr. 22. 16. he that oppresses the poor for to increase his
riches, and he that gives to the rich shall surely come to want, and 22, 23.
verses of that chapter he says.

Rob not the poor because he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the
gates, for the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that
spoil them.

Therefore in the Name of God I do desire, that we may all have a care how we
seek to wrong the widow and the fatherless, or any poor distressed creature,
but rather strive to aid and assist them as the Lord has enabled us, and if
you have not whereby to relieve their wants, then pray for them, and by doing
so, thou may show thy endeavor, and so carry thy self blameless. But alas,
Prayer is out of date with a great many, but I must needs tell such as those,
that if they refrain themselves from Prayer, I may boldly say, they do not
truly offer repentance; I desire you to look in the fifth Psalm, and there you
shall see how David repents by prayer.

Give ear to my words (O Lord) consider my meditations, hearken unto the voice
of my cry, my King and my God, for unto thee will I pray, my voice shall be
heard in the morning, O Lord, in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee,
Psalm. 5. 1, 2, 3.

Nay my brethren, there are many more places in Scripture that does exhort us
unto prayer, I and Christ himself did command his Apostles to pray, as you may
find it written in the 6. of Mat. 9. there he commands his Apostles to pray,
Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

And this is a prayer which is despised by a great many. But you may see here,
that our Savior Jesus Christ loved and warned his Disciples to say it. And
therefore we ought to say it, for I am sure, that there is no Christian that
lives in the fear of God, that will deny the Lords prayer, or any other that
are lawful and good, and for such people as hold the Lords prayer, or any other
prayer as vain babbling (as some will say) I desire such as they to look into
Isa. 38. and there you may see whether prayer be good or no.

In those days was Hezekiah sick to death, and Isaiah the Prophet, the son of
Amos, came unto him, and said, Thus says the Lord, set thy house in order, for
thou shall die, and not live.

Then Hezikiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, and
said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight.
Then Hezekiah wept sore.

But now I would desire you to consider the prevailing of his prayer, for when
the Lord saw and heard how faithfully he prayed, he sent Isaiah to him again.

Then came the word of the Lord to Isaiah, saying, go and say to Hezekiah, Thus
says the Lord, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, and seen
thy tears, behold I will add unto thy time fifteen years, I will deliver thee
and this City out of the hand of the King of Assyria, and I will defend this
City; as you may read it in Isaiah the 38. beginning at the first verse to the
sixth.

Now I would desire those people that deny prayer, to consider whether that
prayer be good or no: for here you may see, that the Prophet prevailed much
with the Lord: for first, the Lord prolonged his life for 15. years, nay, more
then that, he defended the whole City from their enemies for his sake. I pray
God that every Christian would desire the Lord to give them so much grace, as
to pray to him to defend us and this City of London from the hands of all our
enemies, which no doubt but he will, if we but pray with a true heart, as the
Prophet did: And I desire to give you one word or two more, and so to draw to a
conclusion and that is this, I charge you in the Name of God, that when you
pray, to desire the Lord to bless and guide you from all such as would hinder
you from prayer, or from any good devotion. I mean, that you should not refrain
neither Church nor good Sermons, for to be sure you cannot hear too much of any
good instruction.

And lastly, I desire you to look into the 2 of Joel, and 12. 13. ver. and
there you shall see what comfortable speeches the Lord himself gave to his
people:

Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn you even to me with all your heart,
and with fasting, and weeping, and with mourning, and rent your hearts, and not
your garments, and turn to the Lord your God, for he is a merciful and gracious
God, slow to anger, and of great kindness, Joel 2. 12, 13.

Indeed if we have not hearts of stone, methinke it would move us to repent:
therefore in the name of God have a care to serve the Lord, and that withal
your heart, and I will so conclude with these few words, that is, I pray God
give you all grace to make good use of what you have heard at this present, and
this little Book may be a warning-piece to you all, for I will assure you, here
is nothing in it but what is good, and with making good use of it, it may be a
great means to guide you into the way of salvation: And so with the words of
Paul an Apostle, Not of men, neither by men, but by Jesus Christ, and God the
Father, who raised him from the dead, and all the brethren that are with me,
Grace be to you, and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ,
who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil
world, according to the will of God the Father; and no doubt but he will if we
will but do our endeavors to serve him, which the Lord of his heavenly mercy
give us all grace so to do; and not with our lips outwardly, but with all our
hearts, and with all our souls, and with all our minds, and all for the merits
of thy Son our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who shed his most precious
blood for us, and for all true believers, to him, and to none but him, be given
all honor, praise, and thanksgiving, both now and for evermore. And so the
Grace of our Lord and Savior be with us all the rest of our time, henceforth
and for evermore. Amen.

Yours in Christ Jesus, Tho. Robins.

A short Prayer, very good to put every sinner in remembrance of our Lord Jesus
Christ.
O Most gracious, and most glorious, and ever living Lord God, thou that
sit on thy throne, ready to give judgment to all sinners, thou show thy
self very slow to anger, or else thou might utterly destroy us in the
twinkling of an eye. So seeing thou art so merciful to us, we thy poor
servants, dust and no men by reason of our carnal sins, do desire thee, out of
thy tender mercy, to give a blessing to us the rest of this day. And grant, O
most gracious God, to give us grace to make good use of what we have heard this
day: and grant, O most glorious God, that it may be so grafted in our hearts,
that it may be as good seed sown in good ground, that it may increase
abundantly, to the glory of thy holy Name, the good of every one of us, to the
joy and comfort of our poor souls: And most gracious God, we beg on thee, for
thy Son Jesus Christ's sake, to guide and keep us from the inticements of such
seducing people, which thy holy word gives us warning of, such as seek night
and day to rob thee of thy glory, and honor, and seek to beat down the
Ministry, and to trample the Gospel under their feet. Yet, O Lord, we know
thou have power either to convert them, or to cut them off when thy will and
pleasure is, and so, O Lord, we desire thee, for thy Son our Saviors sake, to
go along with us this day, and for evermore. Amen.

THere are two other small Books worth the reading over: One is entitled, The
goodness of God to all true Belivers in the Lord Jesus Christ the righteous,
our Advocate, and only Mediator and Redeemer.

The other is, Christ upon the Cross, suffering for sinners, or the sinners
Redemption, Sanctification, and Exaltation by the death and bitter passion of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

And are to be sold by Sarah Tyus, at the sign of the three Bibles on the
middle of London. Bridge.

FINIS.



