NEW OBSERVATIONS ON THE Natural History OF THIS World of MATTER, AND THIS
World of LIFE: In Two Parts. Being a Philosophical Discourse, grounded upon the
Mosaic System of the Creation, and the Flood. To which are added Some Thoughts
concerning Paradise, the Conflagration of the World, and a Treatise of
Meteorology: With occasional Remarks upon some late Theories, Conferences, and
Essays. By THO. ROBINSON Rector of OUSBY in CUMBERLAND.

LONDON: Printed, for John Newton at the Three Pigeons over against the
Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, 1696.

To the Reverend Mr. William Nicholson Archdeacon of CARLISLE.
REVEREND SIR,
I Have read over the Books you were pleased to lend me, ( viz.) Dr. Burnet's
Theory of the Earth, and Dr. Woodward's Essay toward a Natural History of it:
Both which entertained me with a great many new and very notable Hypotheses,
managed with a great deal of Art, Ingenuity and Learning; but in my Opinion
very ill grounded; many of their Notions being inconsistent with common Sense
and Experience, with Scripture and Reason; especially the Mosaic Account of
the Creation, Paradise, and the Universal Deluge; and in some Particulars, Dr.
Woodward seems inconsistent with himself.

These following Chapters, (which I make bold to present to your Hand, and to
give you the Trouble of perusing) will show you wherein I cannot concur with
these great Virtuoso's, and why I endeavor to establish a quite different
Notion of things; and do ground it upon such Philosophical Theses, as Moses,
that great Philosopher, has laid down as so many Postulata in his short, but
most comprehensive System of the Creation; the whole being a short and
compendious Description of this World of Matter, and this World of Life wherein
we live.

SIR; I am so far from being big with a fond Concei^ of any of these Notions,
that I dare not trust them in any Hands but yours; for I am unwilling that
these Papers (without your Approbation and Encouragement,) should go further
abroad than your Study, lest some ill-natured and peevish Critic should take
occasion to expose the Ignorance and Disingenuity of their Author.

I know (Sir) that the Experience you have lately gained by searching into
those occult Regions of Matter, being now added to your former Speculations
about it; has made you the most capable of determining all Differences, and
solving the most difficult Phenomenon of this Kind. If you will be pleased
therefore to correct with your Pen the Mistakes you meet with in any of these
Notions, and let me have your honest and impartial Opinion of them, you will
further oblige,

Sir, Your most affectionate and humble Servant, THO. ROBINSON.

TO THE Gentlemen Miners.
GENTLEMEN,
IF his Observation be true, That no Man can lose by the World; but what he
loses in Purse, he gains in Experience: You will have no Reason to complain,
if sometimes your subterranean Projects miscarry upon your Hand: Since that
Loss may easily be Repaired by your experimental Knowledge, of those occult
Regions of Matter; concerning which, the most profound Philosopher can give no
Account, but by way of Hypothesis and Conjecture.

Solomon, that great Master of experimental Knowledge, tells us that Wisdom is
better than Rubies; and all the things that may be desired are not to be
compared to it. And though that by Wisdom he may mean that Divine Philosophy
which the New Testament calls Religion; yet certainly there is nothing
contributes more toward making one morally or physically wise, than
Experience, as he intimates in the following Verse, where he brings in Wisdom
thus speaking: Prove. 8.11. I Wisdom dwell with Prudence, and find out the
Knowledge of witty Inventions. I confess that the Theorick Part of Philosophy
(being the firstborn,) is more noble; and therefore deservedly sits Regent in
the superior Faculties of the Soul: Attended with sublime Notions and
Speculations; and sometimes Figments and Chimaera's are also her Maids of
Honor.

And although the practick or experimental Part, sits below in humble Garb,
attended only with mechanic Artificers, and manual Operators: Yet she
oftentimes Entertains the World with more of Certainty, and Demonstration than
the former.

Gentlemen, I shall not complement you into a good Opinion of these No^ions
which I am willing should abide the Test of an impartial Judgment; only I think
it may be convenient to let you know that they are the product of 20 Years
Experience and Observation; for so long I have been concerned in the Inspection
of underground Works of several Kinds.

Besides the Place of my Habitation being under Crosfell, (one of the highest
Mountains in England) whose lofty Top gives a large Prospect both of the East
and West Seas; I have from thence observed, not only the different Classes of
Matter, the Eruption of Rapid Springs; but also the Rising and Falling as well
as the Rarefaction and Condensation of Vapors.

Gentlemen, If the Publication of this short Treatise (which I presume to
present to your Hand, as the most proper Patrons of subterranean Philosophy)
put you to the Charge of an easy purchase, you will certainly have it much
cheaper than the Author, who shall always remain,

GENTLEMEN, D^^^ys, April the 16. (1696.) Your most humble Servant and
Well-Wisher, THO. ROBINSON.

THE PREFACE.
IF the learned Authors of the new Theories and Essays had but taken the Pains
to have considered better of those great Advantages of Learning and Education
which Moses (the greatest Philosopher that ever was in the World, and the first
Describer of its Creation) had beyond any of those learned Philosophers of
later date, who have writ upon the same Subject; they would have entertained a
greater Veneration and Esteem for his short, but most comprehensive System;
than for the larger Volumes of those common Philosophers and Historians whose
Writings are only the Product of their own natural Reason; though set off with
the greatest Artifice of Words, and Advantages of human Learning.

The first Progress which this great Philosopher made in human Learning and
Wisdom was in Pharoah's Court, where he had his Education, under the Tuition of
his own Daughter, who having no Child of her own, designed to adopt him her
Son, and make him Heir apparent to that Crown: To which End he was by her Care
instructed in all the Learning, Wisdom, and Philosophy of the Egyptians: And no
doubt but some of the most learned amongst the Hierophanthae, who were the most
skilled in the Knowledge of mystical as well as natural Philosophy, were his
Tutors.

He being thus qualified with the best Learning Egypt could then afford, the
second Improvement he made was in the Family of his Kinsman Iethro, who being
as well a Priest as Prince of Midian, did not only discipline him in all the
Rules of Policy, Conduct, and Government; by which he was fitted and prepared
for being Captain General of that mighty Host of the Hebrews, which God
designed to deliver from the Egyptian Yoke, and under his Conduct to settle in
Canaan; but also he was instructed by him in the Religion of his Ancestors, the
Patriarchal Traditions concerning the Creation of the World, the Beginnings of
things, and the Genealogies of Men* which being best known to Adam, who coming
immediately out of God's Hand, did undoubtedly deliver it to his Son Seth, Seth
to Enos, and so from Father to Son, to Abraham, from whom Iethro descended by a
second Marriage.

During his Time of Residence in Midian, which was forty Years, and most of
that Time being spent in Contemplation: Its generally believed he wrote this
System of the Creation, with the rest of his Book called Genesis, by the
Assistance and Direction of his Father-in-Law, who could not be ignorant of the
Patriarchal Traditions; himself being descended from a Patriarch of special
Note.

After these Gradations and Improvements in all Kinds of humane Learning,
Wisdom and Philosophy, God took him into his own Service, and was pleased by a
sort of Per^onal Communication to impart to him as well the manner how all
things began to exist, as how the Manners of Mankind were to be exercised; so
that he may be reasonably supposed to found the Authority of his Writings, as
well as of his Government over God's People, upon Divine Revelation.

In this most excellen^ System, Philosophy, Divinity and Mystery seem to be so
closely interwoven that it would be a Matter of great Difficulty (if not
Impossibility) for any, unless such as are well skilled in the Cabalistical
Traditions and Mythology, to unravel the Contexture and distinguish its parts.
And some of the most learned Rabbis are of opinion that God directed Moses,
and the rest of the holy Penmen, frequently to make use of Metaphors,
Allegories, and other Sche matical Forms, which must needs be attended with
some Darkness and Obscurity (these being as it were a Veil drawn over the Face
of Divine Truth) and this might occasion Solomon to join the Words of the Wise,
and their dark Sayings together.

And this was not only the Practice of the sacred Writers; but of the learned
Heathens, especially their Priests and Philosophers; who undoubtedly did
imitate Moses herein: but for different Ends and Purposes; for it did highly
concern the Pagan Priests to hide and conceal their Mysteries from the Light;
which like bastard Eagles would not endure the Trial of it.

But the holy Spirit might direct the holy Penmen to observe their Style for
Reasons of greater and more weighty Moment.

For the Divine Wisdom might see it fit in the Infancy of the World, to
discover his Will and Mind in some things very suitable to the Capacities of
the Men of that Age: And to reserve other things of great moment veiled under
Allegories, and mystical Expressions until the Minds of Men were more opened
and enlarged; for discovering of those brighter Beams of Divine Truth.

Yet that the Glories that were after to appear might not be wholly clouded; he
ordered it so, that such a thin Veil should be drawn over the Matter, as should
not more set off the Beauty, than stir Men up to a diligent Search after those
Divine Truths.

If then a modest Attempt be made to ground a Philosophical Discourse upon some
of these veiled Mysteries, with Submission to Men of greater Learning, and
better skilled in mystical Philosophy: I presume that it will not be judged an
Effect either of Pride or Vainglory.

Preliminary Postulata.
I Know that it is much out of Fashion to beg Principles in this Philosophizing
Age; yet considering that this Schematical Account which Moses has given of the
Creation is as well Philosophical and Mystical, as Historical and ad hominem, I
presume that these following Postulata, being grounded upon such reason, as
cannot be denied, will easily be granted me; as first --

That this Natural World was created He saw that it was good.)





That Paradise in a literal sense may signify

That Adam and Eve in a literal

That by the Serpent in a literal Philosophical Sense, it may signify natural
Concupiscence: And, in a mystical Sense, it may signify the Devil.

Tree of Life, in a literal Sense, may be signified an individual Tree
producing Fruit, and preserving Life. By the Tree of Knowledge in a literal
Sense, may be understood a Tree bearing Fruit of a poisonous Quality, and
destructive of Life; in a Philosophical Sense they may signify the whole
Species of Vegetables, both of a wholesome and poisonous Nature; in a mystical
Sense they may denote eternal Life and eternal Death.

Adam's giving of Names to the Beasts signifies the Exercise of his natural
Reason, by distinguishing of their Natures.

Eve's eating of the forbidden Fruit, may be understood the Desire of natural
Concupiscence; to gratify her Senses with their beloved Objects.

ADVERTISEMENT WITH Additional Remarks.
SInce the writing of the following Discourse, a new Theory of the Earth has
been published by a thoughtful young Divine, who agrees in some Notions with
me; this therefore is to assure the Reader, that my Manuscript laid all the
last Winter in London, and was printed off before I had a Sight of the
aforesaid Book, which several of my Friends can testify (if there should be
occasion) through whose Hands these Papers have passed.

Another thing ought to be taken notice of, and that is my referring several
Hypotheses and Observations to a late Writer (a Fault which Mr. Whiston has
committed up and down his Book) who it seems has taken them from others; which
I accidentally discovered by falling upon the Monthly Miscellany Letters, Vol.
1. Numb. 22. Page 561, 566. Vol. 2. Numb. 2. Page 49. to 57. As also the
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. Numb. 219. from p. 181. to
201. of which it is but just to give some Instances; for a tender regard ought
to be had for the O^iginal Inventors of things, who ought not to be robbed of
the Fruits of their Labors and Studies by Pyratical Rovers, who set up for
stupendous and miraculous Discoverers. Turn to this Essay, Page 33. The Origin
of Mountains from the Disruptions and Changes of the Strata of the Earth was
Steno's Opinion. See his Prodrom to a Dissertation concerning the Changes of
the Earth.

Page 40.75, 76, 77. The same Steno, in his Prod. places about the central Fire
of the Earth, a huge Sphere or Abyss of Waters; which, according to him,
supplies the Earth with Springs, the Air with Vapo^rs, and was sufficient for
the general Deluge, when by the Force of the subterraneous Fires, it was thrust
and forc^d up, whereby the Globe was broken to pieces, and dissolved in the
vast ^luid.

Page 61.62. The perpendicular and horizontal Fissures of the Earth, dividing
the Strata or Beds of Sediments, are with great Care and Accuracy delineated
and described by Dr. Steno in his Prodrom, and many other Phenomen^ relating to
the History of the Earth, are explained at the End of his Anatom. canis
carchar. in his specim. myolog.

Page, 76, 86, 88. The resetling or subsiding of Bodies, as well terrestrial as
marine (dissolved or mixed with the Waters of the Deluge) according to the Laws
of specific Gravity in their several Strata or Beds of Stone, Sand, Clay,
Ma^le, Slate, Lime, Chalk, etc. was published above 26 Years ago, by Nicholas
Steno, and Agostino Scilla; if the ^oremention'd Accounts in the monthly
Miscellan. Letters, and the Philosophical Tra^^^^^^ons ar^ to be relied upon;
the Books themselves being not to be come at in a remote Province. This
Stenoni^n Hypothesis of the Formation of the Note, that Steno proves the Earth
to have been twice fluid, twice plain and dry, twice scabrous and craggy; the
first was at the original Chaos, the second at the Flood; This (says he) is
manifest from some Beds of the higher Hills, containing no Heterogeneous
Bodies, because formed before there were any Animals or Plants, or other mixed
Solids; and so pres^rv'd in their simple antediluvian St^^e by the Height of
their Si^uation, which might secure them against the Load of many adventitious
or factitious B^ds, falling for the most part on the Valleys and low Places,
where they make up all the compound Strata, which in^rust t^^ present Earth,
and separate it from the primitive o^e, whose Beds are more simple, not stuffed
up with such di^^^^ent Bodies as make up the postdiluvian Strata, or Sediments.
This agrees with what Mr. Whiston delivers in many Places of his New Theory. To
which we may add that the simple antediluvian Beds on the high Mountains,
destitute of Heterogeneous Solids, may be l^id open by the washings away of the
incumbent Diluvian Sediments or compound Beds, by the Torrents of Rains, which
carry down those C^usts and Bodies along with them.
present Earth out of the several Beds or Sediments of Matter mixed with, and
sinking down from the Waters of the general Flood according to the Affinity and
Weight of Parts is much opposed by a late Author of two Essays from Oxford, who
cannot believe the Deluge to have been universal, nor the whole Earth planted
with Animals from Noah's Ark, whose Arguments I do not approve of, being
inconsistent with true Philosophy, and Divinity: Neither is Dr. Nichol's second
Creation of Animals after the Flood to be allowed of, being contrary to the
Design of Noah's Ark, and to the whole Mosaic Narration.

As to my Opinion concerning the Origin of fossil Shell^, of formed Stones,
and subterraneous Plants; Scilla himself, tho he with S^eno has taken great
Pains to prove them to be the Exuviae or Spoils of Animals and Vegetables (from
the Similitudes of their Parts in every particular) and to be the Remains of
the Deluge subsided and lodged in several Beds, Layers, or Sediments; yet I
find by Dr. Lister, that Scilla owned some sorts of them to be of another
Original, and the learned Dr. himself proves beyond all contradiction, that
real perfect Shells are ^requently found in the Bladder, Kidneys, Imposthumes,
and other Cells of Animal Bodies; and if so, why need we force them into the
midst of Quarries and Rocks by dissolving the whole Frame of Nature for their
Sakes?

If true Shells can be formed within Stones of the Bladder, and in many other
Parts of the Bodies of Creatures; then by the same Argument a Million may be
formed in the Bowels of the greater World, every ways resembling those of the
Sea, in Striae, Lamellae, Fasciae, Tendons, Threads, etc. so that they might
persuade Steno, Dr. Hook, Boccone, Scilla, Columna, and Mr. Ray, that they were
really the very same, owing their Original to the Flood, or Chaos, or
Earthquakes.

My Hypothesis concerning the Generations of several Animals is much confirmed
by the learned and experienced Father Buonani in his late Observations circa
viventia in non viventibus rep^rta; who maintains equivocal Generation from
many clear and undoubted Proofs.

For, Page 151. to Page 166. compare Huetius and Bochart de Paradiso.

Page 189, 191. Some great Natural Philosophers will have the Ignes Fatui to be
flying Gloworms, or some other shining Insects.

Page 205. See more of the Figures and Phenomena of Snow and Hail in Barthol.
de Nive, Hook's Micrography, Boil of Cold, Marten's Greenland Voyage,
Lewenho^ck's Letters.

As for Mr. Whiston's New Theory, I am afraid it will be found altogether
inconsistent with the Mosaic History, being adapted only to the formation of
our little Globe, without taking in the Heavens (which Moses is particular in)
and depending too much upon mechanical and necessary Laws (as several other
late Theorys and Hypotheses do) whereby the Flood and Conflagration might be
brought to pass without any Relation to the Fall of Man or Sin. For Comets and
Eruptions of boiling Abysses may frequently destroy our Globe, by such Chains
of Natural Causes; Comets by the Laws of Trajection may dash and drown us with
their Tails, and the central Fire may drive up the vast Abyss upon us, whether
we sin or no; these Phenomena may befall the Moon and all the Planets, without
any respect to Inhabitants, and may happen frequently by such Concourses and
Links of Mechanism, and by the ordinary Laws of Motion. Therefore we ought to
be cautious of making such Grand Revolutions to roll upon Machines, as well as
on the other hand of coining new Miracles and second Creations without any
Warrant from Scripture; of the first I am afraid the ingenious Mr. Whiston is
too guilty; and of the latter the learned Dr. Nichols. But considering we are
in a Country of Liberty, and in an Age of Thought and Observation, I can easily
pardon the Freedom they are pleased to take in their Studies and Enquiries.

Having lately met with an accurate Discourse of Bernardini Ramazzini, printed
4 Years ago in Quarto, concerning the subterraneous Waters, the several Layers
or Beds of Earth upon deep diggings, the fossil Shells, Bones, Vegetables,
Pavements, etc. as also upon Inundations, and Deluges, with their Effects, I
thought fit here to acknowledge the many Obligations we owe to that inquisitive
Physician for his various Observations on the Changes of the Earth about the
Territory of Modena, which are equally commendable with those of Columna upon
Apulia; Dr. Hook, Mr. Ray, Dr. Plot, and Dr. Lister upon England* Steno upon
Tuscany; Scilla and Boccone upon Sicily and Malta; to whose Discoveries little
has been added as yet, notwithstanding the high and mighty Pretenses of a late
Author; who, in an Essay toward a Natural History of the Earth, Page 37. throws
Dirt upon those very Gentlemen, from whose Writings he has made bold to borrow
the best Part of the Observations in his Work: It Is also remarkable, how, Page
249, 252, 255, 256, 257, 259. he falls foul upon a very famous and reverend
Divine for taking the same Philosophic Liberty, which he himself assumes in
many Places of his Essay. As for his darling Notion (though none of his own) of
Specific Gravity, it is notoriously false in Fact and Nature, for the Strata,
Layers, or Bed^ of Sediments (out of which Steno, Scill^, Grandius, Ramazzini,
and others, will have the Earth made up) do not lie according to their
different Weights, or according to the Statick Laws of descent of Solids in
Fluids; for the Strata of Marble, and other Stone, of Lead, and other Metals,
lie often near the top or Superficies, having many lighter Strata under them;
and if all the Strata through the whole Globe could possibly be viewed and
examined, I am confident the respective Order of specific Gravity would not
hold in any two together; and who can fancy, that the Parts of Ferns, Mosses,
and other Plants, of Shells, Teeth, and other Bones, should equiponderate with
those of Metallic Fossils; nay, oftentimes subside below them; and whoever
views the Dimensions, Weight, Figure, and Place of those vast Natural Columns,
called the Devil's Causy in Ireland, will be soon convinced of the Weakness of
this Hypothesis. Their Origin therefore must be accounted for some other way
than what Colu^na, Steno, Scilla, Boccone, Grandius, and others copying after
them, have delivered concerning the Deluge and Inundations, Strata, Crusts or
Sediments according to the Laws of Specific Gravity; neither are the many
Phenomena relating to their Situation, explicable by any Theories of the Earth
as yet published; I know not what Dr. Hook may do when he comes to print his
Lectures upon this Subject, which the Virtuosi expect, and very earnestly crave
of him: Much also may be performed by the Learned Mr. Edward Lhwyd, Keeper of
the Oxford Museum, who has been very diligent and accurate in his Observations
on these Bodies, and whose Candor and Modesty, joined with his exquisite
Judgment, render him capable of such an Undertaking.

As to the Origin of subterraneous Plants, either dug out of Earthen Beds,
or lodged within Stony Substances, or else impressed upon them, which Steno in
his Prodroms (translated by Mr. Oldenburgh) Page 93, 94, 95. will needs derive
the same way with those of Shells, Teeth, Bones, and other Parts of Animals,
buried in the like Strata or Sediments of the Deluge; Mr. Lhwy'd of Oxford has
raised many invincible Objections against this Stenonian Hypothesis in the last
Edition of Camden's Britannia, P^g. 692, 693. and Mr. Ray in his second Preface
to the Synopsis of British Plants* argues very Philosophically against this
Opinion, revived of late with great Assurance, and in a positive manner; but
Mr. Whiston has done very wisely in taking no notice of the many insuperable
Difficulties which have been u^g'd against the bringing in of these Bodi^s, and
the forming our present Crusts and Layers of Earth, out of a general Deluge. He
has saved himself much Swea^ and Pains in having Recourse only to two or three
late Books, and in consulting Copies instead of Originals, which would have
given more Strength and Beauty to his Work, and would have looked more
masterly; however the Gentleman has perform^d very well in the main, and has
shown a profound and clear Knowledge in Physical Science, though not in the
History of Learning, nor in that of Nature. Hi^ Conjectures are admirable, but
his Quotations and References are not commendable, being injurious to those
eminent Philosophers who were the first I^ventors, and yet passed over in
Silence, as though there had been no such Writers; many of their Observations
being attributed by the Author of the New Theory to one of his own
Acquaintance, who may do as much for him another time; but I would not
willingly accuse Mr. Whiston of any ungenerous dealing, having discovered a
noble Genius in the Formation of his System; and therefore I conclude with
respect to him, and with Charity to all Mankind.

The Contents of the first Part.
CHap. 1. The Philosophical meaning of these Words ( In the beginning God
created the Heavens and the Earth,) and what may be concluded from them. Chap.
2. Of God the supreme and effici^nt Cause; and why Moses proves not the Being
of a God expressly by way o^ Argument; ^ut implicitly by describing of the
several Degrees of Perfection, and the Subordinations of Life. Chap. 3. Of the
Creation of second Causes, and the manner of their Production, and ways of
working. Chap. 4. Of Light and Darkness, the common Principles of mixed Bodies,
what they were in Mass; and how their Division made the first Production. Chap.
5. Of Light the formal Cause of all mixed Productions; what it was whilst in
Mass. Chap. 6. Of Darkness, the material Cause of all mixed Productions; what
it was in Mass, how it was redu^'d into Form: Of the Power of Matter and
Motion: Of Sympathy and Antipathy. Chap. 7. Of the Spirit of God moving upon
the Face of the Waters, what is philosophically meant by it: Of the first
division of the Waters, and the clearing of the sublunary Firmament. Chap. 8.
The Division of the lower Waters into subterranean, superterr^nean, and
nubiferous, and by what Gradations the dry Land appeared. Chap. 9. Of the
Primeval or Antediluvian Figure o^ the Earth. Chap. 10. Of the constituent
P^rts o^ the Earth; and first of the volatile Part of it, or the central Fire,
its natural Uses. Chap. 11. Of the sixth Part of the Earth: and first of the
Inequality of its Surface; their Natural Causes and Uses. Chap. 12. Of
Mountains, their original Cause, consistences, and natural Uses; being the
first dry Land that appeared. Chap. 13. Of Mountain Heaths, etc. Chap. 14. O^
the Plains and Valleys, etc. Chap. 15. Of the Channel of the Sea, etc. Chap.
16. Of the ^luid Part of this terraqueous Globe; and first of the Sea, etc.
Chap. 17. Of those preternatural Accident^ that disturb and interrupt the
Course of Nature in this Material World, etc. Chap. 18. Of the central Damps:
Their Causes, Natures, and dreadful Effects upon this Globe. C^ap. 19. Of
terrene Damps, and their dreadful Effects upon this Globe, etc. Chap. 20. Of
Noah's Flood, its Causes, the Season of the Year when it happened, the Effects
and Alterations it made upon the Earth. Chap. 21. Of the season of the Year
when the Deluge happened. Chap. 22. Of the Alterations which Noah's Flood made
in, and upon the Earth.
The Contents of the second Part.
CHap. 1. Of the Plastic Spirit in Matter, and its natural Products. Chap. 2.
Of the grand Cover of the Earth, the sympathetical Union of the plastic and
vivisick Spirit; and the Production of Vegetables, the first and lowest Degree
of Life. Chap. 3. Of reducing the confused Mass of Light or the etherial Flame
into a Body, which made the Sun; of reducing those lighter Fogs and wa^erish
Mists into a Body, which made the Moon; how by clearing of the superlunary
Firmament, or the Planetary Spheres, the Stars appeared, and what the Sun,
Moon, and Stars contribute toward the Production of sensitive or locomotive
Animals, and why the Creation of these second Causes made the fourth
Production. Chap. 4. Of the Production of the second Degree of Life, and first
of oviparous Animals, as Fish and waterish Insects. Chap. 5. Of the second
Genus o^ oviparous Animals, viz. the Aerial: And first of Fly-Insects, secondly
of Serpents, thirdly of Birds, and why Moses makes the waterish and aerial
Animals congenial. Chap. 6. Of the terrene, or viviparous Animals. Chap. 7. Of
the Creation of Man, the sixth Production. The Conclusion: Wherein is shown the
meaning and signisicancy of these Words. And God saw every thing that he had
made, and behold it was very good.
A Discourse concerning the Terrestrial Paradise, showing how Adam was
introduced into it: The Time he continued in it, and how he and Eve employed
that Time. A Discourse concerning the Conflagration of this material World; the
Local Hell; its outmost Boundaries, or Abraham's Gulf. A short Treatise of
Meteorology, with some Observations concerning the Changes and Alterations of
the Weather. Chap. 1. Of Vapour^ and Exhalations, etc. Chap. 2. Of the
efficient Causes o^ all Meteors, and first of Heat. Chap. 3. Of Cold, the other
efficient Cause of Meteors. Chap. 4. Of the Air, or Medium wherein all Meteors
are generated. Chap. 5. Of fiery Meteors, etc. Chap. 6. Of Comets, etc. Chap.
7. Of Thunder, its Causes and Effects. Chap. 8. Of vaporous Meteors, and first
of Dews and Hoar Frosts. Chap. 9. Of Rain, Hail, and Snow. Chap. 10. O^ Hail
and Snow, with Observations. Chap. 11. Of Frost and Thaw. Chap. 12. O^ the
Sphere of Rarefaction. Chap. 13. Of Wind, Helms, and Arches. Chap. 14.
Prognostications of the Change and Alteration of Weather, from the setting and
rising of the Sun.

The Author living at a great Distance from the Press, desires the Reader ^o
p^^don those following Mistake^.
PAge 5. line 13. read further, p. 25. l. 6. r. Philosophically, p. 27. l. 9.
r. Anteperistatical, p. 30. l. 10. r. Nutritious, p. 44. l. 25. r. Fluidity, p.
67 l. 1. r. Nature, p. 91. l. 4. r. Sublunary, p. 121. l. 24. r. Litoral^s, p.
13^. l. 25. r. Assimilation, p. 139. l. 10. r. learned, p. 155. l. 28. r.
Zodiac*

A Scheme wherein the Several Phenomenon of this Terraqueous Globe are
Explained.
ABCDEFG


A The Central Fire disseminating a Vital heat, through the whole Cortex or
Shel of the Globe.

B The Mountains from the Center to the Surface.

C Heaths.

D Plains.

E The Channel of the Sea.

The flatt Strata or Beds of Matter, with their Acclivities to the ^ountains
and Declivities to the Seas together with their Elevations and Depressions:
thus described

The winding and turnings of the greater Veins, Dividing the several Classes of
Matter described thus through which the whole Mass of s^^terranean Water
Circulates.

Their Lesser Fibers, or Rami Factions* filling all the flat Strata with
feeders of Water, which breaking out upon the Surface of the Earth cause Spring
etc. described thus*

F The Seas with the Rivers flowing into them from the Tops of the Mountains
swelling them into a Ci^bosity; and causing in them a Continual Fermentation.

G Vapors Arising from the Seas, which being Attracted by the Coldness of the
Mountains, fixes there: Forming an Atmosphere round the whole Globe.


PART. I.
CHAP. I. ^he Philosophical meaning of these Words [In the beginning God
created the Heavens and the Earth,] and what may be concluded from them.
MOSES in his Philosophical Description of the Creation, lays it down as a
granted Principle or a grand Thesis, ^^at the Heavens and the Earth, with (...)
their Parts, Furniture and variety (...) Natures contained in them, were
^^eated [ de novo] and that God the ^^pream Being Un-created, and Inde^endent,
Almighty in Power, and In^^nite in Wisdom and all Perfections, ^as the
efficient cause: That the time when the World was Created, was in the beginning
of Time; or when Time first began to have a Being; for before the World was
Created there was duration, or Stabilis Aeternitas [as the Schoolmen express
it] but Time being an equal mensuration of Motion, it and Motion began together.

From this grand Thesis we may conclude, First against Aristotle, who
endeavored by many Arguments to prove that the World, as it now stands in
Matter and Form, was Eternal; which Hypothesis advances the World into an
equality with God; makes it its own efficient Cause, Uncreated and Independent.

In the Second place this Mosaic Thesis concludes against Plato and his
Followers; who, though he did positively assert, that God made the World; yet he
did conceive that the Matter on which it did consist was Eternal and
Pre-existent: By which Hypothesis he concludes God to be an impotent cause, not
able to create the World without Matter and Stuff to work upon.

These mistaken Principles in Philososophy were occasioned from the Observation
of the regular course of Nature; not considering that there might be other
causes which might produce effects in an other way than could ever come within
the compass of their narrow observation; for how Spiritual Causes produce their
effects, its impossible for us whilst we continu^ in this dark state of Matter;
wherein we have but a very short and narrow prospect to understand.

In the Third place it concludes against Democritus and his Followers, who did
not only conceit that Matter was Eternal and Pre-existent; but that the World
had no efficient cause, but what was from Chance, or the casual motion of
Matter; which consisting of infinite numbers of Atoms or little Corpuscles of
different Figures, Natures and Qualities, which rainged about in a vast and
infinite space; until at the last by Divisions, Separations and Mixtures
occasioned by their contrary and mixed Qualities, and the innate Power of
Sympathy and Antipathy, they at last settled into the Form and Figure of this
World, which it can no more alter or vary from, than the active Fire be taught
to change its Nature, and descend and Gravation to ascend and fly upward.

No doubt but this Hypothesis wa^ grounded upon an experimental Observation of
the several Kinds of Matter of different Natures, which being mixed together in
a Glass, or any transparent Vessel, will separate and divide themselves proprio
m^tu; tho never so jumbled and mixed together.

I shall not in this place show you the absurdity of this Hypoth^sis; but
rather choose in the following Chapters to give some account what Feats, Matter
and Motion will produce by virtue of their contrary Qualities, and the power of
Sympathy and Antipathy; and how far God Almighty might make u^e of th^se
toward the forming the materrial part of this World.

We may hence farther conclude, that viz.) Power, Wisdom, and Goodness,
according to that Model and Idea pre-conceiv'd in the Divine Understanding:

For it cannot be imagined that the Divine Essence would for some time sit
still, and wrap up it is self in sloth and idleness; but did always display its
self in a vigorous activity.

Besides the natural tendency of Infinite Power, is Action; of Infinite Wisdom
is Counsel; of Infinite Goodness is Beneficence: We cannot therefore but
conclude from these Natural Arguments, that God would from all Eternity follow
the inclinations of his own Divine Perfections.

From this grand Thesis we may yet F^at; for tho this might have been
consistent with Infinite Power; yet it would not have been agreeable with
Infinite Wisdom, which consists in Deliberation, Counsel and Contrivance.

Moses therefore tells us that God first created the Heavens, and then the
Earth: Like as some mighty Monarch designing to build a spacious and most
glorious Palace, first forms the Model of it in his mind; and having prepared
his Materials, sets on work his Under-agents, who first of all lay the
Foundations, and complete his own Royal Apartments, then the Apartments of his
chief Ministers of State, after that Chambers for his Domestics, and last of
all Lodgings for his out Servants; and the Work being finished, according to
the Model which he gave his Architects to work by, he gives it his Approbation.
In like manner, the Great and Almighty Monarch of the Universe may be supposed,
first to have laid the Foundations of those Super-Coelestial Regions of
unaccessable Light, the Royal Chambers of his own most Glorious Presence; where
he sits in great Majesty attended with an innumerable retinue of the most Noble
Angels his Courtiers: After these he creates the highest of the Celestial
Spheres, in which he placed Thousands of Royal Mansions, where the Archangels
and Brighter Cherubins, the chief Ministers of State in that Celestial Kingdom
keep their residence: And these are the Morning Stars which Job tells us [by
way of Synecdoche] that met together, and the Sons of God that did shout for
joy. After these God created the inner or lower Spheres, in which he placed
innumerable numbers of bright, lucid and Aetherial Globes; wherein the inferior
Angels and Domestic Officers do inhabit, and these the Scripture styles
Ministering Spirits.

And these differ in Office, Power and Light, as they are placed in Spheres
nearer, or at a distance from the Regions of Light: For as one Star differs
from another Star in Glory, Light, Purity and Magnitude; So do their Heavenly
Inhabitants: And so shall it be in the Resurrection from the Dead; for as Men
improve here in Virtue, Goodness and the Divine Life and Light, so shall they
be placed nearer, or at a distance from God, the Fountain of Life and Light.

After the finishing of these Inner Courts of this Royal Palace, last of all
God created this Material Globe or Outer Court; and made it the Center of the
Universe: And it is built of the Rubbidge, Dross and Sediment of the whole
Creation, and inhabited with the meanest of Creatures, and lowest degree of
Life and Perfection, which may most properly be called God's out Servants; over
which he has placed Man Deputy Lord Governor.

This Material Globe, tho it appears in its own dimensions to be o^ great
Magnitude to us (who bear not so much proportion to it, as a Molehill does to
the greatest Mountain) yet being compared to the whole Universe [if the
computation of the best Philosophers be true] it will scarce bear proportion to
the Ninety six thousand part of it.

It cannot therefore be imagined that the Wise Creator [who never made any
thing in vain, but to the best end^ and wisest Purposes^] should be so fond of
a piece of dull stupid Matter, as to create all those innumerable numbers of
Bright, Lucid, Aetherial Globe^ (the least of which exceeding this Molehill in
Magnitude by several Diameters) for no other end or purpose than distinguishing
of Days, Months, Seasons and Years; and for casting a dark glimmering light to
us poor Mortals.

As God Almighty finished any part of the Creation, he gave it a motion, and
this motion it performs naturally and insensibly, without labor or difficulty;
as our Blood circulates through our Veins and our Vital Spirits glide in the
Nerves through the whole Body.

The Almighty having now finished the Creation which made up but one Royal
Palace, containing in it innumerable Mansions, fit for the Subjects of so great
a Monarch to live in: He sits at the Helm of this Floating Universe, and Steers
all its motion^ with a steady and unerring hand.

And it can be no more labor to God to govern and actuate this World; who as
an Universal Soul is diffu^'d in it, and is vitally present in every part of
it, than for a Man's rational Soul by Will and Cogitation, to move a Finger or
a Toe, or any other part of his Body; tho at the greatest distance from its
Seat.

CHAP. II. Of God the Supreme and Efficient Cause; and why Moses proves not the
being of a God expressly by way of Argument; but implicitly by describing of the
several degrees of Perfection, and the Subordination^ of Life.
WHen Moses writ this excellent System of the Creation, Politheism and Idolatry
had prevailed over the generality of Mankind, and Abraham's Posterity were
become Worshippers of Egyptian Gods, as appears by their making of a Molten
Calf at Horeb.

Yet notwithstanding this multitude of Inferior Deities which the World had set
up for Divine Worship; the generality of Mankind did universally believe, that
there was one Supreme God, who was the efficient Cause and Almighty Creator of
this World, consisting of the Heavens and the Earth: and that this God was the
Father and Governor of all the rest.

The Philosopher might therefore justly conclude it superfluous to prove by
strength of Argument a Tenet, or rather an Article of Faith; to which the
common Suffrage of Mankind did so universally consent and agree: And if it be
supposed that Moses writ this System of the Creation, with the rest of his
Book, which gives an account of the Patriarchal Genealogies, on purpose for the
benefit and instruction of the Israelites; who in all probability could not but
be ignorant of the Traditions and Religion of their Ancestors: [the ^pse dixit]
of so great a Philosopher; a Man so eminent for these mighty and unparalled
Miracles and Wonders, which the Almighty wrought by his Hand upon Egypt before
their eyes; were sufficient to convince them, not only of a bare credibility;
but of the Truth and Certainty of this Divine Thesus, that there was a God, and
that he created the Heavens and the Earth.

But as God did not limit and consine his Favors wholly to Abraham's
Posterity; but extends them to the Universal Body of Mankind: So
notwithstanding that Moses wri^ these Books for the instruction of that People
in the first place, he undoubtedly de^^gn'd them for the information of others
living in a State of Ignorance:

And therefore although he does no^ expressly by way of Argument prove the Being
of a God, and that he wa^ the Supreme Cause of the World's Creation [ Atheism
being not then heard of in the World] yet he does it implicitly by describing
of those several Degrees and Subordinations of Life in the World; and by
showing how every inferior Rank of Creatures is subservient to its Superior;
and how every inferior Species is concatenated and linked to its Superior by
intermediates, all which is so visible and obvious in the Frame of the World,
that an easy Philosopher without any great difficulty, or hard Study may
ascend Gradatim, first from those common Minerals of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury,
to the several degrees and kinds of Oars and Metals; from these to the fertile
Soil: from it to the several degrees of Life and Perfection in Vegetables, as
Grass, Herbs, Plants, Shrubs, Trees, etc. and from these to the Zoophyta or
Plant-Animals, which concatenates the highest degree of Vegetation to the
lowest degree of Sensation; from the several degrees of Sensation in Brutal
Animals, to Man which is an intermediate Animal, that links and couples Heaven
and Eearth together; from Man to the several degrees of Light, Life and
Perfection in the Angelick Nature; and from the Intellectual Nature, to God the
Fountain of Light, Life and Perfection; who, as an Universal Soul, actuates the
whole World, by giving of the several degrees of Life and Perfection to all the
Creatures in the Animal World, as they are placed in Orbs or Spheres nearer or
at a greater distanc^ from his Divine Essen^e.

Thus in God all Creatures Live, Move, and have their Beings, and by these
gradations we may either ascend up to Heaven, where God Almighty resides in
Infinite Glory and Perfection, or from thence descend to the hidden and dark
Regions of Matter.

CHAP. III. Of the Creation of Second Causes, and the manner of their
Producton; and ways of Working.
THE grand reason why Plato and Aristotle, and ^he rest of the Natural
Philosophers did assume it as a granted Principle, that Nothing wa^ made out of
Nothing; and that every thing produced, had necessarily some pre-existent
Matter out of which it was so formed; was [as I have already hinted] because
they could not observe in the ordinary course of Nature any thing produced de
novo; therefore ^hey concluded it impossible that any such Production could
ever be, or ^appen in Nature:

But from particular Experiments or Observations to establish a general
Conclusion; especially concerning the impossibility of any thing's Existence,
is no regular and warrantable way of argumentation; for there may be Agents of
another Sort, and Powers which can produce Effects in another way, than could
ever come within the compass of our observation; for we see, and cannot but
make it an observation, that one sensitive Animal by the power of Sensation can
do more, and produce greater effects, than all the Vegetables can produce by
the power and strength of Vegetation. And one Man by the Power of his Natural
Reason can produce more noble Effects, than all the Brute Animals by the
Strength of Sensation; so one Angel by the Power and Vigor of his Spiritual
and Intellectual Natures, can produce effects more great and wonderful, than
all the Men in the World can by the power of Reason, though never so exalted and
sublimated; for we read in 2 Kings 19. Chap. and 15. Verse that an Angel in one
night went out and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians one Hundred and fourscore
and five thous^nd; but how or by what means this Angelick, power was exercised
it is not within the compass of shallow Reason to conceive: Yet we may
reasonably conclude from it, that if an Angel, by the Power of his Intellectual
Nature, can do more than a^l the Men in the World; so God Almighty by his
Divine Essence can produce greater and far more wonderful effects than the
whole Angelick Nature; even such as is impossible either for us, or them to
understand.

But Moses having, to hi^ great improvements in Natural Philosophy, the
Advan^ages of the Patriarchal Tradition^, and a Divine Revelation; and being
best acquainted with God Almighty's Power in producing Effects; does not only
positively asser^, that God was the Maker and Builder o^ this World; but that
he Created i^ and the Matter on which it does consist, out o^ Nothing, and that
by uttering of tha^ Almighty Word [ s^at] not audibly, for then there was no
sensible Auditor in Being; but mentally, that is, by an Act of Volition; sic
volo sic ^ubeo being only a Prerogative of Almigh^y Power.

The Second Causes which this Almigh^y Power Created out of Nothing, and which
he made use of as instrumental i^ all Productions of a mixed Constitution, may
be considered either as they are Essential or Accidental.

The Essential Causes were Light and Darkness; the External and Accidental
Causes were Motion, Time, and Place; without which all Natural Productions are
Physically impossible.

God having created these Second Causes by another Imperious Word, set them on
working; and he gave them also a Rule or Model to work by, which is most
commonly called the Course of Nature; and when these new Agents had produced
any effect, he viewed it, and gave it his Divine approbation, in these Words;
God saw that it was good (i.e.) that it was agreeable with that Rule and Model
he had given them to work by; which words, though they be spoken ad Hominem, yet
undoubtedly Moses intended by them to instruct and inform Mankind, that the
World was not made by Chance, or the casual Motion of blind Atoms, as some
since have Atheistically asserted; but by Wisdom, Council and Deliberation.

And this established Course of Nature, or these Laws and Rules which the
Divine Wisdom gave to the Second Causes to work by, he never interrupts or
varies from; but upon great and extraordinary occasions, when he is pleased to
give some Demonstrations, of his Almighty Power and Universal Providence by
which he governs the World at his Will and Pleasure; then he can either divert
the Natural Causes from their usual course, or by them produce Supernatural
Effects; as the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by extraordinary Thunder and
Lightning* the Destruction of all living Creatures upon the face of the Earth
by an Universal Deluge; or he can stop them in their Natural Course, as when he
caused the Sea to divide and stand still, and the Sun to move backwards.

CHAP. IV. Of Light and Darkness, the common Principles of mixed Bodies, what
they were in Mass; and how their division made the first production.
ALL the Natural Philosophers wanting the assistance of a Divine Revelation,
did agree in this; that there could be no Production of a mixed Constitution,
without a Sympathetical Union of an active and passive Principle; but what
these Principles of Activity and Passivity were, they could not easily
determine.

These our great Philosopher expresses by the Names of Light and Darkness;
which when they came immediately out of Gods hand, were bound up and hampered
in one confused Mass; which might fitly be compared to a dark and palpable
Mist, like the Egyptian Darkness which was to be felt, in which vast Fog or
Mist were bound ^p, and smothered those bright, lucid and active Particles of
pure and Volatile Ether, as we see Light enclosed within the walls of a dark
Lan^horn; or the active Particles of Fire when smothered in Ashes, or
imprisoned within the dark body of Matter.

Thus Darkness was upon the face of this thick Mist or Fog of Matter, until God
by another Almighty Fiat created Motion; which being infused into the
stagnating Mist of Matter, the whole Mass of it was put into a fermentation and
motion; and whilst the contrary Q^alities were acting their Antipathies one
upon another, these nimble and active Particles of lucid Ether [being the most
Volatile] broke through this dark Mass of Matter, and uniting themselves,
caused a bright shining Light, which Moses calls Day: and this division of
Light from Darkness, occasioned by the putting of the whole Mass of Matter into
a Fermentation and Motion, made the first Production.

CHAP. V. Of Light, the formal Cause of all mixed Productions, what it was
whilst in Mass.
BY Light is to be understood that vast Aetherial flame, which whilst ^t was in
Mass diffused its bright shining Rays, not only through the Material Regions,
but the Planetary and Celestial Spheres: This Aetherial flame was the Anima
Mundi, the Vehicle of Life, wherein was contained the Seminal and Specific
Forms of all sublunary Creatures, [Man only ^xcepted] and then da^c'd about the
Passive Matter, like A^oms in the Morning Sun Beams; until its Prolifick Slime,
by virtue of its Plastic Power was modifi'd and pr^par'd for receiving of Life.

And this seems to be the sense and Philosophical meaning of Moses in the
Second Chapter of Genesis, Verse the Fifth; God made every Plant of the Field
before it was in the Earth, and every Herb of the Field before it grew; meaning
only their Seminal and Specific Forms which were contained in a Vehicle of
Light, before they were united to their Material Vehicles.

Thus Light according to the Mosaic Principles of Natural Philosophy, became
the Formal Cause or the Male Parent of all mixed Productions.

CHAP. VI. Of Darkness, the material cause of all mixed Productions; what it was
in Mass, how it was reduced into Form: Of the Power of Matter and Motion: Of
Sympathy and Antiphathy.
BY Darkness, the other Principle, or Material cause of generation, is not
meant a bare p^ivation of Light; but that vast Mist, or Dark Fog of Matter
consisting of infinite Numbers of Particles or little Corpuscles of different
Figures, and contrary Qualities, which by reason of a Principle of motion
infused into it, run a Reel in a dark confusion until these contrary Q^alities
of Heat and Cold, Siccity and Humidity, Gravitation and Levity, falling out
among 'em selves begun to act their Antipa^hies upon one another; which causing
them to separate and divide, those of the same kindred and affini^y, by the
Power of a S^cret and Innate Sympathy drew together and united.

And first of all, these Particle^ of Matter, which were of a hot and volatile
Nature, being most active and vigorous, placed themselves in the Center or
Middle, as we observe 'em always to do in S^acks of Hay, Corn or other
composi^ions of mixed Matters, wherein there is a strife or contest between
those contrary Qualities of Heat and Cold, Siccity and Humidity.

And these hot and siery Pa^ticles having by their natural tendency taken
possession of the Center, began immediately to ^ct their Antipathy upon those
Particles of Matter that were of a cold and waterish substance; forcing them to
fly to the Circumfe^^nce, and to range about in thick Fogs and waterish Mists;
filling up not only that vast Expansion between the superficies of the Earth
and the Moons Vortex; but all ^he Planetary Spheres.

During which contest between Heat and Cold, Fi^e and Water, the intermediate
Matter of a mixed Nature, neither ^imply hot nor cold; but participa^ing of both
Natures ( viz.) such as were of an Unctious, Pinguid, Bituminous and Terrene
Quality, se^led themselves in a middle Sphere.

And every Class of Matter of the same Kind and Species, the better to secure
it ^elf from intermixing with the Matter of a different Nature, did enclose it
self with great Dykes or Partitions, consisting of Excrementitious, confu^'d
and undigested Matter; and the natural Position of these being Rake-wise from
the surface toward the Center, they most properly may be esteemed the greater
joints of the Earth.

And as these divide the several Kinds of Matter, so they preserve the several
Feeders and Mineral Waters from intermixing, as will be more largely shown;
when we shall have occasion to Discourse of Dykes, Rakes, Veins, Strings,
Riders, etc.

The confused M^ss of mixed Matter being thus red^c'd to several Classes and a
regular ^orm; every Class leading to some proper Mine or Mineral, which is the
siner and better digested part of that Class; as Coal, Rudle, Iron and the
several Kinds of Ore; and these all lay in lax and ^luid Strat^ or Beds, like
the loose Leaves in an unpres^'d Volume or Book, or like the weak joints in a
newly conceived Embrio, enclosed in a Bag of Water in the Womb of its pregnant
Mother.

CHAP. VII. Of the Spirit of God moving upon the face of the Waters, what is
Pholosophically meant by it: Of the first division of the Waters, and the
clearing of the sublunary Firmament.
THE whole Mass of Terren^ Matter being thus far reduced into Form and Order;
[not according to the Laws of Gravity, the heaviest subsiding first in order
and falling lowest, as Dr. Woodward conceives, which mistake in Observation
will be made apparent in its proper place] [but by motion of consent,
suitability of Natures, and an agreeable juxta-position of Parts.]

The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters, which Words, if we
consider 'em under a philoso^^ical Notion, may be understood o^ the Aetherial
Flame, which moving upon those waterish Fogs and Mists, rarifi'd the more
subtle and t^nuious Parts or Fumes of it into a brisk gale of cold condensing
Wind; which did not only clear up the Sublunary Firmament by dividing of those
Fogs into Sublunary and Superlunary Waters; but by condensing the Sublunary
Fogs and Mists into a vast body of Water, it covered and surrounded the whole
body of Terrene Matter; and as the Waters sank down toward the Center, they
pressed together the several Strata or Layers of Stones, Mines, Minerals and
other Subterrene Earths, as we press together the leaves of a large Volume; and
in our sinking and digging into the Body of the Earth, we find them lying upon
Fla^s with a Dibb and Rise, the Rise toward the tops of Mountains, and the
Dibb toward the main Ocean; as the Waters left them and forced them up, when
they drew down into their proper Channel.

The whole Mass of Terrene Matter being thus Compact and Cemented together by
the pressures of the circumambient ambient Waters, as we press Brick and Tyle
in their several Moulds; the Central ^ire did by its heat bake and consolidate
those Stones, Metals, Mines and Minerals that were of a fiery nature, as well
as those of an unctuous and pinguid quality, into their several degrees of
Consolidation and Induration; whilst the Anteperistical Cold, together with
those petrifying juices of Salt and Nitre which then did abound in all the lax
and undigested Strata, did petrify those Strata of a Terrene Nature into their
several degr^es of Induration and Lapidifaction.

By these Natural Gradations the Earth became fixed upon its Center, and ^he
Waters a fluid body moving and circulating about it; and they both made one
Terraqueous Globe of a Spherical and Mathematical Rotundity; all the Lines from
the Superficies to the Center being of an equal length.

Thus the space between the surface of the Waters and the Moon's Vortex was
cleared of all those Fogs and Mists which ranged about in it: And being filled
with their Air, Moses calls it the Firmament of Heaven, which made the second
Production ( viz.) of space, wherein the Under-agents or second Causes had room
to work, and produce effects of a higher and more noble Nature and Quality.

CHAP. VIII. The division of the lower Waters into Subterranean,
Superterranean, and Nubiferous; and by what Gradations the dry Land appeared.
THOUGH this great Embrio was ready for birth and to breath in fresh Air; yet it
could not be delivered from this great Bag of Water, wherein it was enclosed,
by any innate Power it had in it self, without a Supernatural assistance: The
Almighty was pleased therefore to play the Midwife, and to deliver it by
breaking of this great body of Water; and by dividing of the sweet from those
of a Saline and Brakish Nature.

For as soon as the intermediate Matter which made the Shell of the Earth, was
redn^'d into Form and Order; and the several Strata or Layers of Stones,
Metals, Minerals, and Subterrene Earths with their cross-cutting and dividing
Dykes, Rakes, Ryders, Veins and Strings or Side-branches had received from the
heat of the Central fire and the petrefying Juices of Salt and Nitre, their
several degrees of Incrustation, Induration and Lapidifaction; the thirsty
Matter gradually sucked in the thin sweet Water, until all its Veins, Dykes,
Cavities and Pores were filled and saturated with it.

The Salt Water being the Sedement of the whole Mass, and likewise being too
thick to penetrate and pass through the stra^t Pores and Strainers of the solid
and condensed Matter, did gradually draw down to its Channel: And all the Veins
and Pores of the Earth being now Saturated with sweet Water; the Subterranean
Lympheducts, or underground Waterworks began first to bubble up and play from
the tops of the highest Mountains; from whence the Rivers took their first
rise, and began to form their courses to the Sea; and by their rapidity and
weight continually pressing in upon her from all sides, swelled her up into a
Gibbosity, and for^'d her into a constant flux and reflux, which reciprocation
of Motion causing in her a boiling Fermentation, the sweet Water does
disentangle it self from the Salt; and being lighter, rises up in Fumes and
Vapors, which fly abroad until they be condensed into Clouds, which falling
down in showers of sweet Water upon the Earth become^ the Succus Nutritivus of
the fleshy part of it; giving not only a vital nourishment to the several Kinds
of Animals living on the outer Coat or Skin of it; but repairing the
Subterranean Waters by preserving them from wasting.

The Waters being now divided into Superterranean, Subterranean and Nubiferous,
the dry Land appeared, and was gradually prepared for being an habitable World.

CHAP. IX. Of the Primeval or Antidiluvian Figure of the Earth.
DR. Burnet, Dr. ^urnet^ inconsistences.
in his Theory of the Earth, conceits and endeavors to persuade the World,
that the Primeval Earth was Spherically or Mathematically round, without Seas,
Mountains or any inequalities upon its Surface.

Which Hypothesis (or rather ingenious Conceit) seems in the first place to be
inconsistent with the Original State of this Materi^l Globe; which being
designed for a plac^ of Habition for several Kinds of Animals of ^ mixed and
compounded Constitution, whose vital ^lame is nourished and maintained by a
continual respiration of a soft and vaporous Air; which must not only be
frequently fanned with the brisk gales and blasts of a cleansing Wind, but also
moistened and sweetened with showers frequently falling through it: All which
have their Original cause from the constant flux and reflux of the Sea, The
Cause of this Globes Atmosphere.
and those inequalities upon the surface of the Earth: Without which there
would neither have been an Atmosphere, Wind, Rain, or Air; but the Superficies
of the Earth would have been [by the Sun's Beams continually beating upon it]
Baked and Incrusted into the hardness of Brick and Tyle.

This Hypothesis seems also inconsistent with the different Natures of those
Animals with which the Almighty Creator has been pleased to stock it; some of
which being only produced in a Warm and Fertile Soil, others only in a Cold and
Sterile: So some Animals delight only to breath a warm and soft Air, others a
more bleak and piercing: Thus Strawberries and Gilliflowers will not thrive
upon the tops of cold and barren Mountains; nor Mountain Vegetables in the most
fertile Soil, or best prepared warm Beds. This will be made more clear and
evident when we shall give account of the natural uses of the Flux and Reflux
of the Sea, and those inequalities and irregularities of the Earth's Surface.

Once more to suppose the Earth to have been of an even and Spherical
Supersicies seems inconsistent with the different Kinds and Natures of that
Matter of which it consists; some of which being hard, others soft, some fixed
others ^luid, it cannot be imagined that all this variety of Matter would
settle in a Figure Spherically and Mathematically round.

From these Arguments we may without being guilty of any great presumption,
conclude against Dr. Burnet's Hypothesis, that as the Antediluvian Earth
consisted of the same Matter with this present Earth, and produced the same
Species of Animals, of the same natures and qualities, it was of the same
Figure that now we find it in, a Terraqueous Globe of a Physical Rotundity,
with Seas, Mountains, etc.

And that these irregularities and Inequalities of this Terrestrial Globe did
not Date their Original from that Disruption which was occasioned by the Deluge
as Dr. Woodward positively asserts, Dr. Woodard's contradiction of himself.
Part 2d page 80. is evid^nt from part 6. Page 246. where he undertakes to
prove that the Face of the Earth before the Deluge was not smooth, even and
uniform; but unequal, and distinguished with Mountains, Valleys; as also with
Seas, Lakes and Rivers.

CHAP. X. Of the constituent parts of the Earth: And first of the Volatile part
of it, or the Central Fire; its natural Uses.
THE Constituent parts of this Terraqueous Globe are reducible to three
different Classes of Matter, ( viz.) Volatile, Fixed and Fluid; and these bear
equal proportion one to another, and in the Structure of the Earth do occupy
the same proportion of place.

The Volatile Matter, consisting of sublimated Sulphur, Nitre and Bitumen keeps
possession of the Central part; and as all Matter of the same kind and
affinity, which having an appetite to Union, naturally affects a round and
globular Figure, so the Central Fire may be supposed to be of the same Form.

That Figure wherein the Excentral Fire appears, is only accidental, occasioned
by the compressures of the circumambient Air.

That vast subterranean Vault wherein this volatile Globe of Central Fire is
contained [which the Miners call the Belly of the Earth] may be supposed to be
either of a round or circular; or of an aequilateral, multangular Figure;
occasioned by the solid Strata of Stones spreading and vaulting themselves
about it.

The natural Uses of this Central Fire seem to be Analogous to that vital Flame
which is seated in the He^rt or Center of all Animals; ^. Use.
for as that by its Vital heat ^nlivens the whole Body; so this Central ^ire by
that Vital warmth it disseminates through the whole mass of Matter, enlivens
it* and gives as well to the several Strata of Stones, Metals, Minerals and
other subterranean Earths, their degrees of Consolidation; as to the several
kinds of Ores, their different degrees of Purity and Perfection.

As the Vital Flame does not only cause the Ebullition and Pulsisick Faculty in
the Exterior pa^ts of the Body; 2. Use.
but also the Circulation of the whole Mass of Blood through all the greater
and lesser Veins of it; so the Central Fire is as well the cause of the
Ebullition of Springs, Thermae and Mineral Feeders which break out upon the
tops of Mountains and the exterior parts of the Earth; as of the constant
Circulation of the whole Mass of Subterranean Water through those Dykes, Rakes
and Fissures, which from the Mountains do divide and spread themselves through
the whole Body of the Earth, and are the greater and lesser Veins of it.

3. Use.
Again, as the Vital Flame gives the tincture and color to the Blood, Flesh and
all the Heterogeneous parts of the Body; so the Central Fire, by the different
degrees of concoction and boiling up of Matter, gave to the several kinds of it
their different Tinctures and Colors; this might be illustrated by several
Analogous Experiments and Observations, as in the boiling of Quinc^s and other
Fruits; so likewise in B^king of Bread* etc.

4. Use.
The Central Fire, by running a perpetual Round within the Boundaries of its own
Infernal Vault, carries the Shell of the Earth about with it, and is the cause
of its Diurnal Motion.

Lastly, It is the Earth's Aequilibrium that keeps it fixed upon its Center. 5.
Use.


CHAP. XI. Of the fixed part of the Earth: And first of the Inequalities of its
Surface; their Natural Causes and Uses.
THE fixed part of this Terraqueous Globe which we call the Earth, may be
described either as to its Exterior parts, or Interior consistences of it.

The Exterior parts consist of Mountains, Heaths, Dales, Plains, Valleys, with
the Channel of the Sea.

The Interior consistences of it are the Strata or Beds of Stones, Metals,
Mines, Minerals and Subterranean Earths, all lying upon Flats with a Dibb and
Rise.

Or they are Dikes, Rakes, Riders, Veins and Strings either cross-cutting and
dividing the several kinds of Stones, Metals, Mines, Minerals, etc. of a
different kind; or cross-cutting and dividing those of the same Species* as all
Metallic Rakes, etc.

Of the Inequalities of the Earths Surface.
1. Use.
THese Irregularities and Inequalities upon the Superficies of the Earth, are
occasioned by the Elevations and Depressions of the solid Strata; and these are
cau'd either by the greater Dikes, which divide one Species of Stones, etc.
from those of a different kind; and these greater Dikes make Channels and
Watercourse for the greater Rivers, which following their windings and
turnings till they empty themselves into the Sea, cause all those pleasant
Dales, which at last, when the Mountains wear out, dilate themselves into
spacious Plains and Valleys,

2. Use.
The lesser Dikes and Joints which divide the Stones, etc. of the same kind, by
throwing them up and down, cause all those lesser Hills, The cause of Hills.
which as well delight the Eye with a grateful variety of Objects, as
refrigerate and cherish the whole Body with a more cool, clear and wholesome Air.

There is not any thing in this Natural World, that contributes more toward
the making of it Habitable, then these inaequalities upon its Surface.

For, 1. The Cause of different Soils and Natures of Vegetables.
First they occasion all these different Kinds and Natures of Soil, which
produce the several Species of Vegetables suitable to the several Natures of
those Animals that feed upon them: The Earth's Surface being God's Storehouse,
wherein is provided Food and Nourishment agreeable to the Nature of every
Animal, and every living Creature by a Natural Instinct knows its proper Food
and Nourishment, and when and where to find it.

They occasion all those different qualities of the Air, as Warm, Cold, 2. The
different Qualities of the Air.
Thick, Thin, Moist and Dry; for as God has provided Food suitable to the
several Natures to feed on, so He has provided Air suitable to their Natures to
Breath in.

3. The occasion of Spring^, etc.
Those Inequalities upon the Earth occasion all those Springs, Mineral Feeders
and Medicinal Waters, which break out in Rapid Streams from the Tops of
Mountains, and the Skirts of lesser Hills; so that as God has provided
convenient Food for every Animal to feed upon, and agreeable Air to breath in;
He has likewise [by causing of Springs to break forth and bubble up at the Foot
almost of every Hill] provided convenient Water for every Animal to quench its
Thirst with.

Whereas if the Earth had been of an Even and Spherical Supersicies, covered
with one solid Strata, or incrusted Cover of Earth; I doubt we should have been
forced to have Dug as deep as Dr. Burnet and Dr. Woodward's Abyss, before we
sho^'d have met with Water sufficient to have quenched our Thirst; and its also
doubtful that when we had found it, it would not have been Sweet and Wholesome.

4. Of the breaking out of M^nes, etc.
These Inequalities also cause the s^veral Strata of Stones, Mines and O^es,
etc. [having a Natural Rise] to br^ak ^o^th at Day, so that the Inge^^ou^ ^^d
Industrious Miner may meet with, not only Stone for Building of Houses, Coals
for his Fires; but the several Kinds of Ore to enrich his Coffers with.

These Inequalities also produce all those Pleasant and most Profitable Copises
and Thickets of all Kinds of Trees, 5. Of the product^on of Trees, etc.
which delight most to grow where the solid Beds of Stone are weak and broken
and lie near day, and where they may easily thrust their Roots into their
broken Joints and suck in the Mineral Spirits, etc.

CHAP. XII. Of Mountains, their Original Cause, Consistences and Natural Uses;
being the first Dry Land that appeared.
THE Mountains are the Ebullition o^ Matter, The Cause of Mountain^.
occasioned by the Central Fire when it was in its ^ull Strength and Vigor.

1. Use. Their Consistences.
They consist of such Strata of Stones, Metals, Rags, Chivers, Cills, etc. as
are of a Hot quality; and these are like so many Hot-beds wherein the several
kinds of Ore received their Conceptions, as well as their different degrees of
Concoction and Perfection; as hereafter will be more fully shown.

2. Use. Their Natural Uses.
The Mountains consisting of such Matter as is of a Hot quality, and being bound
with strong Cills, which having a quicker Rise than those upon the Plains, do
lift up their Heads above the rest of the Earth; and became not only the great
Pillars and Supporters of the whole Fabric; but the first SeaBanks that broke
the Circulation of the Waters, and were the first dry Land that appeared.

3. Use.
The Tops of the Mountains reaching a^ high as the cold Regions of the Air; and
having but the advantage of a single R^flection of the Sun's Globuli, have
always a Cold and Condensing Air upon them, and striking a Level with the
Gibbosity of the Sea, do by the Sympathy between Cold and Cold attr^ct the
Vapors to them, which either fall down in Showers of Rain, being Condensed by
the rising of the Ground Cold; or are rarifi'd into Wind by the falling of the
Sphere of Rarefaction, which term will be hereafter explained when we describe
the Nature of Winds.

All the greatest Dikes and Divis^ons of the Earth [as I have already observ'd]
do contract themselves and meet in the Mountains, 4. Use.
as the Veins do in the Necks of Animals; and these being the greater Veins of
the Earth, by dividing into lesser Veins and Branches, maintain and preserve a
constan^ Communication or Circulation of Water through the whole Body.

And this is the only Reason why the Heads of all the greatest Rivers in the
World have their Rise from the Tops or Sides of the highest Mountains; which by
following of the Windings and Turnings of these greater Dikes or Veins, and by
receiving into them the lesser Dike-Feeders, are increased from small Rivulets
into large and Navigable Rivers, which at the last empty themselves into the
Main Ocean.

The Declivity of the Mountains gives Rapidity of Motion to the Rivers, 5. Use.
which does not only preserve their Sweetness for the benefit of Men and
Beasts; but also by pressing upon the Sea from all sides, swells her up into a
Gibbosity, and is the only cause of her Flux and Reflux, which the following
Chapters will give account of.

6. Use.
As the Declivity of the Mountains gives Rapidity of Motion to the Rivers; so it
gives Motion to the Winds and Air: For as the Condensation of Vapors causes
an Inundation in the Waters; so the Rarefaction of the Vapors and Exhalations
causes an Inundation and Overflowing in the Air: And those Lateral blasts of
Wind that come so strong upon us, are only Waves of the Air; and the roaring
Noise we oftentimes hear upon the Mountains, is only the breaking forth of the
Winds upon the still Body of the Air, and there putting of it into a rapid
Motion, which is increased by the Descent of the Mountains; for Air and Water
are the same in Specie, differing only in degrees of Thinness and Fludity,

7. Use.
As the Mountains are the great Pillars and Supporters of the Earth, their
Foundations all meeting in the Center, and Forming that Vast Subterranean
Vault, which keeps the Central Fire from breaking forth; so they are the
greatest Ornament of its Superficies; giving not only a most pleasant Prospect
over the Plains and Valleys, but terminating the Visive Faculty with a grateful
variety of Objects.

The Mountains have their Natural Position either in Ridges or Clusters; The
position of Mountains.
those we see in Clusters intermixed with great Dales, Gills and Valleys, were
[at the first settling of Matter] all of an even Superficies; but their Joints
and divisions consisting of Raff, Ragg, Chiver and such confused Matter,
without strong Cills or Strata of Stones to bind them together, were by great
Storms and Tempests of Rain, etc. but especially by Noah's Flood, broken and
driven down into the Valleys; and from thence into the next adjacent Sea.

And this is the Reason why some Mountains have a Perpendicular Rise, The Cause
of Gills, Dales and Vallie^.
why their Ribs and Sides lie Naked and Frightful, threatening to fall upon us;
and these great Dikes and Joints are either filled with Ponds of Water, which
afford great plenty of Fish; or they are become pleasant Valleys Gills and
Dales; having a F^uitful Soil and the warmest Sun, by reason of its Beams being
Reflected from all sides of the Mountains.

CHAP. XIII. Of Mountain Heaths, etc.
THE Mountain Heaths lie upon the Skirts of Mountains toward the Sea, their
Consistences and several Strata are rather of a Pinguid, Bitumious and Nitrous,
than of a Hot and Sulphurous Quality; and they generally lead to Mines of
Coals, The Ingred^ents of Coal.
which are the Pneumatick parts of such Strata of Stones and Metals as are
their upperCovers; the principal and more Pneumatical Ingredients whereof are
Bitumen, Sulphur and Nitre; Bitumen gives the Flame* Nitre blows it up, and
Sulphur gives the Heat.

Their cros^-cutting and dividing Dike^ consist of tough Clay and a mixture of
confused Matters* Lesser Mountains.
These Mountain Heaths were the second dry Land that appeared; for as the Sea
did gradually draw down into its Channel; its unruly Waves drove up these
lesser Hills we see upon the Skirts of the Mountains, and forced their Strata
of Stones, Metals, The Cause of the Chanel of the Sea.
etc. to have a Rise toward them, thereby making a Channel so Spacious as
might contain so Vast a Body of Water, and keep its Proud Waves within their
proper Limits.

Their Stones, Metals, etc. had their degrees of Incrustation and Lapidifaction
from the Central Fire.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Plains and Valley, etc.
THE last dry Land that appeared, was the Plains and Valleys, which by the
Depression of their Strata sank down into the Channel of the Sea; the
Consistences of these are rather of a Terrene and Nitrous, than ^ Pinguid
Quality.

They afford us the best Freestone as White, Gray, Red and Yellow* these
Tinctures and Colors they received from those different degrees of Concoction
they had from the Central Fire; and the degrees of Lapidifaction and Induration
they received from the Anteperistical Cold, and Petrefying Juices: Their Strata
have an easy Dibb toward the Sea, sometimes not a Yard at fifty; for as the
Waters divided, their Strength abated, and the Flat Strata laid more level.

CHAP. XV. Of the Channel of the Sea, etc.
AS the Valleys sink down gradually into the Channel of the Sea; so the Channel
is only a spacious Valley as far depressed before the Surface of the Earth, as
the Mountains and mountainous Heaths are advanced above it.

Its Consistences are of a Terrene, Nitrous, Mercurial and Saline Quality,
which is the reason the Sea-sand will by a violent Heat run into a Glassy
Substance. And why the most precious Pearls are found in that part.

CHAP. XVI. Of the fluid Part of this Terraqueous Globe; and First of the Sea,
etc.
THE Sea is that Vast Body of Salt Wa^er contained in its proper Channel: The
Nature and Quality o^ the Sea.
Its the Sediment of the whole Mass of Water, and therefore is Thicker and
Heavier than either the Subterranean or Aerial Waters; which is the reason why
it can neither penetrate the straight Pores of Solid Matter, and so intermix
with its sweet Feeders; nor be elevated in Vapors by the Sun's In^luence and
fall down in Brackish Showers, (...)
which would be destructive as well of Plants and Herbs as Men and Beasts.

The Seas are in a continual Flux and Reflux: The cause of which is the
Rapidity and Weight of the Rivers continually pressing in upon it from all
sides; and the Sea-waters being not only Thicker, (...)
but of a different Nature from the Thin and Sweet River-water, and having a
Natural Appetite to Union, will not easily suffer the Rivers to Incorporate
with them, The Cause of the Seas Gibbosity.
which is the true reason why the Rivers swells her up on both sides of the
Shore, unt^l the weight of the Salt Water over-balancing the weight of the
Sweet-waters causes the Sea to break in the middle, and by the greater weight
and strength of her Wa^es forces the Invaders to retreat and ^all back until
the Salt Water has lost its weight and Strength; The Cause of the Flux.
and this is the cause of its Flux.

The Salt Water having thus lost i^s weight and strength, the Rivers redouble
their Force, and by the Rapidity of their Motion and weight of their Waves
forces the Salt-waters to a gradual and orderly Retreat* and to swell up into
such a height of Gibbosity that its weight again over-balanceth the weight and
strength of the Rivers; The Cause of its Reflux.
and this is the cause of its Reflux.

Thus the Flux and Reflux of the Sea is occasioned by the continual strife
between the Fresh Water and the Salt* and the Spring-Tides and Dead-Tides are
occasioned by the gradual Increase and Decrease of the Reciprocation of their
Motion; The Cause of Spring-tides and Dead-tides.
as we observed in the Spring or Balance of a Clock in giving her back Strokes
at every Tenth.

This continual Strife between the Fresh Water and the Salt causes a
conconstant Heat and Fermentation in the Sea; The Cause of the Seas
Fermen^ation. The effect^ and Uses of the Seas Fermentation.
and this Boiling Fermentation causes the Sweet River-water to fly up in Mists
and Vapors, which causes an Atmosphere to be round the whole Terraqueous
Globe; and when these Mists and Vapors are condensed into Clouds they fall
down in Showers of sweet Rain upon the Surface of the Earth.

Thus though the Sea affords no Sweet-water, yet it is the only Medium which
preserves and maintains a constant communication and circulation between the
Subterranean and Aerial Waters.

The Saline Quality of the Sea is occasioned by her being boiled up into a
Sediment by the Central Fire; The Cause of the Saltness of the Sea.
as well as those Rocks of Mineral Salt that abound in her Channel.

This Saltish Quality of the Sea does not only preserve that vast Body of Water
from Corrupting; It^ Uses.
but by causing her Water to be thicker and heavier than those in the Fresh
Rivers, it makes them more able to bear Burdens of much greater weight, and
fitter to maintain a Correspondence and Communication of Trade between Land and
Land, though at the greatest distance.

The proportion which the Subterranean Water bears to the Sea.
Though the Sea and Main Ocean seems to contain a vast quantity of Water; yet it
being compared to the Subterranean Waters which circulate through the Veins of
that great Body, and are contained in the Strata and Pores of dens'd Matter; it
will scarce bear the same proportion to them that One does to Seventy-two; for
if the Computation of those Learned Men be true who give Account that the Sea
and Main Ocean cover but one half of the Globe, and that the Channel of the Sea
is but one German Mile Deep [the Shallows being compared to the Deeps] then it
would necessarily follow that if the Earth were Mathematically Round, it would
cover the whole Globe only half a German Mile, which bears but Proportion to
the Circumference of the Earth, as Half a Mile does to Twenty one thousand six
hundred Miles. Again, the Diameter of Twenty-one thousand six hundred Miles
being Seven thousand two hundred, of which if we allow a Semidiameter to the
Center or Belly of the Earth there will remain Three thousand six hundred Miles
for the Shell or Body of it, to which Three thousand six hundred the Fluid part
or Superterranean Water can bear no less Proportion than One to an Hundred;
which Computations being granted (and indeed they cannot ^easonably be denied)
in the whole Body of the Earth, there will be found Thirty-six German Miles of
Fluid Matter, which bears proportion to the Seventy-two Superterranean Seas or
Oceans.

To strengthen this Hypothesis we may further add that in sinking of Pits, the
deeper we sink, we raise the more Water; and that Stone or Mine of Coal which
at Three Fathom Deep runs six Tubs of Water in one Hour, containing Thirty
Gallons a-piece, at Six Fathom it will double the Number; and so on till the
Water be Invincible; as in Hogsheads full of Water the highest Tap runs slowly,
because there is little weight of Water upon it; but the middle or lowest Tap
will run double and treble the Quantity in the same time, there being double
and treble the weight of Water upon it.

Again, If we do further add that besides the Water that circulates in the
Veins of the Earth, there is so much of Water Intermixed and Incorporated with
the Fixed and Solid Matter, that if Stone, Metal, or Coal [when its Dug out
of its Living Strata or Beds] be immediately exposed to the Sun or Fire, it
will in a short time want of Weight above an Hundredth part, the Fluid part
being Exhaled.

Of the greater Veins of the Earth, etc.
The greater Dikes or Veins in the Earth, are Principally Four: The First
divides and changes the Mountain-Strata from the Mountain-Heaths: The Second
divides those several Strata of Stone, etc. of which the Mountain-Heaths
Consist, from those of the Plains and Valleys: The Third divides those Beds and
Layers of Matter on which the Plains and Valleys consist, from the Channel of
the Sea: The Fourth Runs under the Channel of the Sea, whose Side-Branches
causes all those Submarine Quicksands which are the warm Beds wherein the
Seafish scatter their Eggs for the Propagation of their several Kinds: As
this, so all the rest of the greater Dikes and Veins have their Side-Branches
filling all the Strata of Stones, Metals, Minerals and Subterranean Earths with
Water; so that wherever we sink into the Body of the Earth, as soon as we
prick [with our Digging Instruments those Kells of Clay etc. which divide the
several Strata] we presently raise their Feeders.

And if any [who being prompt'd either to gratify his Natural Curiosity, or
gain some considerable Advantage to himself] would raise a new River upon dry
Ground, To raise new River^ upon dry Ground.
let him go to the Foot of some Hill or Rising Ground and begin a Level-Drift,
which by cross-cutting of the several Strata of that Rising Earth, he will Tap
and fet at Liberty all the Feeders; and if he drive on till he shall cross-cut
with the Drift one Branch of those greater Dikes, he will Raise a considerable
River, which may turn to his great Advantage.

CHAP. XVII. Of those Preternatural. Accidents that Disturb and Interrupt the
Course of Nature in this Material World etc.
HAving in the former Chapters given an Account of the Originals, Causes,
Consistences and Natural Uses of the several Parts of this Natural Globe, as
well Fixed as Fluid: It will not be improper to subjoin an Account of such
Preternatural Accidents as sometimes have disturbed, and may for the future
interrupt the regular Course of Nature; and at the last so far destroy the
Frame and Fabric of this Material Part of it, as to render it incapable of
being an Habitable World.

And these are Earthquakes, Hurricanes, Volcano's, violent Eruptions of the
Subterranean Waters, as at Noah's Flood; Stagnations of the Subterranean Air,
causing the Springs and Mineral Feeders to sink down into the Interior ^arts of
the Earth; Interruption of the Circulation of Vapors, and Rains upon the Earth
(as in the days of Elisha the Prophet); violent and Preternatural Thunders,
such as destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah. These and the like, are the Accidental
Distempers that have happened in the Body of the Earth, and they seem Analagous
to those Fevers, Agues, Convulsions, etc. which interrupt the Healthful
Constitutions of our own Bodies, and are sometimes destructive of 'em: And as
all the Diseases and Distempers our Bodies are subject to, have their Original
from Accidental Heats or Colds, which either Sublimates and Exalts our Animal
Spirits into a Feverish degree of Volatility; or by Cold and Aguish Damps
depresseth them into a degree of Stagnation.

So all those Accidental and Preternatural Disturbances that happen in the
Course of Nature, have their original Cause, from the several Kinds and Natures
of Damps, which are, Either Central, Subterrene, or Aerial; And are of Quality
Either Hot, Cold, Sweet, or Foul.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Central Damps: Their Causes, Natures, and Dreadful Effects
upon this Globe.
THE Subterranean Vault being filled with a confused Mass of undigested Matter,
Consisting of Sublimat'd Sulphur, Bitumen and Nitre, whenever it happens that
there arises a War between these angry Volatiles, and their Fluid Neighbors (
viz.) the Subterranean Water and Air, A Subterranean contest between Fire and
Water.
which Circulates through those greater Veins that environ this large Vault;
and do not only Feed and Nourish that Infernal Smother, but keep and confine it
within its own Boundaries, that it break not forth in violent Eruptions upon
the fixed Body of the Earth,

As soon as this Intestine War commenceth, these Active Volatiles of Sublimated
Sulphur, Bitumen and Nitre, collect and aggregate into great Bodies.

And when these discharge in the Flatus, A Concussion of the whole Globe.
dilates and expands its self on all sides, upwards and downwards
Indifferently: And this violent Effort or Flatus causes an universal
Concussion of the whole Globe.

When the Damp gathers toward the Flatus has its Tendency upwards* A
Concussion of half the Globe.
and sometimes causes a Concussion of one half of the Globe, without any
Eruption of Fire.

When the Damp Fires upon some A Local Earthquake.
which at the instant of the Shock opens, and in the Interval between the
Shocks closes again: [Of this Kind was that ^rack or Chasm which opened and
^^allow'd up the Tents of Korah, Dathan and Abiram; and no doubt, but the Shock
struck a Terror into the whole Camp]

Or if the grand Flatus be very Strong and Vehement, it either elevates the
whole Class above the Superficies of the Earth, New Mountains and Pond^.
forming a new Mountain; or else it sinks down into the Vault, and the vacant
place is immediately filled with Water [not from Dr. Woodward's Abyss] but from
the Veins of the Earth which break into it.

Flatus pursues all the Windings and Turnings of these Joints and Clifts until
it break forth in Dreadful Hurricanes; either under the Sea, occasioning most
Horrible Disorders and Perturbations, Of Hurricains and their Effects.
raising its Surface into Prodigious Waves, Tossing and Rolling them about in
most strange Whirlpools, Overturning and Swallowing up Ships in an instant: And
upon the dry Land Overturning Cities, Towns, Blowing up Mountains, etc.

Though these Effects of the Subterranean Nitre when Rarefied and Dilated by the
Central Flame be very Dreadful; yet if these Fissures and Spiracles through
which they get a Vent and break out upon the Earth had been Perpendicular [as
Dr. Woodward Conceits] they would have Destroyed the whole Surface of it.

For then every one of these lesser

And the greater Damps being Fired Flatus, as we observe in Guns and Fuzees.

Again, The very Sulphurous Exhalations which would have ascended through these
Perpendicular Fissures without interruption, would [with their Noisome Smell]
have Suf^ocated and Stifled those Animals that Live by Respiration, and would
have afforded Matter for continual Thunder in the Air.

It was then most agreeable with the State of this Habitable Globe that these
Fissures or Joints of the Earth should have their Position from the Surface to
the C^nter in crooked Lines with various windings and turnings, Dr. Woodwards
notion of perpendicular Fissures is a mistake in observation.
openings and closings; not only for securing us from those dangerous Effects
of the Central and Terrene Damps; but also for the better and more commodious
Communication of the Subterranean Waters through the Flat Strata of Matter.

And Lastly, That the Subterranean Waters by following of the windings and
^urnings of these greater Fissures might have a longer Journey to the Sea, and
thereby supply the Inhabitants of the Earth with sweet Waters at a more
Commodious and Convenient Distance.

These Phenomena of Central Damps, and that they are the only cause of all
those Universal Earthquakes that have happened in this Natural World, being
wholly new, and the World not yet accquainted with them, may at first sight
seem only the Products of Fancy, or mere Conjecture; yet if Seriously and
Impartially inquired into, will be found Grounded upon such Reason, as cannot
without a prejudiced Opinion be easily denied.

For it cannot be imagined by any who have made it their business to understand
the Structure of the Earth* those ^everal Classes of Solid and Dense Matter on
which it consists, the windings and turnings of those Dikes and Partitions
which divide them and are the Subterranean Water Courses, that there should be
Magazines of Subterranean Gunpowder lodged in Infernal Cavities round the whole
Globe, and that there should be Trains laid from one Collection to another, and
that all these Trains should take Fire through all the Subterranean Rivers in
one instant of Time. Neither can it reasonably be supposed that there should be
a Concussion of the whole or half, or any considerable part of the Globe, by
one Subterranean Flatus; but what is from the Central Vault.

Again, The Consistences of the greatest part of the Earth being rather of a
Gold, Terrene and Mercurial, than of a Bituminous Nitrous and Sulphurous
Quality, it cannot be supposed that those parts of the Earth which afford no
quantities of this Natural Gunpowder should suffer a Concussion or Earthquake,
but from these Central Damps.

Besides those Miners who have sunk deepest into these Occult Regions, do from
their own Experience assure us, that there are no Grotto's or Cavities above an
Hundred Fathoms deep, unless in those Mountainous Countries where the
Consistences are of a Sulphurous and Nitrous Quality, affording plenty of
Natural Gunpowder, which being Fired cause all those Vulcano's we Read of in
History.

CHAP. XIX. Of Terrene Damps, and their Dreadful Effects upon this Globe etc.
TErrene Damps have their Original either from Heat or Cold, and are either
Fiery or Waterish: Those which have their Original from Fire, are of the same
Nature with those Central Damps we have given Account of.

As all Local Earthquakes do more frequently happen in the Mountainous
Countries, than in the Plains and Valleys; because all the greater Dikes,
Joints and Veins of the Earth contract and meet there: And the Flatus which is
the occasion of the Shock makes its way by what passage soever it can get Vent.

But these Mountainous Countries especially, which yield great store of
Sulphur, Bitumen, and chiefly Nitre [these Minerals affording the greatest
plenty of Natural Gun-powder] are most injured by those dreadful Shocks,
because those Mountains whose Natural Consistences are of so Hot and Fiery a
Quality are commonly very Cavernous; and their greater Joints and Fissures, Of
Burning Mountains.
as well as strong Strata having by frequent Concussions and Earthquakes lost
their Natural Feeders, are become the most proper Receptacles for those Fiery
Stores to be lodged in until either the Central Fire, or their own Natural Heat
being contracted into a Point, Discharge first the lowest Damp, and the rest by
Trains like so many Subalterns discharge in Course, and sometimes for several
Months together, till the Subterranean Gunpowder be all spent.

And these Burning Mountains such as Aetna, Vesuvius, Hecla, and others, are
only so many Spiracles or Vulcano's serving for the discharge of these
Subterranean Damps, Vulcano's.
which disgorgeth Flames of Fire, and Stones of great Weight and Substance,
Showers of Sand and Rivers of melted Minerals; and yet these Mountains by those
Vulcano's lose nothing of their Height or Mag^itude, all these Eruptions being
Recruited out of the great Magazine of Natural Gunpowder contained in the
Infernal Vault.

Besides these Damps of a Fiery Natore contained in the Interior parts of the
Earth, there are others which sometimes happens in the Exterior parts of it;
such as those Fiery Damps in Colleries are only the Perspirations of Sulphur
and Nitre out of the Cole, Her damps in Colleries.
Wall or Mine, Collected into a Body; and these either take Fire at a Candle,
or like so many dry Exhalations received into the Body of a Cloud, Their
Effects.
and discharge like Thunder shakes the Earth about the Collery, kills the
Miners, and have other Dreadful ^ffects.

To these we may add those Preter-natural Ebullitions and Eruptions of
Subterranean Waters, which Moses calls the Breaking up of the Fountains of the
great Deep: Violent Eruptions of Water.
And these whenever they happen upon the Earth [as at Noah's Flood] are
occasioned by an Universal Fermentation and Dilation of the Central Fire, which
gaining ground upon their Fluid Neighbors, force them into a most Rapid Motion
through all the Subterranean Veins, and consequently causes those v^olent
Eruptions of Water in all the Springs, Rivers, Joints and Fissures of the Earth.

Sometimes the Circulation of the Subterranean Waters stagnates and sinks down
into the Interior parts of the Earth; Of water Damps.
the Springs and Rivers dry up, as in the days of Elisha: and this is
occasioned by the stifling and damping of the Central Heat, the Circumambient
Waters prevailing upon it.

Sometimes the Circumbient Air which Circulates in the Exterior parts of the
Earth, especially the Caverns, Joints and Concavities of Rocky Stones and other
Metals [and is the only cause of the Eruption and Motion of Springs, Rivers,
etc.] Damps and Stagnates, which forces the Springs and Eruptions of Waters to
stand back, and fill those Caverns and Joints, from whence they flow until the
weight of the Waters break the Damp, or rather Damm of Stagnated Air; and then
follows Eruptions and Overflowings of Springs, Rivers, etc.

This kind of Damps I have met with sometimes in Colleries, An Air Damp.
where the Water made way for it self in such Joints and open Closers, as it
met with in the under Cills; especially Limestone, which is of all Stone the
most Jointy and Open.

And when the Air in these open Joints and Cavities was dampt, the Waters stood
back in the Working, and forced the Mines out of the Pit, until the weight
broke the Damp, and then the Waters Drained

This Damp most frequently happens in the Summer Months, A sweet Da^^.
when the Ambient Air is Thick with Hot and Piery Exhalations, and the Effluvia
of sweet Blossoms, especially of Peace and Beans. And this the Miners call the
sweet Damp.

This Stagnation and Damping of the Subterranean Air is [in all probability]
the cause of the Annual Overflowing of the River Nilus, the Horary Overflowing
of the Spring at Gigleswick in Yorkshire, the Drumming in the Well at Bautry,
etc.

And these being by Men of Learning reckoned among the Magnalia Naturae, we
shall enquire more particularly into the Causes of them: And first of the
Overflowing of Nilus.

Nilus is one of the Noblest Rivers in the World, The overflowing of Nilus.
and is famous not only for the long Course it takes through Ethiopia and
Egypt, which is supposed to be Three thousand Miles before it empty's it self
into the Miditerranean Sea; but also for its Over ^lowing and Fertilizing that
Low and Level Country, supplying in it the want of Rain.

It Is believed by Men of great Learning that this Yearly Overflowing of that
Country is oc^^s^on'd by the great quantities of Snow dissolved upon the
Mountains, from whence it takes its Rise; and these [as Geographers give
Account] are that vast Ridge of Mountains, which for their Height bear the Name
of Montes Lunae, as i^ their lofty Tops washed their Head^ in the Moon's
Waterish Vortex.

Others are of Opinion that the Yearly Overflowing of that River is caused by
those great Rains which fall every Spring in the higher Ethiopia: But if either
the Dissolution of Snow, or Inundations caused by the falling of those
Spring-Rains, were the true Reason, etc. they would also cause the other Rivers
in those Countries to Overflow their Banks at the same time; which is so far
from being Observable, that when Nilus Over-flows, the other Rivers are at a
very low Ebb.

The Cause then of this Yearly Overflowing of Nilus, which begins about the
17th of June and continues until the 6th of October, seems to be a Subterranean
Damp, which Yearly Stagnates the Circulation of Air in these vast Rocks and
open Strata, from whence those Rapid Springs and Feeders slow, which are the
Heads of that Famous River.

The Subterranean Air being Dampt, the Springs and Mineral Fe^ders are forced
to stand back and fill all those vast Concavities and Hollows for several Miles
upon ^he Side-rise, and some Miles upon the Top-rise of those Rocks and Metals;
until the weight of so vast a quantity of Water [which may be compared to a
l^sser Sea] breaks the Damp or Damm of Stagnated Air, and then the River begins
to Overflow, an^ continues until the Waters be spent, and the Damp gathers
again.

Its observed that when the River Nilus begins to Overflow its Banks, that
great Plagues break out in Cairo, which seems to be occasioned by those gross
Vapors and Mineral Exhalations that arise from so vast a quantity of Stagnated
Water, which [whilst by its Motion, its Purging of it self and recovering of
its Sweetness] fly about, corrupt the Air, and cause Infections.

The overflowing of the Gigleswick Spring.
This Subterranean Damp is likewise the cause of the Horary Over-^lowing of the
Spring at Gigleswick in Yorkshire; for this Spring b^ing the feeder of a
Limestone Rock near Thirty Yards Perpendicular in Height, which breaks out at
the Foot of it; so oft^n as the Circulation of the Air in the Rock is dampt,
the Spring runs very slowly, and when the weight of the Water has broken the
Damp, it Over-flows, and this Flux and Reflux is once in every Hour.

I observed my self, that before the Waters began to Flow there was a knocking
in the Rock, and this was caused by the pressing of the Water upon the Damp
before it broke.

The same is the cause of that Drumming in the Well at Bautry, The drumming
W^ll a^ Baut^y
which the Inhabitants of the Town told me never happ^n'd but against the
change of Government: This Well is observed to be ^or the most part Dry, which
is occasioned by the feeders standing back; the drumming noise is occasioned by
the Waters pressing upon the Damp, and the Hollows of the Well; for as soon as
the Damp is broken, the Well fills wi^h Water and the Drumming is over.

This occasions the Report of Underground Spirits, which Miners call Mineral
Spirits; and they observe that these Spirits give notice by Knocking or
Groaning before the Mineral Vein be discovered: Mineral Spirits.
I have observed my self that in a new Collerie, when the Workmen were near the
Coal (and only the Kell which kept the feeder of it unbrok^n] there would have
been a sort of Knocking, Sighing or Groaning, heard in the Vein, which was only
occasioned by the weight of the Water lying in the Coal, and pressing forward
for more room and liberty; for as soon as the Coal was pricked, the Water rose
in the Pit, the Knocking was over and the Mineral Spirit Conjured.

Of this kind also is that Damp which the Miners sometimes meet with in their
sinking of deep Pits and new Works; Foul. Air.
where a Cloud of Breath or Sweat perspiring from the Bodies of the Workmen,
will sti^le the Circulation of the Air, and not suffer the Candles to Burn.
This Damp will steal (...) Breath insensibly from the Workm^^ and sti^le 'em.

There is yet another kind of Damp the Miners complain of, which they call the
foul or stinking Damp; and this is caused by the breaking out of corrupted Air
from old crusted Works. This, if not prevented, will Kill and Stifle the
Workmen.

The Aerial Damps will be treated upon in Meteorologie.

Having given an Account of the Causes, Natures and Effects of Damps, and such
Preter-natural Accidents as have and may disturb and interrupt the regular
Course of Nature; we cannot but make an Enquiry into the Causes of Noah's
Flood, the Season of the Year when it happened, and the Alterations and
Devastations it made upon the Earth,

CHAP. XX. Of Noah's Flood, its Causes, the Season of the Year when it
happened, the Effects and Alterations it made upon the Earth.
If these two Learned Men ( viz. Dr. Burnet and Dr. Woodward had understood
better the Structure of the Terraqueous Globe, the Natural Consistences of it,
the Causes, Natures and Effects of Damps, and that those Subterranean Waters
which Circulate through the Veins of the Earth bears proportion to Seventy two
Oceans, they wo^'d have discovered such a quantity of Water as would have
caused an Universal Deluge without the Conceit of a Central or Subterranean
Abyss.

Which Hypothesis [tho' managed with the greatest Artisice of Invention and
Oratory] when seriously inquired into, will be found to have very little of
Truth in the bottom of it; for it seems not only inconsistent with the Original
Settlement of Matter, as we have observed already; but also with Dr. Woodward's
Hypothesis concerning the re-settling of the fluid Matter dissolved by the
Deluge which he positively asserts to have been according to the Rules of
Specific Gravity; the heaviest subsiding the lowest.

etc. would have sunk down into the Central Vault and filled it up.



But suppose it possible to improve the strength of Imagination to such a
height, as to fancy that there was Originally, and is still, a vast Abyss of
Hot Water contained in the Center of the Earth; it cannot be so easily
apprehended by what Power or Means this vast substance of Water should be put
into so high a degree of Fert^entation and Commotion, as to cause an Universal
Disruption and Dissolution of the Earth, as Dr. Woodward conceits; for although
that Fire placed under a Pot sill'd with Water, will by emitting of its fiery
Globuli, and mingling them with the Water, cause so violent an Ebullition and
Commotion in it, as to raise the Cover and overturn it; yet it cannot be
supposed that either that uniform and constant Fire or Heat, disseminated
through the Body of the Earth; or the external Heat of the Sun's warm Influence
can produce any such Effects; because Fire and Nitre do Naturally exert their
power upwards and sideway, but never downward, but when it is so pent up that
it can get no other Vent: And when even Gunpowder is forced to make its Effort
upon the Waters, the strength of its Flatus does little Execution, being
presently sti^l'd. We shall therefore suspend further Enquiry about this
matter, until Dr. Woodward's larger Volume be made public, and endeavor to
find out some other Causes by which that Universal Deluge which happened in
Noah's time might be effected in an other way, and grounded upon fair
probabilities of Reason and Certainty.



But how all these divided Waters should be reunited and gathered into such a
Body as was sufficient to cover all the Tops of the Mountains Fifteen Cubits
high, as Moses gives Account, is the only matter of difficulty to be
^ncounter'd.

In Order to which, I shall not Entertain you with a long Story of the Opinions
of Learned Men about it, not undertake to show you upon what improbable Grounds
and inconsistences the Theorist and Dr. Woodward have established their
Hypothesis of it; but having discovered a Vast and Por^entous Body of Water
Circulating in the Veins of the Earth, bearing Proportion [as I have observ'd]
to Seventy-two Oceans, and several Oceans of Water more floating in the Clouds
and rarisied into thin Air [tha^ it might be a sit Medium for Respiration,
etc.] my Adventure, shall be first to show how, and

And then Secondly, I shall give Account

First then, we may conclude, from

For, First, all the Central Fire by a Preternatural Fermentation and Dilation
of those angry Volatiles on which it consists, gained ground upon its Fluid
Neighbors, those Subterranean Waters which circulate in the Body of the Earth,
and forcing them into a most rapid Ebullition and Commotion, caused most
violent Eruptions in all the Veins, Joints, Fissures and Hyatus's as well under
the Channel of the Sea, as in all the parts of the Earth's Surface.

The meaning of these words, the Fountains of the great Deep were broken up.
These violent Eruptions of the Submarine and Subterranean Waters, which Moses
calls the breaking up of the Fountains of the great Deep, swelled up the Sea
into such a height of Gibbosity that it forced the Rivers to stand back, and
rise as high as their Fountain Heads, which covering all the dry Land,
excepting the Tops of the highest Mountains; the Aerial Damp caused by the
Moon's waterish Vertex pressing down the Vortex or Atmosphere of this
Terraqueous Globe, The Cause of the Aerial Damp and its Effects.
did not only interrupt the Communication of the Subterranean and Aerial
Waters, by causing the raising and circulation of Vapors to cease; but also by
condensing the moist Air into waterish Clouds, which falling down in continual
Spouts for Forty Days and Nights together [the Air being without Motion, What
is meant by the opening of the Windows of Heaven.
consequently neither able to break nor support them] the Tops of the highest
Mountains were covered Fifteen Cubits, as Moses gives Account, Genesis 7.15. and
these portentous Rains which fell in Spouts, Moses expresses by the opening of
the Windows of Heaven, Genesis 7.11.

Thus the divided Waters being reuni^^d as they were in the Creation, and the
circulation of Vapors broken by the stagnation and damping of the Aerial
Regions, the whole Surface of the Earth was covered, until God caused a Wind to
pass over the Earth, The meaning of the Wind which God caused to pass over the
Earth, and its effects.
which breaking the Aerial Damp, the Rain ceased* the Subterranean Waters sunk
down into their Veins* recovered the Ground which the Central Fire had gained
from them: The Rivers forced the Sea to retreat back to her own Channel, and
returning to her regular Flux and Reflux, the Vapors arose and repaired the
Air again wi^h Clouds and Moisture, and all things returned to their Natural
Course. I^ cannot be imagined how the Heart of Noah and his Family was revived
when the Sun began to show its Face again, and the Rainbow appeared in a
broken Cloud.

For Noah being undoubtedly as well a Natural Philosopher as a Priest in his
Family, What the Rain-bows appearing in the Clouds did signify.
the appearance of a Rainbow [which after a long Storm is an infallible sign
of Fair-weather] could not but encourage him with hopes that the Damp was
broken and the Storm over.

God therefore made a Covenant with Noah and his Posterity that there should
never be an Universal Deluge upon the Earth, Genesis 9.23. and to establish this
Covenant with^him, he made the Rainbow [being a Waterish Meteor, and after a
Storm a sign of Fair-weather] a most proper and significant Sign and Seal of
that Covenant [ viz.] a Sign commemorative of the past Deluge, and a Seal
confirmative that there should never be any more Flood to destroy the Earth.
And no more than this seems to be meant by the appearance of the Rainbow in
the Cloud*

CHAP. XXI. Of the Season of the Year when the Deluge happened.
DR. Woodward declares his Opinion, A Refutation of Dr. Woodward's Hypothesis,
etc.
that the Deluge com^enc'd in the Spring Season in the Month we call May; but
upon what Reason he grounds this Conceit I cannot easily apprehend.

For the Fruits of the Earth being then but Growing; and the former Autu^n
Seeds being destroyed by the by past Winter, Nature would have been forced to a
Spontaneous Production of the several kinds of Vegetables as had lost their
Seeds. And when the several Species of Animals which were preserved from the
Flood, had liberty to go abroad and seek Food, they would not easily have found
it in November and December, which Months according to his Hypothesis were the
Season when the Waters ab^ted, and the Beasts orde^'d to leave the Ark, and
seek their own Food where ^hey could find it.

The time when the Deluge commenced.
It seems then most probable that the Universal Deluge commenced in that Month
we call August, when the Seeds of all Vegetables were full Ripe, and ready to
Sow themselves in the Fertile Soil, that when the Deluge was over, and the dry
Land had for some time appeared, and had received Heat and Incrustation from
the warm Influence of an approaching Sun: These Seeds being mingled with a warm
and waterish Soil, might be ready to Spring up and supply the Animals with
pleasant Food.

We likewise observe that when the Dove was sent forth out of the Ark the
Second time, she brought with her a Leaf plucked from an Olive Tree: When she
was sent forth a Third time, she returned no more, having found Food upon the
Earth, which could be no other than Corn floating upon the Surface of the
waterish Earth.

Again, Moses gives us an Account that in the First Month, which probably
answers our January, the Waters were dried up from the Face of the Earth; and
upon the 27th Day of the Second Month, which seems to be our February or March,
God ordered all the Beasts in the Ark, to be tur^'d out to Grass, and shift for
themselves.

Again, we find daily not only great Trees of several Kinds [as Oak, Birch,
etc.] rooted up by the Roots, and lying upon Heaps Buried and Entombed in great
Mosses where they never had grown; but had been brought thi^her by that general
D^vastation made by the Deluge: But Hazel-Nuts* whose Kernels are as fresh ^s
if they had now been growing upon the Trees. These Nuts having been scattered
there by the Deluge, and having layn there buried and ^mbalm'd in those
Bituminous Mosses to this Day; and in all probability might have been continued
as long as the Earth. From these Observations, we may reasonably infer, that
the Flood commenced when the Seeds of all Vegetables were Ripe for the
propagation of their Kinds.

We may yet farther add, that all Damps as well Subterranean as Aerial* most
frequently happen in the Autumn Season.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Alterations which Noah's Flood made in, and upon the Earth.
I cannot agree with Dr. Woodward's Hypothesis, wherein he asserts that during
the time of the Deluge, whilst the Water was out upon, and covered the
Terrestrial Globe, all the Stone and Marble with the Metals and Mineral
Concretions, etc. of the Antediluvian Earth, were totally Dissolved; and their
constituent Corpuscles all disjoined, their cohaesion perfectly ceasing, etc.

Dr. Woodwa^d'^ Hypothesi^ concerning the effects of the D^l^ge Refuted.
This Hypothesis seem inconsistent with Sense and Experience, as well as
Na^ural Reason and Scripture [especially the Mosaic Account of the Deluge.]
For First,

immediate Instruments of the Deluge.

It cannot reasonably be supposed

If the Earth suffered by the Deluge

If not only the solid Fossils; but made one common and confused Mass,
dissolved into a Fluid substance: Then the whole Species of Vegetables, Root
and Branch, Stock and Seed, would have been lost, and Nature forced to a
S^ontaneous Production, as at the Creation.



Moses gives of the Universal Deluge; for he tells us that there were Mountains
during the prevalency of the Waters, and that the Flood covered the Tops of
them Fifteen Cubi^s. He tells us likewise, that the first dry Land that
appeared, was the Tops of the Mountains, and that the Ark rested upon the
Mountains of Ararat. If this Account be true, as undoubtedly it is, the
alterations which the Deluge made were only in the Surface and Exterior parts
of the Ear^h: And those places of Scripture which speak of destroying the
Earth, are to be understood, only the outward Coat or Superficies, and no^ the
Mineral part of it. And neither was the Surface of the Earth altogethe^
destroyed, as appears by the Dove's b^inging of an Olive Leaf in her Mouth
plucked off; and by all Living Creatures in the Ark, being turned to Grass and
to shi^t for themselves in the Seventh Month after the Deluge commenced, which
might be in the beginni^^ of our March.

The Alterations, which the Deluge made upon the Earth, being only in the
Exterior part of it, I shall take notice of such as are most Remarkable and
Obvious. As First,

The uppermost Strata upon the Tops The Alterations which the Deluge made upon
the Ea^^h.
with false and counter Dibs and Rises, like those Flags and Boards of Ice,
thrown out of the Water upon the breach of a Storm.





etc.





for whilst the Waters were arising, The time when these alterations were made.
the Aerial as well as the Subterranean Damp continued, and the Subluniary
Course of Nature was Stagnated; but as soon as God caused a Wind to pass over
the Earth, the Damp broke, and the Waters were put into a Most violent
Perturbation and Commotion; which was the only cause of all those Alterations
and Devastations.

The End of the First part.
A Scheme wherein the several degrees and Concatenations of Life are explained
Animalia Intermedia
Zoophi^a Insects Apes Idiots Heroes Genii boni A Angels God
The Center of the World. The Mineral Sphere The Vegetative Sphere of Life The
Sensitive Sphere of Life The Rational Sphere of Life The Intellectual Sphere of
Life The Divine Essence or Fountain of Life




As the highest degree of Vegetation in the Zooph^^a makes a near Approach to
the lowest degree o^ S^nsation in the Insects. So The highest degree of
Sensation in Apes etc. makes a near Approach to the lowest degree of
Rationalit^ in Idiots etc.

As the Highest degree of Rationality in the Heroes* and Speritualizd Rationals
makes a near Approach to the Boni Genii or lowest order of Angels: So the
highest degree of Intellectuallity in the Angelick Nature makes a near Approach
to the Divine Essence.

PART II.
CHAP. I. Of the Plastic Spirit in Matter, and its natural Products.
THE Plastic and Vivifick. Powers being the first Principles of Life in this
Natural World, which forms the first Lines, and kindles the first Sparks of the
vital Flame:

It will be necessary in order to our present Design, [which is to give a short
Account of the Originals, Degrees and Propagations of Life in this Natural
World] to describe the Natural Operations and Products of these two first
Principles, and to show how they act Severally, as well as in Consort.

The Plastic Spirit in this World of Matter, is a Subtle Saline Volatile,
which [whilst Matter was in a Fluid Substance] diffused it self through all the
Lax Strata and consistences of it.

And ^s that Acid a^^ S^line Humor in the Stomachs of Animals, together with
the Vital Flame, by several degrees of Concoction and Depuration, separates the
more Pure and Spirituous parts of the Nourishment from the Cras^er and more
Excrementitious parts of it, or as that Acid and Saline Rennet separates and
coagulates the more Pure, Spirituous and Oily parts of the Milk from the
Waterish and more Terre^e; so this subtle and Acid Volatile, together with that
Subterranean Flame [which desseminates its warm and enlive^ing Influence, not
only through all the greater Veins Branches and Ramifactions of the Earth, but
also pervades the smallest Pores of the Densest Matter] did separa^e, collect
and coagulate the more Simple, Pure and Homogeneous parts of Ma^^er, from the
Crasser parts of it.

And as the Mass of Fluid and waterish Matter, received its degrees of
Consolidation, these purer and Pneumatical Coagulations were concreted in those
Solid as well as Laxer Strata wherein we find them,

And the Magnitude and Figure of these concreted Coagulations, corr^sponds with
those Moulds of Crasser Matter from whence they were Extracted, and wherein
they are enclosed and compressed. These we find lodged either in the Exterior
or Interior Parts of the Earth,

Those concreted Coagulations which we meet with in the Outer Coat, or grand
Cover of the Earth, are of an irregular Figure; and they are lodged in that
part in disorder and confusion.

And these are either the common Pebles, which are of a Terrene Saline or
Pinguid Quality:

Or,

They are common Flints, Pyritae and Marchasites of a Pneumatical and Fiery
Quality:

Or,

They are Agates, Onyxes, Jaspers, Cornelians, etc. Of a Mercurial and Waterish
Quality, which are more or less Transparent.

This outer Coat or Surface of the Earth consisting of Sand, Gravel, Clay,
Bituminous Peat-Earth, and other kinds of Matter of an Heterogeneous Nature,
affords the greatest variety of these Homogeneous Concretions.

And these are all of the same Nature and Quality with that Courser and Crasser
Matter from which they were Extracted and Coagulated.

Those more Simple and Homogeneous Concretions which we meet with lodged in the
Interior Strata of Solid Matter, which are of an Irregular Figure, are Either
of a Liquifiable or Calcinable Quality.

Those that are not of a Liquifiable Nature, are those which the Miners call
the Kernels of Stones.

For as the Spirit of Nature [at the first settling of Matter] reduced all the
Constituent parts of the Earth to several Classes; and every Class of Matter
leading to some Mine or Mineral; so every Bed or Layer of Stone or Metal has
its proper Kernels, by which the Ingenious Miner may be directed what Mine or
Mineral ^^ey lead to; whether to Coal, Rudle, Iron. Stone, Lead or other
Metallic Ores; and these coagulated Concretions, are commonly lodged in the
middle of such solid Strata

Those Homogeneous and more Pneumatical Concretions of an irregular Figure,
which are of a Liquifiable Quality, are the several Kinds of Metallic Ores,
and these are lodged in those Rakes, Veins, Riders, and Strings which cross-cut
and divide those Solid Strata of a Hot Quality, and the highest degree of
Concoction.

The Male Parent of all these is Sulphur, which being either White or Yellow
gives the Tincture or Color, to all Metals.

The Female Parent is Quicksilver, which is the cause of their Liquifaction,
Flexibility, and Ductility.

All Solid Bodies consist of two several Natures, Tangible and Pneumatical; the
Pneumatical Substance, is the Native Spirit of the Body, which distinguishes
the several Kinds of them: I define therefore all Metallic Ores to be the more
Simple Homogeneous Corpuscles of such Stones and Cills as are of a Hot Quality,
and the highest degree of Concoction, coagulated and concreted in those Rakes,
Veins, etc. which crosscut and divide those Cills.

The more Homogeneous that Metals are, the less of Dross they have in them: The
more of this Native Spirit they have in the Tangible parts, they are the more
Liquifiable, Flexible and Ductile; for the cause of Liquifaction is the
Detention of the Spirits which play within the Body and open it; so that the
greater plenty of Spirits any Tangible Matter has in it, it is the more
Flexible, and therefore when the Tangible parts are Jejune of Spirits, or
easily Emit them, they are Fragile, and will not easily Liqui^ie.

When the Tangible parts of Matter are Ductile or Tensile, it is occasioned by
the Appetite which the Native Spirits have to Union, and Aversness to
Discontinue.

Secondly, That the Metallic Ores are the Homogeneous and Pneumatical
Corpuscles of Stones and Cills of a Hot Q^ality, and the like, coagulated and
concreted by the Plastic Spirit of M^tter, is evident from the Experience of
Mineralists, who find the greatest plenty of Ore, in the Veins of such Cills as
are of the highest degree of Induration and Concoction; for where the Cills are
weak and soft, and have not received a right degree of Heat and Temper, their
Veins are only filled with Sparr, Soil, Clay or Vein-stone, like unripe Nuts
whos^ soft and weak Shells are only filled with a Milky Pabulum, having little
of Kernel in them.

Again, in the Third place, that Ores are the Pneumatical Corpuscles of Sulphur
and Quick^ silver coagulated and concreted into Clods and Nodes, and lodged in
the Veins, will be apparent to those who will take the pains to observe, that
the more Rich any V^in is of Ore, the less Spangled with Sulphur, and
Quicksilver are those Cills and M^tals they cross-cut and divide; and so on
the contrary, the more spangl'd the Stones are, the less Ore in the Vein.

And the Reason why those Metallic Spangles are collected, coagulated and
concreted in those Rakes and Veins, is because they lay most open and ready to
receive them; and this is the reason too, why we meet with float Ore lying in
flat Beds in those upper Cills which lie open:

These being Ebullitions or Overflowings of Vein Ore.

As that Hypothesis of the Theorist wherein he conceits* that there was no
Metallic Ores or Minerals in the Antediluian Earth, contradicts the Account
which Moses gives of Tubal-Cain, who was, Genesis 4. Verse 22.
as he tells us, an Instructor of every Artificer in Brass and Iron: This
Tubal-Cain living before the Deluge. So Dr. Woodward's Hypothesis, that the
Metallic and Mineral Matter, Part the 4th. Page 188.
which is now found in the Perpendicular Intervals of the Strata, was all of it
Originally, and at the time of the Deluge lodged in the Bodies of the Strata,
being interspersed or scattered in single Corpuscles in the Sand or other
Matter, whereof the Strata mainly consisted; seems inconsistent with Reason and
his own Notions of Specific Gravity. For,

First, It cannot be easily imagined by what Art or Chemistry the Metallic or
Mineral Matter, which interspersed and scattered in single Corpuscles in the
Strata of Solid Stone, [especially the Corpuscles being smaller than those of
the smallest Sand] could be separated and made fit for use.

Again, if the Mass of Fluid Matter, Strata wherein they were lodged?

And to assert that they were born

These Hypotheses being inconsistent both with Scripture and Reason; we shall
take it for granted, that all these coagulated Concretions of Metallic Ores,
were by the Plastic Spirit in Matter lodged in the Veins of the several
Strata, lying most open, and being most ready to receive them: And that the
State of the Antediluvian Earth did not differ as to its Constituent parts from
this Postdiluvian Earth.

Having given an Account of the Originals, Natures, and Causes of such
concreted Coagulations, as are of an Irregular Figure; I proceed to Describe
the Natures and Causes of those of a more Regular Form.

And these are the Kernels or Catheads which we meet with in Coal Metals or
Stone Metals, which being either of a Saline or Pinguid Quality, and consisting
of the smallest Grit, gave way to the Plastic Spirit to Form them into more
Regular Shapes and Figures; and these are either Globular, Oval, Triangular,
Quadrangular, etc. as the Matter coagulated had a Natural Tendency to such a
Form or Figure; and they lie in these Beds of Metals, either in Layers, or in
disorder and confusion

Besides these Irregular and Regular Concretions; there are others of a more
Uniform Shape and Figure; and these may most properly bear the name of Formed
Ston^s.

They are found lodged either in Beds of Pinguid and Luxuriant Soil, or in such
B^ds of Stone, Chalk, Sand, Gravel and E^rths as are of a S^line Quality.

Those we meet with lodged in Beds of Pinguid and Luxuriant Soil, have the
forms and shapes of Worms, Serpents, Snails and other T^rrene Ins^cts, which
perhaps could never come within the compass of our Observation.

Those we meet with in the Solid Strata of Stones, Chalk, Sand, Gravel and
Earth of a Saline Quality, have the Forms of Cockels, Muss^ls, Oyst^rs, and
other Marine Insects, which probably Mankind h^s never yet been acquainted
with; and not withs^anding that these Shells have the Fo^ms of those Marine
Insects they repres^nt, yet they never were the spoil^ of Marine B^dies; But
formed in those Stones and E^rths, Fabius Columna, Dr. Hook, Steno, Scylla,
Bocc^^e, Ra^, and many others.
where we find them lodged: And it seems most probable that they received these
Forms and Shapes at the Creation of this Material Globe, when M^tter was in a
Fluid and Wate^ish Mass; and when there was a commixture of Light and Darkness,
of the Plastic and Vivisick Powers; for then the Vivifick Spirit of Nature
disseminated the Specific Forms of those Animals of the lowest degree of Life
in those waterish Funds and Promptuaries of Matter in which they were Formed,
and increased into that Shape and Figure we now find them in.

And if God Almighty had not [by dividing the Light from Darkness, the Vivisick
from the Plastic Power, and by Consolidating the Exterior Strata of Matter]
Cursed the Earth, these Terrene and Marine Insects which we find petrefi'd and
entombed in Marble, Limestone and Chalk, or buried in Beds of Sand, Gravel or
Earth, might have increased to higher degres of Perfection, as well as those
Subterranean Toads, Frogs, Asks and Clocks, which we meet with in the Cavities
and joints of such Stones as have lost their Natural Feeders.

But of these the following Chapters will give a more full Account.

CHAP. II. Of the Grand Cover of the Earth; the Sympathetical Union of the
Plastic and Vivifick Spirit; and the Production of Vegetables, the first and
lowest Degree of Life.
THE Outer Cover of the more Solid parts of the Earth, which we call the
Surface and Fertile Soil, being [as we have observ'd] the Universal Fund or
Promptuary, or the Common Matrix, wherein was desseminated the Specific Forms
of the lowest Degree of Life and Vegetation, whilst others of a higher Degree
Danced about it, like Atoms in a Morning Sun's Beam.

It will be necessary in the first place to give a fuller Description of the
Natures and Qualities of it, and to show by what Degrees of Heat and Vital
Incubations it was Modified and prepared to answer that Imperious Word* Let the
Earth bring forth.

When the Waters were divided and Channel, they left behind them a Feculent Mud
and Sedement, which being like to a universal Q^ag, of a Lax and Waterish
Substance, consisting of the several Kinds of Matter of an Heterogeneous
Nature, and saturated with great plenty of Mineral Spirits of all Qualities:

These Mineral Spirits, by a Natural Motion and Tendency rising up to the
Surface, as we observe Cream rises up to the top of Milk, or as Oil sloateth
above Water; the warm Influence of the Aetherial Flame moving upon it, Thickn^d
these Mineral Spirits into a Liquid Gelly, or a Pinguid and Unctious Slime.

And this we call the naked Skin of the Earth or Fertile Soil.

This Skin or Fertile Soil, before it got any Coat or Cover upon it, was not
only Tinctured and Colored with all those wate^ish Colors of Green, Red,
Yellow, etc. but also was spotted and speckl'd with great variety of other
Colors, occasioned by a commixture of these Mineral Spirits.

And these gave not only the Tinctures and Colors to the common and waterish
Herbs, as Grass, Plants and Flowers, but gave also the different Complexions to
Birds, Beasts and Men.

And as the several Colors and Complexions were occasioned by the mixture and
temperament of the Mineral Spirits, so were their different Natures and
qualities; for a cunning Chemist will Extract out of Herbs and Plants the
several Kinds of Mineral Spirits, as well as out of the Mineral it self.

The Virgin Matter being thus Modifi'd and prepared by the warm Influence and
Enlivening Vegetations of the Aetherial Flame, and its naked Skin Adorned and
Beautified with her great variety of Natural Paints: Those Seminal Forms or
Plastic* Souls which were disseminated in her warm and moist Womb, and
Sympathetically united to their beloved Matter, began to exert their Plastic
Powers, and put forth spungy Strings and Roots; not only to fasten them to the
Earth, but to suck in such Juices as were most proper for their Food and
Nourishment, which by their Seminal Virtues being digested into the Substance
of a Plant, Herb or Tree, of such an Order, Figure and Temperament, it became
an Individual of that numerous Species of Vegetables; which began first to peep
out of the Earth, as Corn out of the Furrows; and afterward gradually
increased to the highest Degree of Perfection and Maturity its Nature was
capable of.

Thus the naked Skin of the Earth was covered with a Coat or Green Livery,
Beautified and Adorned with Flowers of several kinds of Colors; and as the
Passive Matter increased in Degrees of Heat and Modification, it produced
Vegetables of higher Degrees of Life and Perfection, as all kinds of Trees,
from the lowest Shrub to the tallest Cedar or most robust Oak.

That these Productions were not brought forth all at once; but gradually as
the Passive Matter received higher Degrees of Heat and Modification, is
apparent from our observing of those Annual Productions which every Season
brings forth.

For there are some Vegetables of a Cold and Waterish Quality, whose Natural
Spirits are more Fine, Light and Active, which require only a smaller Degree of
Heat to raise them, and these are the Productions of those Early Months,
January, February and March: And these come to their Perfection and Maturity
before April and May, which present us with an other Crop and order of
Vegetables: and for this same reason, June, July and August go further, and
presents us still with different shows of Plants, Herbs and Flowers: And thus
as the Sun increases in Heat, and the passive Matter in degrees of
Modification, we are presented with higher and more noble Productions.

The Seminal Forms of Vegetables, being now united to their material Vehicles,
and being grown up to their several Degrees of Perfection and Maturity, they
retained Seed in themselves, and did Propagate their several Kinds by
scattering of their ripe Seed upon the Fertile Soil, which like the warm and
moist Womb of a fruitful Mother, dissolves them first into a Liquid Jelly, and
then divides their parts into their several uses.

That the Seminal Forms of Vegetables were Originally disseminated in the Earth
as in an Universal Fund or Promptuary, will be yet further evident by those
Ocular Observations which has been frequently made of Productions without Seed;
for take some quantity of Earth dug several Fathoms under Ground, and expose
it to the Sun and Rain, and it will Spontaneously without any Seed bring forth
common Grass and several Herbs and Plants

Again, we observe that particular Soils will produce, without Propagation by
Seed, Herbs and Plants peculiar to that kind of Soil and Earth, as Pavements do
Naturally produce Knot-Grass, etc.

If it be object'd, that the smaller Seeds are disseminated over all by the
Winds, and the greater Seeds scattered by Birds that feed upon them.

I answer that its commonly observed, when Earth is brought out of the Indies
or other Remote Countries for Ballast to Ships, and cast forth upon some Ground
in Italy or other Countries at a great distance, it will put forth Foreign
Herbs to us unknown: And it cannot be imagined that the Winds should blow the
Seeds of these Plants from the Indies, or that the Birds should cross the Seas
and scatter them at so great a distance.

To these I might farther add those tried Experiments of Transmutation*
Transmigration, and Degeneration of Herbs and Plants.

Having described the Original of Vegetables the first and lowest Degree of
Life, and shown that though the manne^ of their Propagation be now by Seed; yet
when Seed is wanting, the Fertile Soil will bring forth common Grass and other
Plants in the Natural way by a Spontaneou^ Generation: Thus the Evening and the
Morning, or the Sympathetical union of the Active Form and Passive Matter
produced the first and lowest Degree of Life, which made the Third Production.

CHAP. III. Of reducing the Confused Mass or Light of the Aetherial Flame into
a Body, which made the Sun; of reducing those higher Fogs and waterish Mists
into a Body, which made the Moon; how by clearing of the Superlunary Firmament
or the Planetary Spheres, the Stars appeared: And what the Sun, Moon and Stars
contribute toward the Production of Sensitive or Locomotive Animals, and why
the Creation of these Second Causes made the Fourth Production.
Though the Earth was now Gay and Trim with a new Green Livery of Grass, Adorned
with Painted Flowers, and pleasant Copices or Thickets of Young Trees; the
Passive Matter was yet too Cold and Waterish to draw down out of the Second
Degree of Life any of the Sensitive Forms to Actuate and Inform it. The
Almighty Power did therefore contract this dilated Aetherial Flame of Light
into a Body, which Moses calls the Sun, that those Enlivening Heats and Vital
Incubations which flow from it, might be more Strong and Vigorous, and
Penetrate deeper into the Cold Matter.

And God placed this Celestial Fire at such a convenient distance from the
Earth, that it might neither be too much scorched by being too near it; nor
frozen, by being at too great a distance from it; but that it might receive
such a temperate Heat from it, as to excite its Seminal Virtues, and draw up
its Juices into them, and thereby Ripen its Natural Fruits.

God gave to the Earth also a Diurnal Motion, that by a just and regular
turning about upon its own Cen^re, it might have the benefit of Day and Night
every Four and twenty Hours, so that no part of the Earth might be too much
heated by theSun's presence upon it, or too long benighted by his absence from
it; because as one side is Warmed and Cherished by its Rays, it withdraws and
turns to it its other side; and so by this just and regular turning about of
the Earth, and an equal distribution of Day and Night, the active Animals get
leave to rest, the overheated Air to cool, and the gasping Earth to recover
its fainting Virtues, which a continued Day would soon Exhaust and Extinguish.

God gave also the Sun an Annual Motion, and has directed it into such a
commodious Course, that it sheds forth its Enlivening Light, Heat and Influence
over all the parts of the Earth, and by turns, gives all Countries their Yearly
Seasons.

And this gradual Increase and Decrease of Heat, answers all the Ends of
Nature, both in the Vegetive and Animal World much better than the constant
Temperature and Equality of Heat, which the Theorist supposes to have been in
the An^ediluvian Earth.

After the Creation of the Sun, God reduced all those vast Fogs and waterish
Mists that ranged about in the Planetary Spheres into a Body, which Moses calls
the Moon, and he designed it [as a Reverend and Learned Divine of our own has
observ'd] to be for a Vicarious Light to the Sun, to supply his absence, and
perform his Office in the lower World.

He placed the Moon in the lowest of the Celestial Spheres, at such a
conv^nient distance from the Earth, that the warm Influence of the Sun being
reflected from it, might carry down with it some of its Celestial Moisture. He
gave also to the Moon so commodious a Motion, which it performs in every 28 or
29 Days, that when the Sun is Southward it moves Northward, and when the Sun
moves Northward it is Motion is Southward, by which Motion the Cold and Darkness
of the long Winter Nights are moderated, and these remote Regions under the
Poles comforted with the Sun's Influence at Second-hand, when they want it at
the First.

Thus by reducing of those waterish Fogs into the Body of the Moon, the upper
Firmament or the Planetary Spheres were cleared, and the Plan^ts, with the rest
of the Stars Created in the Morning of the World, began to appear; and to send
down their Aetherial and Invisible Influences upon this Globe, which were
obstructed and interrupted by the Interposition of these waterish Mists.

And the Creation of the Sun and Moon and the Clearing of the Planet^ry Spheres
God made use of as (...), or necessary Second Causes tow^rd ^he Production of
the Second D^^ree of Life, and therefore these made the Fourth Production.

CHAP. IV. Of the Production of the Second Degree of Life, and first of
Oviparous Animals, as Fish and waterish Insects.
HAving already observed, that whilst the Earth was a Fluid and Waterish Mass,
and there was a commix^ure of Light and Darkness, the Plastic and Vivifick
Spirits; the Specific Forms of Vegetation, and the lowest Forms of Animals
were disseminate^ in the Exterior Strata of this waterish Mass; and if God had
not Cursed the Earth, by dividing Light from Darkness, the Material and Formal
Principles of Life, the Luxuriant Matter would have teemed fo^th such numbers
of Animal Productions, that the Surface of the Earth and Waters would not have
maintained them.

This Hypothesis is grounded not only upon the formed Stones we meet with
lodged in the Interior Strata of the Earth [which having the shapes and
representations of Terrene and Marine Insects] could proceed from no other
Original than a Plastic Spirit; but also upon those Subterranean Animals, as
Toads, Frogs, Asks and Clocks, which we sometimes meet with enclosed in the
Cavities and Hollows of Stone, as well as in their dry Joints. I have found a
large Toad six Yards under Ground, enclosed in the very middle of a hard Stone,
where the Joint that led to it was so straight, that it would not receive the
thinnest Knife; so likewise great numbers of Asks, Clocks and Beetles in the
dry Joints of Stones, which could have no other generation, but what was from a
Plastic Spirit modifying a Subterranean Vapor collected into that Cavity or
dry Joint, the Vivifick Flame kindled a Spark of Life in them, which [by
sucking in such Subterranean Vapors, as abounded in the Joints of these dry
Stones, which had lost their Natural Feeders] were increa^'d to that bulk we
found them in; no doubt but the Stamina Vitae of these Subterrene Animals are
preserved by continual Sleeping, and the Air they breath is purely
Subterranean, like Embrios in the Womb, which live by the Respiration of their
Mothers: And it may seem very probable that these underground Animals have
lived in these Joints and Cavities ever since the Deluge, and perhaps long
before; for as nothing preserves the Vital Flame more than Sleep; so nothing
wastes and spends it more than Action.

To these I might add the Production of Eels, Worms, Marine and Waterish
Insects, as the Vrtica Marina, etc. which being Zoophyta or Plant Animals, and
not Locomotive, could have no other Production, than what was merely Aequivocal
or Spontaneous, and from Matter modifi'd and prepared for rec^iving of the
Vital Spark.

Besides these Invisible Productions, I shall add one more, visible and
apparent.

Take a strong Horse-hair, and put it into the Water warmed by the Influence of
the Sun [especially in May o^ Iune] and within some few Hours it will take
Life, move at both Ends, and in a short time, its probable that it might become
one of those several kinds of Eels we meet with in the Waters.

Notwithstanding that all these Productions had their first Original from such
Matter as was most proper and capable to be modisied by the Plastic Spirit of
Nature; yet being produced, they sometimes propagate their several Kinds by
univocal Generation, these Marine Insects which are not Locomotive, being only
excepted.

From these Praeliminary Instances, and a great many more Ocular Observations
which might easily be produced, I conclude, that as the several Forms of
Vegetables, were disseminated in the upper Covers of the Earth; so were the
Specific Forms of several kinds of Fish [as well those which the Natu^alists
call Pelagiae, as those they call L^turales] desseminated in the Wa^^r^, or
Submarine and fresh water Quicksands; and as the Water received higher D^grees
of Modific^tion, they produced Fish of a higher Degree of Life, in obedience to
that Command laid upon them, Let the Waters bring forth abundantly.

The Second Causes which concurred in the Production of these Waterish Animals,
were,

First, the Celestial Influences. Secondly, The Water which being Modified by
the Plastic Spirit and the Celestial Influences, became waterish Vehicles, or
Bodies for their Specific Forms to act in. Thirdly, The Submarine and Waterish
Quicksands in which their Eggs were Generated. Fourthly, The Subterranean
Heat, which abounding most in these Submarine Quicksands or waterish Nests,
did Hatch these Eggs into Life. Fifthly, An Innate Power in the Plastic Form,
which discriminated their Kinds.
The Original Production of all kinds of Fish, being from their Invisibe and
Vital Forms disseminated in Waterish Quicksands, as soon as they came to
Perfection and Maturity, they retained Seed in themselves, by which they
Propagated their own Kinds. The time of their Propagation is with us about
September; for then being grown strong and lusty with their Summers Feeding,
and the Influence of the Moon and the rest of the Aetherial Bodies, being then
more strong and powerful upon the Waters. Again, about that time the
Subterranean Heat rises toward the Surface of the Earth, and breaks out in
Springs and Quick sands, which is the reason, why about that time the
Freshwater Fish draw up to the Spring-heads, and the Sea Fish to the Submarine
Q^ick-sands, wherein they scatter their Eggs.

The manner how they Propagate, is, first by Digging up the Sand where they
intend to make their Nests, and then [not by Copulation or Penetration of
parts, but playing Cheek for Chole, and by Sympathetical Touches] the Female
whones her Eggs, and the Male his Spawn, which mixing together falls down into
these prepared Nests which they cover up with Sand, thereby securing it from
the Winter Floods.

After this they return to their Winter Holds, leaving their Eggs to be Hatched
by the Subterranean Heat, which continues in the Springs and Quicksands until
the April following; and then the Young Fry, being Hatched creep out of their
warm Nests and Swim down the Waters in numerous Swarms or Shoals.

After the Production of all the Subordinate Kinds of Fish, God last of all
Created great Whales, by which words Moses intimates to us, that all the rest
of the waterish Animals were produced by the ordinary Concurrence of Second
Causes; but God to show his Great Power in the Deep Waters as well as upon the
Dry Land, did seem to give a Preter-natural Assistance to the Production of an
Animal of so great a Body; which in the Atlantic Ocean, when they appear to
Mariners upon the Waters, appear like little Islands or Mountains; and these
are the Leviathans that God made to take their Pastime in the Deep: He made
them Lords also over all the Fish, which He gave to them for Meat.

For as every Superior Rank or Species of Terrene Animals Feed upon their
Inferior, and Man upon all; so every Superior Species of Fish live upon their
Inferior, and so the Whale, being Lord over all the rest, lives upon its
Underlings.

CHAP. V. Of the Second Genus of Oviparous Animals, (viz) the Aerial: And
First, of Fly Insects, Secondly, of Serpents, Thirdly, of Birds, and why Moses
makes the Waterish and Aerial Animals Congenial.
AS it seems preposterous to Create any Species of Animals, before Meat
suitable to their Natures to Live upon was provided for them; so it seems most
probable and agreeable with the Ends of Nature, that Grass, Plants, Herbs, and
the whole Set of Vegetables should be the first Spring and Summers Product.
That the Replenishing of the Waters with all Kinds of Fish, the Production of
the following Winter; and that the next Spring should begin with the Production
of Aerial Animals; these ^iving and Feeding upon the first Products of the
Earth and Waters.

Again, since the several Degrees of Modification of Matter, and the Animal
Life increases, as the Enlivening Influence of the Sun grows Hotter and more
Powerful; it necessarily follows, that the several Kinds of Flying Insects,
[being the lowest Degree of Life under this Genus] should be the first Product;
for as soon as the Fertile Soil had received a degree of Heat from the
approaching Sun, the Earth began to revive, the Young Plants began to peep out
of their Winter Beds, and the tender Leaves of Trees began to break their
Autumn Buds.

The East Wind blowing then Dry, by it is soft and easy Blasts did Condense the
Morning and Evening Dews into viscous and clammy Strings, which like Cobwebs
hang upon every Thorn and spread themselves upon the Young Grass, till the Sun
advancing toward the Meridian, sent down a warm Reflection upon the Earth, and
caused all these fine and tender Threads to draw together, and fashion
themselves into little Nests, in which by a higher Degree of Heat were formed
little Eggs; which by another Degree of Heat took Life, and did Fly about in
the open Air, some Feeding upon Dews, others upon Leaves; others upon
Corruption in the Air; others were Blood-suckers.

Besides these Generated of Dews, there are Infinite numbers of other Kinds of
Insects which are Generated of Slime and Corruption; and these are either Daily
or Weekly Productions, some of which Transmute from one Species to another, as
those Insects which we call Caterpillars the first Summer, the next Summer will
become Butterflies: So Cod-bates in April and June will Transmute into those
kind of Flies we call Clegs, which are Blood-suckers.

To show particularly the Kinds, Natures and Numbers of all these Transmutable
Insects, would be a Task Invincible. Thus were the several Kinds of Flying
Insects produced, having their Colors, Natures and Qualities from Flowers,
Plants, Herbs, Trees, or corrupted Water and Slime, and their Shapes and
Figures from their Plastic Forms, these being the lowest Degree of Life, a
small Degree of Heat produced 'em.

Of the Production of Serpents.
AFter the Production of these Flying Insects, the East Wind still blowing Warm
and Dry, those standing Puddles of Stagnated and Corrupted Water being drained,
and leaving behind a Poisonous Slime, on which by the Sun's Influence were
formed poisonous Eggs; which by higher Degrees of Heat were Hatched into Life,
and by sucking in and feeding upon such Poisonous Matter as they could meet
with ^uitable to their Natures, they got strength, Feet and Wings, and became
Serpents of several Kinds, some Creepers, as Adders and Snakes, some with Feet,
as the Asp and Viper, some with Horns, as the Cerafles; some with Wings, as the
Basilisk and Dragon, and the like.

Although that these have all of them Head, Heart, Blood, Nerves, Senses and other
parts agreeable with the most perfect Animals; and though that some of them be
the most Subtle amongst the Irrationals; yet by reason of their disparity with
Quadrupedes, they are accounted amongst the imperfect Animals and of a lower
Degree of Life.

Of the several Kinds of Birds.
AFter this the Cold and Waterish Earth, being drained and warmed by the
increasing Influence of the Sun, the Mountains, Heaths, Dales, Valleys,
Water-sands and the Seashore, were Covered with a Luxuriant, Plastic and
Prolifick Slime, which drew down [by way of Sympathy] out of the warm Regions
of the Air, the Specific Forms of Birds or Aerial Animals, which being united
to this Luxuriant and Plastic Slime, there were Formed innumerable numbers of
Eggs upon the Mountains, Heaths, Valleys, and all parts of the Earths Surface;
and no sooner were these Eggs Formed, but the warm Influence of the Sun, sat on
Brood upon them until they were Hatched into little Chickens.

Those Hatched upon the Seashore became Sea-Birds, those by the sides of
Rivers, feeding upon Fresh Water Fish, and those Hatched hy the sides of Lakes
and Ponds, became Amphibious Birds, feeding both upon Fish and Herbs, as Geese,
Swans, Ducks, etc. Those Hatched upon Mountains and Heaths feeding upon
Mountain Vegetables, Heath Birds; those upon the Plains and Valleys became
Domestics, feeding both upon Grass and Corn; and those in the Woods, Singing
Birds and Birds of Prey, as the Eagle, and the rest of those Tyrants of the Air.

After this manner were the Aerial Animals produced, and the reason why Moses
makes the Aerial and Waterish Animals Congenial, is,

First, The parity of their Production, being both from Eggs.

Secondly, The Affinity of that Matter on which they were produced, the Air and
Water being Transmutable Elements.

Thirdly, From the likeness of their Actions and Qualities, the one Kind having
Fins by which they Swim in the Water, the other having Wings by which they Fly
or Swim in the Air.

As these were the Productions of the first Spring Months ( viz.) January,
February and March; so in these Months they do always Propagate their Kinds by
laying of Eggs, every Species according to its Kind; some on Mountains, others
in Valleys; some by Water-sides, others in the Woods, etc. the warm Wing of the
Dam, now supplying the Want of a warm Sunbeam.

For as the Wing Hatcheth them out of their Shells, so it strengthens and
nourishes them by Vital Incubations, till their Pinions be able to bear them up
to seek their own Food: Thus the Wing is both the Midwife that brings them out,
and the Nurse that brings them up.

CHAP. VI. Of the Terrene, or Viviparous Animals.
AFter the Production of these Animals of a lower Degree of Life, and
Perfection, and the Sun was advanced higher in his Annual Motion, which Darting
down his warm Beams upon the Earth in a more direct Line, they did penetrate
deeper into the Cold Matter; and by drawing forth its Fertile Spirits toward
the Skin or Surface of it, they set the Plastic power on working, and
modifying the Passive Matter into more noble Forms; which by their
Sympathetical Charms drew down the Specific Forms of the most perfect Animals
within the Second Sphere of Life.

For in every little Pit or Hollow of the Earth, which being filled with
Luxuriant and Prolifick Slime was kindled by the Vivifick Virtue of the Seminal
Form, a little bubble of Life, which the Plastic power began to shape into the
Form or Figure of an Animal.

And thus was the numerous Brood of Quadrupedes, [being Animals of the most
perfect Kind] first Conceived in the warm and moist womb of Modified Matter,
nourished by sucking in the Luxuriant and Prolifick Slime; which by their Vital
Heat they digested and distributed into the several Parts and Members of their
Bodies increasing of them by an equal assimulation of Parts; and as soon as
these young Embrio's had got strength, they Crawled out of their warm Nests of
Matter, and began to suck in those Honey Dews, and lick up that sweet Manna
which laid upon the Grass and Herbs, and this supplied to them the want of
Maternal Milk and Nourishment.

For during the time of these Productions, God neither suffered it to Rain upon
the Earth, nor the Winds to blow, lest this Infant Brood of Young Animals
should have been destroyed, before the Birds got Wing, or ^he Beasts Foot and
strength to defend themselves against a Storm; but there went up only a Mist
from the Earth, which watered the whole Face of the Ground. Genesis 2.6
And this Mist was only a warm and moist Smother, which arose from the Earth,
as we observe it to rise from the Furrows in the Spring, Months occasioned by
the Morning Sunbeams, and these Clouds which did Swim in the Air, only served
for Umbrello's and Parasoli to screen those Infant Animals from being scorched
by the Heat of the Sun, and from drying up their Food and Nourishment.

The Earth being now Stocked with the several Kinds of Animals, contained under
the Sensitive Genus, they did Propagate their Kinds by Univocal Generation. For
which end Nature and Providence has formed several Vessels of Slime-Pits in
every Female, for preserving something Analogous to that Original Slime, which
was then the Passive Principle of Generation, and likewise in every Male such
Vessels as are most fit and commodious for preserving a Beam or Spark of the
Aetherial Flame [which being the material Vehicle, wherein the Specific Form
is preserv'd] kindles the first buble of Life in the Passive Matter.

And we observe that as soon as Age and Maturity has filled these Seminal
Vessels with this Prolifick Slime, and digest'd it into a right Degree of Heat
and Temperature, the Females of every Kind or Species of Animals, begin to
Prune, Dress and Trim themselves, by which modest way of Courtship, the Male is
drawn and Charmed to within their Sympathetical Spheres: Thus the Evening and
the Morning, or the Sympathetical Union of the Active Form and Passive Matter,
made the Fifth Production.

CHAP. VII. Of the Creation of Man, the Sixth Production.
THE Earth being now covered with the great variety of Species, contained under
the Genus of Vegetation, the Waters replenished with all Kinds of Fish, the
Mountains, Plains and Valleys Stocked with Herds and Flocks of all Kinds of
Cattle: God did once more Modifie the Passive Matter into a more noble and
excellent Form, not only capacitated to receiv^ the lower Degrees of the Animal
Life: but also fitted with Organs to entertain an Intellectual Soul, which
Moses ^ells us God Breathed into it: It being impossible for Matter, though never
so curiously Modifi'd by the Plastic Spirit of Nature and the joint
Concurrence of the Celestial Influences to draw down by the power of any
Material Sympathy a Soul out of the Immaterial and Intellectual Spheres of Life
to Animate and Enform it.

And this Noble Creature God called Man, being made not only after his own
Image, Spiritual and Immortal; but also after his Similitude ( viz) Endowed
with all the Affections and Communicable Attributes of the Divine Nature, by
which he became capable not only of disclosing the Secret Mysteries of Nature,
and of diving into its Deep Philosophy; but also of Knowing and Adoring his
Creator; by which Perogatives of his Birth, and Noble Extraction, he became
Qualified for being his Creator's Vicegerent upon Earth.

The Conclusion. Wherein is shown the meaning and significancy of these Words.
And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good.
THat God, who is Infinite in Goodness and all Perfections, cannot be the
Author or Producer of any thing, but what is Good and Perfect in its Kind, has
been always assumed as a granted Principle, not only by the best of Divines,
but even the generality of Pagan Philosophers: Yet Moses, notwithstanding this,
foreseeing that this excellent Frame of the World, which was designed on
purpose to bring all reasonable Creatures to the Knowledge and Veneration of
their Creator, would be perverted to contrary Ends and Effects; and that the
Production of all the Creatures might be ascribed wholly to Second Causes, or
to no Cause at all; but to Chance and to the casual Motion of Matt^r, for the
prevention of which, he here brings in the Almighty more Humano taking an exact
View and Survey of the whole Creation, both as to its Structure and Furniture,
and giving it his Divine Approbation in these words, and he saw every thing
that he had made, and behold it was very good.

The Goodness of the Creatures do Principally consist in these Four Particulars.









First.
That this Infinite variety of Orders, Shapes and Figures, by which the several
Species of Creatures are Charact^riz'd and Distinguished, are not the Effects
of blind Chance or Casual Motion, but the Products of Infinite Power, Wisdom
and Counsel, will be clear and evident, if we carefully observe, that not only
their Numbers, Shapes and Figures; but also their whole Contextures and
Contemperation of parts, with their Natures and Qualities, have all of them a
manifest relation to those several Uses and Operations they perform; and this
is so fairly Illustrated and Proved by the Ing^nious and Leaned Mr. Ray, in his
Treatise concerning the Wisdom and Providence of G^d in the Creation of the
World; that a ^urther enlargement upon this Argument, would be wholly
superfluous.

That all Creatures are Good and Perfect in their Kind, will appear, Secondly
if we consider that it was most agreeable with the Divine Wisdom, that the
whole Scheme and System of Nature, should consist in different Degrees of
Perfection and Subordination of Life: And that every Inferior Spe^ies should be
Concatenated to its Superior by Animals of an Intermediate Nature,

And yet notwithstanding this difference amongst the Creatures in Degrees of
Life and Perfection, we cannot but observe, that every Creature even of the
lowest Degree of Life is Good and Perfect in its Kind ( viz) without any
blemish, defect or flaw; for the meanest Insect, is as perfect an Animal, as
the Elephant and Whale, and God's Wisdom and Power is as well to be Admired in
the Paint upon the Butterflie's Wing, as in the Glorious Body of the Sun.

Again, there is nothing more agreeable with the Divine Wisdom, than that there
should be in so great a variety of Creatures, Degrees of Subordination and
Perfection, will yet further appear if we consider

First.
That these Creatures of a lower Degree of Perfection do by comparison
Illustrate and commend those of a higher Degree.

That those Regular Subserviencies and Harmonies might make up a Vital Cement
whereby the whole Frame and Structure should be United. Secondly


It was nec^ssary that there should be variety of Natures, Thirdly.
and different Degrees of Life, that the Wisdom of the Creator might be the
more Displayed, Acknowledged and Celebrated, and that his Infinite and
Universal Goodness might be more Visible in the supplying and providing for the
Wants of so vast a number of Creatures of so different Natures.

Lastly, That Man being pla^'d at so great a distance from the Beatisick Vision
[which whilst he continues in this Compounded State, would either have Dazzled
or Confounded his Sight, or Affright'd and Ravished his Soul out of his Body]
it pleased therefore the Divine Wisdom to Create all this great variety of
Creatures that he might behold his Creator at Second-hand, when his Bodily Eyes
could not bear the sight of Him at the first.

And Secondly, That he might exercise and improve his Rational Faculties,
Secondly
and entertain his Heaven-born Soul with Natural as well as Divine
Speculations, which in some measure Compensates for the want of a clearer sight
of the Divine Vision.

Again, although it must be granted that in those different Degrees of Perfection
all are not alike Amiable, Lovely and Beneficial to Man; yet those that are the
less Beautiful and Lovely sets off the Beauty of the rest, as Shadows set off
the more lively Colors.

Thirdly, That the goodness of the Creature, Thirdly
does consist in its fitness for those Ends and Purposes for which it was
Created will appear, if we consider that it cannot be easily imagined, that God
who is Infinite in Wisdom and Goodness, should Create any thing in Vain; but to
good Ends, and the best of Purposes.

We therefore in the Nature of Things can discover Infinite agreeableness of
this to that, and of one thing to another. And though we cannot thoroughly
penetrate and discover the Relation Use and End, of every Thing in Nature, by
reason of our Incapacity, occasioned by the Darkness of that State we live in;
yet we have reason from what we can discover, to conclude, That every thing was
Created for good Ends and particular Uses:

For, first of all, we do observe that every Inferior Creature was subservient
to its Superior: And all the Creatures subservient to Man; although our Ignoranc^
in this Dark and Degenerate State, has made us incapable of Understanding their
Natures and Uses.

Secondly
Secondly, We observe that every Element is fitt'd for its Animal, and every
Animal for its proper Element.

We observe that every Object is fitted for its Sense, Thirdly.
and every Sense to its proper Object.

We observe that Food and Nourishment is provided in Nature's S^ore-house for
every Animal, Fourthly
and every Animal for its proper Food and Nourishment.

These being trite and common Topics, I refer the Reader to those Authors who
have made it their Business to enlarge upon them: I shall proceed therefore to
show how in the last place, the goodness of the Creatures consist in observing
and keeping of those Laws given them at their Creation.

When the Almighty had Created the World, Fourthly
and Stocked it with several Ranks and Degrees o^ Creatures, He gave them Laws
to keep, and Rules to walk by: And these we call the regular Course of Nature,
from which they never vary unless at their Creator's Command.

These Laws which all the Creatures are governed by, are, 1. A Divine
Impression; Or, 2. Natural Instinct, 3. External Senses. 4. The Laws and Rules
of Natural Reason.


The Laws of Divine Impression.
1. The Inanimate Creatures, are governed by a Divine Impression; for if we
look up to Heaven, we observe how the Sun, Moon and all the Aetherial Globes do
perform their Natural Motions, from which they have not varied higher or lower,
faster or slower, since their first Creation; and how they shed forth their
Celestial Influences on all things here below.

2. If we look downward, we may observe, how this Terraqueous Globe consisting
of dull and stupid Matter, turns about its own Center, and Naturally,
Constantly and Regularly performs its Diurnal Motion, its cold sides ^her^by
receiving the warm Influence of the Co^l^stial Bodies.

3. We may obse^ve, that those ^^eak and grovelling Plants ( viz.) the Hop, Vi^e
and Ivy, are by Nature (...) with ^endrils or pliant Strings, and how by a
Natural kind of Instinct they seek about for Supporters, and having found them,
they Clasp about them; for all the Plants of this Kind, as (...) they were
sensibe of their being, Adjective, are always in busy quest for their
Substan^ive.

Fourthly, We may observe how the The Laws of natural Instinct.
for with what curiosity do the Bees make their waxen Cells, lay in their
Winter Provision, and how obedient they are to their Master Bees or Governors?
With what wonderful Art does the Spider Spin his Web out of his own Bowels?
With what care and industry does the little Ant first make her Store house in
some dry Hill, then seeks about for Winter provisions, and that the Corn and
Seed she gathers may not grow nor sprout in her Storehouse, she Eats off that
end where the Seminal Form is lodged.

Fifthly, We may observe how all those

Sixthly, we may observe with what form^ suitable to their Weakness or
Strength* how when their Nests are Built, they lay their Eggs, Hatch them with
their Wings, and then Feed them till they get strength to Fly abroad, and seek
their own Meat; we may further observe, that all those Creatures that are
governed by the Laws of Natural Instinct, never varies in their Operations; but
walk in the same Roads and pursue the same Methods.

Seventhly, We may observe how those Animals that are Governed both by Sense
and Instinct do Prepagate their Kinds, The Laws of external Sense.
and how they are all provided with Natural Armor for selfpreservation: We may
also observe amongst those Animals of a higher Degree of Sense such instances
of Love and Hatred, as are seldom practiced by the most Passionate Lovers, or
the most Malicious Haters.

I have known and heard of Dogs and other ^re^tures, that have pined away and
Died for want of their Masters* And others also that have born such an
impl^cable Antipathy against some particular Persons, as was never to be
reconciled.

Eighthly, and Lastly, I might instance

Thus all the Creatures, M^n only excepted, continue still under the government
of those Laws given them at their first Creation.

This may seem sufficient to Convince the most professed Atheist, who is not
resolved to offer violence to his Natural Sense as well as Reason, That there
is a God, and that the World with all its Furniture, was the Product of the
Divine Power, Wisdom and Counsel.

The End of the Second Part.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the Terrestrial Paradise, Showing how ADAM was
Introduced into it: The time he continued in it; and how He and EVE Employed
that Time.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Terrestrial Paradise, Showing how ADAM Was
Introduced into it.
SEveral Men of great Learning* as well Ancient as Modern, have made most
Industrious Enquities, after the place and situation of this Terrestrial
Paradise; of which Moses has given us so particular a Description in his Second
^hapter of Genesis.

And their Opinions about it, being as different and wide, as East and Wes^,
Heaven and Earth* We shall therefore only undertake, to present the Reader with
some Conclusions, drawn, as well from the fairest Arguments of probability, as
from the Mosaic Account of the place.



Judea or Midian [where we suppose Moses Writ this System of the Creation] was
Eastward.





These two last Hypothesis's having no authority from the Sacred Scripture, we
shall endeavor to ground them; not only upon the bare Account which Tranellus
has given of the Fertility of those Aequinoctial Regions, but also upon such
Natural Arguments as cannot [without offering violence to Reason if self] be
easily denied.

For notwithstanding, that several of the Ancient Writers, were of Opinion that
those Countries, under the Torrid Zone, were Uninhabitable, by reason of the
Sun's darting down its fiery Globuli upon them in downright Lines: And because
they wanted those plentiful and pleasant Showers of Rain, which Fertiliz'd the
rest of the Habitable World; yet the Experience of later Travallers has
discovered to us, first that the want of Rain is repaired by those of the Heat;
that no Inconvenience or Distemp^eture is found there.

Walter Raleigh has Observed in his Trav^ls] are so Cool, Fresh and Equal, by
reason of the entire Interposition of the Earth, that there is not to be found
i^ any part of the Habitable World a better, more wholesome, or equal Temper of
Air.

And although there be some Tracts, which lie under the Perpendicular Mountains
where the Air Stagnates, the fresh Gales and Briezes of Wind over-blowing them,
and some other places Sandy, Barren and less Inhabited, yet the greatest part
of those Regions [especially the Dales, which lying above the Plains and lower
Valleys, have always their Air Brushed and Swee^n'd with these fresh Briezes of
Wind; and are plentifully watered, with Rapid Rivolets arising from the Tops
and Sides of their Neighbou^ing Mountains.

And these as well as ^he Plains and Valleys, are Beautified with abundance of
stately Cedars, and other Trees, casting a pleasant Shade, and delightful
Fragrancy.

They are enriched too with all ^orts of most delicate Fruit Trees, always
Green, and bearing the choi^est Fruit in their highest Degree of Perfection.
Their Boughs and Branches are never unclothed and left naked; for their Sap
never creeps under Ground fearing the Winter Frosts.

To these Accounts which we have

We yet further subjoin, that as this adjoining Regions, received the first and
largest Influence of the Sun's Enlivening Vegetation, and consequently were
Stored with the first Products of Nature; as well Animals, as Vegetables. So
that in all probability, there might be Ripe Fruit in Paradise, before those
other Regions toward the Tropicks and Poles were drained from the Waters, or
received the Sun's Vegetation according to their Natural Seasons.

Again, as these Aequinoctial Regions etc. and this is not only evident from
the Mosaic Account of the Rivers of Paradise; but the Experience of those
Merchants, who being tempted by their Value, Trade thither.

with the first products of Nature; so it is most agreeable with Reason, that
all the Regions upon Earth are more or less Paradisaical, as their Situations
are nearer or at a distance from this middle Zone, and that from Paradise they
were first Stocked with the several Products of Nature, and the several Genera
of Animals; which began to Propagate their Kinds there, until the Earth was
Replenished. Although its most probable, that they did degenerate from their
Original Perfection as their Propagations were at a distance from Paradise.

As from these Arguments we Collect Moses gives of the Course and Motion of
that River which watered Paradise: for this River undoubtedly had its Rise from
the Top or side of some of the Eastern Mountains, and took its Course first in
one Rapid Stream, through the midst of that most pleasant Dale, and then by
dividing it self into Four lesser Streams, they became the Heads of Four of the
greatest and most noble Rivers in the World* which sliding down through the
lower Dales, Plains and Valleys, of a great part of Asia and Africa; at last
emptied themselves into the Main Ocean at great distances.



Eastern Countries, which defended it from the Cold Blasts of the Northern
Wind, from whose lofty Top did flow that Rapid Mineral Feeder which took its
Course through the midst of it.

It may be supposed also, that it was encompassed with lesser Hills on all
sides excepting the South-e^st, which let into it the warm Enlivening Beams of
the Rising Sun, and which was the onl^ passage that gives liberty of Entrance
into it.

That these Hills were Beautified and

That these Hills encompassed a large

In the middle of which Nature had Planted a most Curious Grove or Orchard,
wherein did Grow all Kinds of Fruit Trees bearing the choise^t of all Fruit,
that might either gratify the Eye or please the Palate.

The most remarkable Trees in this most pleasant Garden, were the Tree of Life
and the Tree of Knowledge, which [being taken in a Literal and Natural Sense]
had their Names from the Nature and Quality of the Fruit they Bore.

The former ( viz.) the Tree of Life Bore a wholesome Fruit, preserving both the
growing Sensitive and Rational Life; and that so long as a Body compounded of
Matter, consisting of contrary Qualities could last.

The other ( viz.) the Tree of Knowledge, Bore an unwholesome Fruit of a
Poisonous Nature, which destroying the Excellent Frame and Temperament of the
Body, made it subject to Diseases and Pains, and last of all to Death and
Mortality.

As the former gave us the Experience of Health, Life and Vigor, which Men are
seldom sensible of, whilst that happy State continues. So the Fruit of the
other gave us the Knowledge and sad Experience of an Unhealthy and Sickly
Constitution of Body, and Lastly of Death and Mortality; hence it had its Name
of the Tree of Knowledge from the dear bought Experience of its Fruit.

This I con^ess is but a rude Draught of the Terrestrial Paradise; yet I
presume to offer it as a probable Hypothe^is, and I doubt not, [but with Men of
better Judgment] it may pass for such, and serve to Illustrate their Notions of
a more elevated and exalted Nature,

Having given a short and Compendious Description of the Terrestrial Paradise
according to the Literal and Natural Notion of it, we shall proceed to give a
probable Account how Ad^m was introduced into it, how long He might continue in
it, and how He and his Confort Eve employed that time.

Adam the Royal Patriarch of Mankind, being Formed as to his Body and Organical
part of the same Matter with the rest of the Terrene Animals, and having a
Rational and Intellectual Soul Infused into him; as soon as his weak Members
got Strength to Walk abroad from the place of his Nativity, and to take a View
of those large Dominions his Bountiful Creator designed to put under his
Government; The first place he had i^ Prospect was this Terr^strial Paradise,
toward which his Curiosity led him; but not finding an Entrance into it, God
sent an Angel to be his Guide, and to Introduce him in^o its Possession, as an
earnest of all the Felicities of this World* and an Emblematical Assuranc^ of
the Glories of ^he ^oelestial Paradise.

And no sooner had this Royal Patriarch entered this Pleasant and Delightful
^arden, but all the Birds and Bea^^s in Paradise [being surpised at the sight
of a Creature of a Shape and Form quite different from any of them, and of so
Divine and Majestic a Countenance,] came toward his Presence to gaze and
wonder at him. And a Panick Fear having seized them, they be^ame all his
Vassals.

^ will not undertake to determine the time that Adam might spend in Walking
round the Woods and Plains of Paradise, whilst he took a View of all the
Creatures, distinguished their Tribes, and gave Names and Offices to them,
according to their several Natures and Quali^ies I presume that it can hardly
be imagined that one Day could be sufficient for so great ^ ^ask.

As Adam's Ambition was to exercise and improve his Rational Faculties, by
Enquiring into the Natures and Quali^ies of the Sensitive Animals; no doubt but
Eve [being no less desirous to improve her Wisdom and Knowledge, than her
Master Ad^m] did spend that time during his absence, not only in gratifying her
External Se^ses, with the fragrant Smell of the fair Flowers of Paradise, and
Tasting its sweet Fruit; but in making Enquiries into the Natures and Kinds of
Fruits and Simples, in distinguishing their several Sorts, and giving Names to
them according to their Natures.

And certainly it was not her Ambition to be like God in so Divine a Perfection
as Wisdom and Knowledge, made her Forfeit not only the Fair Fields and pleasant
W^lks of Paradise, but Life and Immortality; but her taking a course and method
to that End, contrary to the express Command of her Creator.

And although it be most probable that a Natural Serpent, having a speckled
Skin, Beautified and Adorned with all the variety of Natural Paint, in the most
fresh and lively Colors, was her Officious Favorite, and presented to her
Royal Hand this Beautiful and Lovely Fruit;

Yet doubtless it was her own Natural Serpent, or Concupisence, did frame and
suggest to her a Discourse to this effect.

Has not our Bountiful Creator made this World, with all this great variety of
Creatures in it, on purpose for the Entertainment of your External Senses with
the satisfaction of Enjoying their beloved Objects, as well as the Int^rnal
Faculties of the Rational Soul with the Entertainments of Wisdom and
Philosophy? If you Taste not then this Lovely Fruit, you evacuate God's Design
in Creating of it:

Again, If God did not design that you should Eat of this Fruit, He would not
have made it so Beautiful and Desirable; it is Inconsistent with the Natural
Goodness of your Creator, to lead you into the Fire and oblige you not to Burn,
to Inflame your Affection with a strong Desire, and not to gratify it.

Further, You cannot but observe that God has made all Poisonous and hurtful
Creatures of a less comely, if not of a frightful Aspect, and you have a strong
Antipathy against them; but this Charming Complexion tempts you to taste of it.
To which the Considerative or Rational Faculty replied,

Our Bountiful Creator has given us liberty to eat of all the Tr^es in the
Garden, but this is forbidden upon pain of Death.

This is a grand mistake of the Divine Intention, says Concupiscence, which
was by your Eating of this Fruit to Improve your Knowledge, and therefore he
gave it the Name of the Tree of Knowledge. For as you have discovered the
Natural differences amongst the Sensi^ive Animals, and have given Names to
them, your Creator certainly expects that you should understand the Natures and
differences amongst Fruits and Vegetables; o^herwise you will never be
completely Skilled in your Natural Philosophy.

This proud thought of being Wife, and a Natural Philosopher, so tickled Adam,
or Reason, that he condescended that his Bride Eve, or Concupiscence* sh^u'd
take a Taste to Cure her longing.

And she finding it a Fruit as w^ll grateful to the Taste as pleasant to the
Eye, persuades Adam to a further condescension, until a second Considera^ion
made him feel the miserable Efects of it, as well in his Conscience as in the
Constitution of his Body; which his Reason being ashamed of, he fled from the
Presence of God, who usually, as it is believed by some learned Authors, came
down in the Evening to Discourse with the young Philosopher, who finding
himself Naked, or at a loss for Arguments to defend his Guilt and Shame,
endeavou^'d to cover it with the thin Figg-leaves of Excuses.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the CONFLAGRATION OF THIS Material World; THE Local
Hell: ITS OUTMOST BOUNDARIES, OR Abraham's Gulf.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the CONFLAGRATION OF THIS Material World.
HAving in the former part of the History of Matter, give^ an Account of such
Preternatural Accidents as have disturbed, and sometimes in all Ages
Interrupted the Regular Course of Nature; And having demonstrated that these
Preternatural disturbances, were occasioned by that Natural Strife, that
happens between the contrary Qualities of Heat and Cold, Fire and Water:

And having also shown how Water* by uniting her forces in the Time of Noah,
changed this Terraqueous Globe for some time into a Waterish Planet, by
effecting an universal Deluge which covered the Tops of the highest Mountains
Fifteen Cubits;

And how the Central Fire has ^requently threatened, not only by Universal
Concussions, and Earthquakes, to unhinge its Foundations, but also by
Extraordinary and most Violent Eruptions of Fire and Vulcano's to break the
Structure and Temperament of it, and turn it into a Globe of Fire, or Fiery
Planet;

Now as a great many Learned Men in all Ages, have been inquisitive into the
Natural Causes of this Universal Deluge, and the Difficulty they met with,
being to find Water sufficient to effect it, without a Miracle;

So a great many Le^rned undertakers, have been no less Industrious to find
Fire sufficient to dry up the Seas and Rivers, and then to Effect an Universal
Con^lagration of this Material World:

These two Difficulties [in my Opinion] might have been ^asily removed, if they
had understood better the Structure of the Earth, and the Nature and Quality of
that Matter which makes up the Constituent parts of it.

It will be necessary therefore, in order to our Establishing a Well-grounded
Hypothesis concerning the Universal Con^lagration in a Natural way, to Resume
what we have formerly Observed concerning Matter in General; which we have
divided into Three Classes [ viz.] Volatile, Fixed, and Fluid; and to show that
these Three different Class's of Matter, bear equal Proportions one to an
other, and in the Structure of the Earth occupy the same proportion of Place.

The Volatile Class [which we call the Central Fire consisting of Ethereal,
Nitrous, Sulphurous, and Bituminous Particles] bears proportion to one Third
part of the Diameter; And this Class makes the Earths Equilibrium; and by
running a perpetual Round within the Circle of its own Infernal Vault, Carries
about with it this Crust or Shell of fixed and fluid Matter whereupon we live,
once in every Twent^ four hours, and this we call the Diur^al Motion of the
Earth.

The fixed and fluid Matter being intermixed, like the Flesh, Blood, and Bones,
or Heterogeneous parts of a Compounded Body, bears propo^tion to the other Two
parts of the Diameter.

The fixed Class of Matter Consists of Parts, Combustible, Calcinable,
Liquifiable, and Inflammable.

The fluid Class consists of Water; which is either Subterranean, or
Superterranean.

The Subterranean Water, either circulates through the larger Veins of the
Earth, or pervades the Strait Pores of the Densest Matter.

That which Circulates through the Larger Veins, does not only [by being
Transmuted into Air] feed and nourish the Central Flame, but also hampers it
and keeps it within the Limits and Boundaries of its own Infernal Kingdom.

That which pervades the Strait Pores of Dense Matter, does as well feed and
nourish the Pneumatical and Native Spirits of that Matter, as shackles them, by
keeping of them within their little Cells, which otherwise would break out, and
set on fire the more Combustible part of it.

The Superterraneous Waters do by maintaining a constant Communication between
the Subterranean and Air^al Waters, and by the falling of Plentiful Showers of
Rain upon the Earths Surface, preserve it from being either over-crufted, or
set on Fire by the External Heat of the Suns Influence upon it.

By these Divisions and Computations it is apparent, that one Third part of
this Globe is Volatile, another Third part Combustible and Inflammable, and
only a Third part Fluid. Which Third part preserves the Harmony and Conspiracy
of its Parts, which makes the Cement and Temperament of the whole Body, and if
this should once be broken, and the Volatile and Fluid suffered to act their
Antipathies upon each other, the whole Frame and Structure would presently be
dissolved, and all things shusled into their Original Chaos and Confusion.

Now as in all Compounded Bodies, which have any degree of Li^e or Vital Cement
in them, the Vital Flame is fed and nourished by the Radical Moisture; which,
as it wastes and consumes, the Exterior Parts of the Body become Dry, Withered,
and more Combustible; and at the last the whole Body is thrown into a Feverish
Burning, which continues until the Vital Flame be Extinguished, and the Native
Spirits fly out: So in this great Body of the Earth, the Central Fire, which is
the Vital Flame of it, by continual feeding upon the Fluid Matter, does
gradually wast and consume it.

And this is not only observable in our Sinking of Pits, where we generally
meet with the upper Strata or Beds of Stone and Cole drained from their
Waterish Feeders, their Native Spirits Exhaled; but also several Ancient
Springs sunk down in their Veins; Large Rivers decre^s'd in their Water
Courses; and the Seas in s^veral Countries to have lost Ground, as in Egypt
and Holland* which undoubtedly [in former Ages] have been in the possession of
the Main Ocean. From these general Desiccations of the Fluid part of the Globe
we conclude that [according to the Natural Course of things in this World] the
Volatile Matter, as the Central Fire, will in process of time so far gain
ground upon the Fluid part of it, as to bre^k out upon the Combustible and
Inflammable part, and by setting them first on fire, the whole Globe will be
turned into a fiery Planet; from whose Scorching and fiery Atmosphere, the
Fluid Matter shall be forced to fly and range about it thick ^ogs and Waterish
Mists, until they fix and settle in a Waterish Vortex, ^ividing the Celestial
Regions from the Smoaky and Flaming Atmosphere of this Burning Globe; and its
most probable that by that vast Gulf which Father Abraham told Dives was
placed between Heaven and Hell, is only meant these Fogs and Waterish Mists,
which shall divide the outmost Boundaries of them; through which the Damned
Souls may probaly see, hear, and have some Interlocution with thos^ in the
Celestial Regions; though all this shall only inflame and aggravate their
Torments, when they shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of
Heaven, and themselves shut out, by this unpassable Gulf.

Having already m^de it apparent, that when the confused Chaos of Matter
settled into the Form of this Habitable Globe, the Volatile part of it by a
Natural tendency of Motion, settled in the Central parts;

And that the Central Vault, wherein this Volatile and Fiery Matter is
contained, bears Proportion to a Third part of the whole, seems to be most
probable, as well from Scripture as Natural Reason;

For the Scripture represents Hell as a Lake of Fire, Mat. 9.43 Rev. 20.10, 15.
And this Lake of Fire or Local Hell is commonly called Infernus, which
signifies a place Infra nos, i. e. below the Cortex or Outer coat of the Fixed
Matter whereon we Live; its also called Ta^tarus, which signifies the Pit of
Hell, or that Infernal Dungeon fill^d with Fire and Brimstone, that Burns and
Scorcheth, but casts no Light;

And that this Infernal Lake of Fire was in the Central part of the Earth, was
not only the Opinion of the Roman Church, which had undertaken to give the
Dimensions of it; but agrees with the Opinions of most of the Ancient Fathers
and Doctors of Christianity;

It is also agreeable with the Opinions of our own Doctors, who assert, that at
the Day of Judgment, when the Sentence against the Wicked shall be pronounced
in these Words, Depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting Fire, the Central
Fire shall break out, and cause an Universal Conflagration of this Material
World; for then the Central Hell shall be enlarged, and the Aerial Regions
which are now the Devils Territories shall be filled with Smoke and Fire, and
the Damned confined to that everlasting Smother, where the Worm shall never
die, and the Fire shall never be quenched; by which words its more than
probable that this Terraqueous Globe shall be changed into a Fiery Planet, that
the Aerial Heavens shall become a Flaming Atmosphere, and that this shall be
the Eternal State of this World.

He that would desire further Satisfaction in this particular, may consult Dr.
Hackwel and Mr. Ray's Discourses concerning the Conflagration of this World; my
intention being only to show, that it is most probable that there is a Central
Vault of large Dimensions, filled with Volatile Matter, consisting of Nitre,
Bitumen, and Sulphur; and that it is as probable that this may break out, and
set the Earth on Fire, as its possible for a Man to Die of a Burning Fever.

A Short TREATISE OF Meteorology, With some Observations concerning the Changes
and Alterations of the Weather.

A Short TREATISE OF Meteorology,
CHAP. I. Of Vapors, and Exhalations, etc.
Vapors and Exhalations are the Perspirations of this Terraqueous Globe, and
are caused as well by the Internal Heat and Fermentation of it, as the External
Influence of the Sun, which by opening of its Pores, sucketh them out, and
raises them up into the Regions of the Air.

These Vapors and Exhalations are the Material Cause of the several Kinds of
Meteors that are generated within the Compass of the Atmosphere; which extends
as high as the fiery Globuli of the Sun make their Rebound from the solid
Surface of the Earth, and Fluid Superficies of the Waters, and no higher.

The higher the Sun ascends in the Meridian, it strikes down these fiery
Globuli with greater force upon the Earth and Waters; and consequently they
rise higher, and elevate the Vapors with them. So that the Atmosphere is
higher or lower in several parts of the Earth, as the Sun rises higher or
lower in the Meridian, and its Beams are darted down in a more direct or
oblique Line.

And as the lowness of our Northern Atmosphere, causes the Sterility and
Barrenness of the Northern Mountains; so the height of the Southern Atmosphere,
causes those Mountains in the Aequinoctial and Southern Regions to be more
Fertile and Productive.

CHAP. II. Of the ^fficient Causes of all Metors; and first of Heat.
BY Heat is not to be understood the Element of Fire, which Aristotle and his
Followers conceited to be under the Concave of the Moon, [there being no such
Element there] but by Heat is meant that Internal Heat and Fermentation which
is in the Body of the Earth, and that Natural Fire which is originally and
essentially in the Body of the Sun, the Vehicle of External Heat, which Streams
out from every part of that Fiery Globe, giving Heat, Light, and enlivening
Vegetations to the whole Material World, being within the Compass of its Fiery
and Luminous Atmosphere.

These Streams of Heat and Light [which is only the shadow of Heat] being
Darted through the Regions of the Air in Strait Lines, and single Rays, are
not perceivably Hot or Cold, no more than the Light of a Candle without the
Sphere of its Heat; but being doubled by multiplied Reflections, and
Reboundings from the solid Surface of the Earth, does increase its Heat, as the
Reflections are multiplied and rebounded; which makes it hotter against a Wall,
than upon the plane Ground, and in the Valleys, than upon the Mountains.

We must therefore distinguish between those single Rays of Heat, which dart
through the Air in instants, which are neither perceivably hot or cold, and the
Heat upon the Superficies of the Earth, which being contracted by an Artificial
Glass, is R^al Fire.

The Essential Qualities of Heat are Calefaction, Elevation, Rarefaction,
Liquefaction, and Consolidation, as it meets with Matter Predisposed to receive
its Effects.

CHAP. III. Of Cold, the other efficient Cause of Meteors.
BY Cold is not meant a bare privation of Heat, as former Philosophers did
conceit; but a real Body, of a Subtle Sublimated and Homogenous Nature, and of
a cold and frigid Quality. Its proper place of Existence is between this Earths
Atmosphere, and the Atmosphere of the Moon, which is our next Neighboring
Globe; and by the rising and falling of this main Body of Cold, are caused the
several Changes and Alterations of the Weather with us.

The Cause of its Rising and Falling, is the pressures of these two Atmospheres
between which it is placed: When the waterish Atmosphere of the Moon presses
it down, it causes Storms and Tempests here upon this Globe; And when it
Rises, it causes the same in the Moon.

The Rising and Falling of this Main Body of Cold, is sometimes also occasioned
by its Dilating and Contracting of it self.

Now as the Suns Beams are hotter in their Reflections upon the Earth, than in
the Sun it self, so these Cold Rays which are darted from this Main Body of
Cold, being increased and multiplied by Reflection from the Mountains and
Rivers, are much colder than the Main Body of Cold in its own Sphere. These
Reflected Globuli of Cold may be termed the Lower or Ground-cold; because in
Summer it penetrates the Earth, and in Winter it seldom rises higher than the
Tops of the highest Mountains, unless when it joins with the Main Body, and
then it causes great Storms of Frost and Snow, etc.

This Lower or Ground-cold, is commonly the Rear-guard and Vanguard of the
Sun, always going before and following it; and its most perceivable in the
Evening and Morning Twilights; especially, by Birds and Aerial Animals, whose
Bodies do so sympathize with the Air, that they can more quickly perceive the
Change of Weather (especially the rising of a Storm or Rain or Snow) than any
of the Terrene Animals; and this they commonly discover by their Flying high or
low, or Flocking together; or sometimes by different Notes or Voices. This
occasioned the Ancient Augurs to conceit them prophets, etc.

The Essential Qualities and Effects of Cold in general, are Frigefaction,
Congelation, and sometimes Petre^action; and when the lower Cold is Contracted,
either by Art, or Proprio motu, it Starves and Freezes, as the Fire Burns and
Scorcheth.

This lower Cold contracts and dilates it self, as it meets with Opposition
from the contrary Quality of Heat and Fire.

The Effects of the lower Cold when it enters the Earth.

By Antiperistasis it Fires Damps in Collieries, Mines, burning Mountains, and
Vulcano's.

When it lies upon the Earth, it causes Dews and hoar Frosts, it sucks out
Damps and corrupted Air out of Underground Works, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of the Air, or Medium wherein all Meteors are Generated.
THE Air is a Vast Medium or Expansion, filled with Rarified Vapors and
Exhalations; which like Water would Stagnate, unless by a Daily addition of
Rarified Vapors or Wind, it were put into a Flux and Reflux, as the Sea is the
addition of Rivers continually flowing into it from all sides.

When the Air is Calm, then are the Meteors Generated; when by the Wind the Air
is put into a violent Flux and Reflux, they are Broken and Dispapear.

CHAP. V. Of Fiery Meteors, etc.
THE Lower Cold which follows the Sun in the Evening Twilight, continues its
Operation for some Hours after its Beams are out of sight, and no longer; [the
middle of the Night being for the most part a Calm as well in Winter as Summer]
during which time of its Operation, it causes all those Fiery Meteors which
the former Philosophers gave several Names to, as falling Stars, Rods, Beams,
Ignes Fatui or Will with Wisp, etc. according as they differed in Matter,
Magnitude, and manner of Appearance; some Consisting of a hot and dry
Exhalation, others of an Exhalation mixed with a Viscous and Unctious Matter, a
Third of a simple and unmixed Exhalation: All these are Generated in the Lower
Regions of the Air, the Matter of them being drawn up out of the Earth, Waters,
and Bituminous Boggs and Mosses, by the Sun's Influence upon them, especially
in the Spring Months. For then the Sub^erranean Heat draws out to communicate
with its Main Body; for as at this time all Animals renew their Hair, clear
their Blood from gross Humors, so does this great Animal the Earth purge her
self of gross Humors, by Mushrooms, and other Pinguid Evaporations; for then
the Sub^erranean Heat drawing out to communicate with the External Heat, brings
forth of the Earth these Mineral Spirits and Pinguid Perspirations, in so
plentiful a measure, [which being taken up into the Air are Condensed into
Clouds, and fall down again upon the Earth in such Fertilizing Showers] that
the Psalmist tells us the Clouds at this Season drop down Fatness. These Hot
and Fiery Exhalations which are flying about, scattered and dispersed in the
Lower Re^ion of the Air, being seized on by the evening Cold, are forced in
Defense of themselves to unite their Forces, and being united do Fire upon
their Grand Enemy ( viz.) Cold.

Some Fire in a Round Figure like a Fireball, which the Meteorologists call a
Falling Star; some in a long Train, either Strait or Crooked, and these they
called by the name of Rods or Beams; others being simple and unmixed
Exhalations, flash out in Lightning, like Gunpowder upon a Table; others being
mixed with a Viscous and Unctious kind of Matter Fire near the Earth, are moved
by the Motion of the Air, or an easy and soft Wind, or are drawn down in
pursuit of their Enemy Cold, to Waters, Mosses, Boggs, and Heaths, still
Burning like a Candle in a Lanthorn, till their Unctious Matter be Exhaust'd,
and then they leave a Liquid Jelly upon the Earth.

This Meteor they call Will with Wisp, or Ignis Fatuus, or Fool's Fire, because
Ignorant People conceiting it to be a Spirit, keep their Eyes upon it, until
they lose their way, and then are apt to give a dreadful Account of a Spirit
they met with, which misled them.

If any of these Fiery Exhalations escape the Evening Cold, the Morning Cold
about break of Day, before it be drawn down to the Waters, Fires them, by
causing them to pursue the same Method of Self-defence they took in the Evening.

CHAP. VI. Of Comets, etc.
AMongst the Fiery Meteors, all the former Philosophers reckoned Comets to be
the most Remarkable: And they gave such Dismal Accounts of the Dreadful Effects
of them, that their very Appearance put the World under a great Consternation.
But in my Opinion, the World [according to the Old Proverb] was more afraid
than hurt by them.

For that Comets are Fiery Meteors, and have such dreadful Effects following
their Appearance, is a Mistake in Meteorology so palpable, that it needs no
Confutation:

That which we call a Comet, being no more than a Star of a Fiery and Luminous
Body, in Conjunction with an other Star of an Opake and Waterish Substance, or
a Vast Celestial Cloud, which by receiving into its Body the Bright Rays of
the Luminous Star, becomes Translucent, and appears to us in the Form and
Figure of a Luminous or Fiery Globe; and by emitting Beams or Streams of Light,
it appears to be a Fiery and Burning Meteor, which by the Meteorologists is
called a Comet.

If this Conjunction and Interposition be Centrical, it sends forth its Beams
of Light on every Side; and this we call a Bearded Comet.

If the Interposition be not Centrical* but the Luminous Star be higher or
lower, or on one side, it sends forth a Beam or Stream of Light upward or
downward, or to one side; and this Beam or Stream of Light, is called the Tail
of the Comet.

The Appearance of this Comet continues until their different Motions have
separated them.

A demonstration of this you may have several Evenings, when a black waterish
Cloud interposeth between us and the Body of the Sun; if the Interposition be
Centrical, the Sun's Beams stream out every way; if the Sun be higher, it sends
forth its Beams of Light downward; if lower, upward, or to one side, according
to the Interposition of the Cloud.

Against this Hypothesis, it may be Objected, that there is no such thing in
Nature as an Opake Waterish Celestial Body.

To which I answer, That the Moon is an Opake Globe of a Waterish Substance;
and if its Natural Course and Motion was not within the compass of the Suns
Atmosphere, it would be to us invisible: So there may be [for any thing that we
know] Thousands of Opake Globes, within the Vast Expansion of the Celestial
Spheres, which are never visible to us, but when they fall into Conjunction, or
Oppositon, with a Luminous Star: And when these Opake Globes are of a Round and
Waterish Substance, they appear to us in the Form of Comets.

Again, it is most probable that all these New Stars, which have appeared for
some time, and then disappeared, [which Astronomers have given such Remarkable
Accounts of,] are only Opake Globes, made visible for sometime, by their being
in Conjunction or Opposition to a Luminous Star, and when their different
Motions have separated them the Opake Star has disappeared.

CHAP. VII. Of Thunder, its Causes and Effects.
OF all Fiery Meteors, there are none so dreadful as Thunder, which being an
Aerial Fire Damp, the Nature and Notion of it will be best illustrated by
comparing it to an Aerial Battle between these Two powerful and irreconcilable
Enemies, Fire and Water.

The Army of Fire consists of Hot and Fiery Exhalations, raised out of the
Earth and Bituminous Bogs by the Influence and Heat of the Sun; especially out
of the South-east, full East, and North-east Parts of this Globe: Those vast
and spacious Continents affording most of those hot and fiery Soldiers.

The General that Commands in Chief, and which leads them forth into the Field,
is a Sulphurous and East Wind.

The Army of Water consists of cold and moist Vapors, raised out of the
Southern and Western Ocean.

Their General that leads them forth to Batt^e, is a cold moist West Wind: For
its to be observed, that for some time before the Thunder begins, and whilst it
continues, the Blasts of Wind always blow from contrary Points, and the Clouds
gather and march up in the full Face of the Wind, which always Blows from an
East Quarter.

These Two Armies being Formed into two Wings, and two Main Bodies; First Fire,
being the more Active and Volatile, sends forth a Detachment of fiery Chariots,
from the South-east Wing; which being met with by an other Detachment of
Vaporous Clouds from the South-west Wing, the Battle begins: And those hot and
fiery Exhalations that we see riding in Chariots of Fiery Clouds, like Pillars
of Translucent Smoke, being enclosed and surrounded with this Vaporous Cloud,
are forced to unite all their Forces together, that, Vis Vnita being Fortior,
they may the better be able to defend themselves, and destroy the Enemy.

No sooner then the Forces on both Sides are united, but the Fiery Exhalations
discharge upon the Waterish (...)* in Fire and Lightning.

The Thundering Noise we hear is occasioned by the Opposition they met with, and
the Breach of the Cloud; which falls down in great and dreadful Showers of Rain
upon the Earth; the Dr^ps of Water being greater or less a^ the Breach of the
Cloud is at a higher or lower distance from the Earth.

After the Thundering Battle is thus begun, the other Wings engage, and we hear
the Thundering Sound of the Battle both South-east and North-west. The B^ttel
by this time growing very hot, the Main Bodies engage; and then nothing is to
be heard but a Thundering No^se, with continual Flashes of Lightning, and
dreadful Showers of Rain, falling down from the broken Clouds.

And sometimes random Shots fly about, kill both Men and Beasts, fire and
throw down Houses, split great Trees and Rocks, and tear the very Earth.

For it is no more impossible for the more Earthy Part of an Exhalation to be
on a sudden Petresied into Stone [which we call the Thunder-bol^] in the Body
of a Cloud; than that Lax^ Matter should be Petrefied into a Stone in the Body
of the Earth; the Antiperistatical Cause being the same in both.

^^ese t^o Irreconcil^ble Enemies still keep the Field, until one of them be
utterly destroyed.

If the fiery Exhalations keep the Field, the East Wind blows still hot and
sulphurous.

If the Vapors get the Victory, the West Wind blows cold and moist, the Sky is
clear, the Air is cold, the Battle is over, and the Earth Bu^ies the Dead and
gets the Spoil. If any should think this Account of Thunder to be rather
Figment and Romance, than true Natural Philosophy, I advise him [when ever he
sees the Thunder Packs rising White and Translucent in a South-east Point, when
he feels the Air hot and Sulphurous, with some contrary Blasts of Wind coming
whistling from the West] that he haste make on to the Top of Crossfelt, or some
other high Mountain, that gives a Prospect to both East and West, and he may be
informed both as to the truth and manner of this Aerial Battle.

CHAP. VIII. Of Vaporous Meteors; and first of Dews, and Hoar Frosts.
DEws are Vapors Condensed upon the Surface of the Earth, by the Evening and
Morning Cold, these being the times of the Dews falling.

I have observed that sometimes about Mid afternoon, the underground Cold
being impatient of a long Summers Days Confinement, has broke out, and
condensed the Vapors into a D^w, which by the first Reflection of the Sun was
taken up into the Air, and a viscous Matter left upon the Grass, like Cobwebs
or fine Threads, which we call Tela Beatae Mariae; and these Vapors being
condensed into a Cloud, will fall down again in a Shower of Rain about
Sunsetting.

But the usual time when the Evening Dews fall, is immediately after the Sun is
Set; for then the Lower Cold lies upon the Ground, and as the Sun goes down it
rises.

The Morning Dews begin to fall about break of Day: For about that time the
Waters being colder than the Mountains, draw down the Lower Cold from the
Mountains to them.

And it bringing the Vapors along with it, sits Regent upon the Waters, in
thick Foggs and waterish Mists, until the Influence of the Sun, by warming of
the Waters, either scatters and disperseth the Vapors, or forces them to
rise up to the Mountains, or the cool Regions of the Air, leaving only Dews
upon the Ground behind them.

These Dews, when the Cold is contracted and freezing, become Hoar Fro^ts; for
a dilated Cold causes Dews, and a contracted Cold Frosts.

In the Spring Months, when the Subterranean Heat draws out from its Winter
Quarters to join with the external Heat of the Atmosphere, it brings out of the
Earth with it some of the finer Mineral Spirits; and the Sunbeams being then
Powerful and Attractive, do suck up these Mineral Spirits, with the sweet
Efluvia and Perspirations of Herbs and Flowers; which the Evening and Morning
Cold condenseth into Honeydews, or Manna. In these Months, the Sun's Beams are
so strong and vigorous, that they will draw up Frogspawn; which being received
into the Body of a warm ^loud, will presently be Formed into little Frogs,
which will fall down upon the Earth in these Fertilizing Spring Showers:
Sometimes they will suck up Blood, which will fall down in Showers of Rain,
especially after Bloody Battles fought at great distances: So Corn, etc. will
fall down in Rain. But these are Magnalia Naturae.

CHAP. IX. Of Rain, Hail, and Snow.
RAin, Hail, and Snow, are the same as to their Matter. The difference among
them is only Accidental; Hail being only Drops of Rain frozen in their falling
down from a broken Cloud, by a contract'd Body of the Lower Cold; Snow being
Vapors frozen before they be Condensed into a Cloud.

Of Rain.
Rain is either general or particular, higher or lower.

Observations concerning Rain.


When the Evening Cold condenseth

When the Morning Cold condenseth

When the Air is Calm, and the Waters

When the Morning Cold divides it these lesser Bodies of contracted Cold
condense the Vapors, and they fall down in particular Showers, some not
Mountain height; so that one may sometimes go through a Shower of Rain [if he
please] which will fall upon the Skirts of the Mountains, when at the same time
it is clear both above and below the Shower. Thus a Man may be above the Clouds
and the Rain.

gradatim [or in Sops, as we call it] to the Tops of the Mountains, and they
Trall there too and fro, sometimes rising, and then falling again, the Dispute
being between the Water-cold and the Mountain cold, whether should get the
Prize,

If at the last these Tralling Mists or Vapors be lifted up into the Cold
Regions of the Air, and be there Condensed by some of those lesser Bodies of
Cold which are flying about, they fall down in particular Showers within an
Hour or less after they be taken up; so qui^k is the return of Vapors into
Showers of Rain.

CHAP. X. Of Hail and Snow. OBSERVATIONS.
WHen these lesser Bodies of contracted Cold, are so placed one above another,
having distances of warm Air betwixt them, [as oftentimes it happens in very
hot Weather, for the greater the Heat is, the more narrowly do these lesser
Bodies of Cold contract themselves] if any of the higher Bodies of Cold
condense the Vapors into a Cloud, and it break, and fall down in drops of Rain
through a Body of more contracted Cold, it freezeth these drops of Rain into
Hailstones.

I have observed a Shower of Rain upon the Mountains, the same a Shower of Hail
upon the Skirts of the Mountains, the same dissolved again into a Shower of
Rain in the Valleys. I have observed also a Shower of Hail at one end of the
Town, the same a Shower of Rain at the other end; the contracted Body of Cold
that caused the Hail, being not a Quarter of a Mile in Circumference.

Of Snow.
When the Lower Cold rises, and the Upper Cold falls, and so straitens the
Sphere of Rarefaction that the Wind blows thin, as out of a contracted Mouth,
the Vapors are frozen in-Snow before they be condensed into a Cloud, and the
shower of Snow only at first covers the Tops of the Mountains; but as soon as
the Lower Cold rises Mountain height, and joins with the Upper Cold, the Snow
falls down into the Valleys and covers the Earth.

OBSERVATIONS.
Country condenseth into Clouds, which fall down in great and general Rains.

And this is the reason why those Countries where most of the Vapors rise,
have the least of Rain; which want is supplied by great Dews, which the Evening
and Morning Cold condenseth upon the Ground.

For where the Atmosphere rises high, the Lower and Higher Cold never meet,
which is the cause of their want of Rain.

When the Wind blows N. or N. E.

CHAP. XI. Of Frost, and Thaw, etc.
FRost and Thaw are the Effects of quite di^ferent Causes; the one being
occasioned by the Influence of Heat, the other of Cold; and these two contrary
Qualities do not give ground one to another without great struggle and contest.

The first beginning of Freezing is at the Waters, and this we call a Water
Frost; its the Effect or Operation of the Morning Cold; which drawing down to
the Waters in the Morning Twilight, and carrying the Vapors along with it,
leaves a Waterish Hoar Frost upon the Ground behind it.

These Vapors lie upon the Waters until Nine a Clock; for by that time the
Influence of Heat having warmed the Waters, forces them to remove their
Quarters, first to the cold Tops of the Mountains, and thence to the cooler
Regions of the Air, from whence they fall down in Showers of Rain about Twelve
a Clock, this Frost only gains the Waters, Valleys, and Plains.

The Second Morning, the Cold doubles its Force, and Glaceates the Waters,
congeals the Earth, and rises to the middle of the Mountains; [their Tops
still continuing in the possession of Heat] This degree of Cold is overpowered
by the Influence of Heat about Two a Clock, and falls down in Rain in the
Evening Twilight.

The Third Morning, the Cold trebles its force, and gains the Tops of the
Mountains. And the Influence of Heat commonly recovers this lost Ground a
little before the Sun set; and in the Morning Twilight it falls down in a
shower of Snow, covering only the Tops of the Highest Mountains.

The Upper and Lower Cold being now united, the Frost keeps its possession of
the Earth and Waters sometimes for a Month or more together; and in some
Countries [lying at a distance from the Sea] the whole Winter Quarter; the Wind
all the time blowing Cold and Thin, the Mouth of the Sphere of Rarefaction
being straightened by the joining of the Higher and Lower Cold.

During the Time that the Earth and Waters continue in the possession of Frost
and Snow, the Subterranean Heat breaks out of the Springs and Mineral Feeders,
and joining with the Heart of the Sun Rege^es the Springheads, and part of the
Rivers, gaining them entirely into its possession: But the general Frost
continues until the Vapors rising from the Southern or Western Ocean, recover
the Wind into some of the Solar Quarters; which opening the Sphere of
Rarefaction, the Wind blows warm and moist. For as the same Breath from an open
Mouth warms ones Fingers, so from a contracted Mouth it will cool his Porridge.

The general Frost in the Northern Countries near the Pole, and in Countries at
a distance from the Sea, seldom Regeles, until the Subterranean Heat break
forth, and join with the Heat of the approaching Sun, and then the Frost and
Snow is dissolved in a very short time; and the Spring comes on much sooner
than in those Countries where the Regelation is more gradual.

Thus as a constant Intercourse of Day and Night gives the Active Animals
liberty, by Rest and Sleep, to recover their wasted Strength and Spirits* so an
Annual return of Frost and Snow, recovers and repairs the Strength and Spirits
of the Earth, which had been spent in the preceding Summers Productions. For
in this Natural World all things are repaired by corrupting, preserved by
perishing, and revived by dying.

As the Operation of Cold did gradually gain ground upon the Influence of Heat;
so by the same methods and degrees Heat recovers its lost ground, the Fresh or
Thaw beginning first at the Waters, and from thence rises up to the Plains and
Valleys; and last of all the Tops of the Mountains [which are for sometime kept
in the possession of Frost and Cold, after the lower parts of the Earth be
regeled] are gained.

CHAP. XII. Of the Sphere of Rarefaction.
THE Sphere of Rarefaction is a Sphere of Heat, wherein the Suns Reflections
meet, and unite themselves in their own defense against the Upper and Lower
Cold.

And being placed in a middle between them, it rises or falls, opens or
closes as it prevails upon them, or as they open or close, rise or fall. This
Sphere of Heat, by Rarefying of Vapors and Exhalations, causes Wind.

That Heat is the cause of Wind, is apparent from the Experience of such
People, who, to cause Wind, usually set Chaff, Seeds, or Straw on Fire. And
when Houses or Towns are accidentally thus set on Fire, the Heat of the Flame,
by Rarefying of the Vapors and Exhalations round about, will raise the Wind to
so great a height, as will make it a matter of great difficulty to quench the
Flame.

CHAP. XIII. Of Wind, Helms, and Arches.
WInd is the Nitrous part of Vapor and Exhalation, Rarefied and Dilated by the
Sphere of Rarefaction.

The Winds are either higher or lower, as the Sphere of Rarefaction rises or
falls; they are thicker or thinner, as it opens or closes; they are Moist,
Hot, or Dry, as they have more or less of Vapor or Exhalation in them.

The Pabulum of Winds, is commonly called a Helm, from the Greek Word (...),
which signifies Spiro* to Breath; and they are Either Visible or Invisible.

The Visible Helms, are Either Opake, Mixed, or Translucent.

These Wind Helms fix upon the coldest parts of the Globe, as the Gibbosity of
the Sea, the Tops of the highest Mountains, Mountain-Heaths, Waters, and Rivers.

The Matter on which these Helms consist, is a Vaporous Mist, which as it
endeavors to rise up, is pressed down by the Sphere of Rarefaction; and by
Rarifying the Nitrous part of it [which is always uppermost] into Wind, the
still Body of the Air is put into a violent Flux, every Blast of Wind being
only a Wave of Air; the Rapidity of its Motions is occasioned by the Declivity
of the Mountains.

Wherever the Grand Helm fixes, from that Quarter the Wind blows, until the
stock of Vapors be spent: For Instance,

If the Grand Helm fix upon the Mountains of Germany, the Second Helm fixes
upon the Gibbosity of the Eastern Seas; [by the Gibbosity of the Sea, I
understand that middle Ridge where the Flux and Reflux breaks;] the Third
Helm fixes upon Crossfelt, and that Ridge of Mountains; the Fourth Helm fixes
upon Skidday, and that Ridge of Mountains; and so forward until the Grand
Pabulum be spent, and then the Wind cease, and the Air is Calm.

That distance between Helm and Helm we call an Arch* over which [as the
Vapors rise] the Wind blows them from Helm to Helm, one feeding and repairing
another, until the Grand Stock be spent. And so on the contrary, if the Grand
Helm fix upon the Mountains in Ireland, the Wind blows West, forming Helms and
Arches till that Stock be spent.

The Grand Helm is always Opake* consisting of all Vapor. The first Wind is
Wet and ^ainy, the Arch over-Clouded; for as the Nitrous part of the (...)
^iseth, and is ^arify'd into Wind, it drives before it the Rain, as the Sal^
(...) [being fir'd] drives before it Hail shot.

The Second Helm is Mixed, being part Exhalation, and part Vapor; the upper
part of the Helm being Exhalation, is Translucent; this Wind is Showry* and the
Arch Cloudy.

The Third Helm is Translucent, being all Exhalation, the Wind Dry, the Air
Clear.

The Invisible Helms are all Exhalation, and they seldom rise as high as the
Tops of Mountains* but fix upon Waters, Rivers, the Tops and Sides of H^lls,
and high Buildings; these Winds are the lowest that Blow* one may go through
them, and find a Calm upon the Tops of Mountains. This is a common Observation
made by those who Live under the Mountains. The P^^ulum of these Winds being
soon spent, they change often.

Observations concerning Winds, Helms, and Arches.
When the Vapors and E^halations

When the Vapors rise to the

When they are Opake at the bottom,

When the Helm is White and Translucent,

When the Helms are even Balanced

When the whole Horizon is Helm'd

When the Helms rise and close up the Arch with black Clouds, expect



Pabulum is gathered, the Wind will blow from that Point or H^lm for some
Months together; These we call Trade Winds.

CHAP. IV. Prognostications of the change and alteration of Weather, from the
Setting and Rising of the Sun.
Prognostications of Rain, from the Setting of the Sun.
WHen the Sun Sets in ^ black waterish Cloud, the Vapors

When the Sun goes down wading,



Signs of fair Weather.






Signs of Rain from the Rising Sun.
expect Wind and Rain about Ten a Clock; for the Air is full of Vapors and
Exhalations.

When the Sun Rises broad* and

When the Sun Rises clear, and several

Signs of a fair Day, from the Rising Sun.
If the Sun Rise little and fiery, and

If the Sun Rise in thick Clouds, and





FINIS
BOOKS Printed for John Newton, at the Three Pigeons over against the
Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street.
A Charge given at the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County of
Surrey, holden at Darking, on Tuesday the Fifth day of April 1692, and in the
Fourth Year of Their Majesty's Reign. By the Honorable Hugh Hare, Esquire One of
Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for that County. The Second Edition
Corrected.

An Historical Relation of the Conspiracy of John Lowis Count Deffieschi
against the City of Genoua in the Year 1547. Written in Italian, by Augustine
Mascardi, Gentleman of the Bed Chamber to Pope Urban the Eighth. Done into
English by the Honorable Hugh Hare, Esquire

An Account of the Isle of Iersey, the G^eatest of the Islands that are now,
the only remainder of the English Do^inions in France, with a New and Accurate
Mapp of the said Island. By Ph. Fall, M. A. Rector of St. Savior, in the said
Island, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Mr* Falle's Sermon before the English G^^^ison in Iersey, April the 10th 1692.

-- One Sermon at Whitehall, December. the 30th, 1694.

-- One Sermon before the Lord Mayor April the 21th, 1695.

A Discourse of Natural and Revealed Religion in several Essays, By Mr. T.
Nourse.

The Anatomy of (...) Earth, Dedicated to all Miners, By Tho. Robinson Rector
of Outby in Cumberland.

The History of the Campaign in Flanders for the Years 1692, 1693, 1694, and
1695. All Written by Edward ^ Auergne M. A. Rector of St. Brelade in the Isle
of Iersey, and Chaplain to His Majesty's Regiment of Scots Guards.


