The afflicted Souls Preparation for death.



By Tho. Rbins B. of D.

The afflicted SOULS PREPARATION FOR DEATH. The preparation of the heart in
man, and the answer of the tongue is from the Lord. Prove. the 16. and the 1.
verse.

WITH Loving Exhortations to every true Christian to prepare their Souls for
the Hour of Death. Also many good Instructions to every good Christian to
beware of false Prophets.

Jeremiah 20. and 8, 9. For thus says the Lord of Host, the God of Israel, let
not your Prophets and your Divines that be in the midst of you, deceive you;
neither hearken to your Dreams, which you cause to have dreamed, for they
prophecy falsely unto you in my Name. I have not sent them says the Lord.

Written by Tho. Robins, B. of D. And Licensed according to Order.

London, Printed for W. W. and are to be sold by W. Thackeray at the Dolphin in
Smith-field. 1668.

The afflicted SOULS Preparation for Death.
Lamentations the 1. and 20. verse. Behold, O Lord, for I am in distress, my
bowels are troubled, my heart is turned within me, for I have grievously
rebelled.
MY beloved brethren, I would desire you all to take notice of these words here
mentioned in this place of Scripture: for indeed you may assure your selves
that they were written for no other purpose, but for the better instruction of
us poor miserable sinners: and I pray God give us all grace to be of such an
humble spirit, as to confess our faults, as those people did in this place of
Scripture, crying and calling night and day to the Lord, to behold the
miserable estate and condition that we poor miserable sinners live in: For
certainly brethren we stand in as much need to cry upon the Lord to behold our
miseries as those people could do: For certainly our sins are as great as
theirs could be, and I pray God they prove not greater: For indeed you cannot
name any sin in the World, but it is daily used either by one or other, and
especially these sins that I shall name here unto you that is to say, Pride,
Whoredom, and Drunkenness, Swearing and Lying, and worst of all that terrible
sin of dissimulation, which I am afraid is too much used with a great many now
adays, Indeed my brethren, I would desire every one of you that is addicted to
any sin, I would desire you to strive by all possible means to forsake them:
For alas my brethren there is a day to come that every poor Soul must give an
account for every Wicked Sin that we follow: and as the Prophet Jeremiah cried
out to the people in Lamentations 2. and 19. ver. Even so my brethren I call
and cry upon every one of you that are here present, and these be the words*
Arise, cry out in the night, in the beginning of the watches, pour out thine
heart like water before the face of the Lord; lift up thine hand toward him:
And as Simon prayed unto the Lord, as you may find in Lamentations 5. and the
20. and 21 verses in these words; Wherefore do thou forgive us forever, and
forsake us not so long time; turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be
turned.

Nay, I would desire you to look into the 4. of Hosea, and there you shall see
how the Lord threatened the people because there was no truth, nor mercy, nor
knowledge of GOD in the Land but Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and
Stealing, and committing Adultery: and indeed I am afraid that those crying
Sins here named, are too much used in this Land: Therefore I would desire every
one of you to refrain these sins here named, for fear the LORD should threaten
us with the same words as he threatened the Israelites in the fourth of Hosea
and the third Verse. In these words. Therefore shall the Land mourn; and every
one that dwells therein shall languish with the beasts of the field, and with
the Fowls of Heaven: Yea the Fishes of the Sea also shall be taken away.

Indeed good people, you may see here how the Lord threatened those people all
with most heavy judgments: Nay he did not only threaten the people, but he
threatened the very beasts in the Field, nay, the Fouls in the Air, and the
very Fishes in the Sea too: Therefore in the Name of God let us all have a care
of provoking the Lord too much to wrath, for we do not know how soon he may
come upon us with the same judgments: for certainly good people the Lord had
not threatened ye Israelites with such sore and heavy judgments as he did, but
for their grievous sins. And indeed I do believe that our sinners are as great
as theirs could be, if not greater: For certainly there is not any sin in the
World, but it remains here in this land. Then how do we think that we can
escape the same punishments due for our transgressions: as swearing is
accounted by a great many for a Pastime, a Pleasure, and a good Company-keeper;
for he which can swear and curse, Lie and dissemble, he is counted the best
Companion with a great many in these times. But indeed I could desire all those
that do know themselves to be addicted to those evil conditions, to have a care
what they do, and strive by all possible means to refrain themselves from this
wicked and ungodly custom of sinning; For be assured, there is a day to come
when we must all give an account: Therefore in the Name of God I would desire
every one of you, young and old to do your best endeavors to resrain your
wicked sins, and cry and call unto the Lord night and day, and with an humble
spirit, say as David says in the 39 Psalm and the fourth verse, Lord make me
to know my end, and the measure of my days what it is, that I may know how
frail I am.

Indeed good people you may see in this place of holy Scripture, I, and many
more, that the Prophet had a great desire to serve the Lord* but indeed we are
more ready to serve our selves then to serve him. Alas my brethren, can we
think that the Lord should do any thing for us, when we will do nothing for
him: As if we should say, we had God at command: No, no my brethren let us all
have a care what we do: For certainly the Lord will call us all to an account,
as he did the Servants in the Gospel, that he had formerly given the Talents
to, when the Lord called unto them to see what use they had put them to: and
indeed my Brethren those Talents may very well be termed to the life of a
Christian here on Earth; for certainly the Lord will have an account given him
how we have spent our life here upon Earth; Then who is he that can say, He
has fed the hungry, clothed the naked, or visited the sick, or a help to the
fatherless: No, I am afraid there is but a few now adays that is given unto
Charity; No my Brethren, where there is one now adays that deals with a
Liberal hand to the Poor, there is three that deals with a slack hand, I, but
look into Proverbs the tenth and the fourth verse, and there you shall find, He
that would enjoy Riches, should deal liberally to the poor: He becomes poor
that deals with a slack hand, but the hand of the diligent makes rich:
wealth makes many friends, but the poor is separated from his neighbor,
Proverbs the nineteenth and the 14 verse. And indeed my brethren it is a common
thing with a great many now adays to separate the poor, and if any feel
hunger, let the poor feel it. But O my Brethren, there is a day to come, that
we must all give an account: I would desire you to look into the 25. of Matthew
and the beginning at the 34. verse, and so to the latter end, and there you
shall see the blessed joys that belongs to them that feeds the hungry, or
clothes the naked; I, and the torments that belong to them that do not. Indeed
I would desire you to read over that Chapter at your leisure; for it is too
large upon this matter to set down in this small Volume: and when you have read
it, I pray God give you all grace to make good use of it; for certainly he that
loves not the poor cannot with a safe conscience say he loves God; for look
into Proverbs 12. and the 13 verse, and there it is plainly laid open in these
words, He that oppresses the poor, reproacheth his Maker: but he that
honors him, has mercy on the poor.

Indeed my Brethren, there is many more places of Scripture concerning the same
matter, but I hope here is enough to satisfy at this time, and the Lord give
us all grace to understand it, and make good use of it: Hear ye Children the
instruction of a Father, and attend to know understanding, Proverbs 4. and the
1. verse. Hear O my son, and receive my saying, and the years of thy life shall
be many. I have taught thee in the way of wisdom, I have led thee in right
paths; when thou go thy steps shall not be straightened; and when thou runnest
thou shall not stumble: take fast hold of instruction, let her not go, for she
is thy life, Proverbs 4. and the 10, 11, 12, 13, verses.

And indeed good people, happy are those who will take good Counsel in these
times: for certainly these are the perilous times which our Savior Christ did
speak of that should come in the latter days: For certainly there is but a
little to come to pass of that which our Savior Christ said should come, but
is come: but only the calling of the Jews, the which indeed we do not know how
soon it may come: Nay it is hard for us to say whether that time be come or no,
For certainly so many sundry sorts of Opinions was never known as is abroad now
in our days: No, nor never so many Judas's condition one toward another as
there is now: And indeed my brethren, we do not know but be may term us to be
these Jews: Therefore in the Name of GOD I would desire every good Christian to
have a care how they lead their lives here upon Earth, and let us all cry and
call upon the Lord night and day to send us all of his Spiritual grace into our
hearts, and to say as David said in the 28 Psalm, beginning at the first verse,
Unto thee will I cry, O Lord* my rest: Be not silent to me, lest if thou be
silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit: Hear the voice of
my supplications when I cry unto thee, when I lift up my hands toward the holy
Oracle. Draw me not away with the wicked and with the workers of iniquity,
which speak peace to their neighbors, but mischief is in their hearts: As you
may find it written in the 28 Psalm, the 1, 2, 3. verses.

And indeed, I am sore afraid that there be too many of such people abroad now
adays, that will give you fair speeches to your face, but their hearts are
full of deceit: But indeed any brethren, as the Prophet Jeremiah said by the
Jews, so may we say by such people. Jeremiah 5. and the 4 verse. Therefore I
said, surely these are poor, they are foolish; for they know not the way of the
Lord, nor the judgments of God.

And indeed I would desire every good Christian to have a care what they do in
these times; For certainly the times are very dangerous, as our Savior said in
Mark the 15. and the 22. False Christ's, and false prophets shall arise, and
shall show signs and wonders, to seduce, if it were possible even the Elect,
but behold I have foretold you all things.

Now indeed good people, it is good for us all to take heed; for such people as
these are abroad, you may know them by their Works, for they be people that
professes to have a good Faith; But as the Apostle said in the second of
James, and the 14. verse; What does it profit my brethren, though a man say he
has faith, and have not works, can his faith save him? No, no, faith without
works is but a dead faith. As you may find it written in the 26. verse of this
Chapter: For as the Body without the Spirit is dead, so faith without works is
dead also. Indeed there are very many now adays that will say, they have no
sin, which I pray God they do not find one day that they be not overladen with
a heavy burden of sin; Indeed I cannot perceive that any can live without sin.
I would desire you to look into Romans the 5. and the 8, 9, 10. verses, and
there you may perceive that in those days there was none that lived without
sin: and indeed I am afraid that this Nation is as sinful as they were; Yet
they confessed all sinned, not rather as we be slanderously reported, and as
some affirm, that we say, Let us do evil that good may come on it whose
damnation is just: what then, are we better then they? No, in no wise; for we
have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin, as it
is written, there is none righteous, no not one.

Indeed good people, if you but please to read that Chapter at your leisure,
you will find it all along to that purpose. Therefore in the Name of God have
you a care, for this sin belongs to the sin of presumption, which I do
earnestly desire every good Christians to have a care of it, and strive by all
possible means to forsake it, and learn to be of an humble Spirit with the
Lowly, then to divide the spoil with the proud, Proverbs the 16. and the 19.
verse. Indeed my brethren I would rather exhort you to true Obedience of heart,
confessing your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that you may
be healed. The effectual servent prayer of a righteous man avails much,
James 5. 16.

For certainly good people the Lord does take notice of a Rebellious people:
Look but into the 65. of Isaiah, and the 3 verse. And there you may see that
the Lord took notice of the Rebellious people in these words: I have spread my
hands all the day to a rebellious people, which walked in a way that was not
good after their own thoughts: A people, that provoked me to anger continually
to my face.

And these be some part of their speeches, which said, Stand by thy self, come
not near me for I am holier then thou: I, but the Lord gives them a sharp
sentence in the latter part of this verse: for there he says; There is a smoke
in my nose, and a fire that burns all the day; as you may find it in the
fourth Verse of this Chapter.

Indeed me thinks this would be a fair warning for every Christian which has
any fear of God in them, to take heed how we provoke the Lord God too much unto
wrath; for as he is a God of Mercy, and slow to anger, Yet let not us think,
but when he does come, he will give every Man according unto his Works: and
indeed good people I cannot understand no surer way for to prevent the anger of
the Lord, but by Prayer, and acknowledgeing our sins to the Lord, as the
Prophet David in the 32. Psalm and the 5. verse, in these words, I acknowledge
my sins unto thee: and mine iniquities have I not hid. I said I would confess
my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.
Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness; according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions, Psalm 51. 1.

O that people had but grace in their hearts, and the fear of God before their
eyes for to take example by the holy Prophet, and to pray unto the Lord for to
send down his spiritual Grace into the hearts of every one of us, that we may
serve him, love him, and obey him, and keep his Commandments: And then to be
sure the Lord will love us.

Alas how can we say we love him, when we daily break his Commandments: Ten
there is to be observed, but alas how should we keep ten, when we cannot keep
two of them. First, the Lord commands us to love him. Secondly, he commands us
to love our neighbors as our selves, as you may find it in Matthew 22. chap.
38, 39. verses.

Thus now have you heard the Commandments of the Lord, and the Lord of his
Mercy give us all grace to strive to keep them: and as Moses said unto the
people in Deuteronomy 4. chap. and beginning at verse 5. so I say unto you all.
Behold I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the Lord my God
commanded me, that you should do so in the land whither ye go to possess. Keep
therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom, and your understanding in the
sight of the Nations, which shall hear all the Statutes, and say, Surely this
great Nation is a wise and understanding people, Deuteronomy. 4. chap. 5. and 6.
verses.

And the Lord grant every good Christian grace to serve the Lord, and wisdom to
understand the good from the evil, and confess the Lord to be a Loving and
Gracious God! and confess our sins to the Lord, and not seek to hide them in
our bosoms, with saying we have no sin, as a great many do now adays.

No, good people, rather let us cry and call unto the Lord for mercy for them,
as the Prophet Jeremiah did, in the first of Lamentations and the 18. verse. In
these words, The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against his
Commandments: hear, I pray you, all people, behold my sorrow. And verse 20.
Behold, O Lord, for I am in distress, my bowels are troubled, my heart is
turned within me, for I have grievously rebelled.

And the Lord give every good Christian grace to prepare their hearts to serbe
the Lord, that we may be all in readiness when the Lord shall please for to
call our sinful souls to an account: against that day the Lord prepare the
hearts of every good Christian.

And so to draw toward a conclusion, I desire to give you one word of
Exhortation concerning this: Let every good Christian have a care, and take
heed, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from
the living God. I mean, take heed you be not led away by a Seducing people,
such as will say, they have no sin. Nay, there be some will not stick to say
they be Christ. But look in Mark 25. verse 6. There our blessed Lord and
Savior tells us, such people shall come to you in my Name, saying, I am
Christ, and shall deceive many. And in 2 Pet. 3. 1. and 2. verses. There you
shall understand, that such people are abroad now adays. But there were false
Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers amongst
you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall follow
their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall he evil spoken
of.

And indeed my Brethren, we may see a great many such people abroad now adays,
that will deny the Lord that bought them, for there be some so pernicious in
their ways, and so wickedly bent, who will not stick to say, That there is no
God, nor Devil, no Heaven, nor Hell.

But I desire every good Christian to have a care, that they be not deluded by
such people: For certainly there is a day to come, when they shall find that
there is a God which does know the secrets of all men's hearts. And I will
assure you he will one day call all people to a strict account: Then happy is
those wise Virgins, which is found with their Lamps filled with the oil of
faith: Which the Lord of his heavenly mercy grant every good Christian grace to
endeavor themselves to seek after this Oil of Faith, and never leave seeking
till you have found it; and when you have once found it, pray the Lord to give
us all understanding to make good use of it, and be all found in the same mind
as the Prophet Isaiah was found in, as you may find it in Isaiah 25. and about
the ninth verse, where he said, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, we
will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.

O that every Christian would wait on the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and say as David in the 40. Psalm and the first verse, I waited
patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me and heard my cry; but I am poor
and needy; yet the Lord thinks on me, Psalm 40. 17. verse.

And indeed, my Brethren, I would desire every true Christian to wait upon the
Lord, confess your faults as the Prophet did, and not deny your sins, as a
great many do now adays: For to be sure, The Lord knows the hearts of all
men; and although a great many do think for to dissemble both with God and the
world, with saying we have no sin. Yet let such as they have a care what they
do; for though they seek to delude the people which are ignorant, yet let them
be assured that the Lord will not be mocked with such: oh no: He is a God of
Knowledge, a God of Justice, a God of Truth, and a God of Mercy to all those
that put their trust in him. Which the God of his mercy give us all grace so to
do, and to have a special care that you wait upon the Lord, and prepare you
souls for the hour of death.

And now in the Name of God I do exhort you once more to have a care that you
be not seduced by them, but fly to the Lord your God by true repentance, and
then to be sure he will never leave you, nor forsake you, if you leave not him;
and the Lord of his heavenly mercy give us all of his spiritual Grace, that we
may all serve him here so on earth, that we may deserve to have a resting place
in that blessed Kingdom of our Lord and Savior, which is prepared for all such
as will prepare themselves for that blessed day of the coming of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, which the Lord of his mercy grant us all grace so to do,
and that for Christ Jesus sake; To whom be given; as is most due to him, all
Honor, Power, Praise, Thanksgiving, both now and for evermore. Amen.

A short Prayer for afflicted Souls preparation for Death.
O Most gracious Lord God, thou only know the secrets of all hearts, I am
not worthy to be called thy Son; for mine iniquities are grown over my head, a
burden too heavy for me to bear. O wretch that I am, how dare I come in thy
presence? but now holy and merciful Father, as it has pleased thee to open the
eyes of my sinful soul, grant me a lively faith, that I may apply thy
prevailing mercies, so shall my afflicted soul wait upon thee till the hour of
death: which the Lord of his mercy give us grace so to do, for Christ Jesus
sake. Amen.

FINIS.
THere are 4. more small books full of heavenly Consolation, of a small price,
and worth the perusual of all true Christians.

1. The ready way to everlasting life.

2. Good counsel to be had at a cheap rate; a very heavenly discourse of the
beginning and end of man, describing the happy estate of a faithful servant of
Jesus Christ.

3. Englands Summons, or Londons Alarm; being the directions of all sorts of
people, both how to live and die in these perilous times.

4. Good News from Heaven, Joyful News for all Sincere Christians; an excellent
piece for all Good Christians, and worth the perusal.


