SEVERAL EPISTLES Given forth by Two of the LORDS Faithful Servants, Whom he
sent to NEW ENGLAND, TO Bear Witness to his Everlasting Truth.

And were there (by the Priests, Rulers, and Professors) after cruel and long
Imprisonment, and inhumane Whippings and Banishment, put to death; for no other
Cause, but for keeping the Commandments of God, and Testimony of Jesus.

William Robinson. William Leddra.
Here is also perfixed W. R. his Testimony of his Call to that Service, for
obedience unto which, he underwent the wrath of Men, but has obtained
Everlasting Peace and Rest with God.

And they overcame by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of their Testimony,
who loved not their lives unto the the death.

London, Printed in the Year, 1669.

W. Robinson his Testimony of his Call to that Service, for obedience unto
which he was by the Professors of New England put to Death.
ON the 8th of the 4th month, 1659. in the after-part of the day, in traveling
betwixt Newport on Road-Island, and the house of Daniel Gold on the same
Island, with my dear Brother Christopher Holder; The Word of the Lord came
expressly unto me, which did fill me immediately with Life and Power, and
heavenly Love, by which he constrained me, and commanded me to pass to Boston,
my life to lay down into his Will, for the accomplishing his Service that he
had there to perform, at the day appointed. To which heavenly Voice I presently
yielded obedience, not questioning the Lord how he would bring the thing to
pass, being I was a Child; and obedience was commanded of me by the Lord, who
filled me with living strength and power from his heavenly presence, which at
that time did mightily over-shaddow me, and my Life did say Amen to what the
Lord required of me, and had commanded me to do, and willingly was I given up
from that time to this day, the will of the Lord God to do and to perform,
whatever become of my body: for the Lord has said unto me, My Soul shall rest
in eternal Peace, and my Life shall enter into Rest for being obedient to the
God of my Life; I being a Child, and durst not question the Lord in the least,
but rather willing to lay down my life than to bring dishonor to the Lord; and
as the Lord made me willing, dealing kindly with me, as a tender Father does
toward a faithful Child whom he dearly loves, so did the Lord deal with me, in
ministering his Life unto me, which gave and gives me strength to perform what
the Lord required of me, and still as I did and do stand in need, he ministered
and ministers more virtue and heavenly power and wisdom, whereby I was and am
made strong in God, not fearing what Man shall be suffered to do unto me, being
filled with heavenly Courage, which is Meekness and innocence; for the Cause is
the Lords that we go in, and the Battle is the Lords; and thus says the Lord
of Hosts, the mighty and terrible God, Not by might, nor by strength, nor by
power of mind, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Host, will I perform what my
mouth has spoken through my Servants whom I have chosen, mize Elect in whom my
Soul delights. Friends, the God of my Life, and the God of the whole Earth
did lay this thing upon me, for which I now suffer bonds near unto death; He by
his Almighty Power and everlasting Love, constrained me and laid this thing
upon me, and truly I could not deny the Lord, much less resist the Holy One of
Israel. Therefore all People who are ignorant of the motion of the Lord in the
inward parts, be not hasty in judging in this matter, before you hear the truth
of the matter, lest you speak evil of the things you know not: for of a truth
the Lord God of the whole Earth commanded me by his Spirit, and spoke unto me
by his Son, whom he has made Heir of all things, and in his Life I live, and
in it I shall depart this earthy tabernacle, if unmerciful men be suffered to
take it from me; and herein I rejoice that the Lord is with me, the Ancient of
days, the Life of the suffering Seed, for which I am freely given up, and
singly do I stand in the will of God; for me to live is Christ, but to die is
gain: And truly, I have a great desire and will to die herein, knowing that the
Lord is with me, whatever ignorant men shall be able to say against me, for the
witness of the Spirit I have received, and the presence of the Lord and his
heavenly Life, who has accounted me worthy, and called me hereunto, to bear my
Testimony against ungodly and unrighteous men, who seek to take away the life
of the Upright without a cause, as the Rulers of the Massathuss Bay does
intend, if the Lord stop them not from their unrighteous intent. -- Oh! hear ye
Rulers, and give ear and listen all you that have any hand herein, to put the
Innocent to death! for in the Name, and Fear, and Dread of the Lord God, I here
declare the cause of my staying here amongst you, and continuing in your
Jurisdiction after there was a Sentence of death (as ye said) pronounced
against me, without a just cause, as you well know; that we who are banished,
committed nothing worthy of banishment, not of any punishment, much less
banishment upon death: And now, ye Rulers, ye do intend to put me to death with
my Companion, unto whom the Word of the Lord God came saying, Go to Boston with
thy Brother William Robinson: unto which Command he was obedient, who had said
unto him, that he had a great work for him to do: which thing is now seen, and
the Lord is now doing of it, and it is in obedience to the Lord God of the
whole Earth, that we continue amongst you; and that we came to this Town of
Boston again in obedience to the Lord, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, in
whose hand your breath is, and will ye put us to death for obeying the Lord God
of the whole Earth? Well, if you do this act, and put us to death, know this,
and be it known unto you all, ye Rulers and People within this Jurisdiction,
whosoever has a hand herein, will be guilty of innocent blood, not only upon
your selves will you bring innocent blood, but upon this Town and the
Inhabitants thereof, and elsewhere within your Jurisdiction that has the least
hand herein; therefore be instructed ye Rulers of this Land, and take warning
betimes, and learn wisdom before it be hid from your eyes; And know this, if
you put us to death, the Lord will arise in his fierce wrath against you, ye
Rulers in this Land, ye shall not escape the judgments of the God of Israel,
who will consume you root and branch if you put us to death.

Written by one who fears the Lord, who is by ignorant People called, A
Quaker; and unto such am I only known by the Name William Robinson; yet a new
Name I have received, which such knows not.

Several Epistles given forth by Two of the Lords faithful Servants, whom he
sent to New England, etc.
THe streams of my Fathers Love runs daily through me from the holy Fountain of
Life, to the Seed throughout the whole Creation, I am overcome with love, for
it is my life and the length of my days, it is my glory and my daily strength,
I am swallowed up with love, and in love I live, with it I am overcome, and in
it I dwell with the holy Seed, to which the blessing of love is given from God
who is Love, who has shed it abroad in my heart, which daily fills me with
living joy from the Life from whence it comes: Ye Children of the Living God,
feel me when you are traveling in it, feel me when it runs from the Fountain
into your Vessels, when it issues gently like new Wine into your bosoms, when
the strength and power of it you feel, when you are overcome with the strength
of the Life, which is God, then feel me present in the Fountain of Love, the
House of Heaven, where is many Mansions; ye Children of the Lord, feel me wrapped
up with you in that pure Love which destroys the love which is at emnity with
God, which wars against the Seed; which pure Love proceeds from the Father of
Love, the God of Truth, let nothing separate you from this Love which is my
Life; let neither words nor thoughts enter betwixt which is contrary to it, for
it will stain the place of its abode. So dear Children, who are begotten by
love into the Covenant of Life and Love, keep daily in it; this is the portion
that God has given unto his Children, to continue in his Love, which is the
life of the Seed which is raised by the power of the endless Love of God in the
Creature. I am full of the quickening power of the Lord Jesus Christ, and my
Lamp is filled with pure Oil, so that it gives a clear light and pleasant
smell, and I shall ente^ with my Beloved into Eternal Peace and Rest, wherein I
am swallowed up, with the Life of it I am filled, and in it I shall depart with
everlasting joy and praises in my mouth, singing Hallalujahs unto the Lord who
has Redeemed me by his Living Power from amongst Kindreds, Tongues, and
Nations. And now the day of my departure draws near, I have fought a good
Fight, I have kept the holy Faith, I have near finished my Course, my
traveling is near at an End, and my Testimony is near to be finished, and an
Eternal Crown is laid up for me, and for all whose feet are shod with
Righteousness and the preparation of Peace, even such whose Names are written
in the Book of Life, wherein I live and remain with all the faithful Seed for
ever and ever, Amen.

Written by a Servant of Jesus Christ. William Robinson.

William Robinson, a faithful Martyr, who was banished upon pain of Death, and
robbed and tortured with cruel Whipping, and afterward Condemned to die with
his fellow Sufferers, Marmaduke Stephenson and Mary Dier, who, all three, hand
in hand like innocent Lambs were led away, with the Soldiers guarding, and the
Drums beating (that the People might not hear them speak) to the place of
Execution; where, by the Priests, Rulers, and Professors they were cruelly
murdered for the Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus: Two days before
their death, this Salutation of his Love to his fellow Prisoners, proceeded
from him as follows:
MY dear Brethren and Sisters, to whom my love abounds, I am filled with pure
love unto you all, dear Lambs, feel it in your own lives, and receive it into
your own hearts as new O^l; for truly the fear of the Lord is our strength, and
the blessing of the Lord is our portion, which the Lord does daily give unto
us, blessed be his Name for ever. Oh! let us all keep in Lowliness, and
Holiness, and Meekness, and tender Love one toward another, which is the Seal
and Witness that the Lord is with us; where the Lord for ever keep us staid on
him to receive our daily bread, which satisfies the hungry Soul. Dear Friends,
Brethren and Sisters, this I am constrained to let you know how mightily the
Love of the Lord our God abounds in my heart, and from my Life toward you all;
it runs forth as a living stream, refreshing the Spirit and Life within us all,
and every one as you feel it, and according to your measures receive it into
your hearts, to the refreshing and strengthening of one another. Dear Lambs, I
was the first that the Lord God our heavenly Father did lay this thing upon,
for which I now suffer bonds near to death, from the first day until now, the
weight of the thing was laid upon me from the Lord God, in obedience to his
holy Will and Command, I gave up, in which obedience the Arm and Power of the
Lord has been and is with me to this day, and the thing which the Lord has
said unto me from the beginning of it to this day, which still remains with me,
that my Life must accomplish the thing, and by it must the powers of Darkness
fall, and yet will they seek and labor to take it from me, and through much
difficulty and bustling will they be suffered, to the glory of our God, and to
the rejoicing of the Elect. So my dear Brethren and Sisters, my Love and Life
feel in your own hearts, for I am full unto you all in Heavenly Love, and my
Life is ever with you; the Lord for ever keep us all as we are now, to the
glory of his Name, Amen. This was I moved to write unto you all, my dear
Brethren and Sisters, my fellow Prisoners, that have any part or do partake
with me herein. Your dear Brother, in Holy and Heavenly Joy, and true Love and
Peace.

William Robinson.
Written in the Hole of the Condemned in Boston Goal in New England, the First
day of the Week, being the 16th day of the 8th mon. 1659.
William Leddra, the last of the Four Martyrs that were murdered in Boston: He
for the Truths sake was Prisoner under the hands of the cruel Professors of
New Plymouth near a year, to the admiration of tender People, in a very open
Prison, where he lay, in an extreme cold Winter without any fire, by which he
might have been frozen to death, had not the Lord upheld: He afterward coming
to Boston in New England, where for being called a Quaker, he was by Priests
and Rulers torn and tortured with cruel Whipping, and banished on pain of
Death, and kept close Prisoner almost a year, fast chained to a Logg of Timber,
from the hour of his coming into Prison, till the very moment they led him
forth to be murdered; and when they called him before the Judgment Seat to
receive the Sentence of Death, the cruel Jailer who would drag him by the hair
of the head, sometime lead him along through part of the Town, who in the
silent Lamb-like patience followed him in Chains, bearing the Logg into their
Judgment-Hall; this Lamb of Jesus the very day before the Priests, Rulers, and
Professors murdered him, gave forth to all the Faithful, this ensuing Testimony
for the Lord,
To the society of the little Flock, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
MOst dear and inwardly beloved, The sweet influence of the Morning Star, like
a Flood, distilling into my innocent Habitation, has so filled me with the joy
of the Lord in the beauty of Holiness, that my Spirit is as if it did not
inhabit a Tabernacle of Clay, but is wholly swallowed up in the bosom of
Eternity from whence it had its being; Alas, alas, what can the wrath and
spirit of man that lusts to Envy, aggravated by the heat and strength of the
King of the Locusts which came out of the Pit, do unto one that is hid in the
Secret place of the Almighty, or unto them that are gathered under the healing
wings of the Prince of Peace, under whose Armor of Life they shall be able to
stand in the day of trial, having on the Breastplate of Righteousness, and the
Sword of the Spirit, which is their weapon of War against Spiritual Wickedness,
Principalities, and Powers, and the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, both
within and without? Oh! my beloved, I have waited as a Dove at the window of
the Ark, and have stood still in that Watch, which the Master of the House did
at his coming (without whom I could do nothing) reward with the fullness of his
Love, wherein my heart did rejoice, that I might in the Love and Life of God,
speak a few words unto you, sealed with the Spirit of Promise, that the taste
thereof might be a savor of Life to your life, and a Testimony in you of my
innocent death. And if I had been altogether silent, and the Lord had not
opened my mouth unto you, yet he would have opened your hearts, and there have
sealed my Innocence with the streams of Life, by which we are baptized into
that body which is in God, with whom and in whose Presence there is Life, in
which as you abide, you stand upon the pillar and ground of Truth; for the Life
being the Truth, and the Way, go not one step without it, lest you should
compass a Mountain of sin in the Wilderness: For unto every thing there is a
season, as the flowing of the Ocean does fill every Creek and Branch thereof,
and then retires again toward its own being and sulness, and leaves a savor
behind it; So does the Life and Virtue of God flow into every one of your
hearts, whom he has made partaker of his Divine Nature; and when it withdraws
but a little, it leaves a sweet savor behind it, that many can say, they are
made clean through the Word that he has spoken to them, in which innocent
condition you may see what you are in the Presence of God, and what you are
without him. Therefore, my dear hearts, let the enjoyment of the Life alone be
your Hope, your Joy, and Consolation; and let the Man of God flee those things
that would lead the Mind out of the Cross, for then the savor of Life will be
buried; And although that some may speak of things that they received in the
Life (as experiences) yet the Life being veiled, and the savor that it left
behind, washed away by the fresh floods of Temptations; the Condition that they
did enjoy in the Life, boasted of by the Aerie thing, will be but as the Mauna
that was gathered yesterday, without either scent or savor: for it was only
well with the Man while be was in the Life of Innocence; but being driven from
the Presence of the Lord into the Earth, what can he boast of? And although you
know these things, and many of you much more than I can say, yet for the Love
and Zeal that I bear to the Truth and Honor of God, and the tender Desires of
my Soul to those that are young, that they might read me in that from which I
write, to strengthen them against the Wiles of the subtle Serpent that b^
guiled Eve; I say, stand in the Watch within, in the fear of the Lord, which is
the very entrance of Wisdom, and the state where you are ready to receive the
secrets of the Lord; hunger and thirst patiently, be not weary, neither doubt;
stand still, and cease from thy own working, and in due time thou shall enter
into thy Rest, and thy Eyes shall behold thy Salvation, whose Testimonies are
sure and righteous altogether; let them be as a feal upon thy arm, and as
jewels about thy neck, that others may see what the Lord has done for your
Souls, confess him before men, yea, before the greatest of his enemies, fear
not what they can do to you; greater is He that is in you, than he that is in
the World; for He will cloth you with Humility, and in the power of his
Meekness you shall reign over all the rage of your Enemies in the favor of
God, wherein as you stand in Faith, ye are the Salt of the Earth; for many
seeing your good works may glorify God in the day of their visitation. Take
heed of receiving that which you saw not in your Life, lest you give ear to the
Enemy; bring all to the Life, that they may be proved whether they are wrought
in God. The love of the World, the lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eye, is
without the Light, in the World; therefore possess your Vessels in all
Sanctification and Honor, and let your Eye look at the mark, He that has
called you, who is Holy; And if there be an eye that offends, pluck it out, and
cast it from you; let not the Temptation take hold, for if you do, it will keep
from the favor of God, and that will be a sad state; for without Grace possess
it, there is no assurance of Salvation: By Grace you are saved, and the
witnessing of it is sufficient for you; To which I commend you all, my dear
Friends, and in it remain,

Your Brother, William Leddra.
Boston Goal, the 13th of the First Month, 1661.
THE END.

