The Case and Title of Henry Robinson of London Esquire unto a Deputation and
Management of both the Letter-Offices, together with the profits thereunto
belonging, derived from the Right Honorable Charles Lord Stanhop, unto Endymion
Porter Esquire deceased, and George Porter Esquire his Son, and from them unto the said
Henry Robinson, as it was represented unto the Convention sitting at the time
of his Majesty's happy Restoration, which afterward settled the same upon his
Majesty, without any consideration unto the said H. Robinson for the claim and
improvement of the said Offices from about 3000 l per annum to about 30000 l
per annum, to the undoing the said H. Robinson, his Wife and Children.
THat the Office of Postmaster General of the Dominions of England, is one of
the ancientest Offices of England.

That the nominating of all Postmasters, and carriage of all Letters both
Inland and Foreign, both of the Public and Particulars, are members of, and
incident and belonging unto the said Office, together with the Profits and
Perquisits thereby accruing; as appears by ancient deeds and Custom beyond the
memory of man.

That John Lord Stanhop had a grant of the said Office in the 32. of Eliz.
1577. under the Broad-Seal of England, and by himself his Deputy and Agents
enjoyed the carriage of all Letters by Post, both Foreign and Inland, for
about 40. years, until he dyed.

That Charles Lord Stanhop, who is still living, had a reversion of the said
Office, and by himself his Deputies and Agents, enjoyed the carriage of all
Letters, until he was illegally disturbed by one Matthew Dequester, who having
been the Lord Stanhops Deputy for the carriage of Foreign and Irish Letters,
about 20. years together, under pretense of a grant of a new Office by him
obtained, upon untrue suggestions for services to be done out of the Kings
Dominions (a reversion whereof Mr. William Witherings then claimed by) by
authority thereof took upon him the carriage of Foreign Letters.

That in the year 1624. the said Charles Lord Stanhop brought his action against
the said Dequester for taking upon him the carriage of Merchants Letters, and
receiving moneys for the Postage thereof from London to Antwerp, without the
License, and against the will of him the said Lord Stanhop, who is Postmaster
General, and recovered a Verdict against the said Dequester.

That the Parliament in the 4th of the late King, upon report of a select
Committee, taking notice of the said Dequesters undue suggestions for the
gaining of the said Patent, for services to be done in Foreign Parts, out of
the Kings Dominions, and of the Lord Stanhops Verdict against Dequester, did
declare, and give Judgment against Dequesters said Patent, in favor of the
Lord Stanhops said Patent.

That the said Henry Robinson and his said Trustees, have by several mean
Assignments lawfully conveyed unto them the Deputation, Management, and profits
of the said Offices during the life of the said Charles Lord Stanhop, who is
still living.

That the said Henry Robinson was in possession of the said Offices at the
first assembling of the Long Parliament.

That Mr. Thomas Witherings who procured a reversion of Dequesters Patent, for
services to be done out of the Kings Dominions, well knowing the invalidity
thereof, made over his Interest to the Right Honorable Robert late Earl of
Warwick, upon which one Mr. Pulley and others found means to have a Male of
Foreign Letters to be betrayed into their hands, whereby the said Earl of
Warwick came to get the possession of the Foreign Letter Office.

Hereupon the said Henry Robinson was prevailed upon to call in Edmund Prideaux
Esquire deceased, then a Member of the Honble House of Commons, to protect him (as
he hoped) in the more sure keeping of the Inland Letter Office in Bartholmew
Lane, and recovery of the Foreign from the said Earl of Warwick; but instead
thereof, the said Edmund Prideaux did not only suffer the said Earl of Warwick
quietly to enjoy the said Foreign Office, but removed the Inland Office out of
Bartholmew Lane, unto a sequestered house, and took the profits to himself,
saying, that he carried Letters by the Liberty of the Subject,

Thereupon the said Henry Robinson, well knowing that he could deal with the
said Prideaux at his own weapon of the Liberty of the Subject, if it might as
well have been permitted him. The said H. Robinson (far before any other
undertakers thought thereon) through the in-sight he had in the said Offices,
being well assured, That if he undertook to carry Letters thrice a Week,
Whereas the said Prideaux carried but once; And if he the said Robinson would
take but 3d for a single Letter, whereas the said Prideaux took 6d, that there
would be sent, for time to come, above six three penny Letters for every six
penny Letter which had been sent in the said Prideaux his time, resolved upon
sending thrice a week, and to take but 3d for a single Letter at the most, and
for Scotland, Ireland, and Foreign Parts, accordingly, and to make more sure
work, (as he had cause to hope) did take the subscriptions of most considerable
Merchants and others, in and about London, York, New Castle, Exeter, Plymouth,
Bristol, and other Parts of England, Scotland, Ireland, and foreign parts
(which are yet extant to be seen) thereby obliging themselves, so far as the
Laws of the Land and the Liberty of the Subject did permit, to send all their
Letters, both Inland and Foreign, unto the said Henry Robinson, whenever he
would undertake the conveyance of them upon the terms aforesaid; and in order
thereunto the said Henry Robinson settled Post-Stages up and down from one end
of England unto the other, provided with sufficient number of Posthorses for
that purpose, and made several Journeys into France, Flanders, Brabant, and the
united Provinces, for treating with his Agents, and settling his Correspondents
in Foreign Parts, all at his own particular costs and charges; and just as he
was ready to publish the same, and give notice to all persons, when, and to
what places they should begin to bring their Letters; the said Long Parliament
on the 21. of March 1649. through misinformation of the said Prideaux, made
these following Resolves, Viz.

Resolved, by the Parliament, That the Offices of Postmaster Inland and
Foreign, are and ought to be in the sole Power and disposal of the
Commonwealth.

Resolved by the Parliament, That it be referred unto the Council of State to
consider of the Offices of Postmasters, and of the interest of those persons
who claim any thing therein, and to take into consideration, how the same may
be settled in the best way, for the advantage and safety of the Common Wealth,
and report their opinions therein to the House, and that they take order for
the present management thereof in the mean time.

Hereupon (though the said Prideaux still continued to manage and enjoy the
profits of the Inland Office) the said Robinson, fearing he might by the power
of his opposers, be made an offender, was disabled to proceed further in
carrying Letters, both by the liberty of the Subject, and the authority derived
unto him from the said Charles Lord Stanhop, Postmaster General of England, and
the Dominions thereunto belonging.

But the said contrivance of sending Letters thrice a Week instead of once, and
taking but 3d for a single Letter instead of 6d, being thus discovered by the
said Henry Robinson, was several years after indulged by Oliver miscalled
Protector, to be put in execution by others, whereby the Office became
forthwith improved, and so thought worthy to be annexed unto the Crown Revenue.

The said Henry Robinson therefore, whose Title being such unto the management
and profits of the said Offices, and by whose contrivance, charge, and trouble,
the said Offices had been so much improved, as well to the benefit of the said
Offices, as to the increase of Trade and Correspondency, to the great content
and accommodation of the people in general, having undergone the trouble,
vexation, charge and damage, of above twenty years prosecution and
attendance, did then humbly pray to be relieved therein, and that he might be
restored to the possession and management of both the said Offices, as he was
before at the first assembling of the said long Parliament.

Henry Robinson.


