ADVERTISEMENT.
There is lately published in Latin, Evangelium M^dici, se^ M^dic^n^ Mystica de
Suspensis Naturae Legibus, siv^ de Miraculis. By Dr. Connor, of the College of
Physicians, and Fellow o^ the Royal Society. In Octavo. The chief Heads of the
Matters that he treats of are as follows: I. Of the Nature of a Body,
particularly an Organical one, where the Structure and Natural State of the
H^man Body is explained. II. How many Ways the Natural State of the Human Body,
is said to have been Supernaturally altered. III. Of the Laws of Motion, and of
the three different Suspensions of the same, in order to explain all Miracles.
IV. How it can be conceived, that Water can be changed into Wine. V. How it can
be conceived, that a Human Body can be Invulnerable, Immortal, and can live for
ever without Meat, as after the Resurrection. VI. How a Human Body can be
conceived to be in a Fire without Burning. VII. How we can conceive that an
Army can pass through the Sea without Drowning, or walk upon the Water without
Sinking. VIII. How it can be conceived that a Man can have a Bloody Sweat. IX.
Of the different Ways a Human Body can come into the World; where is given an
Account of its G^n^ration by Concourse of Man Woman. X. How we can conceive a
Human Body can be ^orm'd of a Woman without a Man, as Christ 's. XI. How to
conceive a Human Body to be made without Man or Woman, as Adam 's. XII. How to
conceive a Human Body Dead, some Ages since, to be brought to Life again, as in
the R^surrection. XIII. How many Ways it cannot be conceived that a Human Body
can be Entire and Alive in two Places at the same time. XIV. Of the Natural
State of the Soul, and its Influence upon the Body. XV. Of the Supernatural, or
Miraculous State of the Soul united to the Body.


There is in the Press, and will be published next Trinity-Term, A Third Volume
of Familiar Letters, written by the late Lord Rochester, the Duke of
Buckingham, and Sir George Etherege, which will be entirely theirs. If any
Gentlemen are willing to oblige the Public with any Letters of those
Honorable Persons own writing, they are desired to send them to Sam. Briscoe,
in Cov^nt-gard^n, who will print them in the next Volume.

Familiar Letters: VOL. I.

Written by the Right Honorable, John, late Earl of Rochester, TO THE
Honorable Henry Savile, Esquire And other LETTERS by Persons of Honor and Quality.

WITH LETTERS Written by the most Ingenious Mr. THO. OTWAY, AND Mrs. K. PHILIPS.

Published from their Original Copies.

With Modern LETTERS by THO. CHEEK, Esquire Mr. DENNIS, and Mr. BROWN.

The Second Edition with Additions.

London: Printed by W. Onley, for S. Briscoe, at the Corner of Charles-street,
in Russel Street, Covent Garden, 1697.

TO Dr. RADCLIFF.
I Have presumed, though I knew at the same time how hainously I trespassed
against you in doing so, to Inscribe your Name to the following Collection of
Letters. As you were no Stranger to that Excellent Person, whose Pieces
Composes, by far, the most valuable part of it, so I was satisfied that every
thing, from so celebrated a Hand, would be acceptable and welcome to you; and
in that Confidence, made bold to give you the Trouble of ^his Address. My Lord
Rochester has left ^o established a Reputation behind him, that he needs no
officious Pen to set out his Worth, especially to you, who were acquainted so
per^ectly well with all his Eminent Qualities, that made him the Delight and
Envy of both Sexes, and the Ornament of our Island. In every thing of his
Lordship's writing, there is something so happily expressed, the Graces are so
numerous, yet so unaffected, that I don't wonder why all the Original Touches
of so incomparable a Master, have been enquired after, with so Public and
General a Concern. Most of his other Compositions, especially those in Verse,
have long ago blessed the Public, and were received with Universal Delight and
Admiration, which gives me Encouragement to believe, that his Letters will find
the like Reception. Though most of them were written upon private Occasions, to
an Honorable Person who was happy in his Lordship's Acquaintance, with no
intention to be ever made public; yet that constant good Sense, which is all
along visible in them, the Justice of the Observations, and the peculiar
Beauties of the Style, are Reasons sufficient, why they should no longer be
concealed in private Hands. And indeed, at this time, when the private Plate of
the Nation comes abroad to relieve the present Exigences, it seems but just,
that since the Dearth of Wit^ is as great as that of Money, such a Treasure of
good Sense and Language should no longer be buried in Oblivion. With thi^
difference, however, That whereas our Plate before it can circulate in our
Markets, mus^ receive the Royal Stamp, must be melted down, and take another
Form, these Invaluable Remains want no Alterations to recommend them; they need
only be taken from the Rich Mines where they grew; for their own Intrinsic
Value secures them, and his Lordship's Name is sufficient to make them Current.

As for the Letters by other Hands, that make up this Volume, some of them were
written by Gentlemen, that are wholly Strangers to me, and others belong to
those that are so much better known in the World than myself, that I can say
nothing upon this Occasion, but what falls vastly short of their Merit. But I
cannot forbear to say something of Mr. Otway's: They have that Inimitable
Tenderness in them, that I dare oppose them to any thing of Antiquity; I am
sure few of the present Age can pretend to come up to them. The Passions, in
the raising of which, he had a Felicity peculiar to himself, are represented in
such lively Colors, that they cannot fail of affecting the most insensible
Hearts, with pleasing Agitations. I could wish we had more Pieces of^ the same
Hand, for I profess an entire Veneration to his Memory, and always looked upon
him as the only Person, almost, that knew the secret Springs and Sources of
Nature, and made a true use of them. Love, as it is generally managed by other
Hands, is either raving and enthusiastical, or else dull and languishing: In
him alone it is true Nature, and at the same time inspires us with Compassion
and Delight. After this, I will not venture to say any thing of my own Trifles
that bring up the Rear. Some of 'em were written long ago, and now huddled in
haste; the rest had a little more Care and Labor bestowed upon them. If they
contribute in the least to your Entertainment, which was my only Design in
publishing them, I have attained my Ends: I have some others by me, which I
may, perhaps, publish hereafter, if these meet with any tolerable Success.

I need not, and I am sure I cannot make you a better Panegyric than to
acquaint the World, that you were happy in my Lord Rochester's Friendship, that
he took pleasure in your Conversation, of which even his Enemies must allow him
to have been the best Judge, and that in the Politest Reign we can boast of in
England. The Approbation of so impartial a Judge, who was, in his Time, a
Scourge to all Blockheads, by what Names or Titles soever dignisied, or
distinguished, is above all the Incense that a much better Hand than mine can
presume to offer: Should I put out all the Dedication Sails, as it is the way of
most Authors, I could soon erect you into a great Hero, and Deliverer; and tell
how often you have triumphed over inveterate Distempers, and restored the Sick
to that only Blessing, that makes Life supportable. I could tell how, by your
single Merit, you have ba^^led a Faction formed against you with equal Malice
and Ignorance; I could tell what Marks of Munisicence you have left behind you,
in the Place that was honored with your Education, and how generously ready
you are to serve your Friends upon all Occasions. But after all, the highest
thing I will pretend to say of you her is, That you were esteemed, and valued,
and loved by my Lord Rochester. It Is true, as there never was any Conspicuous
Merit in the World, that had not, like Hercules, Monsters to encounter, so you
have had your share of them; but, Heaven be praised, your Enemies, with all
their vain Endeavors, have only served to six your Interest, and advance your
Reputation: Though I know you hear of nothing with more Uneasiness, than of the
Favors you do; yet I cannot omit to tell, and indeed I am vain upon it, that
you have condescended so low, as to divert those Hours you could steal from the
Public, with some of my Trifles, that you have been pleased to think
favorably of them, and rewarded them. For all which Obligations, I had no
other way of expressing my Gratitude but this; which, I am afraid will but
inflame the Reckoning, instead of paying any part of the Debt: But this has
been the constant Usage in all Ages of Parnassus, and, like Senators that take
Bribes, we have Antiquity and Universality to plead in our Excuse. But I forget
that you are all this while in pain, till the Dedication releases you:
Therefore I have nothing but my Wishes to add, That you, who have been so happy
a Restorer of Health to others, may ever enjoy it yourself, that your Days may
be always pleasant, and your Nights easy, and that you will be pleased to
forgive this Presumption in

Your most humble and most obliged Servant, T. BROWN.

THE Bookseller's Preface.
HAving, by the Assistance of a Worthy Friend, procured the following Letters
that were written by the late Incomparable Earl of Rochester (the Originals of
all which I preserve by me, to satisfy those Gentlemen, who may have the
Curiosity to see them under his Lordship's hand) I was encouraged to trouble
others of my Friends, that had any Letters in their Custody, to make this
Collection, which I now publish.

Indeed the Letters that were written by the abovementioned Honorable Person,
have something so happy in the Manner and Style, that I need not lose my Time
to convince the World they are genuine. I may say the same of Mr. Otway's
Letters, that they are full of Life and Passion, and sufficiently discover
their Author. And that this Collection might be complete, I got some that were
written by the Famed Orinda, Mrs. Katherine Phillips, to be added to the rest;
together with others by some Gentlemen now living, that the Reader might have a
Variety of Entertainment.

Our Neighboring Nations, whom I don't believe we come short of in any
respect, have printed several Volumes of Letters, which meet with public
Approbation; I am satisfied, that if the Gentlemen of England would be as free,
and Communicative to part with theirs, we might show as great a Number, and as
good a Choice as they have done. It has been used as an Objection against
publishing things of this Nature, That, if they are written as they ought to
be, they should never be made public. But I hope this Collection will disarm
that Objection; for though the Reader may not understand every particular
Passage, yet there are other things in them that will make him sufficient
Amends.

I have only a word more to add: Upon the Noise of this Collection, several
Gentlemen have been so kind, as to send me in Materials to compose a Second,
which is now printed; and, on the Printing the Second, I have procured as many
of the Lord Rochester's the Duke of Buckingham, and Sir George Etheridge, which
will almost make a third Vol. which if I can complete, it shall be published
next Trinity-Term; and therefore those Gentlemen that have any Curious Letters
by them, written by those Honorable Persons, and are willing to oblige the
Public, by letting them come abroad, are desired to send them to me, who will
take care to have them faithfully Transcribed for the Press, and Printed in the
third Vol. which will be entirely theirs, and no modern one mixed with them.

SAM. BRISCOE.

A TABLE Of all the Letters in this Volume.
SEveral Letters by the late Earl of Rochester, to the Honorable Henry Savil,
Esquire from p. 1. to p. 50. The Earl of L -- 's Letter to the Honorable Algernoon
Sidney, p. 51. Algernoon Sidney's Letter against Arbitrary Government, p. 60.
Two Letters by another Hand, to Madam -- from p. 67. to p. 72. Love Letters by
Mr. Otway, from p. 73. to 87. A Letter from -- to Mr. G -- p. 88. A Letter to
the Duke of Vivone, by the Famed Monsieur Boiliau. Translated by Thomas Cheek,
Esquire p. 91. A Letter by Mr. Dennis, sent with Monsieur Boileau's Speech to the
Academy of Paris, upon his Admission, p. 102. Monsieur Boileau's Speech to the
Academy. Translated by Mr. Dennis, p. 106. Letters of Courtship to a Woman of
Quality, from p. 118. to 133. A Letter of Reproach to a Woman of Quality, p.
134. A Letter of Business to a Merchant's Wife in the City, p. 136. Letters by
the late celebrated Mrs. Katherine Phillips, from p. 137. to 152. A Letter to
Mr. Herbert, p. 153. A Letter to C.G. Esquire in Covent Garden, p. 156. To the
Perjured Mrs. -- p. 163. To the Honorable -- in the Pall Mall, p. 168. A
Letter to my Lady -- p. 173. A Consolatory Letter to an Essex-Divine, upon the
Death of his Wife, p. 179. A Letter to the fair Lucinda at Epsom, p. 183. To
the same at London, p. 185. To W. Knight, Esquire at Ruscomb, in Berkshire, p. 189.
To a Gentleman that fell desperately in Love, and set up for a Beau in the 45th
Year of his Age, p. 197. The Answer, p. 200. A Letter to his honored Friend,
Dr. Baynard, at the Bath, p. 202. A Letter to Mr. Raphson, Fellow of the Royal
Society, upon occasion of Dr. Conner's Book, entitled, Physica Arcana, seu
Tractatus de Mystico corporum Statu; to be Printed by Mr. Briscoe, p. 213. A
Letter to the Lord North and Gray, p. 218. To a Friend in the Country, p. 221.
BOOKS newly Printed for R. We^lington, at the Lute in St. Paul Churchyard.
A Discourse of the Nature and Faculti^ of Man, in several Essays; with
Refl^^ctions upon the Occurrences of Human Li^^ By Tim. Nourse, Gent. The Lord
Rochester's Letters, Vol. I. The Works of that excellent Practical Ph^^sician,
Dr. Tho. Syden^am; wherein not on the History of Acute Diseases are treated
(...) after a new Method, but also the shortest (...) safest way of curing most
Chronical Diseas^ Ovid Travestie: Or a Burlesque on Ovi^ Epistles. By Capt.
Alexander Rad^liff, Gray's Inn. The Family-Physician: Being a cho^^ Collection
of approved and experienced R^^medies to cure all Diseases incident to H^^man
Bodies; useful in Families, and servi^^able to Country People. By George
Ha^ti^^ Se^vant to Sir Ken^hn Digby, till he died.
PLAYS.
Anatomist, or Sham-doctor. Plain-deal Orphan. Oedipus. Rover. Spanish Wiv^
Unnatural Brother. Younger Brother, Amorous Jilt.

Where you may be furnished with most Plays.

Familiar Letters, By the Right Honorable, JOHN, LATE Earl of ROCHESTER. VOL.
I.
TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
Dear SAVILE,
DO a Charity becoming one of your pious Principles, in preserving your humble
Servant Rochester, from the imminent Peril of Sobriety; which, for want of good
Wine, more than Company, (for I can drink like a Hermit betwixt God and my own
Conscience) is very like to befall me: Remember what Pains I have formerly taken
to wean you from your pernicious Resolutions of Discretion and Wisdom! And, if
you have a grateful Heart, (which is a Miracle amongst you Statesmen) show it,
by directing the Bearer to the best Wine in Town; and pray let not this highest
Point of Sacred Friendship be performed slightly, but go about it with all due
deliberation and care, as holy Priests to Sacrifice, or as discreet Thieves to
the wary performance of Burglary and Shop-lifting. Let your well-discerning
Pallat (the best Judge about you) travel from Cellar to Cellar, and then from
Piece to Piece, till it has lighted on Wine sit for its noble Choice and my
Approbation. To engage you the more in this matter, know, I have laid a Plot
may very probably betray you to the Drinking of it. My Lord -- will inform you
at large.

Dear Savile! as ever thou do hope to outdo MACHIAVEL, or equal ME, send
some good Wine! So may thy wearied Soul at last find Rest, no longer hovering
'twixt the unequal Choice of Politics and Lewdness! May thou be admired and
loved for thy domestic Wit; beloved and cherished for thy foreign Interest and
Intelligence.

ROCHESTER.

TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
HARRY,
YOU cannot shake off the Statesman entirely; for, I perceive, you have no
Opinion of a Letter, that is not almost a Gazette: Now, to me, who think the
World as giddy as my self, I care not which way it turns, and am fond of no
News, but the Prosperity of my Friends, and the Continuance of their Kindness
to me, which is the only Error I wish to continue in 'em: For my own part, I am
not at all stung with my Lord M -- 's mean Ambition, but I aspire to my Lord L
-- 's generous Philosophy: They who would be great in our little Government,
seem as ridiculous to me as Schoolboys, who, with much endeavor, and some
danger, climb a Crab-tree, venturing their Necks for Fruit, which solid Pigs
would disdain, if they were not starving. These Reflections, how idle soever
they seem to the Busy, if taken into consideration, would save you many a
weary Step in the Day, and help G -- y to many an Hours sleep, which he wants
in the Night: But G -- y would be rich; and, by my troth, there is some sense
in that: Pray remember me to him, and tell him, I wish him many Millions, that
his Soul may find rest. You write me word, That I Am out of favor with a
certain Poet, whom I have ever admired, for the disproportion of him and his
Attributes: He is a Rari^y which I cannot but be fond of, as one would be of a
Hog that could fiddle, or a singing Owl. If he falls upon me at the Blunt,
which is his very good Weapon in Wit, I will forgive him, if you please, and
leave the Repartee to Black Will, with a Cudgel. And now, Dear Harry, if it may
agree with your Affairs, to show yourself in the Country this Summer, contrive
such a Crew together, as may not be ashamed of passing by Woodstock; and, if
you can debauch Alderman G -- y, we will make a shift to delight his Gravity. I
am sorry for the declining D -- ss, and would have you generous to her at this
time; for that is true Pride, and I delight in it.

ROCHESTER.

TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
Dear SAVILE,
THIS Day I received the unhappy News of my own Death and Burial. But, hearing
what Heirs and Successors were decreed me in my Place, and chiefly in my
Lodgings, it was no small Joy to me, that those Tidings prove untrue; my
Passion for Living, is so increased, that I omit no Care of myself; which,
before, I never thought Life worth the trouble of taking. The King, who knows
me to be a very ill-natured Man, will not think it an ^asie matter for me to
die, now I live chiefly out of spite. Dear Mr. Savile, afford me some News
from your Land of the Living; and though I have little Curiosity to hear who is
well, yet I would be glad my few Friends are so, of whom you are no more the
least than the leanest. I have better Compliments for you, but that may not
look so sincere as I would have you believe I am, when I profess myself,

Your faithful, affectionate, humble Servant, ROCHESTER.
Adderbury, near Banbury, Feb.ult

My Service to my Lord Middlesex.

TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
HARRY,
I Am in a great straight what to write to you; the style of Business I am not
versed in, and you may have forgot, the familiar one we used heretofore. What
Alterations Ministry makes in Men, is not to be imagined; though I can trust
with confidence all those You are liable to, so well I know you, and so
perfectly I love you. We are in such a settled Happiness, and such merry
Security in this place, that, if it were not for Sickness, I could pass my time
very well, between my own Ill Nature, which inclines me very little to pity the
Misfortunes of malicious mistaken Fools, and the Policies of the Times, which
expose new Rarities of that kind every day. The News I have to send, and the
sort alone which could be so to you, are things Gyaris and carcere digna; which
I dare not trust to this pretty Fool, the Bearer, whom I heartily recommend to
your Favor and Protection, and whose Qualities will recommend him more; and
truly, if it might suit with your Character, at your times of leisure, to Mr.
Baptists's Acquaintance, the happy Consequence would be Singing, and in which
your Excellence might have a share not unworthy the greatest Ambassadors, nor
to be despised even by a Cardinal-Legate; the greatest and gravest of this
Court of both Sexes have ta^ted his Beauties; and, I Will assure you, Rome gains
upon us here, in this Point mainly; and there is no part of the Plot carried
with so much Secrecy and Vigor as this. Proselytes, of consequence, are daily
made, and my Lord S -- 's Imprisonment is no check to any. An account of Mr.
George Porter's Retirement, upon News that Mr. Grimes, with one Gentleman more,
had invaded England, Mr. S -- 's Apology, for making Songs on the Duke of M.
with his Oration-Consolatory on my Lady D -- 's Death, and a Politic
Dissertation between my Lady P -- s and Capt. Dangerfield, with many other
worthy Treatises of the like nature, are things worthy your perusal; but I
durst not send 'em to you without leave, not knowing what Consequence it might
draw upon your Circumstances and Character; but if they will admit a
Correspondence of that kind, in which alone I dare presume to think myself
capable, I shall be very industrious in that way, or any other, to keep you
from forgetting,

Your most affectionate, obliged, humble Servant, ROCHESTER.
White Hall, Nov. 1. 79.
TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
Dear SAVILE,
WEre I as Idle as ever, which I should not fail of being, if Health permitted;
I would write a small Romance, and make the Sun with his dishrievel'd Rays
guild the Tops of the Palaces in Leather-lane: Then should those vile
Enchanters Barten and Ginman, lead forth their Illustrious Captives in Chains
of Quicksilver, and confining 'em by Charms to the loathsome Banks of a dead
Lake of Diet-drink; you, as my Friend, should break the horrid Silence, and
speak the most passionate fine things that ever Heroic Lover uttered; which
being softly and sweetly replied to by Mrs. Roberts, should rudely be
interrupted by the envious F --. Thus would I lead the mournful Tale along,
till the gentle Reader bathed with the Tribute of his Eyes, the Names of such
unfortunate Lovers -- And this (I take it) would be a most excellent way of
celebrating the Memories of my most Pockey Friends, Companions and Mistresses.
But it is a miraculous thing (as the Wise have it) when a Man, half in the
Grave, cannot leave off playing the Fool, and the Buffoon; but so it falls out
to my Comfort: For at this Moment I am in a damned Relapse, brought by a
Fever, the Stone, and some ten Diseases more, which have deprived me of the
Power of crawling, which I happily enjoyed some Days ago; and now I fear, I
must fall, that it may be fulfilled which was long since written for
Instruction in a good old Ballad, But he who lives not Wise and Sober,
Falls with the Leaf still in October.
About which time, in all probability, there may be a period added to the
ridiculous being of

Your humble Servant, ROCHESTER.

TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
Dear SAVILE,
IN my return from New Market, I met your Packet, and truly was not more
surprised at the Indirectness of Mr. P.'s Proceeding, than overjoyed at the
Kindness and Care of yours. Misery makes all Men less or more dishonest; and I
am not astonished to see Villainy industrious for Bread; especially, living in a
place where it is often so de gayete de Coeur. I believe, the Fellow thought of
this Device to get some Money, or else he is put upon it by Somebody, who has
given it him already; but I give him leave to prove what he can against me:
However, I will search into the Matter, and give you a further account within a
Post or two. In the mean time you have made my Heart glad in giving me such a
Proof of your Friendship; and I am now sensible, that it is natural for you to
be kind to me, and can never more despair of it.

I am your faithful, obliged, humble Servant, ROCHESTER.
Bishop-Stafford, Apr. 5. 80.
TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE, Ambassador in FRANCE. Begun, White Hall, May
30th, 79.
Dear SAVILE,
IT IS neither Pride or Neglect (for I am not of the new Council, and I love you
sincerely) but Idleness on one side, and not knowing what to say on the other,
has hindered me from Writing to you, after so kind a Letter, and the Present you
sent me, for which I return you at last my humble Thanks. Changes in this place
are so frequent, that F -- himself can now no longer give an account, why this
was done to Day, or what will ensue to Morrow; and Accidents are so
extravagant, that my Lord W -- intending to Lie, has, with a Prophetic Spirit,
once told truth. Every Man in this Court thinks he stands fair for Minister;
some give it to Shaftsbury, others to Hallifax; but Mr. Waller says S -- does
all; I am sure my Lord A -- does little, which your Excellence will easily
believe. And now the War in Scotland takes up all the Discourse of Politic
Persons. His Grace of Lauderdale values himself upon the Rebellion, and tells
the King, It is very auspicious and advantageous to the drift of the present
Councils: The rest of the Scots, and especially D. H -- are very inquisitive
after News from Scotland, and really make a handsome Figure in this Conjuncture
at London. What the D. of Monmouth will effect, is now the general expectation,
who took Post unexpectedly, left all that had offered their Service in this
Expedition, in the lurch; and, being attended only by Sir Thomas Armstrong, and
Mr. C -- will, without question, have the full Glory as well of the Prudential
as the Military Part of this Action entire to himself. The most profound
Politicians have weighty Brows, and careful Aspects at present, upon a Report
crept abroad, That Mr. Langhorn, to save his Life, offers a Discovery of
Priests and Jesuits Lands, to the value of Fourscore and ten thousand Pounds a
Year; which being accepted, it is feared, Partisans and Undertakers will be
found out to advance a considerable Sum of Money upon this Fund, to the utter
Interruption of Parliaments, and the Destruction of many hopeful Designs. This,
I must call God to witness, was never hinted to me in the least by Mr. P -- to
whom I beg you will give me your hearty Recommendations. Thus much to afford
you a taste of my serious Abilities, and to let you know I have a great
Goggle-eye to Business: And now I cannot deny you a share in the high
satisfaction I have received at the account which flourishes here of your high
Protestancy at Paris: Charenton was never so Honored, as since your Residence
and Ministry in France, to that degree, that it is not doubted if the
Parliament be sitting at your return, or otherwise the Mayor and
Common Council, will Petition the King you may be dignified with the Title of
that place, by way of Earldom or Duked^m, as his Majesty shall think most
proper to give, or you accept.

Mr. S -- is a Man of that tenderness of Heart, and approved Humanity, that he
will doubtless be highly afflicted when he hears of the unfortunate Pilgrims,
though he appears very obdurate ^o the Complaints of his own best Concubine, and
your fair Kinswoman M -- who now starves. The Packet enclosed in your last, I
read with all the sense of Compassion it merits, and if I can prove so
unexpectedly happy to succeed in my Endeavou^s for that Fair Unfortunate, she
shall have a speedy account. I thank God, there is yet a Harry Savile in
E^gland, with whom I drank your Health last Week at Sir William Coventry's; and
who, in Features, Proportion and Pledging, gives me so lively an Idea of
yourself, that I am resolved to retire into Oxfordshire, and enjoy him till
Shiloe come, or you from France.

ROCHESTER.
Ended the 2^ th of June, 1679.
TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
HARRY,
ANY kind of Correspondence with such a Friend as you, is very agreeable; and
therefore you will easily believe, I am very ill when I lose the opportunity of
Writing to you: But Mr. Povy comes into my Mind, and hinders farther
Compliment: In a plainer way I must tell you, I pray for your hapyy
Restoration; but was not at all sorry for your glorious Disgrace, which is an
Honor, considering the Cause. I would say something to the serious part (as
you were pleased to call it) of your former Letter; but it will disgrace my
Politics to differ from yours, who have wrought now sometime under the best
and keenest Statesmen our Cabinet boasts of: But, to confess the Truth, my
Advice to the Lady you wot of, has ever been this, Take your Measures just
contrary to your Rivals, live in Peace with all the World, and easily with the
King: Never be so Ill-natured to stir up his Anger against others, but let him
forget the use of a Passion, which is never to do you good: Cherish his Love
wherever it inclines, and be assured you cannot commit greater Folly than
pretending to be Jealous; but, on the contrary, with Hand, Body, Head, Heart
and all the Faculties you have, contribute to his Pleasure all you can, and
comply with his Desires throughout: And, for new Intrigues, so you be at one
end, it is no matter which: Make Sport when you can, at other times help it. --
Thus, I have given you an account how unfit I am to give the Advice you
proposed: Besides this, you may judge, whether I was a good Pimp, or no. But
some thought otherwise; and so truly I have renounced Business; let abler Men
try it. More a great deal I would say, but upon this Subject; and, for this
time, I beg, this may suffice, from

Your humble and most affectionate faithful Servant, ROCHESTER.

TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
Dear SAVILE,
It Is not that I am the idlest Creature living, and only choose to employ my
Thoughts rather upon my Friends, than to languish all the Day in the
tediousness of doing nothing, that I write to you; but owning, that (though you
excel most Men in Friendship and good Nature) you are not quite exempt from all
Human Frailty, I send this to hinder you from forgetting a Man who loves you
very heartily. The World, ever since I can remember, has been still so
insupportably the same, that 'twere vain to hope there were any alterations;
and therefore I can have no curiosity for News; only I would be glad to know if
the Parliament be like to sit any time; for the Peers of England being grown of
late Years very considerable in the Government, I would make one at the
Session. Livy and Sickness has a little inclined me to Policy; when I come to
Town I make no question but to change that Folly for some less; whether Wine or
Women I know not; according as my Constitution serves me: Till when (Dear
Harry) Farewell! When you Dine at my Lord Lisle's let me be remembered.

Kings and Princes are only as Incomprehensible as what they pret^nd to
represent; but apparently as Frail as Those they Govern. -- This is a Season of
Tribulation; and I piously beg of Almighty God, that the strict Severity shown
to one scandalous Sin amongst us, may Expiate for all grievous Calamities. --
So help them God, whom it concerns!

TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
HARRY,
IF Sack and Sugar be a Sin, God help the Wicked; was the Saying of a merry fat
Gentleman, who lived in Days of Yore, loved a Glass of Wine, would be merry
with a Friend, and sometimes had an unlucky Fancy for a Wench. Now (dear Mr.
Savile) forgive me, if I confess, that, upon several occasions, you have put me
in mind of this fat Person, and now more particularly, for thinking upon your
present Circumstances, I cannot but say with myself, If loving a pretty Woman,
and hating Lautherdale, bring Banishments and Pox, the Lord have mercy upon
poor Thieves and S -- s! But, by this time, all your Inconveniences (for, to a
Man of your very good Sense, no outward Accidents are more) draw very near
their end; For my own part, I Am taking pains not to die, without knowing how to
live on, when I have brought it about: But most Human Affairs are carried on at
the same nonsensical rate, which makes me, (who am now grown Superstitious)
think it a Fault to laugh at the Monky we have here, when I compare his
Condition with Mankind. You will be very good-natured if you keep your Word,
and write to me sometimes: And so good Night, dear Mr. Savile.

ROCHESTER.

TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
HARRY,
WHether Love, Wine, or Wisdom, (which rule you by turns) have the present
Ascendant, I cannot pretend to determine at this distance; but Goodnature,
which waits about you with more diligence than Godfrey himself, is my Security,
that you are unmindful of your absent Friends: To be from you, and forgotten by
you at once, is a Misfortune I never was criminal enough to merit, since to the
Black and Fair Countess, I villanously betrayed the daily Addresses of your
divided Heart: You forgave that upon the first Bottle, and upon the second, on
my Conscience, would have renounced them and the whole Sex; Oh! That second
Bottle (Harry!) is the Sin^^rest, Wisest, and most Impartial Downright Friend
we have; tells us truth of o^rselves, and forces us to speak Truths of others;
banishes Flattery from our Tongues, and distru^t from our Hearts, sets us above
the mean Policy of Court-Prudence; which makes us lie to one another all Day,
for fear of being betrayed by each other at Night. And (before God) I believe,
the errantest Villain breathing, is honest as long as that Bottle lives, and
few of that Tribe dare venture upon him, at least, among the Courtiers and
Statesmen. I have seriously considered one thing, That the three Businesses of
this Age, Women, Politics, and Drinking, the la^t is the only Exercise at
which you and I have not proved ourselves errant Fumblers: If you have the
Vanity to think otherwise; when we meet, let us appeal to Friends of both
Sexes, and as they shall determine, live and die their Drunkards, or entire
Lovers. For, as we mince the Matter, it is hard to say which is the most
tiresom Creature, loving Drunkard, or the drunken Lov^r.

If you ventured your fat Buttock a Gallop to Portsmouth, I doubt not but through
extreme Galling, you now lie Bedridden of the Piles, or Fistula in Ano, and have
the leisure to write to your Country-Acquaintance, which if you omit I shall
take the Liberty to conclude you very Proud. Such a Letter should be directed
to me at Adderbury, near Banbury, where I intend to be within these three Days.

From your obedient humble Servant, ROCHESTER.
Bath, the 22d of June.
TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
Dear SAVILE,
WHether Love or the Politics have the greater Interest in your Journey to
France, because it is argued among wiser Men, I will not conclude upon; but
hoping so much from your Friendship, that, without reserve, you will trust me
with the time of your stay in Paris, I have writ this to assure you, if it can
continue a Month, I will not fail to wait on you there. My Resolutions are to
improve this Winter for the Improvement of my Parts in Foreign Countries, and
if the Temptation of seeing you, be added to the Desires I have already, the
Sin is so sweet, that I am resolved to embrace it, and leave out of my Prayers,
Libra nos a Malo -- For thine is, etc.

ROCHESTER.
Oxford, September. 5.
TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
HARRY,
IT IS not the least of my Happiness, that I think you love me; but the first of
all my Pretensions is to make it appear, that I faithfully endeavor to deserve
it. If there be a real good upon Earth, it is in the Name of FRIEND, without
which all others are mere fantastical. How few of us are fit stuff to make that
thing, we have daily the melancholy experience.

However, dear Harry! Let us not give out, nor despair of bringing that about,
which, as it is the most difficult, and rare Accident of Life, is also the
best; nay, (perhaps) the only good one. This Thought has so entirely possessed
me since I came into the Country, (where, only, one can think; for, you at
Court think not at all; or, at least, as if you were shut up in a Drum; as you
think of nothing, but the Noise that is made about you) that I have made many
Serious Reflections upon it, and, amongst others, gathered one Maxim, which I
desire, should be communicated to our Friend Mr. G --; That, we are bound in
Morality and common Honesty, to endeavor after Competent Riches; since it is
certain, that few Men, if any, uneasy in their Fortunes, have proved firm and
clear in their Friendships. A very poor Fellow, is a very poor Friend; and not
one of a thousand can be good natured to another, who is not pleased within
himself. But while I grow into Proverbs, I forget that you may impute my
Philosophy to the Dog Days, and living alone. To prevent the Inconveniences of
Solitude, and many others, I intend to go to the Bath on Sunday next, in
Visitation to my Lord Treasurer: Be so Politic, or be so Kind, (or a little of
both, which is better) as to step down thither, if famous Affairs at Windsor,
do not de^tain you. Dear Harry! I am

Your Hearty, Faithful, Affectionate, Humble Servant, ROCHESTER.


If you see the Duchess of P -- very often, take some opportunity to talk to
her about what I spoke to you at London.

TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE^
Dear SAVILE,
IF it were the Sign of an honest Man, to be happy in his Friends, sure I were
marked out for the worst of Men; since no one ever lost so many as I have done,
or knew to make so few. The Severity you say the Duchess of P -- shows to me,
is a proof, that it is not in my power to deserve well of Anybody; since (I
call Truth to Witness) I have never been guilty of an Error, that I know, to
her: And this may be a Warning to you, that remain in the Mistake of being kind
to me, never to expect a grateful Return; since I am so utterly ignorant how to
make it: To value you in my Thoughts, to prefer you in my Wishes, to serve you
in my Words; to observe, study, and obey you in all my Actions, is too little;
since I have performed all this to her, without so much as an offensive
Accident. And yet she thinks it just, to use me ill. If I were not malicious
enough to hope she were in the wrong; I must have a very melancholy Opinion of
myself. I wish your Interest might prevail with her, as a Friend of here is, not
mine, to tell how I have deserved it of her, since she has never accused me of
any Crime, but of being Cunning; and I told her, Somebody had been Cunninger
than I, to persuade her so. I can as well support the Hatred of the whole
World, as Anybody, not being generally fond of it. Those whom I have obliged,
may use me with Ingratitude, and not afflict me much: But to be injured by
those who have obliged me, and to whose Service I am ever bound; is such a
Curse, as I can only wish on them who wrong me to the Duchess.

I hope you have not forgot what G -- y and you have promised me; but within
some time you will come and fetch me to London: I shall scarce think of coming,
till you call me, as not having many prevalent Motives to draw me to the Court,
if it be so that my Master has no need of my Service, nor my Friends of my
Company.

Mr. Shepherd is a Man of a fluent Style and coherent Thought; if, as I
suspect, he writ your Postscript.

I wish my Lord Hallifax Joy of every Thing, and of his Daughter to boot.

ROCHESTER.

TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
HARRY,
YOu, who have known me these ten Years the Grievance of all prudent Persons,
the Byword of Statesmen, the Scorn of ugly Ladies, which are very near All,
and the irreconcilable Aversion of fine Gentlemen, who are the Ornamental Part
o^ a Nation, and yet found me seldom sad, even under these weighty Oppressions;
can you think that the loving of lean Arms, small Legs, red Eyes and Nose, (if
you will consider that Trifle too) can have the Power to depress the natural
Alacrity of my careless Soul; especially upon receiving a fine Letter from Mr.
Savile, which never wants Wit and Goodnature, two Qualities able to transport
my Heart with Joy, tho it were breaking? I wonder at M -- 's flaunting it in
Court with such fine Clothes; sure he is an altered Person since I saw him;
for, since I can remember, neither his ownself, nor any belonging to him, were
ever out of Rags: His Page alone was well clothed of all his Family, and that
but in appearance; for, of late he has made no more of w^aring Second-hand C --
ts, than Second-hand Shoes; though I must confess, to his Honor, he changed 'em
oftener. I wish the King were soberly advised about a main Advantage in this
Marriage, which may possibly be omitted; I mean, the ridding his Kingdom of
some old Beauties and young Deformities, who swam, and are a Grievance to his
Liege People. A Foreign Prince ought to behave himself like a Kite, who is
allowed to take one Royal Chick for his Reward; but then it is expected, before
he leaves the Country, his Flock shall clear the whole Parish of all the
Garbage and Carrion many Miles about. The King had never such an opportunity;
for the Dutch are very ^oul Feeders, and what they leave he must never hope to
be rid of, unless he set up an Intrigue with the Tartars or Cossacks. For the
Libel you speak of, upon that most unwitty Generation, the present Poets, I
rejoice in it with all my Heart, and shall take it for a Favor, if you will
send me a Copy. He cannot want Wit utterly, that has a Spleen to those Rogues,
though never so dully expressed. And now, dear Mr. Savile, forgive me, if I do
not wind up my self with an handsome Period.

ROCHESTER.

TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
Dear SAVILE,
THOUGH I am almost Blind, utterly Lame, and scarce within the reasonable hopes
of ever seeing London again, I am not yet so wholly mortified and dead to the
taste of all Happiness, not to be extremely revived at the receipt of a kind
Letter from an old Friend, who in all probability might have laid me aside in
his Thoughts, if not quite forgot me by this time. I ever thought you an
extraordinary Man, and must now think you such a Friend, who, being a Courtier,
as you are, can love a Man whom it is the great Mode to hate. Catch Sir G. H.
or Sir Carr, at such an ill-bred Proceeding, and I am mistaken: For the hideous
Deportment, which you have heard of, concerning running naked, so much is true,
that we went into the River somewhat late in the Year, and had a Frisk for
forty Yards in the Meadow, to dry ourselves. I will appeal to the King and the
Duke, If they had not done as much; nay, may Lord-Chancellor and the
Archbishops both, when they were Schoolboys? And, at these Years, I have heard
the one Declaimed like Cicero, the others Preached like St. Austin: Prudenter
Persons, I conclude, they were, even in Hanging-sleeves, than any of the flashy
Fry, (of which I must own myself the most unsolid) can hope to appear, even in
their ripest Manhood.

And now, (Mr. Savile) since you are pleased to quote yourself for a grave Man
of the Number of the Scandalized, be pleased to call to mind the Year 1676,
when two large fat Nudities led the Coranto round Rosamond's fair Fountain,
while the poor violated Nymph wept to behold the strange Decay of Manly Parts,
since the Days of her dear Harry the Second: P -- ('it is confessed) you showed
but little of; but for A -- and B --, (a filthier Ostentation! God wot) you
exposed more of that Nastiness in your two Folio Volumes, than we altogether in
our six Quarto's. Pluck therefore the Beam out of thine own Eye, etc. And now
it is time to thank you for your kind inviting me to London, to make Dutch-m^n
merry; a thing I would avoid, like killing Punaises, the filthy Savor of
Dutch-mirth being more terrible. If GOD, in Mercy, has made 'em hush and
melancholy, do not you rouse their sleeping Mirth, to make the Town mourn; the
Prince of Orange is exalted above 'em, and I could wish my self in Town to
serve him in some refined Pleasures; which, I fear, you are too much a
Dutchman to think of.

The best Present I can make at this time is the Bearer, whom I beg you to take
care of, that the King may hear his Tunes, when he is easy and private,
because I am sure they will divert him extremely: And may he ever have Harmony
in his Mind, as this Fellow will pour it into his Ears: May he dream
pleasantly, wake joyfully, love safely and tenderly, live long and happily;
ever prays (Dear Savile) un Bougre less qui era toute sa foutue rest de Vie,

Vostre fidelle, amy and tres humble Serviteur, ROCHESTER.

TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
HARRY,
THAT Night I received by Yours the surprising Account of my Lady Dutchess's
more than ordinary Indignation against me, I was newly brought in dead of a
Fall from my Horse, of which I still remain Bruised and Bedrid, and can now
scarce think it a Happiness that I saved my Neck. What ill Star reigns over me,
that I Am still marked out for Ingratitude, and only used barbarously to those I
am obliged to! Had I been troublesome to her in pinning the Dependence of my
Fortune upon her Solicitations to the King, or her Unmerited Recommendations of
me to some Great Man; it would not have moved my Wonder much, if she had sought
any Occasion to be rid of a useless Trouble: But, a Creature, who had already
received of her all the Obligations he ever could pretend to, except the
continuance of her good Opinion, for the which he resolved, and did direct
every step of his Life in Duty and Service to her, and all who were concerned
in her; why should she take the Advantage of a false idle Story, to hate such a
Man; as if it were an Inconvenience to her to be harmless, or a Pain to
continue just? By that God that made me, I have no more offended her in
Thought, Word, or Deed, no more imagined or uttered the least Thought to her
Contempt or Prejudice, than I have plotted Treason, concealed Arms, Trained
Regiments for a Rebellion. If there be upon Earth a Man of Common Honesty, who
will justify a Tittle of her Accusation, I am contented never to s^^ her.
After this, she need not forbid me to come to her, I have little Pride or
Pleasure in showing myself where I am accused of a M^anness I were not capable
of, even for her Service, which would prove a shrewder Trial of my Honesty than
any Ambition I ever had to make my Court to. I thought the Duchess of P --
more an Angel than I find her a Woman; and as this is the first, it shall be
the most malicious thing I will ever say of her. For her generous Resolution of
not hurting me to the King, I thank her; but she must think a Man much obliged,
after the calling of him Knave, to say she will do him no farther Prejudice.
For the Countess of P --, whatever she has heard me say, or any body else, of
her, I Will stand the Test of any impartial Judge, 'twas neither injurious nor
unmannerly; and how severe soever she pleases to be, I have always been her
humble Servant, and will continue so. I do not know how to assure myself the D.
will spare me to the King, who would not to you; I Am sure she cannot say I ever
injured you to her; nor am I at all afraid she can hurt me with you; I dare
swear you don't think I have dealt so indiscreetly in my Service to her, as to
doubt me in the Friendship I profess to you. And, to show you I rely upon
yours, let me beg of you to talk once more with her, and desire her to give me
the fair hearing she would afford any Footman of hers, who had been complained
of to her by a less-worthy Creature, (for such a one, I assure myself, my
Accuser is) unless it be for her Service, to wrong the most faithful of her
Servants; and then I shall be proud of mine. I would not be run down by a
Company of Rogues, and this looks like an Endeavor toward it: Therefore (dear
Harry) send me word, how I am with other Folks; if you visit my Lord Treasurer,
name the Calamity of this Matter to him, and tell me sincerely how he takes it:
And, if you hear the King mention me, do the Office of a Friend, to

Your humble Servant, ROCHESTER.

TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
Dear SAVILE,
THE Lowsiness of Affairs in this Place, is such (forgive the unmannerly
Phrase! Expressions must descend to the Nature of Things expressed) it is not
fit to entertain a private Gentleman, much less one of a public Character,
with the Retail of them, the general Heads, under which this whole Island may
be considered, are Spies, Beggars and Rebels, the Transpositions and Mixtures
of these, make an agreeable Variety; Busy Fools and Cautious Knaves are bred
out of 'em, and set off wonderfully; though of this latter sort, we have fewer
now than ever, Hypocrisy being the only Vice in decay amongst us, few Men here
dissemble their being Rascals; and no Woman disowns being a Whore. Mr. O -- was
tried two Days ago for Buggery, and cleared: The next Day he brought his Action
to the King's Bench, against his Accuser, being attended by the Earl of
Shaftsbury, and other Peers, to the number of Seven, for the Honor of the
Protestant Cause. I have sent you herewith a Libel, in which my own share is
not the least; the King having perused it, is no ways dissatisfied with his:
The Author is apparent Mr. --, his Patron my L -- having a Panegerick in the
midst; upon which happened a handsome Quarrel between his L --, and Mrs. B -- at
the Duchess of P --; she called him, The Hero of the Libel, and complimented
him upon having made more Cuckolds, than any Man alive; to which he answered,
She very well knew one he never made, nor never cared to be employed in making.
-- Rogue and Bitch ensued, till the King, taking his Grand-father's Character
upon him, became the Peacemaker. I will not trouble you any longer, but beg
you still to Love

Your faithful, humble Servant, ROCHESTER.

TO THE Honorable HENRY SAVILE.
HARRY,
YOU are the only Man of England, that keep Wit with your Wisdom; and I am
happy in a Friend that excels in both, were your Good Nature the least of your
Good Qualities, I durst not presume upon it, as I have done; but I know you are
so sincerely concerned in serving your Friends truly, that I need not make an
Apology for the Trouble I have given you in this Affair.

I daily expect more considerable Effects of your Friendship, and have the
Vanity to think, I shall be the better for your growing poorer.

In the mean time, when you please to distinguish from Prosers and Windham, and
comply with Rosers and Bull, not forgetting John Stevens, you shall find me

Your most Ready and most Obedient Servant, ROCHESTER.

The End of the late Earl of Rochester's Letters.
THE E. of L -- 's LETTER To the Honorable Algernoon Sidney.
DIsuse of Writing has made it uneasy to me, Age makes it hard, and the
Weakness of Sight and Hand, makes it almost impossible. This may excuse me to
Everybody, and particularly to you, who have not invited me much unto it, but
rather have given me cause to think, that you were willing to save me the
labor of Writing, and yourself the trouble of Reading my Letters: For, after
you had left me sick, solitary and sad, at Penshurst, and that you had resolved
to undertake the Employment wherein you have lately been, you neither came to
give me a Farewell, nor did so much as send one to me, but only writ a wrangling
Letter or two concerning Money, and Hoskins, and Sir Robert Honywood's Horse;
and though both before and after your going out of England, you writ to diverse
other Persons, the first Letter that I received from you, was dated, as I
remember, the 13th of September; the second in November, wherein you take
notice of your Mother's Death; and if there were one more, that was all, until
Mr. Sterry came, who made such haste from Penshurst, that coming very late at
Night, he would not stay to Dine the next Day, nor to give me time to Write. It
is true, that since the Change of Affairs here, and of your Condition there,
your Letters have been more frequent; and if I had not thought my Silence
better both ^or you and myself, I would have written more than once or twice
unto you; but though, for some Reasons, I did forb^ar, I failed not to desire
others to write unto you, and with their own, to convey the best Advice that my
little Intelligence and weak Judgment could af^ord; particularly not to expect
new Authorities nor Orders from hence, not to stay in any of the Places of your
Negotiation, not to come into England, much less to expect a Ship to be sent
for you; or to think, that an Account was, or would be expected of you here,
unless it were of Matters very different from your Transactions there; that it
would be best for you presently to divest yourself of the Character of a
Public Minister, to dismiss all your Train, and to retire into some safe
place, not very near nor very far from England, that you might hear from your
Friends sometimes. And for this I advised Hamburgh, where I hear you are, by
your Man Powel, or by them that have received Letters from you, with Presents
of Wine and Fish, which I do not reproach nor envy.

Your last Letter to me had no Date of Time or Place; but, by another at the
same time to Sir John Temple, of the 28th of July, as I remember, sent by Mr.
Missonden, I guess that mine was of the same Date: By those that I have had, I
perceive that you have been misadvertiz'd; for though I meet with no Effects
nor Marks of Displeasure, yet I find no such Tokens or Fruits of Favor, as may
give me either Power or Credit for those Under^akings and good Offices, which,
perhaps, you expect of me.

And now I am again upon the Point of retiring to my poor Habitation, having
for myself no other Design, than to pass the small remainder of my Days
innocently and quietly; and, if it please God, to be gathered in Peace to my
Fathers. And concerning you, what to resolve in myself, or what to advise you,
truly I know not: For, you must give me leav^ to remember of how little Weig^
(...) ^pinions and Counsels have bee^ ^ith you, and how unkindly and unfriendly
you have rejected those Exhortations and Admonitions, which in much Affection
and Kindness I have given you upon many Occasions, and in almost every thing,
from the highest to the lowest, that has concerned you; and this you may think
sufficient to discourage me from putting my Advices into the like Danger: Yet,
somewhat I will say: And, First, I think it unfit, and (perhaps) as yet, unsafe
for you to come into England; for, I believe, Powel has told you, that he
heard, when he was here, That you were likely to be excepted out of the General
Act of Pardon and Oblivion: And though I know not what you have done or said
here or there, yet I have several ways heard, That there is as ill an Opinion
of you, as of any, even of those that condemned the late King: And when I
thought there was no other Exception to you, than your being of the other
Party, I spoke to the General in your behalf, who told me, That very ill
Offices had been done you, but he would assist you as much as justly he could;
and I intended then also to speak to Somebody else, you may guess whom I mean:
But, since that, I have heard such things of you, that in the doubtfulness only
of their being true, no Man will open his Mouth for you. I will tell you some
Passages, and you shall do well to clear yourself of them. It is said, That the
University of Copenhagen brought their Album unto you, desiring you to write
something therein, and that you did scribere in Albo these words, Manus haec
inimica Tyrannis,
Ense petit placida cum Liberate quietem:
And put your Name to it. This cannot choose but be publicly known, if it be
true. It is said also, That a Minister, who has married a Lady Laurence here
of Chelsey, but now dwelling at Copenhagen, being there in Company with you,
said, I think you were none of the late King's Judges, nor guilty of his Death,
meaning our King. Guilty! said you; Do you call that Guilt? Why, 'twas the
justest and bravest Action that ever was done in England, or any where else;
with other words to the same effect. It is said also, That you having heard of
a Design to seize upon you, or to cause you to be taken Prisoner, you took
notice of it to the King of Denmark himself, and said, I hear there is a Design
to seize upon me: But who is it that has that Design? Est^e nostre Bandit. By
which you are understood to mean the King.

Besides this, it is reported, That you have been heard to say many scornful
and contemptuous things of the King's Person and Family; which, unless you can
justify yourself, will hardly be forgiven or ^orgotten: For, such Personal
Offenses make deeper Impressions than Public Actions either of War or Treaty.
Here is a Resident, as he calls himself, of the King of Denmark, whose Name (as
I hear) is Pedcombe; he has visited me, and offered his readiness to give you
any Assistance in his Power or Credit with the Ambassador, Mr. Alfield, who
was then expected, and is now arrived here, and has had his first Audience. I
have not seen Mr. Pedcombe since; but, within a few Days I will put him in mind
of his Profession of Friendship to you, and try what he can or will do. Sir
Robert Honywood is also come hither; and, as I hear, the King is graciously
pleased to admit him to his Presence, which will be somewhat the better for
you, because then the Exceptions against your Employment and Negotiation,
wherein you were Colleague, will be removed, and you will have no more to
answer for, than your own particular Behavior. I believe Sir Robert Honywood
will be industrious enough to procure Satisfaction to the Merchants in the
Business of Money, wherein he will have the Assistance of Sir John Temple; to
whom I refer you for that and some other things.

I have little to say to your Complaints of your Sister Strayford's unequal
Returns to your Affection and Kindness, but that I am sorry for it, and that
you are well enough served for bestowing so much of your Care where it was not
due, and neglecting them to whom it was due, and I hope you will be wiser
hereafter. She and her Husband have not yet paid the Thousand Pounds, whereof
you are to have your part, by my Gift; for so, I think, you are to understand
it, though your Mother desired it; and if for the Payment thereof your being in
England, or in some Place not far off, be necessary, as some pretend, for the
Sealing of some Writings, I think that, and other Reasons, sufficient to
persuade you to stay a while where you are, that you may hear frequently from
your Friends, and they from you. I am wholly against your going into Italy as
yet, till more may be known of your Condition, which, for the present, is hard;
and, I confess, that I do not yet see any more than this, that either you must
live in Exile, or very privately here; and (perhaps) not safely; for though the
Bill of Indemnity be lately passed, yet if there be any particular and great
Displeasure against you, as I fear there is, you may feel the Effects thereof
from the Higher Powers, and receive Affronts from the Inferior: Therefore you
were best to stay at Hamburgh, which, for a Northern Situation, is a good
place, and healthful. I will help you as much as I can in discovering and
informing you of what concerns you; though, as I began, so I must end, with
telling you, That Writing is now grown troublesome to

Your Affectionate Le --
London, Aug. 30. 1660.
The Honorable Algernoon Sidney's LETTER, AGAINST BRIBERY, AND Arbitrary
Government. Written to his Friends, in Answer to Theirs, persuading his Return
to England.
SIR,
I Am sorry I cannot in all things conform myself to the Advices of my Friends;
if theirs had any joint concernment with mine, I would willingly submit my
Interest to theirs; but when I alone am interested, and they only advise me to
come over as soon as the Act of Indemnity is passed, because they think it is
best for me, I cannot wholly lay aside my own Judgment and Choice. I confess,
we are naturally inclined to delight in our own Country, and I have a
particular Love to mine; I hope I have given some Testimony of it; I think that
being exiled from it is a great Evil, and would redeem myself from it with the
loss of a great deal of my Blood: But when that Country of mine, which used to
be esteemed a Paradise, is now like to be made a Stage of Injury, the Liberty
which we hoped to establish oppressed, all manner of Profaneness, Looseness,
Luxury and Lewdness set up in its height; instead of the Piety, Virtue,
Sobriety, and Modesty, which we hoped God, by our Hands, would have introduced;
the Best of our Nation made a Prey to the Worst; the Parliament, Court and Army
corrupted, the People enslaved, all things vendible, and no Man safe, but by
such evil and infamous Means as Flattery and Bribery; what Joy can I have in my
own Country in this Condition? Is it a Pleasure to see all that I love in the
World sold and destroyed? Shall I renounce all my old Principles, learn the
vile Courtarts, and make my Peace by bribing some of them? Shall their
Corruption and Vice be my Safety? Ah! no; better is a Life among Strangers,
than in my own Country upon such Conditions. Whilst I live, I will endeavor
to preserve my Liberty; or, at least, not consent to the destroying of it. I
hope I shall die in the same Principle in which I have lived, and will live no
longer than they can preserve me. I have in my Life been guilty of many
Follies, but, as I think of no meanness, I will not blot and defile that which
is past, by endeavoring to provide for the future. I have ever had in my Mind,
that when God should cast me into such a Condition, as that I cannot save my
Life, but by doing an indecent thing, He shows me the time is come wherein I
should resign it. And when I cannot live in my own Country, but by such means
as are worse than dying in it, I think He shows me, I ought to keep myself out
of it. Let them please themselves with making the King glorious, who think a
Whole People may justly be sacrificed for the Interest and Pleasure of One Man,
and a few of his Followers: Let them rejoice in their Subtilty, who, by
betraying the former, Powers, have gained the Favor of this, not only
preserved, but advanced themselves in these dangerous Changes. Nevertheless
(perhaps) they may find the King's Glory is their Shame, his Plenty the Peoples
Misery; and that the gaining of an Office, or a little Money, is a poor Reward
for destroying a Nation! (which, if it were preserved in Liberty and Virtue,
would truly be the most glorious in the World) and that others may find they
have, with much Pains, purchased their own Shame and Misery, a dear Price paid
for that which is not worth keeping, nor the Life that is accompanied with it;
the Honor of English Parliaments have ever been in making the Nation glorious
and happy, not in selling and destroying the Interest of it, to satisfy, the
Lusts of one Man. Miserable Nation! that, from so great a height of Glory, is
fallen into the most despicable Condition in the World, of having all its Good
depending upon the Breath and Will of the vilest Persons in it! cheated and
sold by them they trusted! Infamous Traffic, equal almo^t in Guilt to that of
Judas! In all preceding Ages, Parliaments have been the Pillars of our
Liberty, the sure Defenders of the Oppressed: They, who formerly could bridle
Kings, and keep the Balance equal between them and the People, are now become
the Instruments of all our Oppressions, and a Sword in his Hand to destroy us:
They themselves, led by a few interested Persons, who are willing to buy
Offices for themselves by the Misery of the whole Nation, and the Blood of the
most worthy and eminent Persons in it. Detestable Bribes, worse than the Oaths
now in fashion in this Mercenary Court! I mean, to owe neither my Life nor
Liberty to any such Means; when the Innocence of my Actions will not protect
me, I will stay away till the Storm be overpass'd. In short, where Vane,
Lambert and Haslerigg cannot live in Safety, I cannot live at all. If I had
been in England, I should have expected a Lodging with them; or, though they may
be the first, as being more eminent than I, I must expect to follow their
Example, in Suffering, as I have been their Companion in Acting. I am most in
Amaze at the mistaken Informations that were sent to me by my Friends, full of
Expectations, of Favors, and Employments. Who can think, that they, who
imprison them, would employ me, or suffer me to live, when they are put to
death? If I might live, and be employed, can it be expected that I should serve
a Government that seeks such detestable Ways of establishing itself? Ah! no; I
have not learnt to make my own Peace, by persecuting and betraying my Brethren,
more innocent and worthy than myself: I must live by just Means, and serve to
just Ends, or not at all, after such a Manifestation of the Ways by which it is
intended the King shall govern. I should have renounced any Place of Favor
into which the Kindness and Industry of my Friends might have advanced me, when
I found those that were better than I, were only fit to be destroyed. I had
formerly some Jealousies, the fraudulent Proclamation for Indemnity, increased
the imprisoning of those three Men; and turning out of all the Officers of the
Army, contrary to Promise, confirmed me in my Resolutions, not to return.

To conclude, The Tide is not to be diverted, nor the Oppressed delivered; but
God, in his time, will have Mercy on his People; he will save and defend them,
and avenge the Blood of those who shall now perish, upon the Heads of those,
who, in their Pride, think nothing is able to oppose them. Happy are those whom
God shall make Instruments of his Justice in so blessed a Work. If I can live
to see that Day, I shall be ripe for the Grave, and able to say with Joy, Lord!
now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, etc. [So Sir Arthur Haslerigg on
Oliver's Death.] Farewell; my Thoughts, as to King and State, depending upon
their Actions. No Man shall be a more faithful Servant to him than I, if he
make the Good and Prosperity of his People his Glory; none more his Enemy, if
he does the contrary. To my particular Friends I shall be constant in all
Occasions, and to you

A most affectionate Servant, A. SIDNEY.

A Letter by another Hand.
To Madam --
I Have News to tell you: You got a new Subject yesterday; though, after all,
(perhaps) it is no more News to you, than it would be to the Grand Seignior, or
the French King: For you (Madam) either find or make Subjects wherever you
go. It is impossible to see you, without surrendering one's Heart to you; and he
that hears you talk, and can still preserve his Liberty, may (for ought I know)
revive the Miracle of the three Children in Daniel, and call for a Chamlet
Cloak to keep him warm in the midst of a Fiery Furnace. But really (Madam) I am
none of those Miracle-mongers; I am true Flesh and Blood, like the rest of my
Sex; and, as I make no Scruple to own my Passion to you, so you (Madam) without
incurring the Danger of being questioned by the Parliament, may pretend to all
the Rights and Privileges of a Conqueror. My Comfort is, that all Mankind,
sooner or later, must wear your Chainr; for you have Beauty enough to engage
the nicest Heart, though you had no Wit to set it off: And you have so
plentiful a share of the last, that were you wholly destitute of the former, as
I have already found to my Cost, you have but too much, you could not fail of
harming the most Insensible. For my own part, I confess myself an Admirer, or,
if you please, an Adorer of your Beauty: But I am a Slave, a mere downright
effectual Slave to your Wit. Your very Conversation is infinitely more
delicious than the Fruition of any other Woman.

Thus, my Charming Sovereign, I here profess myself your devoted Vassal and
Subject. I promise you eternal Duty and Allegiance: It is neither in my Power
nor Will to depose you; and I am sure it is not in your Nature to affect
Arbitrary Sway. Though if you do, (Madam) God knows, I am a true Church of
England-man; I shall never rebel against you in Act or Thought, but only have
recourse to Prayers and Tears, and still stick to my Passive Obedience.
Perhaps, Madam, you will tell me, I have talked more than comes to my share; but,
being incognito, I assume the Liberty of a Masquerader, and, under that
Protection, think myself safe. But, alas, did you know how I languish for you,
I dare swear (my charming Sylvia!) you would bestow some Pity upon

AMYNTAS.


To Madam --
I Have never had the Happiness of your Conversation but once, and then I found
you so very charming, that I have wore your lovely Idea ever since in my Mind.
But it is not without the least Astonishment, that I received the News of what
befell you the other Day; it still makes me tremble, and leaves a dismal
Impression behind it, not easy to be imagined. For Heaven's sake, Madam, what
could urge you to so cruel a Resolution, that might have proved irreparably
fatal to yourself, and matter of perpetual Affliction to your Friends? What
Harm have I, and a Thousand more of your Adorers done you, that you should so
terribly revenge the supposed Infidelity of another upon them? Or, Why should
you, whom Beauty and Wit have put in a Capacity to subdue our whole Sex, lay to
Heart the Unkindness of one Lover, who may proceed to a new Election when you
please? If I had Vanity enough to aspire to be your Privy-Counsellour, I would
even advise you to bury the remembrance of what is past, and either to punish
all Mankind, as you easily may, though I need not instruct you how; or else to
choose some happy Favorite out of the Throng of your Servants, and shower your
Favors upon him. If Sincerity and Truth may bid for the Purchase of your
Heart, I can help you to one that thoroughly understands your Worth, and
accordingly values it; that would be damned before he would abandon you for the
greatest Princess in the Universe; that would cheerfully die for your sake, and
yet only lives out of Hopes, that he may one day merit your Esteem by his
Services. I fancy, Madam, you now demand of me, where this strange Monster of
Fidelity is to be found? Know then, that he lives within less than a Hundred
Miles of Red-Lyon-Square; and that his Name is, (Oh! pardon the Insolence of
this Discovery) his Name is

AMYNTAS,


There is another Letter that accompanies this, and was written a Week ago;
which I had not Courage enough to lay at your Feet till now.

LOVE LETTERS,
BY Mr. Thomas Otway.
To Madam --
My TYRANT!
I Endure too much Torment to be silent, and have endured it too long not to
make the severest Complaint. I love you, I dote on you; Desire makes me mad,
when I am near you; and Despair, when I am from you. Sure, of all Miseries,
Love is to me the most intolerable; it haunts me in my Sleep, perplexes me when
waking; every melancholy Thought makes my Fears more powerful; and every
delightful one makes my Wishes more unruly. In all other Uneasy Chances of a
Man's Life, there is an immediate Recourse to some kind of Succor or another:
in Wants, we apply ourselves to our Friends; in Sickness, to Physicians: but
Love, the Sum, the Total of all Misfortunes, must be endured with Silence, no
Friend so dear to trust with such a Secret, nor Remedy in Art so powerful, to
remove its Anguish. Since the first Day I saw you, I have hardly enjoyed one
Hour of perfect Quiet: I loved you early; and no sooner had I beheld that soft
bewitching Face of yours, but I felt in my Heart the very Foundation of all my
Peace give way: But when you became another, I must confess, that I did then
rebel, had foolish Pride enough to promise myself, I would in time recover my
Liberty: In spite of my enslaved Nature, I swore against myself, I would not
love you: I affected a Resentment, stifled my Spirit, and would not let it
bend, so much as once to upbraid you, each Day it was my chance to see or to be
near you: With stubborn Sufferance I resolved to bear and brave your Power;
nay, did it often too, successfully, Generally with Wine or Conversation I
diverted or appeased the Demon that possessed me; but when at Night, returning
to my unhappy self, to give my Heart an account why I had done it so unnatural
a Violence, it was then I always paid a treble Interest for the short Moments
of Ease which I had borrowed; then every treacherous Thought rose up, and took
your part, nor left me till they had thrown me on my Bed, and opened those
Sluices of Tears that were to run till Morning. This has been for some Years my
best Condition: Nay, Time itself, that decays all things else, has but
increased and added to my Longings. I tell it you, and charge you to believe it
as you are generous, (which sure you must be, for every thing except your
Neglect of me, persuades me that you are so) even at this time, though other Arms
have held you, and so long trespassed on those dear Joys that only were my Due;
I love you with that tenderness of Spirit, that purity of Truth, and that
sincerity of Heart, that I could sacrifice the nearest Friends or Interests I
have on Earth, barely but to please you: If I had all the World, it should be
yours; for with it I could be but miserable, if you were not mine. I appeal to
yourself for Justice, if through the whole Actions of my Life I have done any
one thing that might not let you see how absolute your Authority was over me.
Your Commands have been always sacred to me; your Smiles have always
transported me, and your Frowns awed me. In short, you will quickly become to
me the greatest Blessing, or the greatest Curse, that ever Man was doomed to. I
cannot so much as look on you without Confusion; Wishes and Fears rise up in
War within me, and work a cursed Distraction through my Soul, that must, I am
sure, in time have wretched Consequences: You only can, with that healing
Cordial, Love, assuage and calm my Torments; pity the Man then that would be
proud to die for you, and cannot live without you, and allow him thus far to
boast too, that (take out Fortune from the Balance) you never were beloved or
courted by a Creature that had a nobler or juster Pretense to your Heart, than
the Unfortunate and (even at this time) Weeping

OTWAY.


To Madam --
IN value of your Quiet, though it would be the utter ruin of my own, I have
endeavored this Day to persuade myself never more to trouble you with a
Passion that has tormented me sufficiently already, and is so much the more a
Torment to me, in that I perceive it is become one to you, who are much dearer
to me than my self. I have laid all the Reasons my distracted Condition would
let me have recourse to, before me: I have consulted my Pride, whether after a
Rival's Possession I ought to ruin all my Peace for a Woman that another has
been more blessed in, though no Man ever loved as I did: But Love, victorious Love,
o'erthrows all that, and tells me, it is his Nature never to remember; he still
looks forward from the present Hour^ expecting still new Dawns, new rising
Happiness, never looks back, never regards what is past, and left behind him,
but buries and forgets it quite in the hot fierce pursuit of Joy before him: I
have consulted too my very self, and find how careless Nature was in framing
me; seasoned me hastily with all the most violent Inclinations and Desires, but
omitted the Ornaments that should make those Qualities become me: I have
consulted too my Lot of Fortune, and find how foolishly I wish possession of
what is so precious, all the World's too cheap for it; yet still I Love, still
I dote on, and cheat myself, very content because the Folly pleases me. It is
Pleasure to think how Fair you are, though at the same time worse than Damnation,
to think how Cruel: Why should you tell me you have shut your Heart up for
ever? It is an Argument unworthy of yourself, sounds like Reserve, and not so
much Sincerity, as sure I may claim even from a little of your Friendship. Can
your Age, your Face, your Eyes, and your Spirit bid defiance to that sweet
Power? No, you know better to what end Heaven made you, know better how to
manage Youth and Pleasure, then to let them die and pall upon your Hands. It Is
me, it is only me you have barred your Heart against. My Sufferings, my
Diligence, my Sighs, Complaints, and Tears are of no power with your haughty
Nature; yet sure you might at least vouchsafe to pity them, not shift me off
with gross, thick, homespun Friendship, the common Coin that passes betwixt
Worldly Interests: must that be my Lot! Take it Ill-natured, take it; give it
to him who would waste his Fortune for you; give it the Man would fill your Lap
with Gold; court you with Offers of vast rich Possessions; give it the Fool
that has nothing but his Money to plead for him; Love will have a much nearer
Relation, or none. I ask for glorious Happiness; you bid me Welcome to your
Friendship, it is like seating me at your Side-table, when I have the best
Pretense to your Right Hand at the Feast. I Love, I Dote, I am Mad, and know no
measure; nothing but Extremes can give me ease; the kindest Love, or most
provoking Scorn: Yet even your Scorn would not perform the Cure, it might
indeed take off the edge of Hope, but damned Despair will gnaw my Heart for
ever. If then I am not odious to your Eyes, if you have Charity enough to value
the Well-being of a Man that holds you dearer than you can the Child your
Bowels are most fond of, by that sweet ^ledge of your first softest Love, I
charm and here conjure you to pity the distracting Pangs of mine; pity my
unquiet Days and restless Nights; pity the Frenzy that has half possessed my
Brain already, and makes me write to you thus ravingly: The Wretch in Bedlam is
more at Peace than I am! And, if I must never possess the Heaven I wish for, my
next Desire is, (and the sooner the better) a clean-swept Cell, a merciful
Keeper, and your Compassion when you find me there.

Think and be Generous.


To Madam --
SInce you are going to quit the World, I think myself obliged, as a Member of
that World, to use the best of my Endeavors to divert you from so ill-natured
an Inclination; therefore, by reason your Visits will take up so much of this
Day, I have debarred myself the opportunity of waiting on you this Afternoon,
that I may take a time you are more Mistress of, and when you shall have more
leisure to hear, if it be possible for any Arguments of mine to take place in a
Heart, I am afraid too much hardened against me: I must confess it may look a
little extraordinary for one under my Circumstances to endeavor the confirming
your good Opinion of the World, when it had been much better for me, one of us
had never seen it: For Nature disposed me from my Creation to Love, and my ill
Fortune has condemned me to Dote on one, who certainly could never have been
deaf so long to so faithful a Passion, had Nature disposed her from her
Creation to hate any thing but me. I beg you to forgive this Trifling, for I
have so many Thoughts of this nature, that it is impossible for me to take Pen
and Ink in my Hand, and keep 'em quiet, especially when I have the least
pretense to let you know you are the cause of the severest Disquiets that ever
touched the Heart of

OTWAY.


To Madam --
COuld I see you without Passion, or be absent from you without Pain, I need
not beg your Pardon for this renewing my Vows, that I love you more than
Health, or any Happiness here or hereafter. Every thing you do is a new Charm
to me; and though I have languish'd for seven long tedious Years of Desire,
jealously and despairing; yet, every Minute I see you, I still discover
something new and more bewitching. Consider how I love you; what would not
renounce, or enterprise for you? I must have you mine, or I am miserable; and
nothing but knowing which shall be the happy Hour, can make the rest of my Life
that are to come tolerable. Give me a word or two of comfort, or resolve never
to look with common goodness on me more, for I cannot bear a kind Look, and
after it a cruel Denial. This Minute my Heart aches for you; and, if I cannot
have a Right in yours, I wish it would ache till I could complain to you no
longer.

Remember poor

OTWAY.


To Madam --
YOU cannot but be sensible, that I am blind, or you would not so openly
discover what a ridiculous Tool you make of me. I should be glad to discover
whose satisfaction I was sacrificed to this Morning; for I am sure your own ill
Nature could not be guilty of inventing such an Injury to me, merely to try how
much I could bear, were it not for the sake of some Ass, that has the Fortune
to please you: In short, I have made it the Business of my Life to do you
Service, and please you, if possible, by any way to convince you of the unhappy
Love I have for seven Years toiled under; and your whole Business is to pick
ill-natured Conjectures out of my harmless freedom of Conversation, to Vex and
Gall me with, as often as you are pleased to Divert yourself at the Expense of
my Quiet. Oh, thou Tormenter! Could I think it were Jealousy, how should I
humble myself to be justified; but I cannot bear the thought of being made a
Property either of another Man's good Fortune, or the Vanity of a Woman that
designs nothing but to plague me.

There may be Means found sometime or other, to let you know your mistaking.


To Madam --
YOU were pleased to send me word you would meet me in the Mall this Evening,
and give me further satisfaction in the Matter you were so unkind to charge me
with; I was there, but found you not, and therefore beg of you, as you ever
would wish yourself to be eased of the highest Torment it were possible for
your Nature to be sensible of, to let me see you sometime to Morrow, and send
me word, by this Bearer, where, and at what Hour, you will be so just, as
either to acquit or condemn me; that I may, hereafter, for your sake, either
bless all your bewitching Sex; or, as often as I henceforth think of you, curse
Womankind for ever.


Mr. -- to Mr. G --
Dear G --,
AS I hope to be saved, and that is a bold word in a Morning, when our
Consciences, like Children, are always most uneasy; when the Light of Nature
flashes upon us with the Light of the Day, and makes way for the calm return of
Thought, that Eternal Foe to Quiet; but, I thank my Stars, I have shook that
Snake out of my Bosom, and made Peace with that Domestic Enemy Conscience, and
so much the more dangerous by being so --

-- But, as I was going to say, your Letter has put new Life into me, and
revived me from the Damp, that Solitude and bad Company has flung me into; it is
as hard to find a Man of Sense here, as a handsome Woman: A Company of Country
'Squires round a Table, is like a Company of Waiters round a dead Corpse, they
are always ridiculously Sober and Grave, or, which is worse, impertinently
Loud: Wine, that makes the gay Man of the Town brisk and sprightly, only serves
to pluck off their Vail of Bashfulness, a Mask that Fools ought always to wear;
and which, once off, makes 'em as nauseous, as a barefaced Lady of the Pit;
they are as particular in their Stories, as a Lawyer in his Evidence, and
husband their Tales, as well as they do their Moneys: In short, as Madam Olivia
says, They are my Aversion of all Aversions.

You may easily imagine, I have too much of the Men, but on my word, I have too
little of the Women: Full of Youth, Vigor and Health I lie fallow, and, like
the Vestal Virgins, am damned to Coldness and Chastity in the midst of Flames.
God knows what hard shifts I use, my Right Hand often does, what (like Acts of
Charity) I Am ashamed my Left Hand should know. As much as I despise the
Conversation of these Fops, I court it out of an apprehension of being alone,
not daring to trust myself to so dangerous a Companion as myself. It Is in these
cool Intervals of Solitude, that we conspire Cuckoldom against our Friend,
Treason against the State, etc. for the Devil of Lust and Ambition, like other
Evil Spirits, only appears to us when we are alone.

The Talking of the Devil, puts me in mind of the Parsons: I had the Benefit of
the Clergy this Week; I mean the Company of two honest unbigotted Parsons; I
drank a Bowl to the Manes of our immortal Friend, one that was as witty as
Necessity, and discovered more Truths, than ever Time did: One that was born to
Unchain the World, that struggled with Mysteries as Hercules did with Monsters,
and, like him, too fell by a Distaff.

After so mournful a Subject, I'gad I Will make you Laugh -- The Duce take me, if
I did not, last Week, assist at the Ceremony of making a Christian; nay, more
Sir, I was, Honos sit Auribus, a Godfather, who am

your Affectionate Friend, and Servant, etc.

Mons. BOILEAV's LETTERS,
TRANSLATED By THO. CHEEK, Esquire
To the Duke de Vivone, upon his Entrance into the Haven of Messina.
My LORD,
KNow you not, that one of the surest ways, to hinder a Man from being
pleasant, is, to bid him be so: Since you fo^bad me being serious, I never
found myself so grave, and I speak nothing now but Sentences. And, besides,
your last Action has something in it so great, that truly it would go against
my Conscience to write to you of it otherwise, than in the Heroic Style:
However, I cannot resolve, not to obey you, in all, that you command me; so
that in the Humor that I find myself, I am equally afraid to tire you with a
serious Tri^le, or to trouble you with an ill Piece of Wit.

In fine, my Apollo has assisted me this Morning, and in the time that I
thought the least of it, made me find upon my Pillow, two Letters, which, for
want of mine, may perhaps give you an agreeable amusement: They are dated from
the Elysian Fields; the one is from Balzac, and the other from Voiture, who
being both charmed with the Relation of your last Fight, write to you from the
other World, to congratulate you. This is that from Balzac; you will easily
know it to be his by his Style, which cannot express things simply, nor des^end
from its height.

From the Elysian Fields, June the 22d.
My LORD,
THe Report of your Actions, revives the Dead; it wakens those, who have slept
these thirty Years, and were condemned to an eternal Sleep; it makes Silence
itself speak: The Brave! The Splendid! The Glorious Conquest that you have made
over the Enemies of France! You have restored Bread to a City, which has been
accustomed to furnish it to all others: You have nourished the nursing Mother
of Italy; the Thunder of that Fleet, which shut you up the Avenues of its Port,
has done no more than barely saluted your Entrance; its Resistance has detained
you no longer, than an over civil Reception: So far from hindering the Rapidity
of your Course, it has not interrupted the Order of your March; you have
constrained, in their Sight, the South, and North Winds to obey you, without
chastizing the Sea, as Zerxes did; you have taught it Discipline; you have done
yet more, you have made the Spaniard humble. After that, what may not one say
of you? No, Nature, I say, Nature, when she was young, and in the time that she
produced Alexanders and Caesar's, has produced nothing so great, as under the
Reign of Louis XIV, she has given to the French, in her declension, that which
Rome could not obtain from her in her greatest Maturity. She has made appear to
the World, in your Age, both in Body and Soul, that perfect Valor which we
have scarce seen the Idea of in Romances and Heroic Poems. Begging the Pardon
of one of your Poets -- he had no reason to say, That beyond Cocitus Merit, is
no more known: Yours, my LORD, is extolled here, by the common Voice, on both
sides of Styx. It makes a continual remembrance of you, even in the Abodes of
Forgetfulness: It finds zealous Partisans in the Country of Indifference. It
puts Acheron into the Interests of the Seine. Nay more, There is no shade
amongst us, so prepossest with the Principles of the Porticus, so hardened in
the School of Zeno, so fortified against Joy and Grief, that does not hear your
Praises with pleasure, that does not clap his Hands, and cry, A Miracle! at the
Moment you are named, and is not ready to say with your Malherb, A la fin,
c'est trop de silence,
En si beau suject, de parler.
As for me, my LORD, who know you a great deal better, I do nothing but
meditate on you in my Repose; I fill my Thoughts entirely with your Idea, in
the long Hours of our leisure; I cry continually, How great a Man is this! And
if I wish to live again, it is not so much, to return to the Light, as to enjoy
the Sovereign Felicity of your Conversation, and to tell you Face to Face, with
how much respect, I am from the whole extent of my Soul,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most humble, and most obedient Servant, BALZAC.


I Know not, my LORD, whither these violent Exaggerations will please you; and
whither you will not find, that the Style of Balzac is a little corrupted in
the other World; however it be, (in my Opinion) he never lavished his
Hyperboles more to the purpose; it is for you to judge of it: But first read,
(if you please) the Letter from Voiture.

From the Elysian Fields, June the 22d.
My LORD,
Though we poor Devils, who are dead, do not concern ourselves much in the
Affairs of the Living, and are not exceedingly inclined to Mirth: Yet I cannot
forbear rejoicing at the Great Things you do over our Heads. Seriously, your
last Fight makes the Devil and all of a Noise here below; it has made itself
heard in a place, where the very Thunder of Heaven is not heard; and has made
your Glory known in a Country where even the Sun is not known. There are a
great many Spaniards come hither, who were in the Action, and have informed us
of the Particulars. I see no reason why the People of that Nation should pass
for Bullies; for I can assure you they are very civil Persons, and the King
sent 'em hither the other Day very mild and quiet. To tell you the truth, my
LORD, you have managed your Affairs very well of late. To see with what speed
you fly over the Mediterranean-Sea, would make one think you absolutely Master
of it: There is not at present, in all its extent, one single Privateer in
safety, and, if you go on at this rate, I cannot see how you would have Tunis and
Algiers subsist. We have here the Caesar's, the Pompeys, and the Alexanders;
they all agree, That you exactly follow their Conduct in your way of fighting:
But Caesar believes you to be superlatively Caesar. There are none here, even
to the Alaricks, the Gensericks, the Theodoricks, and all the other Conquerors
in icks, who don't speak very well of this Action; and in Hell it self (I know
not whether you are acquainted with that Place) there is no Devil, my LORD, who
does not confess ingenuously, That at the Head of an Army you are a greater
Devil, than himself: This is a Truth that your very Enemies agree in. But to
see the good that you have done at Messina, for my part, I believe you are more
like an Angel, than a Devil, only Angels have a more ^airy shape, and do not
carry their Arms in a Scarf. Railery apart, Hell is extremely biased in your
Favor. There is but one thing to be objected to your Conduct, and that is the
little care, that you sometimes take of your Life. You are so well beloved in
this Country, that they don't desire your Company. Believe me, my LORD, I have
already said it in the other World, a Demi-God, is but a very little thing,
when he is dead; he is nothing like what he was, when he was alive. And as for
me, who know already, by experience what it is to be no more, I set the best
Face on the Matter I can; but to hide nothing from you, I die with Impatience
to return to the World; were it only to have the Pleasure to see you there; in
pursuance of this intended Voyage, I have already sent several times to find
out the scattered Parts of my Body to set 'em together, but I could never
recover my Heart, which I left at parting with those seven Mistresses, that I
served, as you know so faithfully, the whole seven at once. As for my Wit,
unless you have it, I Am told, it is not to be found in the World. To tell you
the truth, I shrewdly suspect, that you have at least the Ga^ety of it: For I
have been told here four or five Sayings of your Turn of Expression, which I
wish, with all my Heart, I had said, and for which I would willingly give the
Panegyric of Pliny, and two of my best Letters. Supposing then, that you have
it, I beg you to send it me back as soon as possibly you can; for indeed you
cannot imagine how inconvenient it is^ not to have all one's Wit about one,
especially when one Writes to such a Man as you are; this is the Cause that my
Style, at present, is so altered: Were it not for that, you should see me merry
again, as formerly, with my Comrade le Broch^t. And I should not be reduced to
the necessity of ending my Letter trivally, as I do in telling you, that I am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble and Obedient Servant, VOITURE.

THese are the two Letters, just as I received 'em: I send 'em you writ in my
own Hand, because you would have had too much trouble to read the Characters of
the other World, if I had sent 'em you in the Original. Do not fancy, my LORD,
that this is only a trial of Wit, and an imitation of the Style of these two
Writers. You know very well, that Balzac and Voiture are inimitable. However,
were it true, that I had recourse to this Invention to divert you, should I be
so much in the wrong of it, or rather ought I not to be esteemed, for having
found out this way to make you read the Praises, which you would never have
suffered otherways? In a word, could I better make appear with what Sincerity,
and with what Respect I am,

My LORD, Yours, etc.

A LETTER Writ by Mr. DENNIS, Sent with the following SPEECH.
SIR,
I Have here sent you enclosed, what I promised you by the last Post, and I
think myself obliged to give you some account of it. In the late Appendix to
the new Observator, I find the Author reasonably complaining of the corruption
of History by the French, and giving a reasonable guess, how false the History
of this Age (as far as it is writ by them) is like to come out in the next. And
particularly what Monsieur Pelisson's History of the present King of France is
like to be, which is now writing by that King's own order. Monsieur Boileau,
who writ the enclosed, has at least as great a share in that History as
Monsieur Pelisson: And therefore you have in the enclosed, in the which he has
very artfully inserted a Panegyric of his Prince, a Pattern of what his part
of the History will be. For having flattered his Master in this small
Panegyric, we have all the reason in the World to believe, That he will
flatter him too in his History. And that he has flattered him here, you will
plainly find; not only by Exaggerations, which are in some measure to be
allowed to an Orator; but in affirming things which are directly contrary to
the truth. Such are those two remarkable Passages of the French King's offering
Peace to the late Confederacy, for the general good of Christendom, (which not
so much as a Frenchman, who has common Sense, believes) and of his Bombarding
Genoa, only to be revenged of its Insolency and of its Perfidiousness, which
every Man, who has heard the Story of Mr. Valdryon, must laugh at. Now since it
is to be presumed, that Monsieur Boileau will flatter him in his History,
because it is plain that he has ^latter'd him in his Panegyric; What are we to
expect from Monsieur Pelisson, whose sincerity is by no means so much talked of
as the other's? I thought to have concluded here: But it comes into my mind to
make two Reflections upon the Panegyrical part of the enclosed. The first is
this, That since Monsieur Boileau, who is, in the main, a Man of Sincerity, and
a lover of Truth, could not but flatter Lewis the Fourteenth when he commended
him; we may conclude, that it is impossible to give him a general commendation
without flattery. For, where a Satyrick Poet paints, what other Man must not
daub? The second Reflection is this, That since this Panegyric is scarce to be
supported, notwithstanding the most admirable genius of the Author, which
shines throughout it; and an Art to which nothing can be added, (remember that
I speak of the Original) and beyond which nothing can be desired; you may
easily conclude how extremely fulsom the rest of the Panegyricks upon Lewis the
Fourteenth must needs be, whose Authors fall infinitely short of Boileau's,
either Genius, or Art, or Virtue.

THE SPEECH OF Monsieur BOILEAV, Upon his Admission into the French Academy.
Translated by Mr. DENNIS.
GENTLEMEN,

THe Honor this Day conferred upon me, is something so great, so extraordinary,
so little expected; and so many several sorts of reasons ought to have for ever
excluded me from it, that at this very Moment, in which I return my
Acknowledgments, I am doubtful if I ought to believe it. Is it then possible,
can it be true, Gentlemen, that you have in effect judged me worthy to be
admitted into this illustrious Society, whose famous Establishment does no less
honor to the memory of Cardinal Richlieu, than all the rest of the numerous
Wonders of his matchless Ministry? And what must be the thoughts of that great
Man? What must be the thoughts of that wise Chansellour, who after him enjoyed
the Dignity of your Protectorship; and after whom it was your Opinion, that
none but your King had right to be your Protector? What must be their thoughts,
Gentlemen, if they should behold me this day, becoming a Part of this Glorious
Body, the Object of their eternal care and esteem; and into which by the Laws
which they have established, by the Maxims which they have maintained, no one
ought to be received, who is not of a spotless Merit, an extraordinary Wit, and
comparable even to you? But farther, whom do I succeed in the Place which you
are pleased to afford me here? Monsieur de Besons.
Is it not a Man who is equally renowned for his great Employments, and his
profound Capacity? Is it not a Magistrate who filled one of the foremost Seats
in the Council; and who, in so many important Occasions, has been Honored by
his Prince, with his strictest Confidence: A Magistrate, no less wise than
Experienced, watchful, laborious; with whom the more I compare myself, the less
Proportion I find.

I know very well, Gentlemen, (and who can be ignorant of it,) that in the
choice which you make of Men who are proper to supply the Vacancies of your
learned Assembly, you have no regard either to Place or to Dignity: That
Politeness, Learning, and an Acquaintance with all the more gentle Arts, have
always ushered in naked Merit to you, and that you do not believe it to be
unbecoming of you, to substitute in the room of the highest Magistrate, of the
most exal^ed Minister, some famous Poet, or some Writer, whom his Works have
rendered Illustrious, and who has very often no other Dignity, than that which
his Desert has given him upon Parnassus. But if you barely consider me as a Man
of Learning, what can I offer you that may be worthy of the favor, with which
you have been pleased to honor me? Is it a wretched Collection of Poetry,
successful rather by a happy temerity and a dexterous imitation of the
Ancients, than by the beauty of its thoughts, or the richness of its
expressions? Is it a Translation that falls so far short of the great
Masterpieces with which you every day supply us; and in the which you so
gloriously revive Thucydides, Xenophon, Tacitus, and all the rest of the
renowned Heroes of the most learned Antiquity? No, Gentlemen, you are too well
acquainted with the just value of things, to recompense at a rate so high, such
low Productions as mine, and offer me voluntarily upon so slight a foundation,
an Honor which the knowledge of my want of Merit, has discouraged me still
from demanding.

What can be the reason then, which in my behalf has so happily influenced you
upon this occasion? I begin to make some discovery of it, and I dare engage
that I shall not make you blush in exposing it. The goodness which the greatest
Prince in the World has shown in employing me, together with one of the first
of your illustrious Writers, to make one Collection of the infinite number of
his Immortal Actions; the Permission which he has given me to do this, has
supplied all my Defects with you.

Yes, Gentlemen, whatever just Reasons ought to have excluded me ever from your
Academy, you believed that you could not with Justice suffer that a Man who is
destined to speak of such Mighty Things, should be deprived of the Utility of
your Lessons, or instructed in any other School than in yours. And, by this,
you have clearly shown, that when it is to s^rve your August Protector,
whatever Consideration might otherwise restrain you, your Zeal will not suffer
you to cast your eyes upon an^ thing but the Interest of your Master's Glory.

Yet suffer me, Gentlemen, to undeceive you, if you believe that that great
Prince, at the time when he granted that favor to me, believed that he should
meet within me a Writer, who was able to sustain in the least, by the Beauty of
Style, or by the magnificent Pomp of Expression, the Grandeur of his Exploits.
No, Gentlemen, it belongs to you, and to Pens like yours, to show the World
such Masterpieces; and he never conceived so advantageous a thought of me. But
as every thing that he has done in his Reign is Wonderful, is Prodigious, he
did not think it would be amiss, that in the midst of so many renowned Writers,
who with emulation describe his Actions in all their Splendor, and with all
the Ornaments of the sublimest Eloquence, a Man without Artifice, and accused
rather of too much Sincerity than of Flattery, should contribute by his Labor
and by his Advice, to set to show in a proper light, and in all the simplicity
of the most natural Style, the Truth of those Actions, which being of
themselves so little probable, have rather need to be faithfully related, than
to be strongly exaggerated.

And indeed, Gentlemen, when Poets and Orators, and Historians, who are
sometimes as daring as Poets or Orators, shall come to display upon so happy a
Subject, all the bold strokes of their Art, all their force of Expression; when
they shall say of Lewis the Great, more justly than was said of a famous
Captain of old, that he alone has achieved more Exploits than other Princes
have read; that he alone has taken more Towns, than other Monarchs have wished
to take: When they shall assure us, that there is no Potentate upon the face of
the Earth, no not the most Ambitious, who in the secret Prayers that he puts up
to Heaven, dares presume to Petition for so much Glory, for so much Prosperity
as Heaven has freely granted this Prince: When they shall write, that his
Condust is Mistress of Events; that Fortune dares not contradict his Designs:
When they shall paint him at the Head of his Armies, marching with Gigantick
Strides, over great Rivers and the highest Mountains; thundering down Ramparts,
rending hard Rocks, and tearing into ten thousand pieces every thing that
resists his impetuous Shock: These Expressions will doubtless appear great,
rich, noble, adapted to the lofty Subject; but at the same time that the World
shall wonder at them, it will not think itself obliged to believe them, and the
Truth may be easily disowned or mistaken, under the disguise of its pompous
Ornaments.

But, when Writers without artifice, and who are contented faithfully to relate
things, and with all the simplicity of Witnesses who depose, rather than of
Historians, who make a Narration, shall rightly set forth, all that has passed
in France, ever since the famous Peace of the Pyrenees; all that the King has
done in his Dominions, to re-establish Order, Discipline, Law: when they shall
reckon up all the Provinces which he has added to his Kingdoms in succeeding
Wars, all the Advantages, all the Victories which he has gained of his Enemies;
Holland, Germany, Spain, all Europe too feeble against him alone, a War that
has been always fruitful in prosperity, and a more glorious Peace: When Pens
that are sincere, I say, and a great deal more careful to write the Truth, than
to make others admire them, shall rightly articulate all these Actions,
disposed in their order of time, and attended with their real circumstances;
who is it that can then dissent from them, I do not say of our Neighbors, I do
not say of Allies; I say of our mortal Enemies? And though they should be
unwilling to acknowledge the truth of them, will not their diminished Forces,
their States confined within stricter Bounds, their Complaints, their
Jealousies, their Furies, their very Invectives, in spite of themselves,
convince them? Can they deny that in that very Year, of which I am speaking,
this Prince being resolved to constrain them all to accept of a Peace which he
had offered them for the good of Christendom, did all at once, and that at a
time, when they had published, that he was entirely exhausted of Men and Money:
that he did then, I say, all at once, in the Low Countries, cause to start up
as 'twere out of the ground two mighty Armies, each of them consisting of Forty
Thousand Men; and that he provided for them abundant Subsistence there,
notwithstanding the scarcity of Forage, and the excessive drought of the
Season? Can they deny, that whilst with one of these Armies, he caused his
Lieutenants to besiege Luxemburgh, himself with the other, keeping as it were
blocked all the Towns of Brabant and Hainault: That he did, by this most
admirable Conduct, or, rather^ by a kind of Enchantment, like that o^ the Head
so renowned in the ancient Fables, whose Aspect transformed the Beholders to
Stones, render the Spaniards unmoved Spectators of the taking of that important
Place, in the which they had reposed their utmost Refuge? That by a no less
admirable effect of the same prodigious Enchantment, that obstinate Enemy to
his Glory, that industrious Contriver of Wars and Confederacies, who had
labored so long to stir up all Europe against him, found himself, if I may use
the Expression, disabled and impotent, tied up on every side, and reduced to
the wretched Vengeance of dispersing Libels; of sending forth Cries and
Reproaches: Our very Enemies, give me leave to repeat it, can they they deny
all this? Must not they confess, That at the time when these Wonders were
executing in the Low Countries, our Fleet upon the Mediterranean, after having
forced Algiers to be a Suppliant for Peace, caused Genoa to feel, by an Example
that will be eternally dreadful, the Just Chastisement of its Insolence and of
its Perfidiousness; burying under the Ruins of Palaces and stately Houses that
proud City, more easy to be destroyed than be humbled? No, without doubt, our
Enemies dare not give the Lie to such known Truths, especially when they shall
see them writ with that simple and natural Air, and with that Character of
Sincerity and Probability, with which, whatever my Defects are, I do not absoly
despair to be able at least in part to to supply the History.

But since this very Simplicity, all Enemy, as it is to Ostentation and
Pageantry, has yet its Art, its Method, its Beauties; from whence can I better
derive that Art, and those Beauties, than from the source of all Delicacies,
this ^am'd Academy, which has kept possession, for so many Years, of all the
Treasures, of all the Riches, of our Tongue? These, Gentlemen, are the things
which I am in hopes to find among you; this is what I come to study with you;
this is what I come to learn of you. Happy, if by my assiduity in f^equenting
you, by my address in bringing you to speak of these Matters, I can engage you
to conceal nothing of all your most secret Skill from me: Your Skill to render
Nature decent and chaste at the very time when she is most alluring; and to
make the Colors and Paint of Art, appear to be the genuine Beauties of Nature.
Thrice happy! if by my Respects and by my sincere Submissions, I can perfectly
convince you of the extreme Acknowledgment, which I shall make all my Lifetime
for the unexpected Honor you have done me.

Letters of Courtship TO A Woman of Quality.
IF it be a Crime in me, Madam, to love, it is your fair Self that is the
occasion of it; and if it be a Crime in me to tell you I do, it is myself only
that is faulty. I confess, 'twas in my Power to have forborne writing, but I am
satisfied I could never have seen you, but the Language of my Looks would have
disclosed the secret; and to what purpose is it to pretend to conceal a Flame
that will discover itself by its own Light? In my mind there is more Confession
in disordered Actions, frequent Sighs, or a complaining Countenance, than in
all the artful Expressions the Tongue can utter; I have been struggling with
myself this three Months to discover a thing which I now must do in three
words, and that is, that I adore you; and I am sure if you will be just to
yourself, you cannot be so unjust to me, as to question the reality of this
Discovery, for it is impossible for you to be ignorant of the Charms you
possess, no body can be rich, and yet unacquainted with their Stores. And
therefore, since it is certain, you have every thing wonderfully engaging, you
must not take it ill that my Taste is as curious as another's, I should do an
injury to my own Judgment if it were not; I am not, Madam, so vain as to
believe, that any thing I can act or utter should ever persuade you to retain
the least kind regard, in recompense of the pain I suffer; I only beg leave and
liberty to complain: They that are hurt in Service, are permitted to show their
Wounds; and the more gallant the Conqueror, the more generous is his
Compassion. I ventured last Night to faulter out my Misfortune, 'twas almost
dark, and I attempted it with greater boldness, nay, you yourself (cruel and
charming as you are) must needs take notice of my disorder; your Sentences were
short and reproving; your Answers cold; and your Manner (contrary to your usual
and peculiar sweetness) was severe and forbidding, yet in spite of all the Awe
and chill Aspect you put on, you must always appear most adorable to,

MADAM, Your most lost and unfortunate humble Servant
.

By the same Hand.
YOu need not have laid an Obligation on me of writing, who am so inclinable of
my own accord, to tire yo^ with Let^ers; it is the most ag^^eable thing I can
do, and could wish you thought it so too; but when I reflect upon the ^a^shness
of my Expressions, I must needs conclude, I have a greater regard to my own
satisfaction in writing, than to your patience in reading; the only way I know
to make me write better, would be to receive more frequent Letters from you,
which would instruct me to do it; and I should think it the greatest perfection
of my Pen to imitate even the faults of yours (if there were any.) I have the
satisfaction left me, that I am writing to one, that, though her Judgment be
nice and discerning, her Interpretation is easy and candid; ONE that has not
only the brightness of Heaven to make me adore her, but also the goodness of it
to forgive my offenses; else I should despair of Pardon for this too long
Letter.

I confess, if I were to make a recital of your Divine Qualities, an Age would
be too small a time to be employed in the Work: I should endeavor to paint
your gay airy Temper, and yet shadow it with all the Modesty and cautious
Reserv'dness; you have an Humor so very taking, that, as it fires the serious,
and dull, so it checks, and restrains the too forward; and as your Charms give
encouragement, so your wakeful Conduct creates despair. If the Paper and your
Patience would not fail me, I could live upon this Subject; but whilst I do
Justice to your Virtues, I offend your Modesty; and every Offense against you,
Madam, must be avoided as much as possible by him, all whose Happiness depends
on pleasing you, as does that of,

MADAM, Your humble Servant.


By the same Hand.
AS I cannot reflect upon the melancholy Appearance of things on Sunday and
Monday last, without an Affliction inexpressible, so I cannot think on the
happy Change without the most grateful Pleasure. Heavens! how my Heart sunk,
when I found the tenderest part of my Soul seized with an Indisposition, her
Color faded, the usual Gaiety of her Temper eclipsed, her Tongue faultering,
her Air languishing, and the charming Luster of her Eyes setting and decayed!
Instead of kind Expressions full of Love and Endearments, I could hear nothing
but Complaints, and the melancholy Effects of a growing Illness. It Is true, (my
dearest Life) though you are as beautiful as Light, though sweet and tender as a
Flower in Spring, though gay and cheerful as dawning Youth, yet all these
Perfections, that captivate others, cannot secure you against the Tyranny of
Distempers; Sickness has no regard to your Innocence, but the same ruffling
Tempest that tears up the common Weeds, blasts also the fragrant blushing Rose:
But now, to the Eternal Peace of my satisfied Mind, ^he Feverish Heat is
extinguished, and your Charms recover their usual heavenly Brightness; I am the
Unhappy Wretch that feels their force, and consumes of a Fever never to be
extinguished, but with the Life of,

MADAM, Yours, etc.


By the same Hand.
THIS Morning I discovered the happy Signal at your Window, which was as
welcome to me as a Cordial to fainting Spirits: Heavens grant the Design be
real, Love is never free from Fears; and my presaging Mind bids me not be too
confident. If there be any Sympathy in our Souls, as there is in our Manners
and Humors, I am sure you must be very much indisposed; for, all Night long,
dreadful Fancies haunted me, and drove all soft and pleasing Idea's from me:
The same Rest which guilty despairing Wretches and Feverish Souls find in the
midst of their Agonies, was my Lot all Night long: I could not, durst not
slumber; and, as my Love grew more outrageous, my Apprehensions about you were
more distracting. I cannot be well till I see you, which, if it be with your
usual Charming Gayety, I shall be the most blessed of Mortals: But if pale
Sickness sit upon your Lips, Heavens grant it may also freeze the Blood of

Yours.


By the same Hand.
IF Distraction be an Argument of Love, I need no other to convince you of my
Passion: All my past Actions have discovered it, since I had the honor to know
you; though not any so sensibly as my Behavior on Sunday-night: My Reflection on
it, gives me more pain than I can express, or you imagin^; though in my Mind
those Actions may be forgiven, that proceed from Excess of Love. My Letter will
discover the Loss of my Senses, which I never had so much occasion for as now,
especially when I presume to write to one of so much Judgment as yourself; but
you, my dearest Creature, must look upon the Infirmities and Distress of a
Lovesick Wretch, with the same Candor and Mildness that Heaven does upon you;
and let all my Faults be forgiven by your tender Heart, that is designed for
nothing but Compassion, and all the gentle Actions of softest Love. Whilst I
am preaching up Pity, I must remember to practice it myself, and not to
persecute you with more Words, th^n to tell you, that I love you to Death, and,
when I cease to do it, may Heaven ^us^ly punish my broken Vows, and may I be as
mis^rable as now I think myself happy. But as the greatest Passions are
discovered by Silence, so that must direct me to conclude.

Yours.


By the same Hand.
I Am troubled, at the Soul, to find my Dearest Life express herself with so
much Concern: I am sure, till Death makes me cold, I shall never be so to one
whose I entirely am, not so much by Vows as by the sincerest Passion and
Inclination. No, my kind Dear, engaging Creature, sooner than utter one Sigh
which is not for You, I would choose to be the Contempt of Mankind, and an
Abhorrer of my own loathed Being. Your Person is too charming, your Manner too
winning, your Principles too honorable, ever to let a Heart escape, that you
have once made entirely your own; and, when mine is not so, may it fester in
the Breast of

Yours.


By the same Hand.
TO express the grateful sense of the Obligation I have to you, cannot be
effectually done, unless I had your Pen. If you observe my Style, you will have
reason to conclude, I have not received your ingenious Letter of Yesterday,
which should have been a Precedent to me, and a Rule to write by; I assure you
I am as well satisfied of the R^ality of the Contents of it, as I am of its
Ingenuity. Your Sense is clear, like your Actions; and that Spirit that glows
in your Eyes, shines in your Lines. I may venture to say, that Writing is not
the least of your Excellencies, and if any thing could persuade me to stay
longer than Friday or Saturday here, it would be in Expectation of a second
Letter from you. It Is my greatest pleasure to hear you are well, and to have
the happiness of possessing in Thought, what is denied to my Eyes; desiring the
Continuance of them for no other end, than to gaze upon my dear Conqueress,
who, after a most engaging manner, has the way of kindly killing

Her humble and eternally obliged Servant.


By the same Hand.
I Hope, my dearest Life, will excuse this Impertinence, though I received her
Commands not to write; but when I tell h^^, that the Tumult of my Mind was so
extreme, upon the reflection of my late Folly, that I could not rest, till I
had acknowledged my Rashness; I hope she will continue her usual Goodness of
forgiving one, that cannot forgive himself. When I think of my unworthiness, I
rave. I have been treated by the dearest and best of Creatures, with all the
Honor and Sincerity imaginable, and my Return has been Brutality and ill
Manners. It Is you alone, Madam, that have sweet engaging Ways peculiar to
yourself, you are easy without Levity; Courteous and Affable without Flattery;
you have Wit without Ill Nature, and Charms without being vain. I cannot think
of all your Heavenly Qualifications, without upbraiding myself for making such
barbarous and unjust Returns. I cannot think of what I have done, without a
Just Abhorrence; I loath and detest myself, and must needs own, I ought not to
subscribe myself by any other Title, than,

MADAM, Your Ungrateful.


A Letter of Reproach to a Woman of Quality.
MADAM,
I Am sorry I must change my Style, and tell you I am now fully satisfied that
your Ladyship never will be so; I always feared your Desires would exceed your
Returns: But when I heard you were supplied by three Nations, I thought you
might have been modestly contented. And I have even yet good nature enough to
pity your unfortunate Condition, or rather Constitution, that obliges half the
Town of necessity to decline all sorts of Commerce with you; I could have
wished you had had Reputation enough left for me to have justified, though you
have cruelly robbed me of the Joy of Loving, without making yourself any
reasonable Advantage of it; had your Soul consulted my Destiny, I should have
had fairer play for my Passion, and not have been thus sacrifi'd to your most
Egregious Follies; yet, since better late than never, take, Madam, this time,
now the Town is disbanded, the Season moderate, and your Ladiship's common
Practice prorogued, to consider if there be any way left you, in some measure,
to save the Confusion of yourself, and that of,

MADAM, Your real humble Servant.
August the 10 th, 95.
A Letter of Business to a Merchant's Wife in the City.
MADAM,
I Can forgive you the Difficulty you made of passing an Evening with me; nay,
even the affected Indifference you entertained me with, when you might have
employed your time much better; I knew your Character, and guessed what would
be the end of our first Meeting, but desire it may not be the beginning of the
Second; for the future, prithee, dear Hypocrite, (do not forget yourself) and
so often engage me to Love tenderly, and yet conjure me to hope for no Return;
but do me the Favor to make a better use of the next Opportunity, lest your
carry on too ^ar the unnatural Jest, and contrive to force yourself out of the
Inclinations of,

Madam, Your real humble Servant.

LETTERS, By the late Celebrated Mrs. Katherine Phillips.
The Famed Orinda, to the Honorable Berenice.
YOur Ladiship's last Favor from Col. P -- 's was truly obliging, and carried
so much of the same great Soul of yours, which loves to diffuse it self in
Expressions of Friendship to me, that it merits a great deal more
Acknowledgment than I am able to pay at my best Condition, and am less now when
my Head aches, and will give me no leave to enlarge, though I have so much
Subject and Reason; but really if my Heart ak'd too, I could be sensible of a
very great Kindness and Condesc^ntion in thinking me worthy of your Concern,
though I visibly perceive most of my Letters have lost their way to your
Ladyship. I beseech you be pleased, first, to believe I have written every
Post; but, secondly, since I came, and then to enquire for them, that they may
be commended into your hands, where alone they can hope for a favorable
residence; I am very much a Sharer by Sympathy, in your Ladiship's satisfaction
in the Converse you had in the Country, and find that to that ingenious Company
Fortune had been just, there being no Person fitter to receive all the
Admiration of Persons best capable to pay them, than the great Berenice: I hope
your Ladyship will speak me a real Servant of Dr. Wilkins; and all that
Converse with you, have enriched all this Summer with yours. I humbly thank
your Ladyship for your Promise of Mr. Boyle's Book, which indeed merits a
public, not View only, but Universal Applause, if my Vote be considerable in
things so much above me. If it be possible, oblige me with the sight of one of
them, which (if your Ladyship command it) shall be very faithfully returned
you. And now (Madam) why was that a cruel Question, When will you come to
Wales? It Is cruel to me, I confess, that it is yet in question; but I humbly
beg your Ladyship to unriddle that part of your Letter, for I cannot understand
why you, Madam, who have no Persons alive to whom your Birth has submitted
you, and have already by your Life secured to yourself the best Opinion the
World can give you, should create an Awe upon your own Actions, from imaginary
Inconveniences: Happiness, I confess, is twofac'd, and one is Opinion; but
that Opinion is certainly our own; for it were equally ridiculous and
impossible to shape our Actions by others Opinions. I have had so much (and
some sad) Reason to discuss this Principle, that I can speak with some
Confidence, That none will ever be happy, who make their Happiness to consi^t
in, or be governed by the Votes of other Persons. I deny not but the
Approbation of wise and good Persons is a very necessary Satisfaction; but to
forbear innocent Contentments, only because it is possible some Fancies may be
so capricious as to dispute, whether I should have taken them, is, in my
Belief, neither better nor worse than to fast always, because there are some so
superstitious in the World, that will abstain from Meat, upon some Score or
other, upon every day in the Year, that is, some upon some days, and others
upon others, and some upon all. You know, Madam, there is nothing so various as
Vulgar Opinion, nothing so untrue to itself: Who shall then please, since none
can fix it? It Is a Heresy (this of submitting to every blast of popular
extravagancy) which I have combated in Persons very dear to me: Dear Madam, let
them not have your Authority for a relapse, when I had almost committed them;
but consider it without a Bias, and give Sentence as you see cause; and in
that interim put me not off ( Dear Madam) with those Chymera's, but tell me
plainly what inconvenience is it to come? If it be one in earnest, I will
submit, but otherwise I am so much my own Friend, and my Friend's Friend, as
not to be satisfied with your Ladiship's taking measure of your Actions by
others Opinion, when I know too that the severest could find nothing in this
Journey that they could condemn, but your excess of Charity to me, and that
Censure you have already supported with Patience, and (notwithstanding my own
consciousness of no ways deserving your sufferance upon that score) I cannot
beg you to recover the Reputation of your Judgment in that particular, since it
must be my Ruin. I should now say very much for your most obliging Commands to
me, to write, and should beg frequent Letters from your Ladyship with all
possible importunity, and should by command from my Lucasia excuse her last
Rudeness (as she calls it) in giving you account of her Honor for you under
her own Hand, but I must beg your pardon now, and out-believing all, I can say
upon every one of these accounts, for really, Madam, you cannot tell how to
imagine any Person more to any one than I am,

Madam, Your Ladiship's most faithful Servant, and passionate Friend, ORINDA.
June the 25th, Priory of Cardigan.

Lucasta is most faithfully your Servant: I am very glad of Mr. Cowley's
success, and will concern myself so much as to thank your Ladyship for your
endeavor in it.

To the Honorable Berenice.
Dear MADAM,
I Have been so long silent, that I profess I am now ashamed almost to beg your
Pardon, and were not Confidence in your Ladiship's Goodness a greater respect
than the best Address in the World, I should scarce believe myself capable of
remission; but when your Ladyship shall know more fully than Papers can
express, how much and how many ways I have suffered, you will rather wonder
that I write at all, than that I have not written in a Week; when you shall
hear that my Dear Lucasia, by a strange unfortunate Sickness of her Mother's,
has been kept from me, for three Weeks longer than I expected, and is not yet
come: I have had some difficulty to live, and truly, Madam, so I have, and more
difficulty to be silent to you, but that in earnest my disorder was too great
to write: Dear Madam, pardon and pity me, and, to express that you do both, be
pleased to hasten hither, where I shall pour all my Trouble into your Bosom,
and receive thence all that Consolation which I never in my Life more needed
than I now do. You see, Madam, my Presumption, or rather Distraction to leap
from Confessions into Petitions, and those for advantages so much above my
merit: But what is that, that the dear Great Berenice can deny her faithful
Orinda? And what is it that Orinda would not do or suffer, to obtain that sweet
and desired Converse, she now begs of you? I am confident my Lucasia will
suddenly be here to, thank you for your Charity which you will, by coming,
express to me, and the Obligation you will put upon her by it; both which shall
be equally and constantly acknowledged (if you will please to hasten it) by

Your faithfully affectionate Friend, and humble Servant, ORINDA.
Nov. 2 1658.
To the Honorable Berenice.
I Must confess myself extremely troubled, to miss a Letter from your Ladyship
in a whole Fortnight, but I must beg you to believe your silence did not
occasion mine; for my Ambition to converse with you, and advantage in being
allowed it, is too great for me to decline any opportunity which I can improve
to obtain so much happiness: But really the Box of Gloves and Ribbons missed a
convenience of going, and a Letter that attended them partak'd in the same
misfortune; by this time and some days before it I hope they have reached you,
for they were sent away above a Week ago; and if so, all that I can tell you of
my Desires to see your Ladyship will be repetition, for I had with as much
earnestness as I was capable of, begged it then, and yet have so much of the
Beggar in me, that I must redouble that Importunity now, and tell you, That I
gasp for you with an Impatience that is not to be imagined by any Soul wound up
to a less concern in Friendship than yours is, and therefore I cannot hope to
make others sensible of my vast desires to enjoy you, but I can safely appeal
to your own illustrious Heart, where I am sure of a Court of Equity to relieve
me in all the Complaints and Supplications my Friendship can put up: Madam, I
am assured you love me, and that being once granted, it is out of dispute, that
your Love must have nobler circumstances than mine, but because the greatness
and reality of it must be always disputed with you, by me there must of
necessity remain the obligingness of your Love to weigh down the Balance, and
give you that advantage over me in friendship, which you unquestionably have in
all things else, and if this reasoning be true, (as sure there are all Sciences
in Friendship, and then Logic cannot be excluded) I have argued myself into
handsome necessity of being eternally on the receiving hand, but let me qualify
that seeming meanness, by assuring you, that even that is the greatest
testimony of my esteem for your Ladyship, that ever I can give; for I have a
natural pride (that I cannot much repent of) which makes me very unwilling to
be obliged, and more curious from whom I receive kindnesses than where I confer
them; so that being contented to be perpetually in your Debt, is the greatest
Con^ession I can make of the Empire you have over me, and really that
Privilege is the last which I can submit to part with all, to be just done in
Acts of Friendship, and that I do not only yield you in all my Life past, but
can beg to have it continued by your doing me the greatest favor that ever I
received from you by restoring me my dear and honored Berenice; this, Madam,
is but one Action, but, like the Sum of an Account, it contains the Value of
all the rest, and will so oblige and refresh me, that I cannot express the
satisfaction I shall receive in it; I humbly thank your Ladyship for the
assurance you have given me, that you suddenly intend it, and that you were
pleased to be accountable to me for your stay till Christmas, which being now
at hand, I hope you will have neither Reason, Importunity, nor Inclinations to
retard the Happiness you intend me: Really, Madam, I shall and must expect it
in these Holidays, and a disappointment to me is the greatest of Miseries; and
then, Madam, I trust you will be convinced of this necessity there is of your
Life and Health, since Heaven it self appears so much concerned in it, as to
restore it by a Miracle: And, truly, had you been still in danger, I should
have looked upon that as more ominous than the Blazing-star, so much discoursed
of; but you are one of those extraordinary Blessings which are the Public
Concernments, and are, I trust, reserved to be yet many Years an Example of
Honor and Ornament to Religion.

Oh, Madam, I have abundance to tell you and ask you, and if you will not
hasten to hear it, you will be almost as cruel as Arsaces; but you will come,
and, if you find any thing in this Letter that seems to question it, impute it
to the continual distrust of my own Merit, which will not permit me easily to
believe my self favored: Dear Madam, if you think me too timorous, confute me
by the welcome Experiment of your Company, which, really, I perpetually long
for, and again beg, as you love me, and claim as you would have me believe it;
I am glad your Ladyship has pitched on a place so near me, you shall be
sufficiently persecuted with Orinda. I know you will pardon me, for not
acquainting you with the News you heard from other hands, when I tell you,
there is nothing of it true, and the Town is now full of very different
Discourse; but I shall tell you more particularly, when I have the honor to
see you; and, till then, cannot with convenience do it. I easily believe Dous
factious; but, in those Disputes, I think he discovers more Wit than Wisdom,
and your Ladyship knows they are inseparable; I shall lose the Post, if I do
not now hasten to subscribe, what I am always ready to make good, that I am
more than any one living,

Your Ladiship's most Faithful and most Passionate Friend and Servant, ORINDA.
December. 30. 1658.
To the Honorable Berenice.
WIth the greatest Joy and Confusion in the World, I received, Dear Madam, your
Ladiship's most obliging Letter from Kew, and thus far I am recon^il'd to my
own Omissions, that they have produced a Shame which serves me now to allay a
Transport, which had otherwise been excessive at the knowledge that I am to
receive, that notwithstanding all my Failings, you can look upon me with so
generous a Concern: I could make many Apologies for myself, and with truth tell
you, That I have ventured Papers to kiss your Ladiship's Hand, since I received
one from it, but really, Madam, I had rather owe my restitution wholly to your
Bounty, than seem to have any pretense to it myself, and I will therefore allow
myself utterly unworthy of having any room in your Thoughts, in that I have not
perpetually begged it of you, with that Assiduity as is suitable to so great
and so valued a Blessing; and I know that though a Sea have divided our Persons,
and many other Accidents made your Ladiship's Residence uncertain to me, yet I
ought to have been restless in my Enquiries how to make my approaches to you;
and all the Varieties and Wanderings and Troubles that I have undergone since I
had the honor to see your Ladyship, ought not to have distracted me one moment
from the payment of that Devotion to you, which if you please, I will swear
never to have been one jot lessened in my Heart, as ill and as seldom as I have
expressed it; but now, that my good Fortune has brought me once more so near
your Ladyship, I hope to redeem my Time, by so constant and fervent Addresses
to you, as shall both witne^s how unalterably I have ever loved and honored
you, and how extremely glad I am still to be preserved in so noble and so
prized a Heart as yours; and, that I may the sooner be secured of that and
restored to your Converse, I must beg your Ladyship to find some occasion that
may bring you to London, where I may cast mysel^ at your Feet, both in
repentance of my own Faults, and acknowledgment of your Goodness, and assure
you that neither Lucasia, nor any other Person, ever had the Will, the Power,
or the Confidence to hinder the Justice of my most affectionate Service to your
Ladyship, and though you fright me with telling me how much you have considered
me of late, yet I will venture upon all the Severity that Reflection can
produce; and if it be as great as I may reasonably fear, yet I will submit to
it for the Expiation of my Failings, and think myself sufficiently happy if
after any Penance you will once more receive me into your Friendship, and
allow me to be that same Orinda, whom with so much goodness you were once
pleased to own as most faithfully yours, and who have ever been, and ever will
be so; and, Dear dear Madam,

Your Ladiship's most affectionate humble Servant and Friend, K. Phillips.


This was wrote but a Month before Orinda died.

To Mr. Herbert.
I Received your two Letters against Hypocrisy and Love, but I must tell you,
they have made me no Convert from, Women, and their Favorite; for who like
Simonides, would give nine scandalous Origins to Womankind, for one good one,
merely because the Follies and Vices of that Sex deserve it, and yet hope ever
to make your account of them? or who, with Petronius Arbiter, would tell the
Lawyers, Quid faciunt Leges ubi sola pecunia regnat?
Aut ubi paupertas vincere nulla potest,
Ipsi qui Cynica traducunt tempora cena,
Nonnunquam Nummis vendere verba solent,
Ergo judicium, nihil est nisi publica Merces
Atque eques in causa qui sedet empta probat.


Thus Englished by Mr. Barnaby. Laws bear the Name, but Money has the Power;
The Cause is bad when ever the Client's Poor:
Those strict-liv'd Men that seem above our World,
Are often too modest to resist our Gold.
So Judgment, like our other Wares, is sold,
And the Grave Knight that nods upon the Laws,
Waked by a Fee, Hems, and approves the Cause.
That the Bar is but a Market for the Sale of Right, and that the Judge sits
there only to confirm what the Bribe had secured before, and yet hope ever to
escape when you come into their Hands? Or what Man that has his Interest before
his Eyes would tell this dangerous Truth, That Priests of all Religions are the
same?

No, no, Plain-dealing must be left to Manly, and confined to the Theater, and
permit Hypocrisy and Nonsense to prevail with those pretty Amusements, Women,
that like their own Pleasure too well, to be fond of Sincerity. You declaim
against Love on the usual Topics, and have scarce any thing new to be answered
by me, their professed Advocate, if by Repentance you mean the Pain that
accompanies Love; all other Pleasures are mixed with that, as well as Love, as
Cicero observes in his second Book de Oratore, Omnibus rebus, voluptatibus
maximis fastidium finitimum est: In all things where the greatest Pleasures are
found, there borders a satiety and uneasy pain: And Catullus, Non est dea
nescia nostri, quae dulcem curis miscet amaritiem: Nor am I unknown to that
bright Goddess, who with my Cares mingles a sweet pleasing Bitter. But I take
this pain in Love to proceed from the imperfection of our Union with the Object
beloved, for the Mind forms a thousand entrancing Idea's, but the Body is not
capable of coming up to that satisfaction the Mind proposes; but this Pain is
in all other Pleasures that we have, none of which afford that fullness of
Pleasure, as Love, which bears some proportion to the vehemence of our Desires:
Speak therefore no more against Love, as you hope to die in the Arms of Sylvia,
or not perish wretchedly in the Death of a Pumpkin. I am

Your Friend, etc.

LETTERS
BY Mr. Tho. Brown.
To C. G. Esquire in Covent Garden.
MAy I be forced to turned News-monger for a wretched Subsistence^ and beat up
fifty Coffee-houses every Morning, to gather Scraps of Intelligence, and
fatherless Scandal; or, (to Curse my self more emphatically) may I live the
restless Life of some gay younger Brother's starving Footman of the Temple,
who, between his Master's Debts and Fornication, visits once a Day half the
Shopkeepers in Fleet Street, and half the Whores in Drury Lane, if I am not as
utterly weary of hunting after you any longer, as ever Statesman was of serving
the Public, when the Public forgot to bribe his private Interest. Should I
but set down how many tiresome Leagues I have traveled, how often I have shot
all the City-gates, crossed Lincoln's Inn Fields, passed the two Tropicks of the
Old and New Exchange, and doubled the Cape of Covent Garden Church to see you,
I should grow more voluminous than Coryat; and you would fancy yourself, without
doubt, engaged in Purchase's or Hackluyt's Itineraries. As you are a Person of
half Business and half Pleasure, (which the Wise say, is the best Composition
in the World) I have considered you in your two Capacities, and ordered my
Visits accordingly. Sometimes I called upon you betimes in a Morning, when
nothing was to be met in the Streets, but grave Tradesmen, stalking in their
Slippers to the next Coffee-house; Midnight-drunkards, reeling home from the
Rose; industrious Harlots, who had been earning a Penny over Night, tripping it
on foot to their Lodgings; Ragmen, picking up Materials for Grubstreet; in
short, nothing but Bailiffs, Chimney-sweepers, Cinderwomen, and other People of
the same early Occupations, and yet, as my ill Stars contrived it, you were
still gone out before me. At other times I have called at Four in Afternoon,
the Sober Hour, when other discreet Gentlemen were but newly up, and dressing
to go to the Play; but to as little purpose as in the Morning. Then, toward
the Evening, I have a hundred times examined the Pit and Boxes, the
Chocolate-houses, the Taverns, and all places of public resort, except a
Church, (and there, I confess, I could no more expect to meet you, than a right
Beau of the last Paris Edition in the Bear-garden) but still I failed of you
every where, though sometimes you escaped me as narrowly as a Quibble does some
merry Statesmen I could name to you. Is it not strange, thought I to my self,
that every paltry Astrologer about the Town, by the help of a foolish
Telescope, should be able to have the Seven Planets at a Minute's warning, nay,
and their very Attendants, their Satellites too, though some of them are so many
hundred thousand Miles distant from us, to know precisely when they go to Bed,
and what Rambles they take, and yet that I with all my pains and application
should never take you in any of your Orbits, who are so considerably nearer to
me? But, for my part, I believe a Man may sooner find out a true Key to the
Revelations, than discover your By-haunts, and solve every Problem in Euclid
much easier than yourself. With all Reverence be it said, Your Ways are as hard
to be traced as those of Heaven; and the Dean of P --, who in his late History
of Providence has explained all the several Phoenomena's of it, but his own
Conversions, is the fittest Person I know of in the World to account for your
Eclipses. Some of your and my good Friends, (whom I need not mention to you)
have crossed the German Ocean, made the Tour of the Low Countries, seen the
Elector of Bavaria and Prince Vaudemont, and might, if they pleased, have got
drunk with a dozen of German Princes, in half the time. I have been beating the
Hoof up and down London, to find out you; -- so that at last, after a World of
mortifying Disappointments, taking a Martial in my hands, I happened to light
upon an Epigram of his, addressed to Decianus, a very honest Gentleman it
seems, but one that was as hard to be met with as yourself: And this Epigram,
suiting my own case exactly, I here send you a Paraphrase or Imitation of it,
call it which you please.

Ne valeam, si non totis Deciane Diebus.
Lib. 2. Ep. 2. In some vile Hamlet let me live forgot,
Small-beer my Portion, and no Wine my lot.
To some worse Iilt in Church-Indentures bound,
Than ancient Job, or modern Sh -- found,
And with more Aches visited, and Ills,
Than fill up Salmon's Works or Tilburgh's Bills:
If it is not still the Burden of my Prayer,
The Day with you, with you the Night to share.
But, Sir, (and the Complaint, you know, is tr^e)
Two damned long Miles there lie 'twixt me and you:
And these two Miles, with little Calculation,
Make four, by that I Have reached my Habitation.
You near Sage Will's, the Land of Mirth and Claret,
I live, stowed up in a White-chappel Garret;
Often, when I Have come so far your Hands to kiss,
Flattered with Thoughts of the succe^ding Bliss,
I Am told, you're gone to the Vexatious Hall,
Where, with eternal Lungs, the Lawyers bawl,
Or else stole out, a Female Friend to see;
Or, what is as bad, you're not at Home for me.
Two Miles I Have at your Service; and that is civil,
But to trudge four, and miss you, is the Devil.
And now, if you are not incurably lost to all sense of Humanity, send me word
where it is you pass your Evenings, or in one of your beloved Catullus's
Expressions, Demonstres ubi sunt tuae tenebrae.
But if you think that too hard upon you, for I would not be thought to invade
your Privacies, appoint some common meeting place, the Grffin, or the Dog,
where, with two or three more select Friends, we may pass a few Hours over a
Righteous Bottle of Claret. As you ever hope that Heaven will be merciful, or
Sylvia true to you, let this happy Night be some time this Week.

I am your most obliged Servant, T. BROWN.
London, June 20. 1695.
To the Perju^'d Mrs. --
THis Morning I received the News, (which, knowing you to be a Woman, I
confess, did not much startle me) that is, spite of all your Promises, your
Vows, and Obligations, nay, and in spite of your Interest too, (which you
Women so seldom sin against) you had sacrificed my worthy Friend Mr. --, and
are to be married next Week to that nauseous, that insupportable, that
everlasting Beast --. Upon which I immediately repaired to my Friend's
Lodgings, and, because I knew but too well how nearly he had taken you into his
Heart, I carried him to that blessed Sanctuary of dis^ppointed Lovers, a
Tavern, the better to prepare him for the News of your Infidelity; I plied him
warmly with the Juice of the generous Grape, and entertained him all the whi^^
with the most horrible Stories of your Sex, that my Malice could suggest to me,
which, Heaven be praised, was fruitful enough upon this occasion; for I don't
believe I forgot one single Instance of Female Treachery, from Mother Eve, of
wheedling Memory, down to your virtuous self. At last, when Matters were ripe,
I disclosed the unwelcome Secret to him --. He raved and wept, and, after some
interval, wept and raved again; but, thanks to my pious Advice, and the kind
Influence of the other Bottle, it was not long before the Paroxysm was over. I
could almost wish you had been by, to see how heroically he threw off your
Chains; with what Alacrity he tore you from his Bosom; and, in fine, with what
a Christian Self-denial he renounced you; more heartily, I dare swear, than his
Godfather abjured the Devil for him at his Baptism.

And now, Madam, though I confess you have prevented my Curses, by your choice of
such a Coxcomb, and it is not good Manners to solicit a Judgment from Heaven on
every such Accident at this, (for Providence would have a fine time on it, to be
at the expense of a Thunderbolt, for every Woman that forswears herself) yet so
much do I resent the ill usage of my Friend, that I cannot forbear to give you
this conviction, how earnestly I can pray, when I set my self to it. Therefore
give me leave, Madam, to throw these hearty Ejaculations at your Head, now,
since I shall not have the honor to throw a Stocking at you on the fatal Night
of Consummation.

May the Brute, your Husband, be as Jealous of you, as Usurpers are of their
new Subjects, and, to show his good opinion of your Judgment as well as your
Virtue, may he suspect you of a Commerce with nothing of God's making; nothing
like a Gentleman that may serve to excuse the Sin, but lousy Bush-begotten
Vagabonds, and hideous Rogues in Rags and Tatters, or Monsters that stole into
the World, when Nature was asl^ep, with Ulcers all over them, and Bunches on
their Backs as large as Hillocks. May you never actually Cuckold him, (for that
were to wish you some Pleasure, which, God knows, I am far from being guilty
of) but what will serve to torment him as effectually: May the Wretch imagine,
you have injured him that way; under which prepossession may he never open his
Mouth, but to Curse, nor lift up his Hands, but to Chastise you. May that
execrable Day be for ever banished out of the Almanac, in which he does not
use his best endeavors to beat one into your Bones; and may you never go to
Bed without an apprehension that he will cut your Throat: May he too have the
same distrust of you. Thus may your Nights be spent in Eternal Quarrels, and
your Nuptial-sheets boast of no honorable Blood but what is owing to these
Nocturnal Skirmishes. May he lock you up from the sight of all Mankind, and
leave you nothing but your ill Conscience to keep you company, till at last,
between his penurious allowance and the sense of your own guilt, you make so
terrible a Figure, that the worst Witch in Mackbeth would seem an Angel to you.
May not ^ven this dismal Solitude protect you from his Suspicions, but may some
good-natured Devil whisp^r into his Ear, That you have committed Wickedness
with a Bedstaff, and, in one of his frantic Fits, may he beat out your Brains
with that supposed Instrument of your Lust. May your History be transmitted to
all Ages in the Annals of Grubstreet, and, as they fright Children with
Raw-head and Bloody-bones, may your Name be quoted to deter People from
committing of Matrimony. And, to ratify all this, (upon my Knees, I most
devoutly beg it) may Heaven hear the Prayers of,

T. BROWN.

To the Honorable -- in the Pallmall.
SIR,
LAst Night I had the following Verses, which, for my part, I confess, I never
saw before, given me by a Gentleman, who assured me they were written by my
late Lord Rochester; and, knowing what a just Value you have for all the
Compositions of that incomparable Person, I was resolved to send 'em to you by
the first opportunity. It Is indeed very strange how they could be continued in
private hands all this while, since the great care that has been taken to print
every Line of his Lordship's Writing that would endure a public view: But I am
not able to assign the Reason for it. All that you need know concerning the
occasion of them, is, that they were writ^en in a Lady's Prayer Book.

Fling this useless Book away,
And presume no more to pray;
Heaven is just, and can bestow
Mercy on none but those that mercy show.
With a proud Heart, maliciously inclined,
Not to increase, but to subdue Mankind.
In vain you vex the Gods with your Petition;
Without Repentance and sincere Contrition,
You Are in a Reprobate Condition.
Phillis, to calm the angry Powers,
And save my Soul as well as yours,
Relieve poor Mortals from Despair,
And Justify the Gods that made you fair;
And in those bright and charming Eyes
Let Pity first appear, then Love;
That we by easy steps may rise
Through all the Ioys on Earth, to those Above.
I cannot swear to their being genuine; however, there is something so delicate
in the Thought, so easy and beautiful in the Expression, that I am without
much difficulty to be persuaded, that they belong to my Lord. Besides, I cannot
imagine with what prospect any Gentleman should disown a Copy of Verses which
might have done him no ill Service with the Ladies, to father them upon his
Lordship, whose Reputation was so well established among them beforehand, by a
numerous and lawful Issue of his own begetting. The Song that comes along with
them was written by Mr. Gl -- of Lincoln's End; and, I believe, you will applaud
my Judgment, for seeking to entertain you out of my Friend's Store, who
understands the Harmony of an English Ode so well, since I have nothing of mine
own that deserves transcribing.

I.
Phillis has a gentle Heart,
Willing to the Lover's Courting;
Wanton Nature, all the Art,
To direct her in her Sporting:
In the Embrace, the Look, the Kiss,
All is real Inclination;
No false Raptures in the Bliss;
No feigned Sighings in the Passion.
II.
But, oh! who the Charms can speak,
Who the thousand ways of toying,
When she does the Lover make
All a God in her enjoying?
Who the Limbs that round him move,
And constrain him to the Blisses?
Who the Eyes that Swim in Love,
Or the Lips that suck in Kisses?
III.
Oh the Freaks, when mad she grows,
Raves all wild with the possessing!
Oh the silent Trance! which shows
The Delight above expressing.
Every way she does engage,
Idly talking, speechless lying:
She transports me with the Rage,
And she kills me in her Dying.
I could not but laugh at one Passage in your Letter, where you tell me, That
you, and half a dozen more, had like to have been talked to death the other day,
by -- upon the Success of his late Play. For my part, I don't pity you at all;
for why, the Devil should a Man run his Head against a Brick-wall, when he may
avoid it? On the other hand, I wonder why you Gentlemen of Will's Coffee-house,
who pretend to study Pleasure above other People, should not as naturally
scamper out of the Room when your Persecut^r appears, as Monsieur Misson tells
us, the Dogs in Italy ran out of Church as soon as ever they see a Capuchin
mount the Pulpit. I find by you, that the abovementioned everlasting Babillard
plagued you with his Songs, and talked of outdoing Don Quixot of Melodious
Memory; so far I agree with him, that if he has any Genious, it lies wholly in
Sonnet. But (Heaven be praised) notwithstanding all the feeble Efforts of his
Enemies to depose him, Mr. D'Vrfey still continues the only Legal, Rightful and
Undoubted King of Lyricland, whom God grant long to Reign over all his Hamlets,
and may no Gallic Attempts against his Crown or Person ever prosper. So wishes

Your most obliged Servant, T. BROWN.

To My Lady --
I Found a Letter of your Ladiship's own Hand left for me last Night at my
Lodgings. This Morning a Porter visited me with another of the sort, and just
now going to dine with some Friends at the Blew-posts, you send me a third to
refresh my Memory. I vow to God, Madam, if you continue to draw your Bills so
^ast upon me, I must be forced to protest them in my own defense, or fly my
Country. But, with submission, methinks the Language of all three was very
surprising: You complain of my absence, and coldness, and the Lord knows what,
though it is but four days ago since I gave you the best convictions of my Love I
could, and you flattered me strangely, if you were not satisfied with them: May
I be as unacceptable to all Womankind as an old Eunuch with Io. Haynes's Voice,
if there is a Person in the Universe whom I adore above yourself; but the
devoutest Lover upon Earth may sometimes be without an Offering, and then
certainly he is excused by all Love's Cannon-Law in the World, for not coming to
the Altar. There are People I know that love to hear the rattling of the Boxes,
and show themselves at the Groom-Porter's, when they have not a Farthing in
their Pockets; but for my part, I could never endure to be an idle Looker on. I
have a thousand Obligations to your Ladyship, and till I am in a capacity to
repay them, should be as uneasy to see you, as any other Creditor when I have
no Money to send him going. I am so very honest in my own nature, that I would
not put you off with half Payments, and if I were not, your Ladyship is so
discerning, that I might much easier palm clipped Money upon a Jew, than succeed
in such a trick with so nice a Judge. Perhaps, Madam, you are scrupulous in
this matter even to a Fault. It Is not enough for you, that your Money is
Parliamentary, and that other People would be glad on it, for if it is not of
the largest size, or wants one grain of its due weight, you reject it with
indignation. But, what is the hardest case of all, (and you must pardon me,
Madam, if I take this occasion to reproach you with it) you are for engrossing
a Man's whole Cash to your self, and, by your good will, would not leave him
one solitary Testar to distribute among the Needy elsewhere, though you don't
know what Objects of Charity he may meet abroad. This, in truth, is very severe
usage: It Is the same as if the Government should only take care to pay off the
Soldiers in Flanders, and suffer the poor Seamen to starve. Even the Royal-Oak
Lottery, who are fit to be imitated by you in this particular, never strip a
Man entirely of all, but let him march off decently with a Crown or two to
carry him home. If this Example will not work upon you, pray learn a piece of
Tartarian-m^rcy; they are none of the best bred People in the World, I confess,
but are so civil when they come to a place, not to Eat out the Heart of the
Soil, but, having served a present turn, shift their Quarters, and forbear to
make a second Visit till the Grass is grown up again. Nay, a Nonconformist
Parson, who is a kind of a rambling Church Tartar, but of the worser sort,
after he has grazed a beloved Text as bare as the back of one's Hand, is glad
for his own convenience, to remove to another. Both these Instances, you will
say, look as if I advised you to supply my defect in another place; I leave
that to your own discretion, but really your humble Servant's present Exigences
are such, that he must be forced to shut up his Exchequer for some time.

I have a hundred times wished, That those unnatural Rogues, the Writers of
Romances, had been all hanged, ( Montague before me did the same for the
Statuaries) for giving you, Ladies, such wrong Notions of things. By
representing their Heroes so much beyond Nature, they put such extravagant
Idea's into your Heads, that every Woman, unless she has a very despicable
Opinion of her own Charms, which not one in a Million has, expects to find a
Benefit-Ticket, a Pharamond, or an Oroondates, to come up for her share, and
nothing below such a Monster will content her. You think the Men could do
infinitely more, if they pleased; and, as it is a foolish Notion of the Indians,
that the Apes would speak, if it were not for fear of being made Slaves to the
Spaniards; so you, forsooth, imagine, that we, for some such reason, are afraid
of going to the full length of our Abilities. We cannot be so much deceived in
our hopes of your Constancy, as you are disappointed in our Performances; so
that 'twere happy for the World, I think, if Heaven would either give us the
Vigor of those Brawny longliv'd Fellows, our Ancestors, or else abridge the
Desires of the Women: But, Madam, don't believe a word, that those Romance
Writers, or their Brethren in Iniquity, the Poets tell you. The latter prate
much of one Hercules, a Plague take him, that run the Gantlet through fifty
Virgin-sisters in one Night. It Is an impudent Fiction, Madam. The Devil of a
Hercules, that there ever was upon the Face of the Earth, (let me beg of you
therefore, not to set him up for a Knight of the Shire, to represent the rest)
or, if part of his History is true, he was a downright Madman, and prosper'd
accordingly; for you know he died raving and impenitent upon a Mountain. Both
he and his whole Family have been extinct these two thousand Years and upwards.
Some Memoirs tell us, That the Country rose upon them, and dispatched them all
in a Night, as the Glencow-men were served in Scotland. I wont justify the
truth of this; but, after you have tried the whole Race of us, one after
another, if you find one Man that pretends to be related to this Hercules, though
at the distance of a Welsh Genealogy, let me die the Death of the Wicked.

Therefore, Madam, take my Advice, and I Will engage you shall be no loser by it.
If your Necessities are so pressing, that you cannot stay, you must e'n borrow
of a Neighbor; since Cheapside fails you, a God's Name, try your Fortune in
Lombard Street. But if you could order Matters otherwise, and allow me a Week
or so longer, to make up my Sum, you shoul'd then be repaid with Interest, by

LYSANDER.

A Consolatory Letter to an Essex-Divine upon the Death of his Wife.
OLD FRIEND,
A Gentleman, that lives in your Neighborhood, told me this Morning, after we
had had some short Discourse about you, that you have buried your Wife. You and
I, Doctor, knew one another, I think, pretty well at the College; but being
absolutely a stranger to your Wife's Person and Character, the Old Gentleman in
Black take me, if I know how to behave my self upon this occasion; that is to
say, whether to be Sad or Merry; whether to Condole, or Congratulate you. But,
since I must do one or the other, I think it best to go o^ the surer side; And
so, Doctor, I give you Joy of your late great Deliverance. You Will ask me,
perhaps, why I chose this Party? To which I shall only reply, That your Wife
was a Woman, and it is an hundred to one that I have hit on the right. But if
this will not suffice, I have Argument to make use of, that you can no more
answer, than you can consute Bellarmine. I don't mean the Popish Cardinal of
that Name, (for, I believe, you have oftener laid him upon his Back, than Mrs.
Mary, deceased) but an ungodly Vessel holding about six Gallons, which, in some
Parts of England, goes by another Name (the more's the pity it is suffered) and
is called, a Jeroboam. -- And thus I urge it. -- Mrs. Mary, defunct, was either
a very good, or a very bad, or an indifferent, a between Hawk and Buzzard Wife;
though you know the Primitive Christians, for the four first Ages of the Church,
were all of Opinion, that there were no indifferent Wives^ however, disputandi
gratia, I allow them here. Now, if she was a good Wife, she is certainly gone to
a ^etter place; and then St. Jerome, and St. Austin, and St. Ambrose, and St.
Basil, and, in short, a whole Cart-load of Greek and Latin Fathers (whom it is
not your Interest, by any means, to disoblige) say positively, That you ought
not to grieve. If she was a bad one, your Reason will suggest the same to you,
without going to Councils and Schoolmen. So now it only remains upon my hands
to prove, that you ought not to be concerned for her Death, if she was an
indifferent Wife; and Public Authority having not thought fit as yet, to
oblige us to mourn for Wives of that denomination, it follows, by the Doctrine
of the Church of England, about things indifferent, that you had better let it
alone, for fear of giving Scandal to weak Brethren.

Therefore, Doctor, if you will take my Advice, in the first place, Pluck up a
good Heart; secondly, Smoke your Pipe, as you used to do; thirdly, Read
moderately; fourthly, Drink plentifully; fifthly and lastly, When you are
distributing Spoon-meat to the People next Sunday from your Pulpit, cast me a
Hawk's Eye round your Congregation, and, if you can, spy out a Farmer's
Daughter plump and juicy, one that is likely to be a good Breeder, and whose
Father is of some Authority in the Parish, (because that may be necessary for
the Support of Holy Church) say no more, but pelt her with Letters, Hymns and
Spiritual Sonnets, till you have gained your Carnal Poi^t of her. Follow this
Counsel, and I Will engage your late Wife will rise no more in your Stomach; for,
by the unerring Rules of Kitchin-Physick, which, I am apt to think, is the best
in all cases, one Shoulder of Mutton serves best to drive down another. I am

Yours, T. BROWN.

To the fair Lucinda, at Epsom.
MADAM,
I Wish I were a Parliament Man for your sake. Another now would have wished to
have been the Great Mogul, the Grand Seignior, or at least some Sovereign
Prince, but you see I am no ambitious Person, any farther than I aspire to be
in your good Graces. Now, if you ask me the Reason, why I wish to be so; it is
neither to bellow my self into a good Place at Court, nor to avoid paying my
Debts; it is to do a Public Service to my Country, it is to put the famed Magna
Charta in sorce: In short, Madam, it is to get a Bill pass, whereby every pretty
Woman in the Kingdom, (and then I am sure you will be included in it) should
under the severest Penalties imaginable, be prohibited to appear in public
wi^^out her Mask on. I have often wondered, why our Senators flatter us with
being a free People, and pretend they have done such mighty things to secure
our Liberty, when we are openly plundered of it by the Ladies, and that in the
Face of the Sun, and on His Majesty's Highway. I am a sad Instance, Madam, of
this Truth. I that, but twelve Hours ago, was a free as the wildest Savage in
either Indies, that Slept easily, Talked cheerfully, took my Bottle merrily,
and had nothing to rob me of one Minute's Pleasure, now love to be alone, make
Answers when no Body speaks to me; Sigh when I least think on it; and, though I
still drag this heavy lifeless Carcass about me, can give no more account of my
own Movements, than of what the two Armies are doing this very moment in
Flanders. By all these wicked Symptoms, I terribly suspect I am in Love. If
that is my case, and Lucinda does not prove as Merciful as she is Charming, the
Lord have Mercy on poor

MIRTILLO.

To the same at London.
MADAM,
AT last, but after a tedious Enquiry, I have found out your Lodgings in Town,
and am pleased to hear you're kept by -- who, according to our last Advices
from Lombard Street, is Rich and Old, two as good Qualities as a Man could
desire in a Rival: May the whole World (I heartily wish it) consent to pay
Tribute to all your Conveniences, nay, to your Luxury; while I, and none but I,
have the honor to administer to your Love. Don't tell me your Obligations to
him will not give you leave to be complaisant to a Stranger. You are his
Sovereign, and it is a standing Rule among us Casuists, that under that capacity
you can do him no wrong. But you imagine he loves you, because he presents you
with so many fine Things: After this rate, the most impotent Wretches would be
the greatest Lovers; ^or none are found to bribe Heaven or Women so high, as
those that have the most defects to atone for. You may take it for granted,
that half the Keeping-Drones about the Town, do it rather to follow the Mod^,
or to please a vain H^^our, than out of Love to the Party they pretend to
admire so, and this foolish A^fectation attends them in other things. I ^^^'d
tell you of a certain Lord, that keeps a Chaplain in his House, and allows him
plentifully, yet this Noble Peer is a rank Atheist in his Heart, and believes
nothing of the matter: I know another, that has a fine Stable of Horses; and a
third, that valu^s himself upon his great Library, yet one of (...) ou^ but
once in half a Year, and the other never looked on a Book in all his Life. Admit
your City-Friend l^ved you never so well, yet he is old, which is an incurable
Fault, and looking upon you as his Purchase, comes with a Secure, that is with
a sickly Appetite; while a vigorous Lover, such as I am, that has honorable
Difficulties to pass through, that knows he is upon his good B^haviour, and has
nothing but his Merits to recommend him, is nothing but Rapture, and Ecstasy,
and Devotion. But oh, you a^e afraid it will come to Old Limberham's Ears; that
is to say, You apprehend I shall make Discoveries; for it is not to be supposed
you will turn Evidence against yourself. Prithee, Child, don't let that frighten
you. Not a bribed Parliament Man, nor a drubb'd Beau, nor a breaking Tradesman;
n^y, to give you the last satisfaction of my Secrecy, not a Parson that has
committed Simony, nor a forraging Autho^ that has got a private Stealing-place,
shall be half so secret, as you will find me upon this occasion. I Will always come
the back-way to your Lodgings, and that in the Evening, with as much prudent
religious Caution, as a City Clergyman steals into a Tavern on Sundays; and
though it be a difficult Lesson for Flesh and Blood to practice, yet, to convince
you, Madam, how much I value your Reputation, above my own Pleasure, I Will leave
you a Mornings before Scandal it self is up; that is, before any of the
censorious Neighborhood are stirring. If I see you in the Street, or at the
Playhouse, I Will know you no more, than two Sharpers, that design to bob a
Country-fellow with a dropped Guinea, know one another when they meet in the
Tavern. I Will not discover my Engagements with you by any Overt-acts of my
Loyalty, such as Drinking your Health in all Companies, and Writing your Name
in every Glass-window, nor yet betray you by too superstitious a Care to
conceal the Intrigue.

Thus, Madam, I have answered all the Scruples that I thought could affect you
upon this Matter. But, to satisfy your Conscience farther, I am resolved to
visit you to Morrow-night; therefore muster up all the Objections you can, and
place them in the most formidable posture, that I may have the Honor to attack
and defeat them. If you don't wilfully oppose your own Happiness, I Will convince
you, before we part, that there is a greater Difference than you imagine,
between your Man of Phlegm, and such a Lover as,

MIRTILLO.

To W. Knight, Esquire at Ruscomb in Berkshire.
Dear SIR,
YOu desired me, when I saw you last, to send you the News of the Town, and to
let you see how punctually I have obeyed your Orders, scarce a Day has passed
over my Head since, but I have been enquiring after the freshest Ghosts and
Apparitions for you, Rapes of the newest date, dexterous Murders, and
fantastical Marriages, Country Steeples demolished by Lightning, Whales
stranded in the North, etc. a large Account of all which you may expect when
they come in my way, but at present be pleased to take up with the following
News.

On Tuesday last, that walking piece of English Mummy, that Sybil incarnate, I
mean my Lady Courtall, who has not had one Tooth in her Head, since King
Charles's Restoration, and looks old enough to pass for Venerable Bede's
Grandmother, was Married -- Could you believe it? -- To young Lisanio. You must
know I did myself the Honor now and then to make her Ladyship a Visit, and
found that of late she affected a youthful Air, and spruc'd up her Carcass most
egregiously; but, the Duce take me, if I suspected her of any lewd Inclinations
to Marry; I thought that Devil had been laid in her long ago. To make my Visits
more acceptable, I used to compliment her upon her Charms and all that^ where
by the by, my dear Friend, you may take it for a general Rule, that the Uglier
your Women are, and the Duller your Men, they are the easier to be flattered
into a belief of their Beauty and Wit. I told her, she was resolved to act
Sampson's part, and Kill more People in the last Scene of her Life, than other
Ladies could pretend to do in the whole five Acts of theirs. By a certain
awkard Joy, that displayed itself all over her Countenance, and glowed even
through her Cheeks of Buff, I could perceive this nauseous Incense was not
unwelcome to her. It Is true, she had the Grace to deny all this; and told me, I
rallied her, but dedy'd it so, as intriguing Sparks deny they have lain with
fine Women, and some Wou'd-be Poets deny their writing of Fatherless Lampoons,
when they have a mind at the same time to be thought they did what they coldly
disown. I could not but observe upon this, and several other occasions, how
merciful Heaven has been to us, in weaving Self-love so closely into our
Natures, in order to make Life palatable. 'The Divines indeed arraign it as a
Sin; that is, they would make us more miserable than Providence ever designed
us, though were it not for this very Sin, not one of them in a hundred would
have Courage enough to talk in public. For my part, I always considered it as
the best Friend, and greatest blessing we have, without which, all those merry
Farces that now serve to entertain us would be lost, and the World itself be as
silent and melancholy as a Spanish Court. It Is this blessed Vanity that makes
all Mankind easy and cheerful at home, (for no Body's a Fool, or a Rascal, or
Ugly, or Impertinent in his own Eyes) that makes a Miser think himself Wise, an
affected Coxcomb think himself a Wit, a thriving gay Villain think himself a
Politician, and, in short, that makes my Lady Court-all believe herself
agreeable. But to quit this Digression and pursue my Story.

On the Day abovementioned, this dry Puss of Quality, that had such a furious
longing to be Matrimonially larded, stole out of her House with two of her
Grave Companions, and never did a Country Justice's Oatmeal-eating Daughter of
Fifteen use more discretion to be undone with her Father's Clark, or Chaplain.
Gray's Inn Walks was the place of Rendezvous, where, after they had taken a few
Turns, Lisanio and she walked separately to the Chapel, and the Holy Magician
Conjured them into the Circle. From thence they drove home in several Coaches,
Dined together, but not a Syllable of the Wickedness they had committed, till
toward Night, because then I suppose their Blushes were best concealed, they
thought fit to own all. Upon this some few Friends were invited, and the
Fiddles struck up, and my old Lady frisk'd about most notably, but was as much
overtopp'd, and put out of Countenance, by the Young Women, as Somerset House
with the New Buildings. Not to enter into a Detail of all that happened, this
rusty Gammon of Bacon at last was dished up between a pair of clean Sheets,
soon after the Bridegroom followed, going to act Curtius's Story, and leap
alive into a Gulf. Let others envy his fine Equipage, and brace of Footmen,
that think it worth the while; as for me, I shall always pity the Wretch, who,
to fill his Guts at Noon, obliges himself to work in a Mine all Night. A poor
Knight of Alsatia, that Dines upon good wholesome Air in the Temple-Walks, is a
Prince to him.

I met Lisanio this Morning at the Rainbow, and whether 'twas his Pride, or
ill Humor, since Marriage, I cannot tell; but he looked as grum as a Fanatic
that fancies himself to be in the State of Grace. I have read somewhere, that
the Great Mogul weighs himself once a Year, and that the Courtiers rejoice or
grieve, according as the Royal Body increases or diminishes. I wonder why some
of our Nice Beaux that are Married, don't do the like, to know exactly what
Depredations a Spouse makes upon the Body Natural. As for Lisanio, I would
advise him never to do it, because if he wastes proportionably to what he has
done this Week, a Skeleton will outweigh him by the Year's End. But this is
not half the Mortification that a Man must expect, who, to show his Courage,
ventures upon a Widow. Though he mounts the Guard every Night, and wears out
his Carcass in her Service, till at last, like Witherington, in the Ballad, he
fight's upon his Stumps, yet he is never thanked for his pains; But labors
under the same ill Circumstances with a King that comes after one that is
deposed, for he is sure to be told of his Predecessor upon all occasions. The
second Temple at Jerusalem, was, without question, a Noble Structure, and yet
we find the old Fellows wept, and shook their Heads at it: Every Widow is so
far a Jew in her Heart, that as long as the World lasts, the second House will
fall short of the Glory of the first. And indeed I am apt to imagine the
Complaints is just, for a Maid and Widow are two different things; and how can
it be expected that a Man should come with the same Appetite to a Second-hand
Dish, as he brought with him when it was first served upon the Table?

And now Mr. Knight, I am upon the Chapter of Widows, give me leave to add a
word or two more. A true Widow is as seldom unfurnished of an Excuse to Marry
again, as a true Toper is without an Argument for Drinking. Let it rain or
shine, be hot or cold, it is all one, a true Son of Bacchus never wants a good
Reason to push about the Glass. And so a Widow, if she had a good Husband,
thinks herself obliged, in mere Gratitude to Providence, to venture again; and
if he was a bad one, she only tries to mend her hand in a second Choice. It was
not so with the People of Athens and Rome. The former had a King that lost his
Life in their Quarrel, and they would have no more, because he was too good for
them as the latter, because theirs was an ill one. But Commonwealths, you
know, are Whymsical things. I have only one thing more to say before I have
done, which though it looks like a Paradox at first sight, yet after you have
considered a while upon it, I fancy you will grant to be true: It Is in short
this, That a Man is the decay of his Vigor, when he begins to mistrust his
Abilities, had much better Marty a Widow than a Maid, For, as Sir John Suckling
has long ago observed, a Widow is a sort of Quagmire, and you know the finest
Racer may be as soon foundered there, as the heaviest Dray-horse. I am

Your most obliged Servant. T. BROWN.


POSTSCRIPT.
I believe I shall see you in the Country, before you hear from me again. Lest
I should come down a Barbarian to you Fox-hunters, I have been learning all
your noble Terms of Art for this Month; and now, God be praised, am a great
Proficient in the Language, and can talk of Dogs and Horses half an Hour,
without committing one Solecism. I have lived as sober too all this while as a
Parson that stands Candidate for a Living, and with this Month's Sobriety in my
Belly, design to do Wonders among you in the Country.

To a Gentleman that fell desperately in Love, and set up for a Beau, in the
45th Year of his Age.
I Never was a Predestinarian before, but now begin to think better of Zeno and
John Calvin than ever, and to be convinced there is a Fatality attends us. What
less could have made -- once the Gay, the Brave, the Witty (six Months ago I
should have added the Wise) at the approach of Gravity and Gray Hairs forfeit
his Character, fall in Love with Trash, and languish for a green Codling, that
sticks so close to the Stem, that he may sooner shake down the Tree, than the
Fruit? It Is true, the foolish Hours of our Lives are generally those that give
us the greatest share of Pleasure, but yours is so extravagant, so unreasonable
a Frolic, that I wonder you don't make your Life all of a piece, and learn at
these Years to jump through a Hoop, and practice other laudable Feats of
Activity. Oh, what a Conflict there is in your Breast, between Love and
Discretion^ ^Tis a motly Scene of Mirth and Compassion, to see you taking as
much pains to conceal your Passion from the prying malicious World, as a
bashful young Sinner does to hide her Great Belly, and to as little purpose,
for 'twill out. -- You must be a Touchwood-Lover, forsooth, and burn without
Blaze or Smoke. But why would you feel all the Heat, yet want the Comforter
Light? Such sullen Fires may serve to kindle your Mistress's Vanity, but never
to warm her Heart. Well, Love I find operates with the Grave, like Drink with
Cowards, it makes 'em most valiant, when least able. But why's the Hair cut
off? Can you dock any Years with it? Or are you the Reverse of Sampson, the
stronger for shaving? If so, let me see you shake off these Amorous Fetters to
show your power. But you are Buccaneering for a Prize, and would surprise a
Heart under false Colors. Take my word for it, that Stratagem will not do, for the
Pinnace you design upon, knows you have but a crasie Hulk, in spite of your
new Rigging and Careening. Wearing of Perukes, like advancing more Standards
than there are Troops in an Army, is a stale Artifice, that rather betrays your
weakness to the Enemy, than alarms them: For though powdered Vallancee, like
Turkish Horse-tails, may at a distance make a terrible show of Strength, yet,
my dear Friend, like them too, they are but very unserviceable Weapons at a
close Engagement. After all, if you're resolved to play a French Trick, and
wear a Half-shirt in January, to show your Courage, have a little of the
Frenchman's Prudence too, and line it with a Swanskin Wastcoat: That is, if you
must needs at this Age make Love to show your Vigor, take care to provide
store of Comforters to support your Back.

The Answer.
WEll, but hark you, Friend Harry! And do you think now that forty Years (if a
Man should ever come to it) is as fumbling a doting Age in Love, as Dryden
says, it is in Poetry? Why then, what will become of thee, who have made such
wicked Anticipations upon thy Nature's Revenue, that thou art utterly
non-solvent to any Matrimonial Expectations? Thou that in thy Post-haste of
Town-Riot and Excess, overleapest all the Measures of Time, and art got to be
Fifty in Constitution, before thy Age writes Thirty! Enjoy thy acquired
Iubilee, according to thy wonted Course, but be assured no Body will ever be
able to enjoy thee. The Woman- Prodigals, feed upon Husks, when they have any
thing to do with thee, thou emptied, raky, dry Bones. My Rheumatical Person, as
such, will be allowed some Moisture, and Gray Heirs only tell you, the Sap is
gone down to the Root, where it should be, and from whence thine has been long
since exhausted into every Strumpets Cavern about the Suburbs; confound your
Widows, and put your own Farthing Candle lighted at both ends, under one of
their Bushels, if you please: I find I have Prowess enough for the best
Maidenhead in Town, and resolve to attempt nothing under that honorable
Difficulty. And so much for the Women --

To his Honored Friend, Dr. Baynard, at the Bath.
My Dear DOCTOR,
I Have not writ to you these two Months, for which I expect to be severely
reprimanded by you, when you come to Town. And yet why should you wonder at
such a poor Fellow as I am, for being backward in my Payments, if you consider
it is the Case of Lombard Street, nay of the Bank, and the Exchequer it self
(you see I support myself by very honorable Examples) at this present
melancholy juncture, when, with a little alteration of Mr. Cowley's Words, a
Man may truly say, Nothing of Ready Cash is found,
But an Eternal Tick goes round.


However, to make you some amends for so long a Delay, I come to visit you now,
like Noah's Dove, with an Olive Branch in my Mouth; that is, in plain English,
I bring you News of a Peace, of a firm, a lasting, and a general Peace, (for
after this merry rate our Coffe-house Politicians talk) and pray do but
consider, if 'twere only for the Pleasure of such an Amusement, what will be
the happy Effects of it.

In the first place, this Peace will soon beget good store of Money, (the want
of which, though we are sinful enough in all Conscience, is yet the most Crying
Sin of the Nation) and this Money will naturally end in a great deal of Riot
and Intemperance; and Intemperance will beget a jolly Race of brave Diseases,
with new Names and Titles; and then, My dear Doctor, you Physicians will have a
Blessed Time on it.

As for the Lawyers, who, were it not for two or three Noble Peers, some of
their never-failing Clergy-Friends, a few well-disposed Widows, and stirring
Sollicitors, that keep up the Primitive Discipline of Westminster Hall, would
perfectly forget the Use of their Lungs, they too will see glorious Days again.
I was told a melancholy Story the other Day of two hopeful young Attorneys, who,
upon the general Decay of their Profession, were glad to turn Presbyterian
Divines; and that you will say is a damned Time indeed, when Lawyers are forced
to turn Peacemakers. But as the World grows richer, People will recover by
degrees out of this State of Laziness; Law Suits will multiply, and Discord
make as splendid a Figure in the Hall as ever. Headstrong Squires will Rebel
against their Lady Mothers, and the Church no longer connive at the abominable
Sacrilege of Tythe-Pigs and Eggs converted to Lay Uses.

And then, as for the honest Good-fellows of the Town, whose Souls have mourned
in Secret, ever since the unrighteous Abdication of Claret; how will they
rejoice to see their old Friend sold at Twelve-pence a Quart again? What Matter
of Joy will it be to his Majesty's Liege-people, that they can get Drunk with
half the Cost, and consequently with half the Repentance next Morning? This
will in a particular manner, revive the drooping Spirits of the City Sots; for
nothing goes so much against a true Cheapside Conscience, as an expensive Sin.
As times go now, a younger Brother can hardly peep into a Tavern without
entailing a Week's Sobriety upon himself; which, considering what Occasions
there may be to drink away the Public and Private Calamities, is a sad
Mortification. Wine indeed is grown a sullen Mistress, that will only be
enjoyed by Men of some Fortune, and not by them neither, but upon solemn Days;
so that if these wicked Taxes continue, Canary it self, though a Confederate of
ours, is like to meet the Fate of condemned Criminals, to return to the dismal
Place from whence it came, an Apothecary's Shop; and to be distributed about by
discreet Nurses in the Primitive sneaking Gill. It Is true, the Parliament, as
it became those to whom the People had delegated their Power, thought to
obviate these Grievances, by the Six-penny Act, and laying a Five hundred Pound
Fine upon Cellar-Adultery; but the Vintners, an impudent Generation, broke
through these Laws as easily as if they had been Senators themselves; nay, had
the Boldness to raise new Exactions upon the Subject: This obliged one half of
the Town, at least, to come down a Story lower, and take up with dull English
Manufacture, so that half our Wit lies buried in execrable Flip, or fulsome
Nottingham. To this may be ascribed all those phlegmatic, sickly Compositions,
that have loaded of late both the Theaters, most of which puny Butter-prints,
like Children begot by Pockey Parents, were scarce able to endure the
Christening; and others, with mighty pains and difficulty, lived just long
enough (a Methuselah's Age!) to be Crowned with Damnation on the third Day. But
when Money circulates merrily, and Claret is to be had at the old Price, a new
Spirit will appear abroad, Wit and Mirth will shake off their Fetters; and
Parnassus, that has made such heavy returns of late Years, will trade
considerably. It would be too tedious to reckon up all the other Advantages
that the Kingdom will receive by this joyful turn of the Scene; but there are
some behind, which I must not omit, because the Public is so nearly concerned
in them. We have a World of Married Men now, that, to save Charges, take St.
Paul's Advice in the Literal Sense, and, having Wives, live as if they had none
at all, and so defraud both them and the Government; but upon the happy Arrival
of Peace, they will vigorously set their Hands to the Plough again, and the Stale
Batchelors too will find Encouragement to Marry, and leave behind them a pious
Race of Fools, that, within these Twenty Years, will be ripe to be knocked in
the Head, in defense of the Liberty of the Subject, and the Protestant Religion.

We hear there is such a thing as New Money in the City, but it only visits the
Elect, for the Generality of People are such Reprobates to the Government, that
they may sooner get God's Grace, than a Milled Crown-piece. To inflame our
Reckoning, though there is so little Silver stirring in the Nation, that Dr.
Chamberlain is in greater hopes than ever of making his Paper-project take, yet
the World was never so unseasonably scrupulous. What an Usurer would have
leaped at in King Charles's Time, our very Porters now reject; which is full as
ridiculous, as if in the present Difficulty of raising Recruits, a Captain
should resolve to take no Men but such as were eight Foot high, or a Gentleman
in the last Ebb of his Fortune, when he can scarcely pay for Small-beer, should
then, and never before, fall in Love with Champagen. The last Year we had Money
enough, such as it was, merrily Circumcised, the Lord knows, however it made a
shift to find us Wine and Harlots: Now it is all silenced, and in the room of
it, (but that too, will soon suffer Circumcision) Faith passes for current, and
never was there a Time of more Universal Chalk, since the Apostolical Ages.
This, among other Evils, cannot but have an ill Effect, My dear Doctor, upon
the Gentlemen of your Profession; for People at present, are so taken up with
the Public Transactions, or their own Losses, that they have no leisure, or
are so poor, that they have no fancy to be Sick. The Generality of those that
are, Christen a Distemper as they do Shipwracks in Cornwall, by the Name of
God's Blessing, and though a Legion of Diseases invest them, don't think it worth
the while to send for a Physician to raise the Siege: If they do, it is for none
of the College, it is for some Half-Crown Surgeon, who has cheated the World
into an Opinion of his Skill, by putting Greek into his Sign, or for a
Twelve-penny Seventh Son, that preaches on Horseback in the Streets; but in the
Case of Chronical Diseases, let the World rub, is the general Language. Men put
off the mending of their Bodies, as they do of ill-tenanted Cottages, till they
have Money to spare. There Is a venerable Bawd in Covent Garden, that had her
Windows demolished last Shrove-Tuesday, and she will not repair them neither, till
there is a General Peace.

I believe no Body in the Nation will be averse to it, but only our Friends in
Red, and these find their Account so visibly in the continuance of the War,
that if they ever pray, which, I believe, is but seldom, we must excuse 'em if
it is against that Petition, Da pacem Domine in Diebus nostris. Some of 'em
quitted Cook upon Littleton, and some abandoned other Stations to go into the
Service; and these upon a Change of Affairs, must either turn Padders upon
Apollo's, or the King's high Road, and either turn Authors, or Grands Voleurs,
in their own defense. But Paul's will be built in a short time, and then a
Low Country Captain will make as busy a Figure in the Middle Isle, as ever his
Predecessors did in the Days of Ben. Johnson. Some of them may fight over the
Battles of Steenkirk and Landen in Ordinaries, or demonstrate how Namur was
taken, by scaling the Walls of a Christmas Pie; and others set up Fencing
Schools, to instruct the City Youth. The latter, indeed, will act most
naturally; for I observe, that when People are forced to change their
Professions, they keep to 'em as nigh as they can, though they act in a lower
Sphere: So for instance, a battered Harlot makes a discreet Bawd, and a broken
Cutler an excellent Grinder of Knives. As for the Poets, I believe they are the
most indifferent Men in the Kingdom as to what happens: They have lost nothing
by the French Privateers since the Revolution; nor are like to do, if the War
lasts Seven Years longer, so it may be supposed they will not be angry to see
the only Calumny of their Profession, I mean their Poverty made universal; and
indeed, if to pay People with fair Words, and no Performance, be Poetical,
there is more Poetry in Grocers-hall, than in Parnassus it self.

But, My dear Doctor, after all this mighty Discourse of a Peace, for my part,
I should believe as little of it, as I do of most of Mr. Aubrey's Apparition
Stories, but that we have not Money enough to carry on this great Law Suit,
much longer, (for in effect, War is no other, only you must Fee more Council,
and give greater Bribes) and the Lord have Mercy, say I, on a Man that Sues, or
a Prince that fights for his Right in Forma Pauperis. This, and nothing but
this, makes me imagine we shall have a Peace, and not the Christian Piety of
one or the other side. And to say the truth, half the Virtue in the World, if
traced to the Cradle, will be found to be the lawful Issue of mere Necessity.
People lay aside their Vices, to which their Virtues succ^ed, just as they do
their Clothes, sometimes when they are Un^ashionable, but generally when they
are worn Threadbare, and will hang about them no longer. A Godly Rascal of the
City leaves off Cheating, when the World will Trust him no longer; and a
Rakehell turns Sober, when his Purse fails, or his Carcass leaves him in the
Lurch: And lastly, which word^ I don't doubt, sounds as comfortably to you, as
ever it did to a hungry Sinner in a long-winded Church; it is for want of more
Paper, more Ink, and more Candle that I persecute you no longer, who am

Your most humble Servant, T. BROWN.

To Mr. Raphson, Fellow of the Royal Society.
I Send you by the Bearer hereof, Mr. Aubrey's Book, that you have so much
longed to see: It Is a Collection of Omens, Voices, Knockings, Apparitions,
Dreams, etc. which whether they are agreeable to your System of Theology, I
cannot tell. And now I talk of Dreams, I have often wondered how they came to
be in such request in the East: Whether their Imaginations in those hot
Countries are more rampant than ours, or whether the Priesthood, for their own
ends, cultivated this Superstition in the People, which I am rather inclined to
believe; yet it is certain, that Affairs of the last Consequence, have been
determined by them. An Interpreter of Dreams, was, in some sort, a Minister of
State in those Nations^ and an Eastern King could no more be without one of
that Profession in his Court, than an European Prince without his Chaplain, or
Confessor. Homer too, the Father of the Bards, had a great Veneration for
Dreams. (...). He makes them all Iure Divino you see; had he lived in
Archbishop Laud's Time, he could not have said more for Monarchy, or
Episcopacy. If you can pardon this foolish Digression, (for which I can plead
no other Excuse than the Dog Days) I have something of another Nature to
communicate to you, which I am confident will highly please a Gentleman of your
Curiosity.

Dr. Connor, o^ the College of Physicians, and Eellow of the Royal Society,
has now Published in Latin, his Evangelium Medici, seu Medicina Mystica de
Suspensis Naturae Legibus, sive de Miraculis. He designs in this Book, to show
by the Principles of Reason and Physic, as likewise by Chemistry and Anatomy,
that the natural State of any Body can never be so much over-turned, or the
Situation of its parts so extremely altered, but it may be conceived in our
Mind. He treats of Organical Bodies, and the Human in particular: But because
some Persons, who never gave themselves the Trouble, to be fully informed of
what he means, have been pleased to censure his Undertaking as very
extravagant, I have his leave to lay open his Tenets before you, who are owned
by all that know you, to be so great a Master in all parts of Learning, and
chiefly the Mathematical. Now the chief Heads of the Matters that he treats of,
are as follows.

I. Of the Nature of a Body, particularly an Organical one, where the Structure
and Natural State of the Human Body is explained. II. How many ways the Natural
State of the Human Body, is said to have been Supernaturally altered. III. Of
the Laws of Motion, and of the three different Suspensions of the same, in
order to explain all Miracles. IV. How it can be conceived, that Water can be
changed into Wine. V. How it can be conceived, that a Human Body can be
Invulnerable, Immortal, and can live for ever without Meat, as after the
Resurrection. VI. How a Human Body can be conceived to be in a Fire without
Burning. VII. How we can conceive that an Army can pass through the Sea without
Drowning, or walk upon the Water without Sinking. VIII. How it can be
couceived, that a Man can have a Bloody Sweat. IX. Of the different Ways a
Human Body can come into the World; where is given an Account of its Generation
by Concourse of Man and Woman. X. How we can conc^ive a Human Body can be
formed of a Woman without a Man, as Christ 's. XI. How to conceive a Human Body
to be made without Man or Woman, as Adam 's. XII. How to conceive a Human Body
dead, some Ages since, to be brought to Life again, as in the Resurrection.
XIII. How many ways it cannot be conceived, that a Human Body can be Entire and
Alive in two Places at the same time. XIV. Of the Natural State of the Soul,
and its Influence upon the Body. XV. Of the Supernatural, or Miraculous State
of the Soul united to the Body.
The Doctor desires, and I am sure you will own, it is a very reasonable Request,
that Gentlemen would be pleased to suspend their Judgments, till they see his
Reasons, which he will ingenuously submit, without any Presumption on his side,
to their better Und^rstanding. He is the more encouraged to publish his
Thoughts about these Matters, because some of his Friends, to whom he has
communicated his Reasons, have told him, That none but such as will not rightly
understand him (and People of that Complexion, are never to be convinced) could
deny what he maintains; because his Reasons are not grounded upon any
Metaphysical Abstract, or Hypothetical Notions, but entirely upon the visible
Structure of the Human Body. When your Affairs will permit you to come to
London, you and I will take an Opportunity to wait upon the Doctor, who I know
will give you what farther Satisfaction you can desire.

And now, Mr. Raphson, I hope you have finished in your Country Retirement,
your Treatise de Spatio Infinito, Reali, which the Learned World has so long
expected from your Hands. All your Friends here earnestly long to see you in
Town, and particularly my self, who am

Your most Obliged Friend, and Servant, T. BROWN.

TWO LETTERS BY Capt. AYLOFFE.
To the Lord North and Gray.
MY LORD,
YOu seem to wonder, what should be the reason that Men, in Matters of
Gallantry, generally have incurred the Censure of Inconstancy, when Women prove
faithful even to an Inconveniency. One reason I believe is, that we hate to be
long confined, and their Conversation soon palls; though what may be assigned,
with greater plausibleness, I think is, that those very Favors a Woman grants
to her Lover, increase and continue her Affection, but withal lessen his. Men's
Passion almost always extinguish with possession; and what is the Parent of a
Woman's Tenderness is the Paricide of ours: We seldom adore longer than we
desire, and what we aim at most can be conferred but once. In our Sex there is
not that fatal distinction: but as a Virgin, after yielding, has dispossessed
herself of that Jewel which every one was willing to have purchased, and only
courted her for. I believe the Demonstrations of Love from Women, are more real
than ours; there being too frequently more of Vanity than Verity, more of Study
than Affection in our Pretenses: But it is no small Wound in a Woman's Heart,
that constrains her to speak, and I really am of opinion, that she can hardly
love more violently, who confesses she loves at all. A Word sometimes drops
from their Mouths, which, as it was undesign'd, gives a clearer evidence of a
growing Inclination, than all the elaborate Actions and affected Languishings,
the greatest part of Gallants put in practice. A lovely Face is certainly the
most agreeable Object our Eyes can behold, and the very Sound of the Voice of
one we dearly love, is beyond the softest Harmony: Yet, by I know not what
Fate, I have seen the Juncture when both were without any effect, and this more
than once. The Latitude (I fancy) which we take in our Addresses, makes the
Impression but feeble: Variety of Objects distracts the choice, and we conserve
our Liberty while we are pitching upon a Tyrant. The indulgence of one Woman,
who is not extremely charming, makes some sort of reparation for the slighted
Vows we vainly offered to a cruel Beauty. Few Men are so much in love, as to be
Proof against the continued Scorn of the most agreeable Phillis: We ask to
obtain, not to be denied; and he that can find the ^ame satisfaction in every
place, will hardly ^e long confined to any one. Not but that Women, speaking
generally, are not so perfidious as Men; and it is Injustice, as well as
Malice, in us to treat 'em as we do. They deserve really more than Policy will
permit us to show 'em they do.

Your Lordship's Humble Servant, AYLOFFE.

To a Friend in the Country.
YOu have now, at length, left scouring the Watch, and teizing the
Exchange-women, bid adieu to Bourdeaux, and taken up with Barrel-ale. You are
all the Morning galloping after a Fox; all the Evening in a smoaky
Chimny-corner, recounting whose Horse leaped best, was oftenest in with the
Dogs, and how readily Lightfoot hit the cooling Scent, and revived your
drooping Spirits with a prospect of more diversion; which some Men, who think
themselves as wise in the enjoyment of this World, as all the Men in
Oxfordshire, are pleased to term mere fatigue. And I believe your own Footman
would not ride so far and so hard to fetch a good Dinner, as both of you do to
see the Death of a stinking Beast. Has not the Rose as good Accommodation as
your Catherine-wheel Inn? And does not a Masque give a more Christian-like
chase, and conclude in more satisfaction than the Animal you wot of? I saw your
Letters to some of our Club, and laughed not a little at the strangeness of
your Style; it smelt of filthy Tobacco, and was stained with your dropping
Tankard. You acquainted 'em at large with the Situation of your Mansion House;
how a knot of branching Elms defended it from the North Wind; that the
South-sun gave you good Grapes, and most sort of Wall-fruits; your Melons came
on apace, and you had hopes of much good Fruit this Summer. After all, in
Covent-gard^n Market, we can buy, in one quarter of an Hour, better Plants than
yours, and richer Melons, for Groats a piece, than you have been poring over
this three Months. You thanked 'em for some News, that was so old we hardly
could imagine what you meant, till Tom, who has all the Gazetts and Pamphlets
locked up in his Heart, as David did the Commandments, disclosed the Mystery to
us. I pity your new State indeed: Your Gazetts are as stale as your Drink;
which, though brewed in March, is not broached till December. The chief Topics
of Discourse, (for Conversation you have none) are Hawks, Horses, and Hounds;
every one of 'em as much God's Image as he that keeps 'em, and glorifies the
Creator in a greater degree, and to more purpose. This you call a seasonable
retreat from the Lewdness of London, to enjoy a calm and quiet Life: Heaven
knows you drink more there, and more ignoble and ungenerous Liquors than we in
Town; for yours is downright Drinking: Your Whoring I will allow safer, but it
is mere Brutality too; there is no such thing as Intrigue in all your County,
which is like an exquisite Sauce to good Meat, qualifying the Palate more
voluptuously. Well, it is Six, and I must to the Club, whereas we will Pity your
Solitude, and Drink your Prosperity, in a Cup that is worth a Stable of Horses
and a Kennel of Hounds So adieu.

The End of the First Volume.
BOOKS newly Printed for and Sold by Samuel Briscoe, in Russel Street, the
Corner of Charles-street, Covent Garden, 1697.
POlybius's Roman History, translated by Sir H. Sneers: With the Character and
Life of the Author, by Mr. Dryden. Letters on several ^ccasions: Written by and
between Mr. Dryden, Mr. Wycherl^y, Mr. Congreve, and Mr. Dennis: With a
Translation of Vo^ture's Letters, by Mr. Dryden and Mr. Dennis. The Second
Edition. The World bewitched: Written by B^ltaz^r B^kker, Minister of
Amsterdam. Translated into ^nglish from a Copy approvd by the Author. The
History of the Revolu^ion of Sweden: Translated by the ingenious Dr. Mitchel.
The Second Edition. Mrs. B^^^'s Novels and Historie^, in one Vol. Also her
Memoirs and Life, by a Lady of her Acquaintance, with her Pict^re curiously
engraven on a Copper-plate: Wi^h Love-Le^ter^. The Third Edition, with Novels
never before printed. The Cour^ier's Manual: Or the Art of Prudence: Written by
Balta^^r Gracian, one of the greatest Wits of Sp^in. Translated into English by
a Person of Honor. The Select C^medies of Plautus. Transl^ted by Mr. Eachard.
With Critical Reflections on the Ancient and Modern Dramatique Rule, by Mr.
Eachard. There is in the Press, and will speedily be published, The Annals and
History of Cornelius Tacitus. Tran^l^^ed into English by Mr. ^ryd^n, and
several eminent Persons of Honor and Q^ality. Wi^h Historical and Political
Not^s, by Amelo^ de la Husa. In three Volu^es, 8 ^o.

