A BLAST blown out of the NORTH And Ecchoing up toward the SOUTH, To meet the
CRY of their Oppressed Brethren.

Being a Relation of some of the Sufferings and other Exercises of several of
the People of God in scorn called Quakers in and about Richmond, Massam,
Coverdale, Wensleydale and Swaledale, and some others of the adjacent Parts and
Places in the North Riding of the County of York, since the beginning of the
year 1660.

Prove. 10. 7. The Memory of the Just is Blessed; but the Name of the Wicked
shall Rot.

Job 18. 7. The Light shall be dark in his Tabernacle, and his Candle shall be
put out with him.

Verse. 16. His Roots shall be dried up beneath, and above shall his Branch be
cut off.

Verse. 17. His Remembrance shall perish from the Earth, and he shall have no
Name in the Street.

Verse. 20. They that come after him shall be astonished at his Day, as those that
went before were afrighted.

Verse. 21. Surely such are the Dwellings of the Wicked, and this is the Place
of him that knows not God.

Prove. 10. 23. It is a Sport to a Fool to do Mischief; but a Man of
Understanding has Wisdom.

Verse. 25. As the Whilewind passes, so is the Wicked no more; but the
Righteous is an Everlasting Foundation.

Printed in the Year 1680.

TO THE READER
FRIEND;
THat part of this ensuing Treatise which relates to the Sufferings of the
Lord's People in Scorn called Quakers, in the years 1670, and 1671. (hereafter
mentioned) upon the Act entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles, was for the most part of it save what is now altered by reason of
Time and the Death of some of the Persecutors, and other Matters) drawn up and
made ready in or about the year 1671. or beginning of the year 1672. (as is
remembered) and after several Examinations of the same, as to the Truth and
Certainty thereof, was intended for the Press; but the within-named James
Metcalfe dying, and the within-named William Thornaby the Informer removing to
London, whereby the Persecution of the said People in that behalf and in those
Parts seemed to cease, the Printing of what was so drawn up was for that time
suspended, and the rather for that it was in the View and stood in the Faith
and Belief of the Compiler of those Papers, that there might be a further
Opportunity rendered for that purpose; and that the within-named Joseph Craddock
(to the filling up of the measure of his former Wickedness) would (ere his
Death) be concerned in the further Persecution of some of the aforesaid People,
called Quakers, or some other such like Wicked Act; and that the Compiler of
the said Papers might also come to be therein concerned, which thing is
accordingly now come to pass; for he is one of the Prisoners herein after
named: whereupon the aforesaid Papers so drawn up, or the things therein
contained upon a new review, with some Alterations and Additions of things not
then known or come to hand, are thought good to be Printed, to which are also
added and before the same joined some former Sufferings and Exercises of the
aforesaid People, or some of them, as follows.

R. R.

A Blast blown out of the North, and Ecchoing Up Toward the South, to meet the
Cry of their Oppressed Brethren.
A brief Relation of some of the Sufferings of some of the Lord's People in
Scorn called Quakers, at and near Bellerby in the North Riding of the County of
YORK, the 13th Day of the 3d Month, in the Year 1660.

UPon the said day several of the said people from several parts in and about
Richmond, Massam, Coverdale, and some other of the adjacent Places, being met
together at the House of Ralph Ainsley in Bellerby aforesaid, to wait upon and
worship the Lord, two men came and called Ralph Ainsley, and told him, They had
Order to break up the Meeting; but before Friends in the House had any notice
(for Ralph then being busy setting up Horses had not told them) there came
diverse Armed Men Rushing to the Door, crying, Where are these Rogues? We have
Order to break up your Meeting; some of them saying, We will cut you as small
as Bread. Whereupon one of those People so met, went to the Door to understand
the Real Cause of their so coming, and whether they had any Order to hinder the
said peaceable Meeting, or they in their own Wills had taken in hand to do it;
who in Meekness spoke to them and told them, That they were there met in the
Fear of the Lord, without the least thought of Harm to any Creature. And
another of the said People, who were so met at the said House, being at the
Door, spoke to some of them, desiring to see their Order for so doing; and one
of them drew his Sword, and said, That was his Order: And their Fury was such,
that they would not hear what was in Soberness spoken to them, but fell a
beating of them and other Friends; and after several had been beaten, one of
the men said, He would show their Order; but before it could be read Friends
were so hurryed and beat away, that none of them could either see the Extent of
it, or tell from whom it came; only some of them said, it came from William
Dalton, one of the then Commissioners of the Militia. And while these things
were thus doing at the Door (Friends in the House not fully knowing the Matter,
but what they might understand from the Noise and Tumult they heard) presently
came in some with Swords and Pistols, and haled several forcibly out, and beat
some of them, and haled some down to the Ground, to the shedding of Blood,
whilst others turned out their Horses loose into the Street, which by beating,
pricking with Swords, shooting with Guns and Pistols, the Owners had much ado
to get their Horses again, by means whereof diverse Friends, after the breaking
up of the said Meeting, were prevented for some time of departing out of the
Town: And several were beat in the Street with Swords and Staves, some bunched,
some fired Guns and Pistols charged with Powder at them, to the hurting of some
of them. And some (besides the Hurts themselves sustained) had their Hats and
Clothes cut, some thrown down by the Hair of the Head, some stoned, and with
luch like Usage driven and hurryed away in a Violent and Brutish Manner. And
after they had been thus Hurryed, Beaten, Abused and Driven away, and were
thereupon drawing Homewards; as those whose Way lay toward Marrick and
Richmond were staying and hovering one upon another, that they might see how
each other did, or had escaped, and being about to part as their several Ways
lay toward their respective Dwellings, presently some of the fast Rude Violent
People on Horseback, and some on Foot, with Swords, Guns, Pistols and Staves,
came riding and running after them unto a Moore which lay in the Way, near a
Mile from the Town aforesaid, and there fell violently again upon them,
striking and beating both Young and Old Men and Women in a most Inhuman and
Cruel Manner, riding and running up and down, beating them, to the sore hurting
of many, and to the shedding of the Blood of some; for several were beat down
to the Ground, insomuch that some were for some time senseless, and not able of
Body to remove till helped by others; yea, their Cruelty was such, that they
spared none, no, not young tender Maids, nor ancient Women, but gave them
several Blows, to the bruising of their Flesh, making as it were even a Sport
of such Cruelty; all which to particularize, would be both too hard or
difficult, and too tedious: Yet to the intent that such a Suffering, so
notoriously wicked and cruelly inflicted, without any just Cause or
Provocation, upon an innocent People (for no other Matter but simply meeting
together to wait upon and worship the One, True and Living God) may not wholly
be cast into Oblivion, I shall make mention of some, who being yet alive, and
of good Report and Credit in their Generation, may be (if queried of) Witnesses
of the same, that is to say:

Thomas Whitton of Pattrick Brunton, when the Men came to the Door, threatening
to break up the Meeting, upon desiring to see their Order for such Actings, one
drew his Sword, and said, That was his Order.

William Lofthouse, now of Bishopdale (then of Stainton) received several Blows
on his Back, and had his Clothes cut, and was cast down by the Violence they
used.

His Son, Edward Lofthouse, received several Strokes on his Back and Arms with
a Sword and Pike-staff, and a great Stroke on his Head with the Butt-end of a
Musket or Fowling piece, besides several Thrusts with a Sword, running through
his Clothes, though not to the Wounding of his Body.

Robert Gosling of Richmond (a tender man) was by the Violence of several Blows
about his Head, Arms and Shoulders, with Staves, etc. beat down to the Ground,
where for some time he was bereaved of Sense, and not able to Recover, till
helped up by others; by reason of which Usage, much Weakness has since been,
and yet is upon him.

Phillip Swale of Hartford, a man well known unto many men of several
Qualities, and of good Repute, being Serviceable in his Generation, received a
sore Blow on his Back with a Stone, and several Blows on his Head and Back with
a Sword.

William Orton of Marvick, when he did go to take his Horse, they beat him sore
with Swords, Pikes and Guns, that they much bruised his Arms and Shoulders; and
when he led his Horse away they beat him and his Horse with much Cruelty; his
Wife also was beaten.

John Key (then also of Marvick) was beaten on the Moor with Swords and Staves,
and pushed with a Pike, that his Head, Arms and Shoulders were sore bruised,
and was twice beat to the Ground, in such sort that some who saw it, thought he
should never have risen again.

Christopher Terry, now of Rippon, was beat in the Town and on the Moor, so
that they felled him twice to the Ground, and his Head was cut, and it and
other parts of his Body sore bruised.

William Beckwith had Powder shot in his face, that sore hurt his Eyes.

Anthony Raynold of Snape, as he was going away a man with a long Staff gave
him several Blows, that he fell to the Ground, and after he was fallen did also
beat him.

Marmaduke Beckwith (now of High-Burton, and Brother of the aforesaid William
Beckwith) going in the Town to get his Horse, a Man in great Rage said, Thou
Dog, cannot thou speak, and took him off the Ground by the Hair of the Head,
and cast him down at his Feet, and then Fudded him sore with his Foot or Feet
on his Head, both before and behind, that it swelled, and much Hair came off;
and also fudded him in like manner on his Back.

Mary Chaytor (of Richmond, aforesaid) received several Blows on her Arms,
Neck and Back with a Staff, to the sore bruising and blackening of her Flesh.

Sarah Kirkby, then of the same place, received several Blows on her Arms with
a Staff, and a sore Blow on her Shoulder with a Musket or Fowling piece, by
which Blows her Flesh was sore bruised and blackened.

But the Particularizing of so much Cruelty in such an Assembly, being both too
tedious, and also too difficult, what is before mentioned in that behalf shall
suffice: only this know, that there were many others, both Men and Women (some
whereof are dead, others yet living) that might have been mentioned, and who
suffered very cruelly at the hands of the aforesaid Persons, by being beat
down, some till they lay senseless, struck with Swords, Guns, Staves, and in a
most inhumane manner; yea, many of them as cruelly (if not some more cruelly)
than those mentioned before, all which would be too tedious to relate, and that
for no other Cause (as is before related) but only for meeting together to wait
upon the Lord: Neither could they charge them with tho Breach of any just Law,
nor had any words from them that might in the least provoke them to this
Cruelty, but in Meekness and Patience suffered what the other in their mad Fury
were permitted to do unto them, rejoicing (as themselves, or some of them
testified) that they were counted worthy to suffer for his sake, who in the
days of his Humiliation suffered the Contradiction of Sinners; further also
testifying, that they wished no Evil unto those, by whom they thus suffered,
but desired they might come to see the Evil of their Doings, and Repent, and is
not here made mention of or revived with intent to call the Parties therein
concerned to an Account to their Prejudice; but only to the Intent that so
cruel an Act of the Unrighteous, and patient Suffering of the Innocent and
Harmless, may not be cast into Oblivion, but left to Posterity to judge, by the
same in this behalf, of the Fruits of the True Spirit, and of the False.

In the same Year 1660. and in the 3d Month of that same Year, and as is
supposed, about the same time, that the aforesaid business at Bellerby was
acted, came George Fawcett of Ballowfield in Wensleydale, in the aforesaid
County of York, then a Chief Constable, with a Sword about him (being a rude
Boisterous kind of Young man) to Burton, in or near Bishopdale in the
North Riding, of the aforesaid County of York, bringing with him a Rude Wild
Company of men, like himself, with Staves, Clubs, etc. where some of the People
in Scorn called Quakers were peaceably met together, to wait upon and Worship
the Lord, according to that Manifestation of his Will discovered to them; and
in a Rude and Boisterous manner broke up their said Meeting, and did Abuse,
Hale and Beat in or after a Violent Inhuman manner those so met together, and
very Uncivilly, Boisterously and Savagely behaved themselves toward them; and
particularly one among the rest (to wit) John Hudson of Burton aforesaid,
having, as is remembered, a long Hazle Staff in his hand, somewhat in length
resembling a Hunting Pole, which, as is remembered, he took by the small end in
both his hands, and therewith he smote Samuel Watson of Knight-stainforth (who
was then among the aforesaid People, so peaceably met together to wait upon the
Lord, as aforesaid) so violently upon or about the Head, that with the Violence
thereof, he (to wit) the said Samuel fell to the Ground, and in that Condition
for some considerable time lay as one in a manner dead, or bereaved of his
Life, to the terrifying of those who had so rudely behaved themselves, and also
of the doer thereof; and several of them began to shrink, or as it were draw
back or aside, and excuse themselves, as not having a hand in it, fearing as it
should seem, that he had been dead; but after he, through the Mercy of God was
in some sort recovered, they (to wit) the wild Company, returned to their
former Barbarous Behavior and Deportment again, Hailing, Beating, Mis-using,
Punching, and Driving several of the said People, so met as aforesaid, in a
Barbarous, Inhumane and Uncivil manner out of the Town, not leaving them (as is
remembered) until they set a great part of them some considerable space out of
the same, and after they had a little left them (as is remembered) the said
Samuel going to Prayer, some of the aforesaid Rude Company, came again, and in
a Rude, Uncivil, Uncomely, Inhumane manner behaved themselves toward the said
People, both Men and Women, which is now too hard to be particularized; only
one William Farnaby drawing his Knife, cut several of the Horses Bridles: And
so after much Abuse, having driven away the said People, they (to wit) the rude
Multitude departed, many of them Glorying in what they had so done; but the
just Revenger of the Upright, who knows how to deliver the Righteous, and how
to reserve the Wicked to the day of Judgment to be punished, though he may, and
does oft-times (as in this Case he did) spare long, and give a large time, yea,
several Years to Repent in; yet if they will not Repent, and be Reconciled, so
as the Lord may pass by and Pardon them, and Heal them, he does sometimes bring
them to become Examples of his Wrath, as may be observed in this man, (to wit)
John Hudson, who was the man that smote down the said Samuel Watson, who though
he lived several Years after, yet going to Richmond about some Business in the
Year 1678. in or about the 6th Month of the same Year, and about the 17th day
of that Month (as is remembered) and being going overthwart the Marketplace of
the same Town, as though he intended to go toward the Door of Anne Hopps,
Widow, another man being with him, as he drew near the said Door, suddenly he
fell down flat upon his Face, and there finished his days: The said Anne Hopps,
being by, who saw it, and gave the Relation of it, and was never by her seen
more to move. And thus he (who some time before had in the Wickedness of his
Mind smitten down an Innocent man, without any just Cause or Offense given or
administered unto him, so that he lay for a considerable time as a man wholly
dead, or without Life, yet by the Mercy of God was recovered) was by the hand
of the same just God (against whom he had sinned in this behalf) smitten down,
so that he never rose again; which may be a Caveat, and ought to give Warning
to all men of what Degree or Condition soever they be of, to beware and have a
care what they do, and how they behave themselves; for though the Lord by many
may be looked upon, as one that delays his coming, yet at last he may be
expected to come unto such, and when he comes his Reward is with him, to give
unto every man suitably, as his Works shall be; Tribulation and Anguish to
every Soul that does not Righteously; but Peace and Joy to the Upright in
Heart: So while there is a time let all men prize it.

Upon the 31th Day of the 6th Month, called August, in the Year 1662. being
the first Day of the Week, came James Metcalfe of Nappa, in the Country of
York, and then in the Commission of Peace to the Door of James Wetherald in
Askrigg in the same County, where some of the People of God in Scorn called
Quakers were peaceably met together, only to wait upon and worship the One,
True and Living God in Spirit and Truth, according to his will and those
manifestations of him they had received. And though he the said James Metcalfe
had often known or heard of their so peaceably meeting together at that place
before that time, and for no other purpose save only (as aforesaid) to wait
upon and worship the Lord; yet to the intent to render the said People more
Odious or Dangerous, or else to render his Appearance the more Terrible, he
brought with him a great Company of Armed men; and being on this wise come to
the Door of the said House, they caused Friends by the said Armed men to be had
out, and brought before them; where upon Promise made to appear before the said
James Metcalfe the next day, they were all, save Richard Robinson, let go, and
him the said James Metcalfe committed to the Custody of Richard Besson of the
same Askrigg, then Constable, who let him go Home also: and coming again the
next day, the said James Metcalfe committed Nineteen of them to the Common
Jayle at York, and Four to the House of Correction, until the next Quarter
Sessions of the Peace, to be held for the North Riding of the said County of
York. But by the Kindness of the said Constable, Rich. Besson, to whose Charge
they were committed, they were stayed at Home most part of a Month; and then
through the Threatenings of the said James Metcalfe, sent to Prison until the
said Sessions, where, after much Discourse, those Persons here after-named,
with others, were fined, and the Fines levied as follows.

First, Richard Robinson of Countersett in Wensleydale was fined 2 l. for which
he had a Mare distrained by Christopher Todd of Middleham, Edmond Blades and
Bartholomew Blades of Askrigg, aforesaid, or some of them, about the 3d day of
the 11th Month, in the Year 1662. worth, by the Owner's Estimation of her, 3
l. 6 s. 8 d.

Richard Rowth of Hawes was fined 10s. for which the aforesaid Persons, or some
of them, did distrain and take a Cow, at or about the same time, worth about
3l. 10s.

Bartholomew Harryson of Countersett and Isabell his Wife, being fined either
of them 12d. had distrained for the same by the aforesaid Persons, or some of
them, about the time aforesaid, some Cloth and Apparel; but the same was
released by a Neighbor, and returned back again, only the party got some other
Commodities, and stayed so much as the Fines came to, in Payment for the same.

James Gurnell of Marsett, fined 10s. had four Pewter Dishes and one
Riding-Coat distrained, and taken for the same, by the aforesaid Edmond and
Bartholomew Blaydes, the 13th day of the Month aforesaid, worth about 1l. 9s.

Mary Lambert of Busk fined 10 s. had Stockings distrained and taken for the
same, by the aforesaid Edmond and Bartholomew Blaydes, worth about 12 s.

There were several other Persons at that time fined, besides what is
beforementioned, so that the Fines in all came to 19 l. 13 s. But whether any
of the Residue was distrained for or no, I know not.

Now follows an Account of some of the Sufferings, and other Exercises of
several of the said People of God in Scorn called Quakers, which has happened
unto them since the beginning of the Year 1670. in and about Richmond, Massam,
and some of the adjacient Parts, and Dales, within the North Riding of the
aforesaid County of York, occasioned by the Proceedings of Joseph Craddock, now
living, and James Metcalfe deceased: Together with some few others in the
Commission of Peace, within the said Riding; and also by the Proceedings of the
Mayor and Recorder of the said Town of Richmond, upon the Information of
William Thornaby the Elder, Inn keeper of the aforesaid Richmond, and late one
of the Sergeants there (but cast out of that Place for his Evil Carriage and
Misdemeanors) together with his Son, and other Agents and Emisaries of his,
who being given up to Spoil and Destruction, did with Covetousness seek after
their Neighbors Goods, and did greedily endeavor to catch them by any means,
not regarding what became of the Owners, so they could but get their Prey;
taking their occasion by, and Encouragement thereunto from the late Act of
Parliament, Entitled, An Act to Prevent and Suppress Seditious Conventicles,
etc.

FRom which (I say) according to that Construction, they passed upon it, and
Use they have made of it, such Loose and Dissolute Persons, as the said
Thornaby, being a man of a desperate Condition, has been Emboldened under the
Notion of An Informer for the King, to commit such Gross and Horrid Villainies,
as in the times of a more Sober and Christian-like Dispensation or Distribution
of Law and Justice, could be looked on by Sober and Discreet Persons (as it is
by such at this day, whose Hearts have been sadded to see it) to be no less
than Theft and Robbery: And that Act (according to that Construction they have
passed upon (and use they have made of it) no better or other than a Cloak for
such to Act by or under; who would have acted as badly before, but that they
feared Punishment by a Law; nay, some known Thieves condemning their Doings in
this behalf, disdaining to act so grossly upon an Innocent Harmless People, as
they (in this Case) did upon us, being Encouraged thereunto, as will appear by
the Sequel of this Discourse, which is no other than Truth, and not all that
might be truly said of their Evil Actions in this behalf neither) by such whose
Endeavors should have been to Suppress Vice and Encourage them that do Well;
for to this end only should the Magistrate bear his Sword, and not to set up
and carry on the Interest of False Swearers, and other Injurious Persons, whose
Proceedings in this behalf they Countenanced and Encouraged, under pretense of
putting that Act in Execution, made (as appears by the Title and Preamble
thereof) To Prevent and Suppress Seditious Conventicles (Only) and to provide a
more speedy Remedy against the growing and dangerous Practices of Seditious
Sectaries, and other Disloyal Persons, etc. And if made only for such as are
Dangerous, Seditious, Disloyal, Contrivers of Insurrections and Plotters, and
such as are only Pretenders to Tender Conscience (but are not really
Conscientious) and for such as are Disturbers and Breakers of the Peace,
according as the same ought to be; then not for Peaceable Harmless People, such
as the Harmless People called Quakers are, and have been, who make, and have
made it their Endeavors only to Serve, Wait upon and Worship the One, True and
Living God in Spirit and Truth Really; and not in or under a pretense only of
Religious Exercise, do they meet together under that Pretense, to Plot or
Contrive Insurrections, neither to stir up any Sedition, or Disturb or break
the Peace, or offer Violence to any, as Experience on their behalf does
witness, who have given their Cheeks to the Smiter, and their Heads to them
that have plucked off the Hair, not answering again. Neither is it to be
believed that a Christian-Parliament (and such the Parliament of England would
be thought to be) who are guided in the Counsel, Wisdom and Fear of the Lord,
and therein directed, will ever make Laws to limit the Lord God to this or that
Form, or to this or that Way of Worship, and that he shall either be Served and
Worshipped in such a Way as they have prescribed, that is to say, according to
the Liturgy of the Church of England (the Inventions of men) or he must not be
served at all; for this were to limit the holy One of Israel, and to make God,
even the Living God, Subordinate to Sinful Man; but rather to let him have his
Liberty to be served and worshipped as he will, and in what way he most
delights and chooses; For does not the Wind blow where it lists, and thou
hear the sound thereof, but neither know from whence it is, nor whither it
goes? and so are all they that are born of the Spirit: And therefore not to be
restrained under great Mulcts and Punishments; for this was never the Practice
of the People of God in any Age, but the contrary. Neither can they which
practice such things now claim any Interest or Part with the People of God in
this Age, nor in the Scriptures of Truth, and Writings of the Prophets and Holy
men of God, who were never Persecutors, but on the contrary were Persecuted,
even as it is at this day; He that lives after the Flesh Persecutes him that
lives after the Spirit. And therefore, I say, in Christian Charity (considering
they professed themselves to be Christians that made it) might the said Act (if
we did not know their Intent in making it) be looked on only to concern
Seditious, Turbulent, Unruly, Peace-breaking Persons, whose Actions demonstrate
them to be so; and only to be made and intended for such, rather than for
Harmless Innocent Self-denying People, such as the Innocent People called
Quakers are, and have been; whose Endeavors (I say) both now, and at all
times, ever since they were a People, have been, and yet are, To keep a
Conscience void of Offense, both toward God, and toward Man; and not to Plot
and Contrive Insurrections: Neither have our Meetings been, or yet are a Terror
to the People among whom we live or reside, and have our Converse, they being
generally otherwise persuaded of us, and know or believe us to be otherwise
minded; yet against and upon us in particular (and that to the dissatisfaction
of the good People in this part of the Nation, among whom we live) has the
Force of the said Act been put in Execution, and the said Thornaby employed
himself, his Son, and other his Agents and Emisaries, as Informers, to subvert
and destroy the Estates of many.

And as a beginning to his Actions, he the said Thornaby, together with one
Matthew Chawder of Reeth in Swaledale, in the County and Riding aforesaid, upon
the 15th of the 3d month, called May, in the year 1670. (he the said Thornaby
having the same day been at Richmond Meeting) did come to the House of one
Elizabeth Cherry Widow in Swaledale aforesaid, where finding to the number of
Seven Persons (besides those of the Family) of the aforesaid People called
Quakers, met together to wait upon and worship the One True and Living God in
Spirit and Truth, according to his Will, they the said Thornaby and Chawder the
Informers went to the beforenamed James Metcalfe; and swore to the number of
Seventeen Persons; by which it may easily be perceived, what manner of Persons
employ themselves as Informers, which ought not, neither heretofore have been
thought worthy to go unpunished. And as a further Evidence of their wilful and
desperate Wickedness and Perjury, at the same time swore, That one Thomas
Kipling was then at the said Meeting; who the same Day and at or about the same
Hour was at Newcastle upon Tine, about Thirty Five Miles from the said
Elizabeth Cherry's House (as was after proved.) And further also swore at the
same time, That Richard Robinson of Healaugh Park in Swaledale aforesaid, was
then also there. And when the said Thornaby came about ten days after to
distrain the Goods and Chattels of the said Richard Robinson, for a Fine of 5
s. by their said Oaths imposed upon him, he confessed openly, He had never
seen the Face of him the said R. R. before; and so in effect confessed himself
Forsworn, and gave his own Oath the Lie (as it well deserved) for the said R.
R. was not at the said House when the said Thornaby was there, as was also
proved. Likewise they the said Thornaby and Chawder further swore at the same
time against William Orton and John Key, then both of Marrick, for Preaching
and Teaching in the said Assembly; whereas upon an Appeal made by the said
William Orton and John Key, upon the Distress of their Goods and Chattels taken
for the Fines of 20 l. apiece imposed upon them by reason of the said Oaths, it
was plainly proved there were no Words spoken by the said William Orton and
John Key; or either of them, in way of Preaching or Teaching; but what was
spoken, was spoken in way of Discourse between the said William Orton and John
Key on the one part, and the said Thornaby and his Agents on the other part:
Nevertheless the said James Metcalfe upon the Information and Oaths aforesaid,
without any other manner of Conviction, and without calling or summoning the
Parties accused to appear and answer personally before him according to Law,
did issue forth a Warrant, whereby he gave power to the Constables,
Churchwardens (so called) and Overseers, to distrain for the several Fines
imposed by him on the said Seventeen Persons, so reported by the aforesaid
false Information to be at the said Elizabeth Cherry's House. And lest he the
said James Metcalfe should come short in Wickedness, or otherwise, that he
might gratify the Informers, he directed his Warrant to the Constables,
Churchwardens and Overseers, and more especially to the said Thornaby, whom he
terms a Gentleman, and Chawder, whom he calls a Yeoman, giving unto them
thereby also power to distrain as well as the other, and also more SPECIAL
Power, inasmuch as the Warrant was more especially directed to them; although
that very Act by which they did pretend to proceed, does give the Power of
Distress only and jointly to the Constables, Churchwardens and Overseers, and
to no other: And the Appointment of One, is the Exclusion of Another, according
to that Rule or Maxim in Law, Designatio unius est exclusio alterius; as when
an Act of Parliament (which is the Introduction of a Novel Law (as this is)
gives the Power and Interest to one certain person, by that express
Designation of one, all others are excluded: for it is a further Ground in Law,
Expressum facit cessare tacitum; That which is expressed makes that which is
employed to cease. Read Hawks his Grounds of the Laws, fol. 448, and 466.
Cooke's Comm. fol. 183. Ployd. 106. Stradling's Case. And also further by the
said Warrant in the King's Name commands them to distrain the Goods and
Chattels of the aforesaid Richard Robinson for a Fine of 5 s. imposed by him
the said James Metcalfe, upon the said Richard Robinson, under pretense that
the Wife of the said Richard was at the aforesaid Meeting; against whom the
said James Metcalfe had no Information, neither did she stand Convicted before
him. And here all may see what manner of Man the said James Metcalfe was, and
whether fit to be in the Commission of Peace or no, and what he would have
done, if not restrained by a more secret Hand: For if the Law, by which, in
this behalf, he pretended to proceed, were not strict enough to answer His
Will, and the Informers Ends; he would (as in this Case he did) add to it, to
make it worse: And whether these things be according to Justice, and conducing
to the Honor and Reputation of the King, his Government and Parliament, and to
the Advancement of his Interest in these Nations, let the Wife in Heart judge:
And whether they which act such things could or can be truly said to be the
King's Friends, and to Love and Honor him, and seek the Conservation and
Advancement of his Interest and Government, who so grossly and in the Face of a
wise People Abuse him (who is said to be The Fountain of Justice, and should
Act no Unjust Thing) by sending forth such Warrants in his Name, and acting
such things under the Notion of his Authority, as are quite contrary to Law,
and conducing very much to the Subversion of Justice, Truth and Righteousness;
which things flourishing and abounding in any Kingdom, causes Happiness, and
gives Satisfaction to the Good People thereof; but being subverted and turned
backward (as in this Case) many times brings Ruin: But the aforementioned
Proceedings, False Oaths and Informations, being in part laid before and
presented to the view of some more Eminent Persons (Members of the then
Parliament) who appeared Haters and Detestors of such Illegal and Unjust
Proceedings, and from whom better Returns of Justice was expected) their Advice
was, To indict the said Thornaby and Chawder of Perjury, which being
accordingly done, the said Chawder, knowing himself guilty, Fled; but Thornaby
being an Impudent Person, appeared at the next General Quarter Sessions of the
Peace for the said Riding, held at Richmond, where the Grand Jury, upon
Evidence sworn and examined, found the Indictments (there being two) against
Thornaby; whereupon the said Thornaby, by the Advice of Joseph Craddock and one
William Robinson also in the Commission of Peace, who it seems feared the
Justice of some then present, did put in his Traverse to the said Indictments,
they or the one of them promising him All the Favor the Court could show him;
and further told him, That if he did not Traverse the said Indictments,
Ignominy would follow, or to that purpose; whereupon he was bound over to
traverse the said Indictments at the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the
said Riding, which was holden at Thursk in the said County; where it was the
Endeavors of some then present (who may since have seen the Bad Effects of
that Action of theirs) to quash the Indictments, which they did for some Defect
(as was pretended) in Form; nevertheless, it was assented unto, That Thornaby
should be indicted again at the next Sessions; which being effected, and the
Indictments preferred, and the Witnesses sworn, and Grand Jury also, who was
gone forth to examine the Witnesses in order to the finding of Thornaby Guilty
or Not Guilty; whick Joseph Craddock knowing, who had seen the Indictments, and
knew them to be punctually proved, together with James Metcalfe, at the
Instance of the said Thornaby, sent for the said Indictments to the Grand Jury,
who not knowing their Intent in sending for them, did send the same accordingly
unto the said Joseph Craddock and James Metcalfe, who kept them, and would not
return them back again, nor suffer the said Thornaby to come to his Trial, nor
the Grand Jury to proceed and discharge themselves of that Oath, which but a
little before the Court had imposed upon them, touching Thornaby's Trial;
neither would they deliver the Indictments to those that paid for them, and who
suffered by Thornaby's False Oaths; but by all Means, like the Jews of old,
sought how to deliver or free Barrabas, and give up Truth unto Suffering: For
when Justice was desired according to Law, the said Joseph Craddock
domineeringly began to accuse Friends of Malice for prosecuting of Thornaby;
though such as suffer (as those who prosecuted in this behalf had done, having
their Goods taken from them by reason of the said False Oaths) have always and
at all times in the Laws of England, and by the Impartial and Unbyassed
Ministers thereof, been thought worthy and been adjudged to have Just Cause to
complain, for to redress and remedy Wrongs and Injuries, and to punish
Offenders and Perjuries, and to Answer all Just Complaints was the said Law
provided; and such Complainings and Proceedings, whether by Indictment or
otherwise, howsoever grounded upon a real Suffering (as in this Case it was)
have not heretofore, neither at this time honestly can be accounted Malice,
especially in so weighty a Matter as that is, wherein Life, Liberty and Estate
is concerned, and especially when the Punishment desired and endeavored to be
inflicted upon the Offender, for his False Oath (though it be of Dangerous
Consequence to all men) is no other or greater than simply such as may disable
and stop him from wilfully sinning against his own Soul, and desperately
running into those Evils which are of bad Consequence both before God and Man.
But on the contrary, Malice is not hid in such, who contrary to their Duty and
Oath deny or defer to do Justice upon Offenders, yea, even in Criminal Causes
for the King, because of their particular Envy to them which prosecute. And as
a farther Evidence of his Evil Will and Desire of Ruin to the Sufferers; or
otherwise, to the Intent to render them more odious, thereby to get a Cloak for
his illegal Proceedings; he the said Joseph Craddock further upon the Bench
said, That if they (to wit, the Quakers) had Power, they would Cut all their
Throats: which Report of his, as it is most False, so it gained him as little
Credit, the people generally before whom he spoke it being otherwise persuaded
of us, as a people that had known our Deportments better than to believe such
Lies. But on the contrary, he the said Joseph Craddock, together with the said
James Metcalfe, and all others that joined with them in this Business, did more
plainly make it appear, that they sought the Loss, Ruin and Destruction of the
Quakers, and not only of them, but by these Examples leave a Gap open, which
being entered in at, may tend to the Ruin and Destruction of all Men, of what
Degree or Condition soever. For if Perjury may escape, and go unpunished, and
be Tolerated, Encouraged and Protected in one man; by the same Rule, and with
as good Authority may it (to wit, Perjury) be Tolerated and Encouraged in every
man; and if by False Swearing they may Rob one Man of his Goods, by the same
Rule, and with as good Authority may they do it to another; and hereby no man
comes to be safe either in Life or Estate: for if the Law, which is or should
be the Guard of every man's Life, Liberty and Estate, be broken upon one, by
the same Rule, and with as good Authority, may it be broken upon all; and then
what is become of those good and wholesome Laws, heretofore made for the
Protection of Men in their Lives, Liberties and Estates, and for the Punishment
of Transgressors and False Swearers? or were they made for some, and not for
others, and so consequently against some, and not against others, according to
the Wills and Fancies of the Ministers thereof? Was not, nay is not Justice to
be done to all the King's Subjects, without Respect of Persons? Read the Oath
appointed for all the Justices, Rastal, fol. 244, and 245. Mag. Char. Chap. 29.
Stat. Rich. 2. Chap. 4. Rastal, 332. Nay, Though Letters or Commandments should
come from the King to the contrary, yet were they to go forth to do Justice,
notwithstanding such Letters and Commandments. And are not the same Laws in
force yet? if not, show us when repealed, and when there was a Law made for
Judges and Justices in such Cases to deny and defer to men Justice and Right,
as here in the Case of Thornaby Justice and Right was both denied and deferred;
and so in effect the said Joseph Craddock, and the rest that joined with him in
protecting Thornaby, are become more guilty than the Quakers, of that which he
slanderously endeavored to cast upon them, that is to say, Cutting of Throats,
or Taking of Life. For if what the Learned Cook says in Adams and Lambert's
Case, be true, viz Panis pauperum, vita pauperum et qui, defraudat eos vir
sanguinis est; Then Joseph Craddock and James Metcalfe, and all others who
joined with them in protecting Thornaby from coming to condign Punishment for
his False Oaths, and thereby encouraged him to persevere in his said Wicked
Practices, to the Taking, Spoiling and Destroying of his Poor and Harmless
Neighbors Goods, to the disabling some of them to get competent Sustenance for
themselves and Children, and that without Just Cause, will have much ado to
clear themselves from being Men of Blood, or Bloodguilty or Blood-thirsty Men.
And here by the Protecting of Thornaby in his said Perjury (as well as in other
Cases) it may plainly be perceived, That it was not so much Joseph Craddock and
James Metcalfe' s Zeal to put the Laws in Execution, and increase the King's
Revenue by getting of Fines, and his Honor by distributing Justice
impartially, that made them so forward, as it was their Envy and Evil Will
against the Quakers, so called; for if it had, they would have done Justice
upon Thornaby for his False Oaths, according to Law; 5 Eliz. chap. 9. 14 Eliz.
chap. 11. and not have protected False Swearers under the Notion of doing
Service for the King, who is Dishonored by such Services, and his Name Abused
by such Applications; neither would they have hindered the King of such a
Considerable Sum of Money, as upon proof of the said Perjury had been due unto
him by the said Law. But I may truly say, Justice is turned backward, and
Equity cannot enter; for if it could, False Oaths and Perjury would not be made
the Instruments of ruining men in their Estates, as in this Case they were and
have been. And now whether such Actions, and the Proceedings before mentioned,
were not and are Dangerous Practices, and of Bad Consequence, against the
growing and increasing Evils; whereof a prudent Parliament had more need to
provide a speedy Remedy, than against the Peaceable Meetings of the Lord's
People; let the Wise in Heart judge. For by the latter God is Honored, his
Name and Power Exalted and Magnified, his Truth Spread and Increased; and by
the Protection, Toleration and Encouragement thereof the Kingdom and Government
may expect to be Blessed and Established: But by the former, as God is
Dishonored, so the King and his Authority is Abused, his Laws Violated, his
Subjects Ruined, and their Liberties Infringed, and therefore have need to be
remedied. For it is an ancient but honorable Rule or Maxim, Salus populi
suprema lex; i. e. The Safety of the People is the chiefest Law. But this seems
with these men and in this matter to be laid waste or disregarded, while the
Hedge, which the Law sets for the Protection of every man's Life, Liberty and
Estate, comes thus to be thrown down, and laid open for every Wild Bore and
Ravenous Beast, such as the said Thornaby, even as it were the very Scum and
Offscouring of men, by False Oaths or otherwise, to enter in, root up and lay
waste the Rights and Interests of Honest, Harmles, Self-denying People, such as
the Law in it self principally delights to honor, and for whose only
Protection the same Law appears to have been chiefly made: For even upon these
Encouragements, and the Oaths and Informations of the said Thornaby and other
his Agents and Emisaries were all those Goods taken, and Spoil ensuing made,
most whereof by Warrants from Joseph Craddock and James Metcalfe in the
Country, and by Thomas Craddock and John Bartlett in Richmond; for no other
Offense but only for peaceably meeting together, simply to wait upon and
worship the One, True and living God in Spirit and Truth according to his Will,
and not for Plotting or Contriving Insurrections, neither for any Sedition or
Dangerous Practices; these or any of them being not so much as by the said
Informers, or any of them, laid to their Charge.

And first, Taken from the before-ntioned Richard Robinson of Healaugh Park in
Swaledale by Warrant from the said James Metcalfe, grounded (...) false Oaths
and Informations of William Thornaby, Matthew Chawder, for a Fine of 5 s.
imposed upon himself, who was proved not to be at the said Meeting when
Thornaby and Chawder were there; and for a Fine of 5 s. for his Wife, against
whom James Metcalfe had no Information, neither did she stand convicted before
him, yet by his Warrant did Henry Watson Constable, and William Thornaby,
(about the twenty fifth day of the third month, 1670.) take Pewter from the
said Richard Robinson, worth about 19 s.

By the same Warrant did the same Constable, at or about the same time,
distrain and take from Robert Addeson of Healy, three Pewter Platters and one
Brass Pot, worth about 12 s.

And about the same time did the same Constable and Informer, by the said
Warrant, distrain a Mare of one Nicholas Rawes in Swaledale aforesaid, for a
Fine of 5 ^ imposed upon him, worth about 2 l. 10 s.

Also the same Constable, about the same time, and by the same Warrant, did
distrain and take from Simon Harker of Swaledalc aforesaid, for a Fine of 5 s.
one Brass Pot, worth about 7 s.

Upon the 22d day of the 3d Month, called May, 1670. did William Thornaby,
Elder, and Henry Spence, both of Richmond, Informers together, with James
Metcalf of Bainbrigg, Constable, and one Robert Jackson of the same place, came
to the House of Thomas Fawcett of Hawes in Wensleydale, where finding some of
the aforesaid People called Quakers peaceably met together, to Wait upon and
Worship the Living God, according to his Will, in the Way of his Commandments;
he, the said Thornaby, and other his Agents begun to take the Names of some of
them so met, but not coming to his Purpose, in respect he did not know them
all; and thereupon going away he met with one Thomas Shore, a most Notorious
Bad Man (who to the Countrie's great Satisfaction was afterward for his bad
Carriage removed by the Justice of Charles (then Lord St. John) now Marquess of
Winchester) who gave him Information of the Names of several so met, which he
had not before got; upon which Information, together with what he had got
before, he, the said Thornaby, together with the said Henry Spence, went to
before the said James Metcalfe, and desperately Swore against a great Number of
Persons, (many whereof he knew not) That they were at an Unlawful Assembly or
Conventicle, at the place aforesaid (though such as meet to wait upon the Lord,
have not heretofore been accounted an Unlawful Assembly, but Encouraged, Heb.
10. 25.) and particularly against one Thomas Winn of Grisedale, and Thomas
Bedam's Wife of Hawes, neither of whom the said Thornaby or Spence saw there;
for the said Thomas Winn was not that day in Wensleydale, as might have been
proved. And for a further Evidence of this man's Wickedness, he the said
Thornaby coming into an Assembly afterward, where many of the said People he
so Swore against was present, he voluntarily Swore, He knew not a Face among
them but Three, viz. Richard Robinson, Bartholomew Harryson and John Thompson.
And yet upon these men's Oaths and Informations, together with the Oaths and
Informations of others, after given, and without calling the Parties accused
before him, did the said James Metcalfe issue forth his Warrants, by which
these Goods and Chattels here-after-named were taken from the People following
in Wensleydale.

And First, James Metcalfe of Bainbrigg and Anthony Swinbanke of Mosedale, both
Constables for Bainbrigg aforesaid, with others, upon the 7th day of the 4th
Month, 1670. by the Warrant or Warrants aforesaid, did take from Oswald Routh
of Hawes aforesaid Three Kine, and the next day one Mare. And the 5th day of
the 8th Month, 1670. the said Constables or their Agents, took from him Brass
and Pewter, altogether worth about 12 l. 2 s.

The same Constables, with others, upon the 4th day of the 4th Month, 1670.
did take from Richard Routh of Hawes aforesaid, Brass and Pewter; and the 8th
of the same Month Five Kine, altogether worth 16 l.

The 7th day of the same Month, 1670. did the same Constables take from
Christopher Routh of Hawes aforesaid (now Prisoner) One Cow, worth about 2 l. 6
s. 8 d.

And the 8th day of the same Month did the same Constables take from Richard
Binkes of the same place One Mare and a Colt of about one year old, which was
sold for 3 l. 18 s. 6 s.

The same day the same Persons took from Thomas Reedham of the same place one
Cow, worth about 2 l. 10 s.

They, or some, or one of them, also about the same time, took from Fancis
Metcalfe of Mosedale in Wensleydale aforesaid one Cow, worth about 2 l.

All, or most of which Goods so distrained and taken as aforesaid by Warrant
from the said James Metcalfe, was either by Relations or Neigbours to the
Sufferers bought of the Distrainers, though many of them at pretty dear Rates,
on purpose to save something for the Sufferers.

The same James Metcalfe Constable and John Metcalfe Churchwarden (so called)
both of Bainbrigg, and Francis Lambert of Marsett, Overseer, together with
William Thornaby Elder, and Henry Spence, Informers; about the same time did
take from John Thompson of Blean, Brass and Pewter, which they sold for 1 l. 5
s.

And from Bart. Harryson of Countersett in Wensleydale, Pewter worth by
Estimation 4 s.

From Michael Pratt of Burgehill in the same Dale, Pewter worth, by Estimation
about 15 s.

The same Officers and Informers did also come into the House of Richard
Robinson of Countersett at the same time, and some of the Officers often after,
but never made any Distress.

By Warrant from Joseph Cradock were these Goods following in and near Massam
distrained, upon the Information of the said William Thornaby the Elder, his
Son, and other his Agents, or some of them.

Jane Bridgewater a poor Widow-Woman, for having a Meeting at her House in
Massam had all she had distrained, but to what Value is Uncertain.

Thomas Bridgewater of the same place had Goods distrained worth by Estimation
about 2 l.

Robert Lodge of the same place, for a Fine of 1 l. 10 s. had Household Goods
distrained worth by Estimation about 5 l.

Anne Blackburne of High-Ellington, another poor Widow, had Household Goods
distrained, worth about 3 l. 10 s.

Thomas Whitton of Pattrick-Brunton had two Kine taken from him, worth about 5
l.

Marmaduke Beckwith of Aldburgh, had Household Goods distrained, but not taken
away, for his Brother bought them, and let him have the Use of them, worth
about 20 l.

William Beckwith had Household Goods distrained worth 3 l. 10 s.

Thomas Pratt, for a Fine of 10 s. laid on him, had Goods distrained and sold,
worth about 2 l.

Much also of the Goods aforementioned was bought by Neighbors and Relations
to the Sufferers; not out of Envy to the Owners, but out of Pity and good Will
to their Harmless Neigbours and Friends, on purpose to save something, if
possible, out of their Ruins, having, many of them, their Hearts Sadded to see
such Havoc made.

Taken in Coverdale upon the account aforesaid, the 10th day of the 7th Month,
called September, in the Year 1670. Anthony Slaytor and Rich. Rinder
Constables, by Warrant from the Lord St. John, distrained and took from Stephen
Winn of Melmerby in Coverdale (now Prisoner) a piece of Cloth, worth about 13 s.

Rich. Beck, Constable of Melmerby aforesaid, by Warrant from Joseph Craddock
distrained and took from the said Stephen Winn two Kine and Household Goods, so
that he neither left Dish, Dubler, Spoon nor Stool to sit upon; he also
distrained and sold two pair of Looms, and other working Instruments, and Yarn,
he being a Weaver, and Stuff upon the Beam, an unwrought part of it belonging
to others, for whom he wrought it, valued together about 7 l. 10 s. 6 d.

The 16th day of the Month and Year aforesaid, and by the same Warrant, as was
supposed, did Simon Winn Constable, distrain and take from Richard Geldart of
Carleton in Coverdale aforesaid, five Kine and two Heiffers, well worth 13 l.

And the 25th of the same Month and Year, and by the said Warrant of Lord St.
John did the said Constables distrain and take from William Hornor of Woodall
in Coverdale aforesaid, seven Kine, one Mare, Household Stuff, two Stacks of
Hay, and other two parcels of Hay, altogether worth about 26 l.

And the same Constables also distrained from James Janson of the same place,
Household Goods worth about 5 l.

But most of the Goods aforementioned, which were taken by force of the Lord
St. John's Warrant, and by the Constable who distrained them by virtue of the
said Warrant, sold to such as would buy them, but because not sold at dear
Rates, were either by Warrant from Joseph Craddock distrained again, or
otherwise by his means and cruelty forced to be compounded, bought and
contracted for again, under pretense of a Combination to defeat the King,
thereby afrighting the poor Innocent People, who had bought them out of their
Bargains, to the subversion of Commerce and Dealing in this behalf, they
knowing no Law to prohibit the Buyer from peaceably enjoying, and otherwise
disposing of what he had so bought from those authorized to sell, as the
Constables, etc. in this Case of force by the said Act and Warrants thereon
grounded was said to be, neither any Law which binds the Constables to sell at
dearer Rates than they can get: And it was also contrary to the Order of his
Son Thomas Craddock at the Quarter Sessions for the Town of Richmond to the
Constable there, who affirming, That he could not get the Goods he had so taken
in distress sold, or to that purpose, (as is remembered) told him, He must sell
them, though he sold Ten Pounds worth for Ten Shillings. And here all may
perceive their Evil-will to the Sufferers, and those that wished them Well; for
if they could but perceive what most tended to their Disadvantage, they would
choose that which most conduced to their Ruin; for rather than they should
forbear distraining, because they, to wit, the Constables, etc. could not get
the Goods sold, few or none having a mind to buy such Ill-gotten Goods, they
must have liberty to sell, though in a manner for nothing: But if any that
bought them were judged to bear good Will to the Sufferers, they might be
troubled, under pretense of Defeating the King, as those poor Buyers and
Constable were, who all or some of them were had to the Sessions, and there
threatened, and the Constable imprisoned and fined 20 l. as is remembered. And
herein, as well as in other matters, the Malice of some men was made manifest;
and that it was they in this sense that sought Life more than the Quakers.

Upon the 2d day of the 2d Month called April, in the Year 1671. came one
Richard Murrow, then of Burton in or near Bishopdale, Constable, now deceased,
together with William Thornaby the Younger, of Richmond, (Son to the aforesaid
William Thornaby the Elder) Informer, into the Assembly of the Lords People at
the House of Thomas Simpson in Burton aforesaid, where they were met in the
fear of the Lord, and to wait upon him; and coming in, the said Constable
seeing them met, in a Scornful manner said, They are pannelled; and when they
had according to their former use taken the Names of those so met, the
Constable said, He had a Warrant to search and rifle among them; which some
desiring to see, he refused, only pulled out some Papers, but what was in them
they did not know; and being advised, To take heed what he did, lest he run
himself into a Snare, he refused to hear; and having searched the House, and
not coming to his purpose, they went to the Stable, wherein were three Mares,
one of the man's own who owned the Stable, and two of his Friends, which they
had borrowed, but the Door being bolted, and they not getting in, the said
Constable returned and told the Owner of the House, He must open the Door;
which not being done accordingly, but he advised, To take heed what he did; He
Scoffingly refused the Advice, and said, He would have it opened, or he would
break it; and further said, He would Charge others to do it for him; which he
did, but they refused; at which he was grieved, and said, They had as good have
held a Cow to the Bull, if he lived: By which may be seen his Forwardness, Envy
and Malice, whom God did not suffer long to escape: whereupon Thornaby the
Informer said, Charge me, and I will do it, or to that purpose; but the other
being as willing as he, they both went, and having got into the House took
thence one Mare, which William Hornor had borrowed, with a Saddle and
Woman's-Seat thereon, worth altogether about 2 l. And another which Stephen
Winn had borrowed, with a Saddle and Woman's-Seat thereon, worth about 4 l. 10
s. And a little Mare belonging to the Owner of the House; all which they
carried away to the Constable's House; but a little Girl plucked off the
Halter from the little Mare's Head, whereby she got away; which when the
Constable perceived, he was grieved, and came again to the Stable, and said,
They had lost one of their Prizes; but she must be made good. Afterward the
same day by the Permission or other Assent or Agreement of the said Constable,
the said young Thornaby, the Informer, carried away the remaining two Mares
toward Richmond, whither the next day, being the 3d day of the Month
aforesaid, followed the said Constable, and came to the House of old William
Thornaby to lodge, where the next Morning he got his Breakfast pretty well, and
was Cursing of the Quakers (so called) in the presence of one Thomas Winn, who
gave the Relation of it; but going from thence to the Carriers House in that
Town, about the sending of a Daughter of his to London, where he did also eat
and drink, he suddenly fell down dead, over, upon or besides the Table, where
he had been eating, and was about to count Money, and part of the Money fell
from him. A True Evidence of God's Righteous Judgments upon him, who had so
Audaciously behaved himself against his innocent Neighbors, and may give
sufficient Warning and Caution to such Officers and Constables in this day, and
forever hereafter, as do not in a Moderate Fear abstain from such Actions as
this man pursued, whose Intentions were Wicked; for when some of his
Neighbors, (which were no Quakers, so called) asked him, What made him so
Sawsie; he said, He had not been so Sawsie, but he would be; and sometimes
said, They (to wit, the Informers, Constables, and the rest) would not leave
them (to wit, the Quakers) all a Groat; and That they would take a Course with
them, and such like Wicked Stuff, which were too long to relate; by which may
be seen his Envy and Wicked Intentions; but God cutting him off in the midst of
his Iniquity, before he had accomplished what in Evil Intent he aimed at, may
signify to all them that remain and employ themselves in such Wicked Actions,
and Spoiling of their Neighbors Goods (as this man did) who proffered to seek
them in the Night-season; that it is not the Clothing themselves with the
King's Authority and Warrants, and saying, They have the King's Authority and
Justices Warrants; and that they must and will Obey; that will excuse and
deliver in the Day when God comes to plead with men; for if that could have
been an Excuse and brought Deliverance, then the most Mighty men that were in
the Army of Nebuchadnezzar might have been excused, who had the King's Command,
and that a Mighty King too, for the binding and casting of Shadrach, Meshack
and Abednego into the fiery Furnace, and have pleaded, They could not help it;
they were Compelled to it (as some in these days have said) But this Command,
though from a Mighty King, as aforesaid, excused not the matter so, but that
they suffered Death by Force of that Flame, which was appointed for the
Destruction of others: Which Thing is Worthy to be taken notice of by all the
Officers and Constables in England at this day, to whom it has been often in
my Heart, It is a Figure; and therefore had need to be warned and advised by
the same, that the Command they pursue be Righteous; and also, that what they
do, be done in the fear of the Lord; for the Lord knows how to deliver the
Righteous, as he did Shadrach, Meshack and Abednego, who could not bow to the
King's Will in that day, no more than the Innocent People called Quakers can
bow to the Wills of them that would limit the holy One of Israel at this day;
and the same God also knows how to reserve the Wicked, as he did this
Constable, unto the day of Judgment, to be Punished, which we do not rejoice
over, as Glorying in any man Destruction, but only set forth to the end, that
others may see and be warned, lest they likewise come into the like
Condemnation. It is also worthy to be further taken notice of, That old William
Thornaby's Wife and young William Thornaby's Mother, who was hardened in the Sin
of her Husband and Son, having been visited with Sickness much of the time of
their aforementioned Wicked Employment, dyed the same day, and as was
reported, about the very same Hour her Son was exercised in taking the Mares
aforesaid: and the two Mares themselves, so taken as aforesaid, also shortly
after dyed in the Possession of the said Thornabyes, or the one of them, as
others so got before by them likewise did; and there was neither King nor Poor
got any part out of them, but Thornabyes went with the whole, which both the
said Joseph Craddock and James Metcalfe, notwithstanding their pretended zeal
for the King, could dispense withal.

Also the Goods of one James Calvert of Burton, in or near Bishopdale, together
with the Goods of a Friend there, called Jeremiah Simpson, were distrained to a
great value, by Warrants (as was said) from Joseph Craddock (for we were
sometimes forced to take their Words, they being unwilling, and sometimes
resusing to show their Warrants) for the Offense (as it was called) of the
aforementioned Stephen Winn, who being at Prayer in the House of the aforementioned
Thomas Simpson in Burton aforesaid, where the Porsons distrained on were
present; and the abovenamed Thornaby coming in, and finding the said Stephen
at Prayer, as aforesaid, after some seemingly wondering Expressions, he went
away and Informed the said Joseph Craddock; but whether his Information upon
Oath was, That he was Praying only, or that he was Preaching and Teaching, we
know not, having never seen the Information, neither, may be, would he greatly
scruple what he Swore, as may be perceived by his former deportment; but
whatsoever he Swore, it was Prayer only that the said Stephen at that time was
exercised in, and for which Offense it was said, the Goods were distrained; by
which it may be perceived, that neither Law nor Scripture was any Limit to
these men in their Proceedings; for the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 2. and 8. I will
therefore, that men Pray every where, lifting up holy Hands, without Wrath or
Doubting. And the very Law by which they did pretend to proceed imposes no
Penalty upon any for the mere Act of Prayer; and if it did, yet it were
contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, 2 These. 5. 17. who commands To Pray without
ceasing, and also to Christ's, Luke 18. 1. and contrary to Law also, as appears
by Shepherd in his Grand Abridgment, part 3. page 9, and 274. Nay, though a
Statute should be made to prohibit men to Pray to God, yet the same were void,
as appears by the places afore-cited, and those quoted by him: Read also the
Epistle to the English Translation of the Mirror of Justice. And as if this
were not Wickedness enough, they imposed the Punishment of that which they call
the Fault of one upon another, contrary to the Scripture, which they have
sometimes (though falsely) called their Rule, which says, It shall no more be
said, the Fathers have eaten a sour Grape, and the Childrens Teeth are set on
Edge; for every man shall dye for his own Iniquity; and the Soul that Sins
shall dye, not another; and it is also a Rule in their own Law, Nemo pro Alieno
delicto Punitur: But they neither regarded Scripture nor the Law, further than
they will suit their Envy and Covetous Ends. For having sometimes (but falsely)
condemned the Quakers, so by them called, for Denying Prayer; they in this case
Condemn, and go about to Punish for Praying; and so are all found in the
Confusion, Lies and Falsehoods.

The Constable of Bellerby, with others, about the times abovesaid, or some of
them, did distrain and take from Ralph Ainesly of the same place, by Warrant
from the Lord St. John, Pewter worth about 16 s. and after that, by Warrant
from Joseph Craddock, two Kine, one Mare, two Stacks of Hay, and a Burden of
Hay off his Wife's Head, together with three Burden Ropes and two Hay-Spades
(by which it appears they will leave little) altogether worth at least 16 l. 10
s.

More taken in Swaledale.
Upon the 21th day of the 12th month, called February, in the year 1670. came
Henry Watson Constable, Henry Thwaite of Reeth in Swaledale Overseer, William
Thornaby the Elder, William Thornaby the Younger and one John Allison
Informers, to the aforesaid House of Elizabeth Cherry Widow in Swaledale, and
under Pretense of the Lord St. John's Warrant, and to seek for a Meeting, they
broke the Door of the said House after they had been informed by one of their
own Company which was in the House, That there was no Meeting there; and having
so broken the Door, by another Warrant from James Metcalfe, they distrained and
took out of the House in Bedding, Wearing-Apparel and other things belonging to
this poor Widow and her Children, to the value of about 16 l.

The same persons also (save Henry Watson) the same day, by Warrant from the
said James Metcalfe, did distrain of Jeoffrey Lonesdale of Healy in Swaledale,
Stockings, Wearing Apparel, Bedding, and other things, worth by estimation 20 l.

The 1st day of the 1st month (called March) following, did the same Henry
Watson, Henry Thwaite and one Mark Hutchinson, by Warrant from the said James
Metcalfe, distrain of Ralph Peacock of Winterings in Swaledale, six Beasts,
worth about 14 l.

Which with some of the other there taken aforesaid, they sold to such as would
buy them, but at what Rates has not as yet been to the Compiler hereof known.

Upon or about the 19th day of the 12th month (called February) 1670. came
William Thornaby the younger and John Allison, both of Richmond, Informers,
together with the abovenamed Henry Thwaite Overseer, to the House of the said
Elizabeth Cherry, under pretense to search for a Conventicle, where finding
none besides those of the Family, save Ia. Longstaff and the said Widow
Cherry's Sister, and Elizabeth Orton, who was there visiting the said Widow
Cherry's Daughter, then very Weak, and not likely to live, which Thornaby
perceiving would have gone into the inner Rooms, under pretense to see if there
were no more there; and said, He had a Warrant from the Lord St. John, to break
open the Doors; she bid him show it; who pulling it forth began to read it; she
said, He might read what he would, for she could not read, but said, William
Orton was a little off intending to go home, we shall call him in to read it;
which being done, and William being come into the House to read it, told them
(having read it) that that Warrant did not concern that place nor any other,
except there were an unlawful Assembly; nevertheless Widow Cherry opened the
Doors for their satisfaction, who searching found no more: only Katherine
Longstaff who came to see her sick Kinswoman, and Edward Williamson came into
the House while they were searching, which when Thornaby perceived he began to
set down their Names, but Katherine Longstaff refused to tell hers, being, as
she signified to them, one that frequented their Parish Church, and came but to
see her Kinswoman, whereupon the said Thornaby and Allison went to the
aforesaid James Metcalfe, who as one fit for their design, answered their Ends,
and granted forth a Warrant against William Orton and his Daughter, not knowing
either her Name or Age, and fined them together 10 s. Katherine Longstaff 5 s.
James Longstaff 5 s. and Edward Williamson 5 s. and further also fined William
Orton for the House 9 l. and James Longstaff 5 l. and Widow Cherry the rest.
Whereupon William Orton, Katherine Longstaff, the Constable, and some other
Neighbors went to the said James Metcalfe, and told him of the Informers
unjust Swearing against them, and Katherine Longstaff also carried a
Certificate under the Priest of the Parish his Hand, signifying that she was no
Quaker (so called) but frequented their Church, and another, that she had
received the Lords Supper (as they called it) nevertheless the said James
Metcalfe would not recall his Warrant, whereupon William Orton put in his
Appeal, and the next general Quarter Sessions held at Thrusk had a Trial with
the Informer, where the Records of the pretended Conviction being read, there
proved but five Persons in it, whereof Widow Cherry Owner of the House was
one, which not being according to Law must needs be void, the Act by which they
pretended to proceed, requiring that there be five Persons besides those of the
Family: Whereupon the said James Metcalfe (being still willing to assist the
said Informers in their Unjust proceedings) would not acknowledge that the said
William Orton did Appeal from him, though himself at the same Sessions had
delivered the same Appeal, together with the pretended Record of Conviction
into the Court, whereupon (to his shame) William Orton did prove in open Court,
that he did appeal from him, and that he drew the Appeal in James Metcalfes own
House, by his Instructions, and by a president the said James Metcalfe gave him
to draw it by; Also the said William Ortons Counsel urged that there ought to
be Witnesses besides the Informers; but the said James Metcalfe being willing
still to carry on the Informers unjust designs (though all the Bench was
against it, seeing their Illegal Proceedings) said, That Old William Thornaby
was Informer, and Young William Thornaby and Allison were Witnesses; which was
not Truth; for Old William Thornaby was not at Widow Cherry's House that day,
neither had James Metcalfe any Information from him touching that matter.

Whereupon the Justices ordered, That William Orton should have his Money upon
his Appeal again; and that the Conviction was Illegal.

Nevertheless by what is here expressed may easily be perceived how the said
James Metcalfe endeavored himself (though often to his shame) to vindicate and
carry on the Interest of those Unjust Informers and False Swearers; for when
Truth would not do it, he would so far dishonor himself as to tell Lies on
their behalfs, as in this his saying, That Old William Thornaby was Informer;
who neither was there, nor saw the matter done, neither gave Evidence nor
Information of it; and also refused to acknowledge the Appeal, which he himself
had been assistent in drawing, as abovesaid. And in all things demeaned himself
as one that delighted to make himself concerned in carrying on the Informers
Interest, or otherwise desirous to do his Neighbor a Mischief.

Sufferings in and about Richmond on the same Account.
Jane Chayter Widow, and John Chayter her Son, both of Richmond, upon the
Information of the aforesaid William Thornaby was by John Bartlet Mayor, fined
30 l. for having a Meeting in their House the 13th of the 3d Month, 1670. and
though the said Mayor, when he came in found none but his Harmless Neighbors
waiting upon the Lord in Silence, yet by Warrants from him did Mich. Fawcett
and Richard Hogg, Constables, with others, take Stuff and other Goods, so that
the Damage did amount to the Sum of 20 l.

About the 10th day of the 7th Month, in the Year 1670. the said John Chaytor
upon the account of meeting with the People of God in Scorn called Quakers, was
fined 2 l. and had Goods taken out of his Shop for the same, by Warrant from
the said Mayor and Recorder, by the aforesaid Constable and others, worth about
3 l.

Thomas Johnson of the same place, about the same time fined 1 l. 10 s. had
Goods taken out of his House by the said Constables, upon Warrant from the
aforesaid Mayor and Recorder, worth about 1 l. 15 s.

Mary Adamson of Richmond, about the same time fined 10 s. had Goods taken out
of her House worth about 14 s.

Isabel Williamson, a poor Woman of the same place, who had little but her
Hand-labour to relieve her self with, was by the parties aforesaid fined 5 s.
and had by the said Constables her Wearing-Apparel distrained, worth about 1 l.

Robert Cutter of Ravensworth near Richmond, for being at a Meeting at the
House of the said Widow Chaytor, about the 15th day of the 3d Month 1670. was
fined 5 s. for which Corn was taken from him, by Warrant from one William
Robinson, worth about 13 s.

The same Robert Cutter about the 10th day of the 7th Month, 1670. was fined 2
l. for which he had Corn taken from him, by Warrant from the aforesaid William
Robinson, worth about 2 l.

About the 26th day of the 8th Month, 1670. the said John Chaytor was fined 2
l. 5 s. for which, by Warrant from the aforesaid Mayor and Recorder, the said
Constables did take Goods out of his Shop, worth about 3 l. 5 s.

Thomas Johnson the same time fined 2 l. 10 s. had Goods taken by the said
Constables upon like Warrant, worth about 3 l. 10 s.

John Hopps of Richmond fined also 1 l. 5 s. had Goods taken out of his Shop,
by the same or like Warrant, worth about 1 l. 15 s.

And at another time for a Fine of 10 s. had Goods taken out of his Shop, by
Warrant from the aforesaid Recorder, worth about 1 l. 4 s.

The aforesaid Thomas Johnson about the same time, by the same Warrant and
Officers, and for the like Fine of 10 s. had Household Goods taken from him,
worth about 14 s.

Mary Adamson aforesaid fined 1 l. 10 s. had Houshold-Goods taken out of her
House, worth about 2 l.

Also, Jane Chaytor, Mother of the said John Chaytor, for meeting with the
aforesaid People was fined 2 l. 10 s. for which Goods was taken out of the Shop
of the said John Chaytor, worth to the value of 3 l. 5 s.

The aforesaid John Chaytor, for having a Meeting at his House the 12th day of
the 12th Month called February, in the Year 1670. was fined by Thomas Craddock
Recorder for Richmond, aforesaid, upon the Information of the aforesaid W.
Thornaby, the Sum of 20 l. for which he had Shop-Goods distrained and taken
from him upon the 21st and 22d days of the 2d Month, in the Year 1671. by
Henry Shaw, James Sayer and others, by Warrant from the said Thomas Craddock,
worth about 33 l.

The said John Appealing, had his Trial at the next Quarter Sessions held for
the said Borough of Richmond, where the Jury found for the said John Chaytor,
and against the Informers; so that upon their Verdict, the said John should
have had all his said Goods (so distrained as aforesaid) again: But one of the
said Constables (to wit, Henry Shaw) having within the time limited by the said
Act for Appeal, sold the Goods amounting to the value of 33 l to the Informer
Thornaby, as was said for 20 l. the said Thornaby and Shaw pretending, that the
said Goods so sold was disposed of that they could not be had again. All (...)
the said John Chaytor had or could get without Suit (...), which he was not
willing to make use of; notwithstanding their bad dealing with him, was only 20
l. the pretended Price the Goods were sold for: So that his Loss in this
particular, besides Charges of the Appeal, amounted to the Sum of 13 l.

Also the said John Chaytor for having a Meeting in his House on the 25th day
of the 4th Month called June, 1671. was fined 20 l. for which by Warrant from
the said Thomas Craddock, he had Shop Goods to wit, a certain Commodity called
Battery) distrained and taken from him by Henry Shaw, Robert Burton and James
Sayer, Constables, to the value of about 20 l. 16 s. which Goods being
delivered to Richard Dawson, then Mayor of the said Town of Richmond, he kept
to his own Use, and as is supposed, paid down the 20 l. they were distrained
for, at the next Sessions held for the said Town: But his Wife Isabell Dawson
being troubled at such Unjust Dealings and Proceedings against an Innocent
People, upon the account of their Consciences, would not have had her Husband
to have dealt so by them, or in that kind concerned himself with them (as I
think I have heard) but he not regarding her, or not submitting to that
wholesome Advice, given by her unto him, did continue the said Goods in his own
Possession, with intent (as it should seem) to convert the same to his own use.
But some time after being out of his Mayorality, he dyed, and his Estate
thereupon coming to be divided between his Children and Widow, she the said
Isabell, then his Widow, desired, that the same parcel of Goods so taken from
the said John Chaytor (if it were possible) might be made parcel of her share
of her said deceased Husband's Goods, which thing did accordingly fall out; and
being in her own Possession, or at her Dispose, she did enquire of the said
John Chaytor, the Value and Quantity or Weight of the said Goods, so taken from
him; which when she understood, she did Fully restore unto him in Weight,
Worth, or otherwise, the Whole Value or Quantity of the said Goods: Which thing
we do not here make mention of, and Report as being a Suffering, or an Act
whereby the said John Chaytor did come to any Loss, for that was made up and
Re-pay'd by her in manner as aforesaid; but this we make mention of and Record
to the intent, that so Noble an Act of this Woman, so truly worthy and
deserving Commendations in this behalf, might not be hid in obscurity, but that
the same might be published, to the intent, that how far soever this Testimony
of the hard Usage of the Lords People, by the hands of Unreasonable and Wicked
men may go, this good Deed of this Woman, so truly worthy, as aforesaid, may in
this behalf be also born Testimony of; that so no one Person herein concerned
may want of that due Weight and Measure that of Right belongs to them; but that
as the Wicked and Unreasonable meet with the Report of their Wickedness and
Unreasonableness to their Shame, so the Good Deeds and Upright Dealings of the
Honest and Truly Conscientious, may also commend them to their Praise, knowing,
and being further persuaded, that as this Woman, or any other comes to be led
and guided by that Principle of Truth and Righteousness in their Inward Parts,
that led and guided her at this time, to the doing of this Worthy and truly
Commendable Act, the same Principle will never leave them, as they are guided
by it, until it has led them unto the Light of Life, and brought them unto the
Banqueting House of the Lords Love, and to that which is truly Praiseworthy
before him; but being disobeyed and rejected, will become their Condemnation,
notwithstanding any former notable Act done by them; therefore let every such
one mind to keep to the same, and whilst they have a time to prize it.

More taken in Burton, Coverdale and Wensleydale upon the like Account, as
follows.
Upon the 4th day of the 10th month, 1671. George Ryder Constable of Burton
aforesaid, and Thomas Crookey Overseer, by Warrant from James Metcalfe, did
distrain and take from Thomas Simpson of the same Burton, two Kine and four
Sheep, worth 6 l. 10 s.

The pretended Crime being because some Friends met at his House to wait upon
the Lord the 17th day of the 9th month in the year 1670. which was informed
against as an Unlawful Assembly.

And upon the same day the Constable did distrain and take from Jeremiah
Simpson of the same Burton, and Brother of the said Thomas Simpson, several
Implements of Household Stuff to the value of 4 s.

Upon the 7th day of the 10th month, 1671. by the same Warrant from James
Metcalfe, came John Watson and Thomas Stephenson Constables of Melmerby in
Coverdale, and John Smithies Overseer, with William Thornaby the younger and
Henry Spence Informers, to the House of Stephen Winn in Melmerby aforesaid, who
was from home, and none in the House but his own Family, except two or three
Women that came with their Work to bear Stephen Winne's Wife Company; the
Constable John Watson said, He might see what Company there was, and he must
see if there were not a Conventicle: To which Stephen Winne's Wife replied, It
is not usual where People come together to worship God, to follow their Outward
Employments, as you see we do (they being then at Work) or words to that
purpose; and further told them, There was no Conventicle: To which William
Thornaby the younger said, There were three (meaning the three Women that were
come in) and there might be other two within, and then there will be a
Conventicle; and read a Warrant for breaking in, if refused to enter where such
Meeting is known to be: but this Warrant could not reach then to that Place,
because there was then no Meeting known to be there, as indeed there was none
at that time, which they likely beforehand knew well enough. But they having
another Design, and the Constable too willing and ready to comply with the Evil
Intent of the Informers went to an inner Door, which being locked they
violently broke open, and broke and spoiled some things thereby; but finding
none, the Constable bid to open the next Door, which Stephen's Wife (who
perceived their Design) refused, only told them, There was none there; but that
would not serve, for that Door was broken open also, and being broken, then
William Thornaby began to pull the Bedding off the Bed, and opened a large
Chest, and groaped in the Corners of it, and sought a Box to the bottom in
which was some Linen, more like one that was seeking for MONEY than a MEETING:
And the said Thornaby sought the Buttery, to see what he could find there worth
carrying away, and gathered their Wearing Apparel together; and when one that
saw it told him, He was a right Plunderer; the said Thornaby replied, It might
not be the last time he might Plunder there; though then they took what they
well could; for of Bed-Clothes and Yarn they took to the worth of about 4 l.
And the said Stephen Win being a poor man, was by this and the like former
Cruelties, left in Want of Necessaries for his poor Family, not having any
manner of Bed-Clothes for him and his said Family to lie on, besides the Abuse
his Wife sometimes sustained from the said Informers, and their Affrighting of
his Children by their Boisterous Deportment, who, or one of them this time so
vehemently cried, that Henry Spence the Informer, a Wicked and Bad Man, desired
them to get done, he could not endure to hear the Child cry so: and by this
Cry, which made even the Wicked and Ungodly relent, it may easily be perceived,
their Deportment was Wicked and Uncomely.

Upon the 5th day of the 11th month (called January) 1671. Anthony Swinbank of
Mosedale Constable, Geoffrey D^nsdall of Gayle and Richard Metcalfe of Aporset,
the one being a Churchwarden (so called) and the other an Overseer, did by
Warrant from the aforesaid James Metcalfe, dated (as was said) a year before,
distrain and take from the aforesaid Christopher Routh of Hawes in Wensleydale
five Beasts, worth about 9 l.

And we were further informed from a Credible Hand, That the said James
Metcalfe Urged or Threatened the Constable to distrain, who being unwilling
thereunto alleged, He knew not the Goods, or to the like purpose (as is
remembered) then James Metcalfe told him, He knew his Neighbor Francis
Metcalfe's Goods; to which (as we had notice) the Constable replied, He (to
wit, Francis Metcalfe) was grown poor, and had not a Cow but as he hired: then
James Metcalfe asked, If they did not bring the Milk into Francis's House? The
Constable said Yes: James Metcalfe replied, She might be distrained, or to this
purpose, as is remembered. Which much manifests the continued Wickedness of this
man (to wit, James Metcalfe) he appearing as one that had shut out all Pity,
and given up himself to answer the Informers Ends, and made himself
Instrnmental toward the Ruin of his Neighbors, whom God suffered not long to
escape; for shortly after this he dyed, and was cut off to the Informers Loss,
who not long after sled or departed out of these Parts, one of his chief Props
and Supports being on this wife fallen.

And there were several others that had Fines imposed on them; some the
Constables or other Officers would Labor or endeavor with Kinsfolks,
Relations or Neighbors to lay down, and have sometimes laid it down
themselves, rather than they would levy for the same, and sometimes Neighbors
out of kindness have driven away and hid the Parties Goods that were to be
distrained, and that without the Owners Consent or Knowledge; nay, against
their Wills, because they would not have seen such spoil and havoc made of the
Goods of those whom they knew to be Peaceable and Harmless People, and
Labored, and do Labor in Honest things to be serviceable in their Generation.
And several of the said Officers have expressed the trouble which was upon them
to be concerned in such things as tended to the Injury of their Honest and
Harmless Neighbors: By which it is manifest, that according to the
Interpretation they put upon the said Act, or rather by the Use made of it, the
Honest and Conscientious were and are Troubled, Burdened and Oppressed; and the
Envious, Cruel, Unmerciful and Covetous Strengthened, Upheld and Encouraged.
Now the hand of the Evil Doer should not be strengthened. And this will be
found a Truth, That to Justify the Wicked, and Condemn the Righteous, are both
an Abomination to the Lord.

All which Goods so as aforesaid taken, and Spoil beforementioned made in the
Interest of Honest, Harmless, Self-denying People, was for no greater, or other
Crime or Offense, save only for peaceably meeting together, simply and
Innocently to wait upon and worship the One, True and Living God in Spirit and
Truth, according to his Will; and for such meeting together and Praying before
him, according to the Apostles Doctrine, and neither for Plotting, Contriving
Insurrections, or other dangerous Practices, these or any of them, not being so
much as laid to our Charge; but if they could but find to the Number of Five of
us, or above, sometimes fewer, as may be perceived before, besides those of the
Family, peaceably sitting together, waiting upon the Lord, or the like number
visiting a Sick Friend or Neighbor, or doing the like Christian, Humane and
Neighbourly Duty, yet this was made occasion great enough for them to inform
upon, and for some of the Justices (so called) to issue out Warrants upon, to
take and to Spoil our Goods; yea, so great has been the Envy of some of them
(to wit, Joseph Craddock and James Metcalfe, (as the Constables have reported)
that they, or the one of them, to wit, Joseph Craddock, has commanded them (to
wit, the said Constables) To distrain whatsoever Goods they found upon their
Land, whom the Warrants were against, or in their Possession, be it whose it
would: So that if any Neighbors or Relation, in Compassion to the Sufferers,
and their innocent Children, for their Sustenance would have lent them a Cow to
give them Milk to live upon, when their own was taken from them, or a Horse or
a Mare to ride upon, they have been afraid to do so by reason of such
Threatenings and of Actions brought forth suitable to the same; for some were
taken upon the like account as the Mares from Stephen Winn and William Horner;
though the Act by which they did pretend to proceed, imposes the penalty of
Distress upon the Goods and Chattels of none save upon the proper Goods and
Chattels of the Offender only; neither is the Land in this behalf a Debtor, or
the Goods there upon liable to distress, if not the Goods of the Offender, as
aforesaid. And hereby the Officers who had a mind to do wickedly have been
Encouraged; and those who had not a mind to do so wickedly, were sometimes
through fear compelled to take the Goods of others: as they did Yarn out of the
House of a Weaver, brought him to work, and Stuff already wrought for others,
thereby ministering occasion to People, seeing their Goods so taken from them to
leave working with them, hereby endeavoring as it were to stop Trading with
them, and hinder a livelihood or the Issues of Life from coming to them, and
so are the men that in this case are found more Guilty of endeavoring to take
Life then the Quakers, making the Informers Word and Oath, how false soever, a
sufficient ground for Conviction, and that without calling the parties accused
before them, to make their defense according to Law, and either to confess or
deny the Fact. But this, though according to Reason, and to the Law both of
Nature and of Nations they outrun; yet nevertheless for and notwithstanding
all the Spoil that this Informer Thornaby did make, and Goods he thus (as
aforesaid) got from Innocent People; and for and notwithstanding all the
assistance and encouragement that the said Joseph Craddock and James Metcalfe
offered him, such was the Judgment of God upon him, that though he sometimes
(as was said) got both the King's part and the Poor's part (as it is called)
unto himself, yet instead of satisfying Debts, and growing Rich thereby, he run
so far into Debt, and was active in so many Dishonesties, that he durst not
frequently, as formerly, show his Face.

And it is to be noted, that the said William Thornaby the Elder coming upon a
time, together with the Constable of Bainbrigg, into the Honse of one Dorothy
Todd in the same Bainbrigg, where was a Meeting of the said People in Scorn
called Quakers, about his aforesaid Wicked Enterprises, where the Compiler of
these Paper, was present; he the same Compiler was moved of the Lord to tell
him, (to wit, the said Thornaby) That the Lord God was intended, or would
shortly bring a Ruin, Desolation or Destruction upon him, and his Family or
House, or something to that or the like purpose, as is remembered; which shortly
after came to pass; for he, to wit, the said Thornaby never came in that place
again; But his Wife being dead, as aforesaid, and he by reason of his Debts,
and other Misdemeanors, not daring well to show his face, as at other times,
went for a time skulking up and down, being often observed to shift or remove
in the Evening, which gave occasion of bad suspicion to People; and at last the
aforesaid Ja. Metcalfe (one of his chief Props) being dead, as aforesaid, he,
to wit, the said Thornaby Cheating an Excise-man of his Horse, and other
things, by borrowing the same of him, and going away therewith, as was
reported, he went or removed himself up to London, and being come thither,
applied himself to the then Attorney General of the King (as was said)
Laboring with him to get all the remaining Fines (then ungotten, and which had
been Charged, by reason of his Informations, and the Information of his Agents,
as aforesaid, upon several of the aforesaid People called Quakers, Inhabiting
in and about the places beforementioned) Levied for; but failing of his
Intent, or meeting with a Repulse therein, he applied himself in or about the
aforesaid City of London to a Bad, Dishonest, Cheating kind of Life, as was
said; and after his continuing therein some time, at last dyed miserably in
Prison, as was reported. And his Children being as it were despised with many
for their Father's Acts, became scattered here and there, bearing the Reproach
or Ignominy of their said Father's Dishonesty: And thus, or in like mannrr, as
we are informed, was the End of this Thornaby. And his Son young William
Thornaby yet remains as we hear, leading a Life not much unlike the Practices
he learned of his Father, as we are informed. All which might be sufficient
Cautions to forewarn all those that remain from having a hand in such like
Actions, as these men beforementioned (who are now gone) pursued, lest they
fall by that Hand, and come into the same Condemnation, and under the like Lash
and Reproach, as these men did.

Nevertheless, the said Joseph Craddock yet remains, and not (as it seems)
being content with the Wickedness he has already committed against the Lord's
People, neither taking that Example by other men's Harms as will be sufficient
to him, to make him beware what he does in that behalf; but posting on to the
filling up of that measure of Wickedness that is yet behind; and being
Commissary to the Bishop of Chester, within the Arch-Deacony of Richmond, in
the Diocese of Chester aforesaid, has himself or his Officers, or those that
act under the Umbrage of him, cast several of the aforesaid People called
Quakers (being most of them of those that suffered as aforesaid) in Prison at
or near Richmond aforesaid, upon Writs of Excommunicato Capiendo, to wit,
Richard Robinson of Countersett, John Fothergill of Garr End and Christopher
Routh of Hawes, all in Wensleydale, who were committed the 4th of the 11th
month, 1678. and Stephen Win and Richard Geldart both of Carleton in
Coverdale, and two of the aforesaid Sufferers, who were committed the 15th day
of the 1st month last past, and most of them without being personally cited,
or having any Summons served on them, or ever hearing of that Proceed, until
they were either Arrested (as was John Fothergill, Stephen Win and Richard
Geldart) or within two days thereof (as was Richard Robinson) the Cause of
whose Commitment, as alleged by the Procurers thereof, or some of them, is as
follows, viz.

The said Richard Robinson for Non-payment of an Assessment of 10 s. imposed
upon him toward the Repair of the Steeplehouse at Askrigg, and other Matters
joined with the same, as Money for Destroying of Foxes, etc. all which he could
have paid save that for the Repair of the Steeplehouse, if the same had been
districtly assessed.

John Fothergill for an Assessment of 5 s. imposed on him for the same Use, but
never demanded on him (as he affirms) neither did he hear of the same until he
was Arrested, which was very Unjust. It had been but reasonable to demand or
acquaint the Party with what they expect from him, before they endeavor to
punish for Non-payment of that which they never demanded of him.

Stephen Win and Richard Geldart, for not going to the Steeplehouse, nor
receiving the Sacrament (so called) or some such like things.

And having thus imprisoned them, endeavor to make their Bonds as hard as they
can or lies in their power, by Threatening the Jailer to keep them strait; yet
nevertheless the Just and Holy God is with them, and has hitherto kept them
from bowing or being bowed under them, or defiled with them; and He that has
hitherto kept them, we hope will still be with them, so that we hope the Wicked
One will not prevail over them, to make or compel them (notwithstanding all
their Endeavors) to do that which tends to the Defilement of their
Consciences, or lessening of that Testimony which God in this behalf has given
unto them.

NOw it were convenient to discover what all those Fines before mentioned, for
which the Distresses since the beginning of the year 1670. were taken did
amount to, to the intent it might appear, whether those Persons before
mentioned (to wit, Joseph Craddock, James Metcalfe, Thomas Craddock, and the
rest, that made themselves so Active in the Matters aforesaid, have dealt truly
with the King and the Poor, in rendering to each their respective Parts of the
same; but being that we cannot do the same, because the Quantity of all the
said Fines so distrained for has not as yet (that we remember) come to our
Knowledge, neither know we how all the Goods were by those that distrained the
same sold, therefore shall cast up as near as we can the true Value and Worth
of the said Goods; according to that Estimate that the Owners of them have
respectively given in, and do find them upon Examination to amount (besides the
Distresses taken in the Town of Richmond) to about the sum of 234 l. 9 s. 8 d.

Besides paid by James Calvert of Burton 10 l. which in the whole will make the
sum of 244 l. 9 s. 8 d.

Now seeing the King was by the Act of Parliament to have one Third Part of the
said Fines, and the Poor another Third Part, the Question will be, How much of
the aforesaid Sum they severally got? for it cannot be reasonably expected, but
that the Value of the Distress so taken, being great, the Fines for which the
same was taken (though we cannot acertain them all, because we know them not
all) must also be Considerable.

But for the Town of Richmond; we find that the Fines for which those
Distresses there taken were levied, do amount to the Sum of 57 l. 5 s. that 20
l. which Richard Dawson was said to pay for the Goods taken from John Chaytor,
and which his Widow after his Death restored, either in Quantity, Quality or
Worth, being included.

And then out of this Sum of 55 l. 5 s. -- The King's Part will be 18 l. 8 s. 4
d. The Poor's Part -- 18 l. 8 s. 4 d.
The Question will be, How this last was paid? which Thomas Craddock and the
Officers concerned must Answer.

THe Compiler of these Papers did receive the Account of all the Sufferings
within mentioned (but what himself was a Winess of, or Sufferer in) from the
hands or by the Information of the Sufferers themselves, or such Persons as
were appointed by them, or took it upon them to collect and make known the
same; and is now, after several Examinations thereof, as to the Truth of it,
committed to public view, and owned by us whose Names are hereunto subscribed,
and who were Witnesses of, or concerned in some part or other of the same
Sufferings and Passages, as a true Testimony and Relation of the same.

Richard Routh, Richard Binks, Thomas Whitton, Oswald Routh, Richard Robinson,
John Key, Thomas Johnson, Robert Cutter, John Chaytor, James Janson, James
Longstaff, William Horner.
now Prisoners.
Stephen Win, Christopher Routh, John Fothergill, Richard Geldart, Richard
Robinson,


THE END.

