Sir Walter Raleigh's HISTORY of the Reign of William the First.

The true Effigies of is HONble Sr. Walter Rawlegh Knight F. H. Van. Hove. sculp


An Introduction to a BREVIARY OF THE History of England With the REIGN OF King
Williamthe I. Entitled the CONQUEROR.

Written by Sr. Walter Raleigh, Knight. And Dedicated to the then Earl of Salisbury.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Keble at the Great-Turks-Head in Fleet Street. And
Dan. Brown at the Black-Swan and Bible without Temple Bar. 1693.

THE PREFACE OF THE PUBLISHER.
THIS Life of William the Conqueror Writ by Sir Walter Raleigh was found in the
Library of a Person of High Quality. Whosoever has been conversant in the
Works of that accomplished Knight, and a little acquainted with his great Genius
and Spirit, and his manly and unaffected Style, will make no doubt, but what
here is presented unto the World was his genuine Issue.

For the Comprehensive and Penetrating thoughts, the lively imagination, and
the mature and exact Judgment of Sir Walter Raleigh, do all manifestly appear
in this small Treatise.

It may be matter of some wonder, that a Work filled with such a number of
judicious Reflections upon the Nature of Government in General, and so many
Wise Observations relating to the particular State of our own Country should
have been thus long condemned to obscurity, had not an ill fate attended the
learned Compositions, as well as the brave Actions of this renowned Gentleman.

But by what unhappy Accident soever it has been hitherto confined to Privacy,
it was thought it would be an injury to the public any longer to conceal a
just and true Account of the Reign of William the First, wherein so many
remarkable matters, and great Revolutions happened, and to which the Writers of
Government and Policy in our Nation have very frequent recourse;

Since the Transactions of that Time, unto which they so commonly appeal, are
here related with that faithfullness, brevity, and clearness, that become an
Exact Historian.

IMPRIMATUR.

December 31 1692: EDM. BOHUN.

A BREVIARY OF THE History of ENGLAND; Beginning at the REIGN of WILLIAM the I.
Entitled the Conqueror. The Introduction.
1. I Intend by the Help of God, and your furtherance (Right Noble Earl of
Salisbury) to write a Brief History of England, from William I. entitled the
Conqueror, to the End of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of perpetual Memory: A
Work difficult, as well for the Antiquity, as the Lateliness of things done;
the one bereaving our Knowledge of the certain Counsels held in the managing of
Businesses so long past; the other not allowing our Understanding the inward,
and particular Motives of such Actions, as are so near us. Yet according to my
Collections out of those ancient Remains that are left unto the World, and the
Conferences, Acts, and Instruments of latter Times, I will deliver the
Succession, and course of our Affairs, insomuch as shall be fit for the public
Understanding, without passion, or partiality; endeavoring to be of no other
side; then of Truth, as it shall appear to my Apprehension.

2. And though I had a Desire to have deduced this History from the Beginniug
of our first Kings, as they are delivered in their Catologue; yet finding their
Actions uncertainly delivered, and the Beginning of all eminent States to be as
uncertain, as the Heads of great Rivers, and that idle Antiquity, discovering
no Apparent Way beyond their Times, have ever delighted to point Men out into
imaginary Tracts of Fictions, and monstrous Originalls; I did put off that
Desire with this Consideration, that this space of five hundred years, which
the Government of twenty Kings, and two Sovereign Queens, was more than enough
for my and Ability; weighing withal, that it is but our Curiosity to look
further back into the Times past, than we can well discern, and whereof we can
neither have Proof nor Profit. Besides, it seems that God in his Providence
has bounded our Searches within the Compass of a few Ages, as if the same were
sufficient, both for Example, and Instruction in the Government of Men: For had
we the particular Occurrents of all Nations, and all Ages, it might more stuff,
but not better our Understanding. We shall find the same Correspondencies to
hold in the Actions of Men; Virtues and Vices the same; though rising and
falling according to the Worth, or Weakness of Governors; the Causes of the
Ruins, and Changes of Commonwealths to be alike, and the Train of Affairs
carried by the Precedent in a Course of Succession under like Figures.

3. But yet, for that this Chain of Affairs has a link of Dependency to the
former Times, it shall not be amiss, briefly to repeat the three Mutations in
the State foregoing this last Conquest, since the Time that Letters and
Christianity were here received, which left more certain Knowledge of Things
done, though not in that sort, as we can assuredly learn, either the Form of
the British Government under their Kings, or by what Rule, they held together;
whether their Petty Princes (whereof they had many) were subject to one
Monarch, or all Sovereign alike; whether any parties did Cantonize, or were
free Estates, or Commonwealths, as peradventute they might be, as well as the
Gauls, with whom they were one in Language, or the Germans, ancient Precedents
of like Liberties. For no doubt, the same Necessity that is the Mother of
Society, and Contriver of Men's Defenses, and Safeties, finds out like Forms of
Government, in like times, upon like Occasions. But insomuch, as is delivered
in these uncertain Antiquities, we find, this Isle was never, or never long
subject to one entire Monarch, but ruled by diverse Kings.

4. And so Caesar found it; and thereby found the easier Means to subdue it;
which was the first Dissolution of the State, after it had remained under the
Government of the Brittons (as say our Stories) one thousand and sixty years,
from Brutus to Cassibalan. And yet the State then seemed by this Conquest, to
lose little, besides their Savage Liberty, being reduced to a Civil Subjection;
For the Vanquisher sought not to extirpate the Nation, but to maintain and
improve it. And under this Government it remained almost five hundred years,
until the Division of the Roman Empire in the time of Theodosius; when it
became neglected, and recovered again the State of a Kingdom under Princes
partly British, and partly Romans, which by reason of continual Tumults and
Mutinies, seemed never to have held any, calm or flourishing Government worthy
the observing; and in the end Vortigern an Earl of the Cornwall. Bid 1. 14.
Guisses, abusing the Weakness of Constantius supplanted him, and obtained the
Kingdom: which the better to keep against Aurelius and Pendragon, the Sons of
Constantius, and also to oppose against the Invasion of the Picts and Scots he
called in the Saxons to his Aid.

5. Who entering this Land under the Conduct of Hengist and Horsus, gave the
occasion of the second, and indeed the most absolute Dissolution of the State.
For Vortigern, to establish the Kingdom in his own Line, and (as he thought to
strengthen himself with these Strangers, took to Wife Rowena.
Renix, the daughter of Hengist, (his own Wife living:) and by his dotage on
her, being a beautiful Lady, who knew to take the advantage of his love, gave
the Saxons those Preferments in the State, as the Brittons, neglected by him,
soon became a prey unto them: This Alliance, and the Fertility of the Land,
letting in so many of this populous, and Warlike Nation, that e're Men scarce
perceived their danger, they were undone: And notwithstanding the Combination
of the British Nobility, with the deposing of Vortigern, and Electing King his
Son Vortimer, a valiant Prince, who gave them many stout Battles; yet could
they not prevail against the Saxons thus established, but were forced to quit
their Country, and betake themselves to remote Mountains, and Deserts, leaving
All to the Invaders; Who after many Fortunes, dividing the Land into seven
Kingdoms, extinguished both the Religion, Language, and even the Name thereof.
And in this Heptarchy it continued, till Egbert, K. of the West Saxons, An.
828. being three hundred fifty years after their Entrance, subduing the other
Kings, obtained the whole Dominion to himself; And to raze out the Memory of a
Division Caused by an Edict the whole Kingdom to be called England, of the
Angles, a people, that possessed the middle part of this Island.

6. But neither he, nor his Successors quietly enjoyed it: For the Danes,
having been first called in to aid the King of Northumberland against the other
Kings, sorely infested the Land; and combining themselves with the Welsh, and
Scots prevailed so much, that from the reign of King Britric, Anno 387. they
continued to afflict the same the space of two hundred fifty five years; and in
the End by the negligent, and ill Government of King Ethelred, whose Luxury,
and Oppression had made way for Division, they got the absolute Dominion of the
Kingdom, and held it twenty six years by three of their Kings successively,
Canutus governed it twenty years and left it to Harold who reigned two years.
Canutus the second succeeded his Brother Harold, and at a Banquet at Lambeth,
either by Surfeit or Poison died in the Second year of his Reign: When straight
the People of the Land, by a sudden and general Massacre, redeemed themselves
from that odious Yoke of a Foreign Subjection, which was held to be the Third
Dissolution of this State. But I cannot see, how it should be so accounted,
seeing that this Canutus, never altered the Government; but embraced the same
Religion, maintained the Laws he found, and added many Constitutions for the
good of the Kingdom. And to get into the People's affections, he married Emma,
sometimes Wife to King Ethelred, and daughter to Richard Duke of Normandy; to
whom for his better strength, he had likewise given his Sister to Wife: And
then the short Time of the Government in the Succession of his two Sons seems
not to have bred any great Alteration in the state of the Kingdom; but only
in the Change of the person of the Prince, and the preferment of his Nation
before ours; which, by reason of the long foregoing wars, were made
incompatible of each other.

7. But yet this gave the Cause to that great, and last Mutation of State,
effected by the Norman. For King Etheldred, to make his party good against the
Invasion of the Danes, combined himself with Richard Duke of Normandy, married
his Sister Emma, and by her had Issue, Edward after King of England, entitled
the Confessor; who with his Brother were there brought up out of the dangers of
the Wars, and by the assistance of the Duke reconveyed over, after the death of
the last Canutus, and here invested in the Kingdom. For which Offices of
Kindness diverse Preferments were in way of Gratification, bestowed on the
Normans; as the Archbishopric of Canterbury, and other especial Places and
Dignities Ecclesiastical, in a manner throughout the whole Land; which prepared
an easier passage for the Invasion following; when the death of this good King
Edward without Issue to inherit, left the Succession doubtful, or else by the
Iniquity of times made it seem so. For Edgar surnamed Atheling, son of Edward
the Son of King Edmond Ironside, had his Claim neglected; Either in respect of
his Youth, which yet was no Bar to his Right? or for want of Means, and power
to oppose against the ambition of others; who having swaied the Fortune of the
time, under an easie-natured Prince, had Opportunity enough to work for
themselves: Although the Worthiness of his Grandfather, showed in the Defense
of his Country, might seem to deserve to have his Issue remembered in their
Right.

8. But the Earl Godwin, what in respect, that King Edward had matched with his
Daughter, and what with his own Greatness, and popularity, having long managed
the State of the Kingdom, made the Ascent easy for Harold his Son to get up
to the Crown; and by Crossing the right Line of Succession, called up
Destruction, and Misery, both upon his own Race, and the whole Kingdom, For
though Harold had a show of Title, as being the Son of Thira, sister to Canutus
King of England; Githa sister to Swain. Dan.
yet seeing all the Land had received an Oath upon the Massacre, and expulsion
of the Danes, never to have any King of that Nation to reign over them, it
might seem no lawful Claim. But yet the Favor of the people, which both his
person, and Valor had gotten, with the Necessity of the Time that required a
Man of Spirit, and Courage, to undertake the burden of war, and the Trouble,
which the World (they saw) was like to grow into, cast it upon him, with hope
to keep out the Misery of a foreign Subjection, and the Insolency of Strangers.

8. But the whole Course of things being overcast and set for Storms, and
Alteration, could not by any providence of Men be prevented. Though this new
King (who is said to have crowned himself) used all the Means, that a wife, and
valiant Prince could do, both for the well ordering of the State, and all
provisions for defense; yet the disjointed Affections of Men, tending to their
private Ends, and working several Ways to get up to their Hopes, either left
the Ship of the State, which contained them all, to the mercy of the Waves, and
every Man cast to save himself, where the greatest likelihood of Mastery
appeared; or else distracted with the ^error of the approaching Mischief,
failed in their Spirits, and courage to withstand it; For the Diligence of Men
becomes often dashed with their Fear in public Tumults, and with the very
Cogitation of the Evil to come.

9. And the first Man which began to afflict his new Government, was his own
younger Brother, Tosty; Toustain. D.
who for a former conceived Hatred, was easily set on by the Duke of Normandy,
and Baldwin Earl of Flanders, (whose Daughter he had married) to assail the
Isle of Wight, and to prepare the Way for the great After-work intended. And
having done much Mischief on the Coast of Kent, Harold with strong Navy forced
him to draw toward the North parts; where seeking to Land, he was repulsed by
the Earls Morcar, and Edwin, and forced to look Aid of the Scots, and after of
the King of Norway, whom he induced to invade this Kingdom with great store of
Men, and Shipping. These landing at Tinmouth, and discomfiting their first
Encounterers, marched into the heart of England without Resistance. But being
come near to Stamford, King Harold with a mighty army met them; and after long
Fight, with the Loss of much Blood, and his best Men, he finished that Action
with the Death of Tosty, and the King of Norway.

10. But from hence was he called with his wearied, and broken Forces to a more
fatal Business in the South. For now William Duke of Normandy, pretending a
Right, to the Crown of England, both by the Testament of the late King Edward,
and also by Parentage; upon the Advantage of the Time, and the Disfurnishment
of those parts, Landed at Hastings; Near to which Place was Fought that bloody
Battle, wherein Harold Valianty Fighting amidst his Enemies, Ended his Life,
and Reign, which was scarce of one Year; and the English, with the loss of
20000. Men, and the Flower of the Kingdom, became the miserable Prey of the
Normans.

11. But how so great a State as this, could be with one Blow subdued by so
small a Province in such sort, as it could never after come to make any general
Head against the Conqueror, may seem strange, and considerable: But the
Circumstances, with the Disposition of that Time, as may be Collected from the
Writers, that lived near it, may somewhat, though not altogether satisfy us in
that point. For they say, the People of the Kingdom were (by their being secure
from their Foreign Enemies the Danes, and their long Peace which had held in a
manner from the Death of Edmon Ironside, the space of fifty Years,) grown
neglective of Arms, and generally debauched with Luxury and Idleness; The
Clergy licentious, and only Literatura tumultuaria contenti, Scholae, non vitae
discebant, says Malmesbury; the Nobility given to Gluttony, Venery, and
Oppression; the Common sort to Drunkenness and all Disorder. And they say that
in the last Action of Harold at Stamford, the bravest Men perished: And himself
growing insolent after the Victory, retaining the Spoils without Distribution
to the Soldiers, made them discontent, and unruly; Or peradventure being not
inured to be Commanded by Martial Discipline, they were of themselves
unmanageable; and that coming to the Battle of Hastings with many mercenary
Men, and a discontented Army, there was not that Valor, and Resolution showed,
as was meet in so important an Occasion. Besides, the Normans had a peculiar
Militia, or Fight with Bows and Arrows, wherein they were Excellently
practiced; and the English, unacquainted with that Weapon, were altogether
unprovided for the Defense. And thus they excuse the shame of our Nation.

THE REIGN OF WILLIAM the I. Anno I.
12. BY these Advantages William, the base Son of Robert, Duke of Normandy,
having gotten the Victory in the Battle near Hastings, Marched without any
opposition toward London: Where the Earls Edwin, and Morcar Brothers of
eminent Dignity and Respect in the Kingdom, labored with all their Power in
soliciting the People for the Conservation of the State; And to have
Established Edgar Etheling, next of the Royal Issue in the Sovereignty,
whereunto the rest of the Nobility had likewise consented, had they not seen
the Bishops averse, or wavering. And all Men generally, transported with Fear,
or corrupted with new Hopes, running from themselves, and their endangered
Country, and striving who should be first to entertain the present Fortune,
sought to preoccupate each other. For straight upon his Approach to London the
Gates was set all open; the Archbishop of Canterbury Stigand with other
Bishops, the Nobility, Magistrates, and People, all rendered themselves, and
their Obedience unto him; and he, returning plausible Promises of his future
Government, was within a short Time after Crowned at Westminster by Aldred
Archbishop of York; for that Stigand was not held Canonically Invested in that
See, and yet was thought to have been a principal Adherent to this Enterprise.

13. Here (according to the accustomed Form) in his Coronation, the Bishops and
Barons of the Realm took their Oath to be his true and Loyal Subjects; and he
reciprocally being required thereunto by the Archbishop of York made his
personal Oath before the Altar of Saint Peter to defend the holy Church of God
and the Rectors of the same; to govern the universal people subject unto him
justly; with care to establish equal Laws, for the preservation of Justice, and
upright Judgment to be used amongst them; and taking Hostages for his more
Security, and Order for the Defense, and Government of his Kingdom.

14. At the opening of the Spring then next following he returns into Normandy;
so to settle his Affairs there, as they might not distract him from his
Business in England, which required his whole powers. And to leave all sure
behind him, he committed the Rule of the Kingdom in his Absence to Odo, Bishop
of Bayeux, his half-Brother by the Mothersside, and to his cozen Fitz-Osborn,
whom he had made Earl of Hereford: taking with him the chiefest Men, Natives,
of the State, who were likeliest to be Heads to a Revolt; as the ArchBishop
Stigand lately discontented, Edgar Atheling a Titular, Edwin and Morcar, with
many other Bishops and Noblemen. In his Absence, which was all that whole
Summer, nothing was here attempted against him, but only that Edric, surnamed
the Forrester, in the County of Hereford, called in the Kings of the Welsh to
his Aid, and Forraged only the remote Boders of that Country. The rest of the
Kingdom stood quiet, expecting what would become of that new World; wherein;
as yet, they found no great Alteration, their Laws and Liberties remaining
still the same, they did, and might hope by this Accession of a new Province,
the State of England would be enlarged in Dominion abroad, and not impaired in
profit at home; by reason the Nation was but small, and being a plentiful, and
not over-peopled Country they were not likely to impester them.

15. The King now grown to this power, soon settled his Estate in Normandy,
which in his Youth he had always found turbulent within, and overhardly
neighboured abroad, and secured him of that side of the World; wherein he was
much advantaged by the Time. For Philip the first, then King of France, was a
Child; who otherwise would never have suffered the Normans, being so stubborn,
and little affectionate to that Crown, to have grown to such Greatness; and
besides, was under the Curature of Baudovin Earl of Flanders, (his Uncle by the
Mother,) whose Daughter King William of England had to wife, which Alliance
indeed gave him the greatest Means to his Con^uest. Besides, he had made the
Pope most sure unto him; by promising if he subdued this Kingdom to hold it
of the Church; for which Alexander upon his enterprise sent him a Banner, and
a Hair of Saint Peter. He held strict Amity also with the Princes of France,
that bordered upon him, and might interrupt his Affairs; as with the Earls of
Anjou, Poictou, Main, Ponthieu, Bologne, and others; to every one of whom he
had promised Lands in England upon their Aids lent him. And to keep fair with
the State of France in general, he engaged himself to their King to hold this
Kingdom from him, and to do him homage for the same; by which means he so
strongly under. set himself as made his Fortune such as it was.

16. And now having disposed his Affairs in Normandy; he returns toward Winter
into England; Where he was to satisfy three sorts of men. First the especial
Adventurers in the Action; Secondly those of his own People, whose Merits or
Nearness deserved Recompense; whereof the Number being so great, many must have
their Expectations Fed, though not satisfied; Thirdly the People of this
Kingdom, by whom he must now subsist. For being not able with his own Nation so
to People the same, as to defend it, if he should proceed to a general
Extirpation of the Natural Inhabitants, he was likewise to give them
Satisfaction: Wherein he had more to do than in his Battle at Hastings; seeing
all Remunerations with discharge of Moneys must be raised out of the Stock of
the Kingdom, (which could not be pleasing to the State in general.) And all
Preferments, and Dignities conferred on his, must be either by Vacancies, or
displacing others; which needs must breed very feeling Grievances in
particular. And yet we find no great Men thrust out of their Rooms, but such as
put themselves out, by their Revolting after his Establishment in the Crown.

17. In the second Year of his Reign no Exaction was made to raise Treasure for
these Satisfactions: Anno 2.
so that it seems he contented himself, and his, for the time, only with what
he found here ready; and with filling up, their Places, who were slain in these
two last Battles, or fled, (as many were) out of the Kingdom with the Sons of
Harold. But the English Nobility, incompatible of these new Concurrents, found
notwithstanding a Disproportion of Grace, and a darkning of their Dignities by
the Interposition of so many, as must needs lessen their Light. And doubting
daily to be more impaired in Honor, and Estate, all the Chiefest of them
conspired, and fled; some into Scotland, some into Denmark, to try, if by Aid
from abroad they might recover themselves, and their Greatness again at home.

18. Amongst these the Chiefest was Edgar Atheling, (entitled Englands Darling,
with showed the Peoples Zeal to his Blood;) and with him (besides his Mother
Agatha, and his two Sisters, Christine, and Margaret,) fled the Earls Edwin and
Morcar, Marleswin, Hereward, Gospatric, and Siward, and shortly after Stigand,
and Aldred, the two Archbishops, with many other Noblemen, and diverse of the
Clergy. Those, that fled into Scotland, were all Hospitably received of King
Malcolm; whom it concerned to look to his own, his Neighbor's House being thus
on Fire; and to succor a Party against so dangerous an Incommer: Which made
him not only to entertain them, but to enter League with them for the Public
safety. And to combine himself the more firmly, he Married Margaret, the Sister
of Edgar, by whom the Blood of our ancient Saxon Kings was conjoined with the
Norman in Henry the Second, and so became English again.

19. These Noblemen, with the Aid of the Scots, Anno 3.
and Danes, in the third year of this King's Reign raised great Commotions in
the North beyond Humber, and wrought very valiantly themselves to recover their
lost Country. But now it being too late, and the Occasion not taken, before the
settling of the Government, whilst it was new, and brandling, they prevailed
nothing, but gave Advantage to the Conqueror to make himself more then he was,
for all Conspiracies of Subjects, that succeed not, advance the Sovereignty:
And nothing gave Root to the Normans planting here more, then the petty Revolts
made by scattered Troops in several parts, begun without Order, and weakly
seconded without Resolution; whereas nothing could be done for the general
Recovery, but by the general rising of the People, which seldom we see to
happen. And for this the new King had taken good Order: First by disarming
them; then by sorbidding them Assemblies, and all secret Intercourse upon heavy
Penalties; that every Man at the closing of the Day, by the Warning of a Bell,
should cover his Fire, and go to bed; by making them to be bound Pledges one
for another, to answer for their Obedience and Loyalty; by building diverse
Fortresses in several parts of the Kingdom, to awe the Country, and to hold
them in, with many such like provisions.

20. So that these Lords, though they did, as they might, hold him doing in the
North, and imbroil themselves in an unsuccessful Business, yet he having all
the South settled under his Power, with well practiced, and prepared Forces,
could not but needs tire and consume them in the end; and in the mean Time
invest the Normans in their Rooms, and possessions, forfeited by this Attempt:
As the Earldom, and all the Lands, which Edwin held in Yorkshire, were given to
Alanus Earl of Britain, his Nephew; the Archbishopric of Canterbury,
conferred on Lanfranc an Italian; That of York on Thomas, his Chaplain, a
Norman; and all the rest both of the Clergy, and others, which fled, and were
out, had likewise their Places supplied by Normans.

21. And now the King having appeased the Commotion in the West, where the Sons
of Harold had landed with Forces out of Ireland, and Wales, and also represt
the Rebellion of Oxford, he takes his Journey in Person Northward with all
Expedition; least the Enemy there should grow too great in Heart, and Opinion,
by the Defeat of his Lieutenant with 700 Normans at Durham, and the great
Slaughter of his People made at York. Where, at his first coming, he so
wrought, as he corrupted the Generals of the Danes with Money, and sent them
well contented away; and then set upon the Army of the Earls, weakened both in
Strength and Hope, by this Departure of their Confederates, and put them to
Flight: Which done, he utterly wasted, and laid desolate all that goodly
Country, between York and Durham, the space of Sixty Miles, that it might be no
more a Succor to the Revolter. And the like Course he used on all the Coasts,
where any certain Landings were known, thereby to prevent Invasions; and so
returned to London: where he seized into his Hands all the Plate, Jewels, and
Treasure within all the Monasteries of England; pretending that the Rebels, and
their Assisters, had conveyed their Riches into these Religious Houses, as into
Places Privileged, and free from Seizure, to defraud him of it.

22. Most of the Lords, after this great Defeat in the North, came in upon
Public Faith given them, and were conducted to Barkamstead by the Abbot
Frederick. Where some write, that the King again took a personal Oath before
the Archbishop Lanfranc, and the Lords, to observe the Ancient Laws of the
Realm Established by his Noble Predecessors, the Kings of England; and
especially those of Saint Edward: And all the Lords, upon their Oath, and
submission, were then reconciled unto him, and thereupon held themselves quiet
for a Time. But whether it were, that they found not their Entertainment such,
as they expected; or that they had received Intelligence of new Hopes from
abroad; or that Edgar, who was still in Scotland, had solicited them upon
Promise of fresh Succors to aid him; or howsoever it was; many of them again
Conspired, contrary to their Oaths, and went out. The Earl Edwin, making
toward Scotland, was Murdered by his own People by the way. The Earls Morcar,
and Hereward, betook them to the Isle of Ely; meaning to make good that Place
for that Winter; whither also came the Earl Siward, and the Bishop of Durham
out of Scotland. But the King, who was no Time giver to growing Dangers, beset
all the Isle with flat Boats on the East, and made a Bridge of a Mile long on
the West, and safely brought in his People upon the Enemy; who seeing
themselves surprised, yielded them all to the King's Mercy; Except Hereward, (a
man of great Valor and Courage) who with his Soldiers made a Retreat through
the Fenns, and Escaped into Scotland. The Rest were sent to diverse Prisons,
where they died, or remained during the King's Life.

23. We find, that those Lords, who remained Loyal upon their last Submission,
were all employed, and well graced by the King: As Edric the Forrester, that
was the first Revolter in his Reign, was held in especial Favor, and Trust
near about him; Gospatric was made Earl of Northumberland, and sent against
Malcolm, who in this time takes Advantage of subdue the Countries of Tisdall,
Cleveland, and Cumberland. Waltheof, the Son of the Earl Siward, he so highly
Estemeed, as he Married him to his Niece Judith; Though he were a Principal
Actor in this last Commotion, and in the Defense of the City of York against
him, and is said, to have stricken off the Heads of diverse Normans one by one,
as they entered upon a Breach, to the great Admiration of all Men: By which
Valor of his, he ransomed the Offense he had made, and grew to that great
Grace with the King; who therein showed a Noble, and Magnanimous Nature, to
honor Virtue even in his Enemies.

24. And now there rested nothing, for the general Quieting of the Kingdom, but
only the Suppression of Malcolm King of Scots, the greatest Kindlefire of all
these Conspiracies in the North parts, and the only Fefuge for all, that were
discontented and mutinous in this State. Against him the King led such mighty
Forces, both by Sea, and Land, as Malcolm rather then to adventure Battle, was
content to make his Peace; and not only to give up Hostages for securing the
same, but also to do him Homage for the Kingdom of Scotland. And so all his
Home-Wars were ended Regni Anno 6. Anno. 6.
Saving only in Anno 15. he levied a Puissant Army, and subdued Wales; which
Business held him not long. For the Rest of his Government here, he had no more
to do here with the Sword, though he had it always abroad during his whole
Reign.

25. Now for the Doubt, he might have of the great Men of the Kingdom, who by
Power, or Love were aptest to disturb his Government, it was in this sort taken
away. First by the Submission of Edgar Atheling, who Anno 7. Anno 7.
was restored into Grace, and had a fair Maintenance, which held him ever after
quiet: Then by those, whom the Prisons kept from Attempting any more: And
lastly by the Revealing of a new Conspiracy, contrived at a Marriage, between
Ralph de Waher Earl of Norfolk, Roger Fitz-Osborn the Son of William, Cousin
and especial Councellor to the King.
and Suffolk, and his new Kinswoman, the Sister of Roger, the Young Earl of
Hereford: At which Solemnization in their Banqueting, and Jollity, the two
Earls Normans, with Waltheof, and diverse English, Plotted to call in the Danes
again, and to make away the King: Upon which Discovery, they were all
apprehended (except the Earl of Norfolk, who fled the Land;) and died some in
Prison, and some on the Scaffold.

26. The The Danes being on the Coasts with 200 Sail, hearing how their
Confederates had sped, and the great Preparations the King had made, after some
spoils taken on the Coast of England, and Flanders, returned home, and never
after infested this Kingdom. Though in Anno 20 of this King, there was a great
Rumor of their fresh Preparations for a new Invasion; which made him entertain
a great number of Frenchmen, besides Normans, which he brought into England
about Harvest, and held the most part of them all the Winter to the great
Charge of the Kingdom. But it came to nothing; For the Wind held so long
against the Danish Navy, consisting of about 1000 Sail, as it overthrew their
intended Action, and freed both the King, and his Successors from future Fears
that way for ever after.

27. The Foreign Wars he had, were all about his Dominions in France, and raised
by his own Son Robert, whom he had left his Leiutenant Governor of the Duchy
of Normandy, and the County of Maine. Where, by his Fathers Absence, tasteing
the Glory of Command, he grew to assume into his own Power the Sovereign Rule
of the Province; caused the Barons there to do him Homage, as Duke, not as
Leiutenant; and put himself wholly under the Protection of the King of France;
who was not a little pleased, to apprehend so good an Occasion, to foster a
Division, in the House of so great and near a Neighbor; who was now grown
fearful, and dangerous, to all the Princes about him; and therefore spared for
uo Cost to set forward this Work. The King, understanding the Fire thus Kindled
in his own House, whilst he labored to quench that himself had made in
Others; hasts with his Forces into Normandy, to have surprised his Son. Who,
advertised of his Coming, furnished with 2000. Men at Arms, by the King of
France, put himself in Ambush, where his Father should pass, and set upon him
so Fiercely, as he Defeited most of his People, and in the Press happened to
encounter with himself; whom he unhorsed, and wounded in the Arms with his
Lance. But perceiving by his Voice it was his Father, he hasted to lift him up
again to his Horse, craving most humble Pardon for his Offense, which the King
seeing in what Case he was, easily granted, and received him into Grace, with
whom, and with his Son William, (who was likewise hurt in the Skirmish) he
retired to Roan, and after being there cured of his Hurt, returned again into
England.

28. Where he was no sooner arrived, but he heard, that his Son was again
Revolted, Treated the Normans ill, and renounced his Father's Sovereignty over
that Province; which caused his little Stay in England for that time, but only
to prepare for his Return into Normandy. Whither passing, he was by Tempest
driven, on the Coast of Spain; and there is said to have Fought in Battle
against the Sarasnis. Afterward arriving at Bourdeaux, his Son Robert came,
and submitted himself the second time; whom now he took with him into England,
to frame him to a better Obedience, by employing him here for a Season; and
then sent him back again, with his Youngest Son Harry, (whom he more trusted)
into Normandy; where he held himself quiet a while, and gave his Father some
small Breathing time to dispose of the Affairs of this Kingdom.

29. But it was not long, e're new Occasions of greater Troubles grew up: which
took by this means. The two Princes, Robert, and Henry, went to Visit and
salute the King of France at Couflans; where being seasted certain Days, upon
an After-dinner, Henry wan so much at Chess of Louis the King's eldest Son,
that he grew so far into Choler, as he called him the Son of a Bastard, and
threw the Chess in his Face. Henry takes up the Chess-board, and struck Louis
with that Force, as he drew Blood, and had killed him, had it not been for his
Brother Robert, who came in in the mean time, and interposed himself; whereupon
they suddenly took Horse, and with much a do saved themselves at Pontoise
from the King's People, that pursued them.

30. This Quarrel arising upon the intermeeting of these Princes, (which is a
thing, that seldom breeds good Blood amongst them) reinkindled a Heat of more
Rancor in the Fathers, and set a mighty Fire between the two Kingdoms; which
made the first War, the English, and French had together, whereupon followed
many others. For presently the King of France complots again with Robert,
enters into Normandy, and takes the City of Vernon. The King of England invades
France, subdues the Country on Xaintoign, and Poitou, and returns to Roan;
Where the third time his Son Robert is reconciled unto him; which much
disappointeth, and vexes the King of France. Who hereupon Summons the King of
England, to come and do him Homage for the Kingdom of England: Which he refused
to do; saying, that he held it of none, but of God, and his Sword: But yet
offering to do him Homage, for the Duchy of Normandy, it would not satisfy
the King of France; who was willing to make any Occasion the Motive to set upon
him: And again he invaded his Territories; but which more loss than Profit. In
the End they conclude a little unperfect Peace together; which held no longer,
than King William had recovered a Sickness, whereinto by Reason of his Years,
Travel, and Fatness, he was lately fallen. At which Time the King of France,
(then Young, and Lusty) jesting at his great Belly, whereof he said he lay in
at Roan; so irritated him, as being recovered, he gathered all his Forces,
entered into France, in the Chiefest Time of their Fruits, and came even before
Paris; spoiling, and burning all in his way: Where with Heat and Toil, he fell
into a Relapse, returned to Roan, Anno. 20.
and there made an End, of his Wars, and Life, after he had held this Kingdom
twenty years and ten Months.

31. Now concerning his Government in Peace, and the Course he held in
Establishing the Kingdom thus gotten; first he examines the English Laws, which
were then composed of Merchenlage, Danelage, and Westfaxlage: Whereof some he
abrogated, and some allowed, adding other of Normandy; especially such, as made
for the Preservation of the Peace, which most imported him to look unto: And
these Laws thus reformed he caused to be all Translated, and and Written into
the Norman Tongue; hereby to draw the People of the Kingdom, to learn that
Language for their own Need, that the two Nations might the better grow
together and become one; seeing a difference of Speech would continue a
difference of Affections. Wherein he attained not his Desire; nor ever was it
in the Power of any Conqueror so to do, without the universal Extirpation of
the Land-bred People: Who being so far in number (as they were) above the
Invaders, both carry the main of the Language, and also in few Years, make them
to become theirs, that subdued them. But yet upon these Laws thus Established
by so prudent a Prince, this free, and Fierce Nation, was so well held in
Peace, and Obedience, as his Successors, with some Abatement of Rigor, and
Prerogative, have ever since continued a most Glorious Sovereignty over the
same.

32. And for that he would be well, and certainly supplied with Treasure, which
his great Wars and Entertainments required, he took a most provident Course for
reforming the Fisque or Exchequer, and the ordering, and raising of his
Revenues; Endeavoring to make, and know the utmost of his Estate. And
therefore he employed a most discreet Choice of Men to survey the whole
Kingdom, and to take the Particulars of his own, and every Man's Ability, the
quantity, and nature of Lands, and Possessions, with the Discriptions, Bounds,
and Divisions of Shires, and Hundreds within the same. And this was drawn into
one Book, and brought into his AErarium, the Exchequer, (so called of the
Table, whereat the Officers sat; before termed the Talce) and the same
entitled Doomesday-Book. Liber Iudiciarius, (says Gervasius) the Judgment
Book, that was to decide all Doubts concerning these Particulars.

33. All the Forests, and Chases throughout the Kingdom, he took into his
proper Possession, and exempted them, from being under any other Law, than his
own Pleasure, to serve as Penetralia Regnum, the withdrawing Chambers of Kings,
to recreate them after their serious Labors in the State; where none might
presume, to have to do, and where all Punishments, and Pardons of Delinquents
were to be Disposed by himself absolutely, and the former Customs abrogated.
And to make his Command the more, he increased the Number of them in all parts
of the Land; and on the South-Coast dispeopled the Country for above thirty
Miles space; making of old inhabited Possessions a new Forest; Inflicting
great Punishments for Hunting his Dear, whereby he much advanced his Revenue:
which was the greatest Act of Concussion, and Tyranny, he committed in his
Government. And the same Course held almost every King near the Conquest. For
Henry the first proceeded with such Violence, as to make a Law, that if any Man
killed the Kings Deer in his own Woods, he should forfeit his Woods to the
King. But King Stephen having need of the Peoples Favor repealed that Law. And
in the End this Grievance, amongst others, after much Bloodshed in the Kingdom
was allayed by the Charter of Forests, granted by Henry III. For other
Possessions he permitted those, which held them before his Coming, to continue
them quietly in the same manner, and took none, but from such, as after his
Possession of the Crown, Rebelled against him, or were slain in the Wars.

34. He imposed no new Taxations on the State, and used those he found very
moderately: As Danegelt being a Tax raised by the former Kings, of two
Shillings upon every Hilde-Land, to maintain the Wars against the Danes, he
would not have it made an Annual payment, but only taken upon urgent Occasion:
Gervasins.
And it was seldom gathered in his Time, or his Successors. Scutagium, or
Escuage, which was also then an Imposition of Money, upon every Knight's Fee
(afterward only employed for the Service in Scotland) was never Levied, but in
Like Occasions, for Stipends, and Donatives to Soldiers.

35. Only one Exaction he he was forced to raise, to cure a Mischief; which
arose by his Means. In the beginning of this Reign, the Rancor of the English
toward the New-come Normans was such, as finding them single in Woods, and
remote Places, they secretly murdered them; and the Deed doers, for any the
severest Courses taken, could never be discovered. Whereupon it was ordained,
that the Hundred, wherein a Norman was found slain, and the Murder not taken,
should be condemned to pay the King, some thirty-six pounds, and some twenty
eight pounds, according to the Quantity of the Hundred. And this was done to
the End, the Punishment, being generally inflicted, it might particularly deter
them, and hasten the Discovery of the Malefactor, by whom so many must
otherwise be interessed. This Mulct, and the seizing into his Hands the Church
Treasure before-noted, (though both were done by the especial commanding
Warrant of Necessity) were much taken to heart in the Kingdom, both by the
Clergy, and Common People.

36. And yet otherwise was he to both very gracious, and beneficial. For upon
petition made unto him, he relieved the Oppression of such as were Tenants at
will of their Lords, which were a very great Number, and began after this
manner. All those, who were discovered to have had a Hand in any Rebellion, and
were pardoned, only to enjoy the Benefit of Life, having all their Livelihood
taken from them, became Vassails unto those Lords, to whom the Possessions were
given of all such Lands, as were forfeited by Attainders. And if by their
diligent Service they could attain any Portion of Ground, they held it, but
only so long, as it pleased their Lords, without having any Estate for
themselves, or their Children; and were oftentimes miserably cast out upon the
sudden, contrary to Promise, upon any small Displeasure. Whereupon it was
ordained, that whatsoever they had obtained of their Lords by any obsequious
Service, or agreed for upon any Lawful Pact, they should hold by an inviolable
Law during their own Lives.

37. And for the Clergy other than in this one Act, he maintained all their
Immunities, and Privileges, and they grew very much under him. But this (it
seems) was the Cause, that made them so much disfigure his Worthiness, and
leave his Memory in so black Colors to Posterity, as they did, in delineating
his Tyranny, Rigor, and Oppression; when the Nature, and Necessary Disposition
of his Affairs do much excuse him therein; and show that he was, a Prince of a
most active Virtue; whose Abilities of Nature were equal to his Undertakings of
Fortune, as preordained for so great a Work. And though he might have some
Advantage of the Time, wherein we often see Men prevail more by the
Imbecilities of others, than their own Worth: Yet let those Times be well
examined, his Strength and Eminency (if we take his just Measure,) where of an
exceeding Proportion. Neither wanted he those Encounters and Concurrences of
sufficient able Princes, his Neighbors, to put him to the Trial thereof;
having on one side the French to grapple withal, on the other the Dane, far
mightier in People, and Shipping than himself, strongly sided in the Kingdom,
as greedy to recover their former Footing here, as ever, and as well, or better
prepared.

38. But this name of Conquest (which ever imports Violience, and Misery) is of
so harsh a found, and so odious in nature, as a people subdued seldom gives the
Conqueror his due, though never so worthy: And especially to a Stranger, whom
only time must naturalize, and let in by degrees into their Liking and good
Opinion: Wherein also this King was greatly advantaged by reason of his twenty
years Government, which had much impaired the Memory of former Customs in the
younger sort, and well inured the elder to the present Usances and Form of
State: Whereby the Rule was made more easy to his Sons, who though they were far
inferior to him in Worth, were a little better beloved then he; and the rather
for that they were content somewhat to unwrest the Sovereignty from the Height,
whereunto he had strained it; which brought the State to a better proportion of
Harmony.

39. Of those, who were the especial Men of Employment in his Reign, time has
shut us out from the knowledge of many; it being in the Fortune of Kings, to
have the Names, and Memory of their Counselors (like Rivers in the Ocean)
Buried in their Glory. Yet these we find principally mentioned in Stories.
First, William Fitz-Osborne Earl of Hereford, the especial Mover and Counselor
of this Voyage of England; reported also to have furnished forty Ships at his
own Charge for the Enterprise. Odo Bishop of Bayeux, and Earl of Kent,
sometimes his Viceroy in England; and seems also to have managed the Finances;
but of such excessive Avarice, that he gathered so much Treasure, as he went
about to buy the Papacy; and attempting to go to Rome about the same, the King
staid him at Home in a fair Prison; and excused the matter (upon Exclamation
made) in this sort, that he only Imprisoned the Earl of Kent, not the Bishop of
Bayeux. Beside he had Lanfranc, a Man of universal Learning, and an excellent
Lawyer, Born in Lumbardy, who peradventure might introduce something of the
Constitutions of that Province, to the making up our Laws, which in many things
seem to participate with theirs. And no doubt he had many others else: For
being of a strong Constitution of Judgment, he could not but be strongly
furnished in that kind; seeing ever weak Princes, have weak Sides; and our most
renowed Kings have been best underset with Counsel, and happily served with the
ablest Officers.

40. He had a fair issue by Maud his Wife; Four Sons, and Five Daughters. To
Robert his Eldest Son he left the Duchy of Normandy; to William the Kingdom of
England; and to Henry his Treasure, with an Annual Pension of 8000. pounds to
be paid him by his two Brothers. Richard, that was his Second Son, Died in his
Youth, of a surfeit taken by Hunting in the New Forest, and began the fatal
Misfortune, that followed, of that place, by the Death of King William the
Second, there slain with an Arrow; and of Richard the Son of Robert Duke of
Normandy, that brake his Neck. His eldest Daughter Cicilia, became a Nun.
Constance Married to the Earl of Britain; Adela to Stephen, Earl of Bloys,
who likewise became a Nun in her Age: such was their great Devotion, and so
much were these Solitary Retirements affected in those times, by the greatest
Ladies. Another was Affianced to Alfonsus King of Galicia; who with the other
Sister promised to Harold, Died before Marriage.

41. What he was in the Circle of himself, in his own continent, we find him of
an even, or middle Stature, comely Personage, of good presence, Riding,
Sitting, or Standing, till his Corpulency gathering upon him in his latter Age,
made him somewhat unwieldy; of so strong a Constitution, that he was never
Sickly, till a few Months before his Death; His Strength such, as few Men could
draw his Bow; and being about Fifty One of his Age, when he subdued this
Kingdom, it seems by his continual Actions, he felt not the Weight of Years
upon him, till his last Year.

42. His Mind was no less excellently composed, and we see it the fairest drawn
in his Actions; wherein his Mercy and Clemency (the brightest Stars in the
Sphere of Majesty) appeared (next to his great Devotion) above all his other
Virtues, by the often pardoning, and receiving into Grace those, who had
forfeited their Loyalty, and most dangerously Rebelled against him: Seeming to
hold Submission satisfactory for the greatest Offense; and that he sought to
extinguish Men's Eenterprises, but not themselves. For we find, but one great
Nobleman executed in all his Reign; and that was the Earl Waltheof, who had
twice falsified his Faith before: And those, whom he had held Prisoners in
Normandy, as the Earls Morcar, and Siward, with Wolfnothus, the Brother of
Harold, and diverse others, upon Compassion of their Endurance, he released, a
little before his Death.

43. Besides he was as far from Suspicion as from Cowardice; and of that
Confidence (an especial Note of his Magnanimity) has he gave Edgar, his
Competitor in the Crown, the Liberty of this Court; and upon his suit, sent him
well furnished to the Holy War; where he so Nobly behaved himself, as he
attained to great Estimation with the Emperors of Greece, and Almain: Which
might have been held dangerous in respect of his Alliances that way, being
Grandchild to Henry the third Emperor. But these may be as well Virtues of
the Time, as of Men; and so the Age must have part of this Commendation.

FINIS.
Books Printed for SAMUEL KEBLE at the Turk Head in Fleestreet.
EPICTETI Enchiridion: Or the most Excellent Morals of Epictetus made English
in a Poetical Paraphrase.

History of the Bible Lively described in 120 Cuts or Figures 120.120.

The Innocent Lady.

Degrees of Marriage, that which is Ordered to be had in all Churches.

Preparation to a Holy Life or Devotion for Families and Private Persons by the
Author of the Weeks Preparatin.ation.

A Collection of Private Form of Prayers out of the Common Prayer Book, for
Morning, Noon, and Night, and other special Occasions; being in a different
Method from any former: By the Author of the Weeks Preparation to the
Sacrement. Together with the Holy Feast and Fasts, as they are observed in the
Church of England Explained, and the Reasons why they are yearly Celebrated.

A Table to all the Epistles and Gospels in the Book of Common Prayer, so that
you may Find any Text of Scripture, being contained in them. This Table may be
put in your Common Prayer Book without new binding.

Rules for our more Devout Behavior in the time of Divine Service in the
Church of England.

An Explanation of the Terms Order and Usefullness of the Liturgy of the Church
of England. By way of Question and Answer, recommanded to be learned after the
Church Catechism.

A Persuasive to the stricter Observation of the Lords Day in pursuance of his
Majesty Order and Direction to Preachers. By Matthew Bryan. LL. D.

Books Printed for and Sold by D. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar.
A New Method and Extraordinary Invention to Dress Horses and work them
according to Nature as also to Perfect Nature by the Subtilty of Art, which was
never found out. But by His Grace the Duke of Newcastle.

Novae Hypotheseos ad Explicands Febrium Intermittentium Symptomata and typos
Excogitatae hypotyposis una cum AEtiologia Remediorum Speciatim vero de
Curatione per Curticem Peruvianum Accessiti Dissertatiuncula de Intestinorum
motu Periscaltico. Authore Gulielmo Cole. M. D.

Epistolae Medinciales variis Occasionibus Conscriptae Authore Richardo Carr.
M. D.

The Reading of the Famous and Learned Robert Callis Esquire on the Statute of the
23 of Henry the Eight Cap. 5. Of Sewers, as it was delivered by him at Gray's
Inn in August 1622. The Second Edition Enlarged with the several Judgments and
Resolutions of the Reverend Judges upon the Laws of Sewers and other Remarques
not before Published with a new Table to the whole.

Rules for Explaining and Decyphering all manner of Secret Writing, plain and
Demonstrative, with Exact Methods for Understanding Intimation by Signs,
Gestures, or Speech; Also an Account of the Secret ways of Conveying, Written
Messages, Discovered by Tritbenrius Schottus, Lord Fran, Bacon, Bishop
Wilkings, etc. with Exact Tables and Examples. By I. F.

ADVERTISSEMENT:
THE Slaughter of the Innocents by Herod. A Poem Written in Italian by the
Famous Italian Poet the Cavalier Marino. Translated by T. R. Printed for S. M.
And to be Sold by Sam. Keble at the Turk- Heads in Fleestreet, and D. Brown at
the Blak-Swan without Temple Bar.


