IRELANDS TRAGICAL TYRANNY: SENT OVER IN TWO LETTERS, BY A SPEEHlesse Damzell,
which landed at Miniard upon the 18. day Jan. 1642. wherein is plainly and
truly shown, what Cruelty has possessed the Irish Rebels hearts, and how
barbarously they have dealt with her: first how they defloured her body, and
after tore the hair from her head, And lastly, how they cut out her tongue;
and one of her hands for resisting them.

ALSO, HOW THE WOLVES DESTROYED Mr. THOMAS ADAMS, his Wife and Children, to the
number of fourteen persons in one night, being constrained to forsake their
habitation. With a true Relation of other remarkable Passages, performed by the
blood-thirsty Rebels.

These Letters were sent from the Damzels Father out of Ireland, to her Uncle
Robinson, who lives near unto Miniard in Summerset-shire.

LONDON, Printed for TL, 1642.

A COPY OF THE First Letter which was sent by the speechless Damzell to her
Uncle, from her Father.
Dear and loving Brother with weeping eyes, and bleeding heart, I am enforced
to write unto you the Cause of my unparalled heaviness: I have before this
time sent you three several Letters; to the which you sent me back answer that
you could not believe that which was written to be true. But alas brother, the
world is now grown to such a pass, that men will not believe any thing to be
true, unless it be done upon their own persons, or in their own houses.
Therefore for your further satisfaction, I have sent you my only daughter, with
two letters, that you may with a lamenting heart behold her sorrow: there may
you see the body of her, whom the villains abused: there may you see in what
manner her hair was torn from her head, because she would not yield to their
lust: there may you discern how her hair was cut off, because she sought to
resist their tyrannical cruelty: there may you also perceive, how her tongue
was cut out of her mouth, because she would not blaspheme against her Maker.
This woeful spectacle have I sent unto you, that when you have seen her
perplexity that she is in, you may bewail her calamities: and these Letters
have I sent by her, because her tongue is cut out, that she cannot express her
mind. So hoping that you will with patience peruse (...) lines, and the other
Letter. I remain your faithful brother, till death gives end to my life,

John Robinson*
From London Derry* Jan. 18. 1642*
THE Copy of the second Letter which was sent to the speechless Damzell.
Upon the eighth day of this present month of Jan. a great part of the Irish
Rebels, being seven score in number, came to the House of Mr. Thomas Adams an
English man who had long time lived in fear of their coming, and having in
readiness provided a way out of his back-doore: whereby that himself and the
rest of his Household might escape the enemies fury.

On the backside of the house there was a running River, over which they had
placed a Drawbridge, that they might at any time weigh up and down, according
as their need required.

On the forepart of the house they had framed a goodly prospect, that they
might the better descern the enemies approach; in the house was Ammunition,
powder and shot, muskets, and other weapons sufficient to furnish 30. men.

About the house were four goodly Ricks of wheat, with two great barns full of
other grain, besides in the stables there were 12. stout horses some that
belonged to the Plow, and some for other uses, and four yoke of Oxen at the
staul with abundance of victual, and all manner of good household stuff, all
which was consumed in a moment of time by the Rebellious Irish, as you shall
hear in the following discourse.

Now for the better safeguard of the house, and family, Mr. Adams, always kept
one on purpose to watch through the Prospect, but the Rebels being grounded in
villainy, had by some means learned where the house stood, and how it was
furnished, and therefore went about the number of twenty first, and came within
sight of the house, which when the watchman had taken view of, he m^de his
Master acquainted with the same, who presently gave Command that every man in
the house should prepare for battle; for why, said he, J see there are but
twenty in sight of the Rebels, and we are thirty in number: let it never be
said, that we will flee from them, and forsake all that ever we have for fear
of them that cannot hurt us.

You know that one stroke from the hand of a true man, gains more victory then
the force of thieves.

Therefore let us approve our selves to be bold hearted Englishmen, and fight
for our Countries honor against these Papisticall enemies of truth. At which
manly resolution, every one of his menservants betook himself to his musket,
and liking so well of their masterr forwardness, every man seemed so
courageous, as if they had no fear of death at all: by tha^ time the
treacherous Rebels were come within gun shot of the house, they marched 4
abrest, and five in rank, and made an assault upon the house.

Whereupon the Master of the house and his men, having their muskets charged in
readiness, gave fire upon them out at the windows, and slew six of the twenty
at the first valley of shot; the other sixscore of the Rebels which lay in
ambush, hearing the Guns make such a rattling noise, knew that their fellows
were in hot service, made all speed that might be toward the house, who were
presently descried by the watchman, which cried out with a loud voice, O
Master now seek to save your self, or else we are all dead men. When the Master
and his men perceived themselves in such a grievous straight, they kept fast the
fore doors, and fled out at the back door, and some over the draw-bridg,
together with the Mistress and her Children, and the Maidservants all in
general, hoping thereby to save their lives. But see how they ran out of one
danger into another, the men because they were constrained to help the women
kind, cast away all their arms, that the enemy might not overtake them in
running, and so for succor they ran into a wood to hide themselves from their
following foes, and having gathered together a deal of Fern, they made them
lodging under the trees: in which miserable night the Mistress was delivered of
a man-child in that desert place. But here comes the grief of all, it chanced
so that in the dead time of the night, a Wolf that had bin chased the day
before, coming near unto the place where these distressed people lay, and
having scented them came to them, and ceised upon one of the maids, and bit her
by the arm, and by the left breast, before she could make any means to shift
for her self.

At last, crying out for help, one of the men which had a sword, drew it to
save the maids life, The subtle wolf, finding himself like to be over-matcht,
ran straightways to asleep hill, and sat thereon, and therwithall made such a
howling noise, that he called such a number of wolves together, that all the
power they had was not able to resist them, some that had swo^ds fought for
themselves, and some that could climb got upon trees, the rest were torn in
pieces by the ravening wolvs, to the number of 14. amongst the rest, the tender
mother and her newborn infant served to suffice the hungry maws of the
devouring monstrous wolves. The next day went forth of the town of Londonderry
500. ^rmed men, thinking to have met with the Rebels, but they were too swift
of foot for them: but as they passed through the wood, they beheld what was
done by the wolves. There might they see the blood of Christians which was
spilt by means of wolves and Cany bals. Their hearts, livers, and entrails torn
in pieces with other woeful objects.

Thus gentle brother have I sent you the cause of my delay in my mournful
Letters, hoping that the next time that I write to you, to send you better
news, otherwise would I might never live to write more.

Your distressed Brother John Robinson.

FINIS.

