THE Wonder of the World; BEING A perfect Relation of a young Maid, about
eighteen years of age, which has not tasted of any Food this two and fifty
weeks, from this present day of my Writing, December, 22. Which may well be
called a Wonder of Wonders.

Wherein is Related the whole truth, and no more: as it was taken from the
mouth of the Damsel and her Mother; Being a true Account of her Condition.

Written by Thomas Robins B. of D. a VVellwisher to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Hear ye that are far off, what I have done, and ye that are near, acknowledge
my might; Isaiah 33. 13. Here you may see and read the Glory of God, as the
Word says, in the 11. of John and the 40. Verse. Jesus says unto her, said I
not unto thee, if thou would believes, thou should see the Glory of God?

London, Printed for Tho. Passinger, at the three Bibles on the middle of
London Bridge. 1669.

A Relation of a Gentleman in Chesterfield, a frequent Visitant of Martha
Tailor, for many months, also attested by diverse others.
MArtha Tailor of Over Hadton is Eighteen years of Age next Candlemas, having
line in this extremity seven years come Candlemas, having taken no food since
St. Andrews day, 1667. nor never had a Stool since Alhollou tide; and it is two
years next Sunday, since her water could be deserned to be water; and at the
beginning of her Fast, she spent much blood at her Mouth, Nose, left eye; and
tears of blood their continues bleeding by degrees: from St. Andrews-tide,
1667. till last Lady Day: upon which her sight failed, and speech, about three
weeks as that we could not well understand her; but it has pleased God since
to give her perfect memory, and desires to have the Bible always with her, and
ofter good Books; having many godly Expressions, with strength of faith: the
Guts of her body are almost dried up, and no (...) comes from neither part, nor
spits at mouth, nor has she parted with any blood, but Sunday after twelve a
Clock* September 4. 1668. These watched her; One from Over Hadton, and another
from Gallon-grove, night and day, for seven days and six nights, to wit* Hannah
Hollis, Dorothy Webster, Alite Trantor, Mary Jones, Elizabeth Glossop* Jone
Heath, Ann Tailor, Ann Bott, Ann Benford, Ruth Gates, Since Whitt, Mary Goodwin,
Dorothy Sheldon: from Gallon-grave, Sarah Buntin, Parson Wilson's Maid, Hester
Hatseild* Mary Cotes, Dorothy Sheldon, Hester Pigiard, Elizabeth Toft,
Elizabeth Crane, Mr. Buxton's Maid, Barbarah Mosley, Ann Webster: from Grutton,
Elizabeth Milner, and Elizabeth Wolley, as two went out two came in; and Mr.
Fr^dhurst of Over Hadton, George Brodhurst; at my parting away, I took her by
the hand, and finding her Pulses very weak, and her nether parts being very
cold, and by much speaking causes to Heek-up; being in a violent manner in that
extremity, she put out her hand, and were content with so much water, to the
vallew of two drops; and her sleep is quite gone, and she thinks her time very
short, and her Spirits grow very low: there was some other things observed,
which in modesty ought not to be spoken off.

THE Wonder of the World: BEING A perfect Relation of a young Maid, about
eighteen years of age, which has not tasted of any Food this two and fifty
weeks, from this present day of my Writing, December, 22.
Isaiah 34. 1. Come near ye Nations, to hear and hearken ye people* let the
earth hear, and all that is therein, the world and all things that come forth
of it.
GOod people, according as God called the people, for to hear his judgments,
concerning his Church: Nay, He did not only call the People, but he called the
whole earth; nay, the whole World: and all things that comes forth of it: Even
so I desire all Christians within this our Nation; Nay, all in the whole World,
to hear and to give their due attention, to what I here declare: concerning a
very strange and marvelous wonderful work of God, which is to be proved at this
present time of my writing, within the County of Darby, near to Backwell,
within a Mile, or something more: at a little house noer Over Hadin, hard by
the Mill:

Indeed I gave you a little Caviat conserning this wondersul strange slory,
which is nothing but true: I say I gave you a Character of it, which was dated,
October 13. Which I had, by Relation, from many several persons: but since that
time, I my self, the Author of this Book, has been with the Maid, and has had
some discourse with her, which has given me a great deal more satisfaction
then I had before; and so I thought it good to give every one as good
satisfaction as lies in my power for to do: and by Gods assistance, I do
intend to declare the truth as near as I can, and no more but what I saw and
heard from the Mouth of the Damsel and her Mother. For on December the 6. day,
being the Lords day, I was with the Maid, and had some discourse with her,
conserning her condition; For when this Damsel was about Eleven years old, it
pleased the Lord to strike her with a lamentable pain in the small of her back,
which was a great means to make her stoop very much, and it pleased the Lord
that she so continued for the space of six years, and at the end of those years
her Stumach was taken from her, that she could not eat as formerly she could;
and about St. An hews day, she quite sorsock her meat, and has not tasted of
any Food since: Save only upon St. Thomas day in one thousand six hundred
sixty seven, she eat three slices of an Apple, but never since she has not
tasted of any Rind of mortal Food, bread nor drink, or water, but as they wet
her lips with a Spoon and Spring water; but now since Martlemas day, she has
sucked of a Stu'd Pruan: but nothing can be perceived to go down into her body
to this present day. And yet etc is very lively, and likely for to live; She is
Nineteen years of Age about Candlemas next; she is worn very bare of her body,
very small left but skin and bone, much like the Picture of Annotomy, yet she
has some flesh left on her Arms, and her face, and some little blood in her
Cheeks; and her lips, and her Speech is very plain, and perica, as ever it was,
yet her voice not all out so strong as formerly, and yet very strong and
perfect, considering her condition, to the great amazement of all which sees or
hears her speak, a thing which is almost past the belief of man, but yet very
true, for I the Author of this Book can witness it for truth: For as I told you
he ore, I was with her on the sixth day of this present December, and had some
discourse with her, concerning her condition; and most of her discourse is of
the Scripture; concerning the duty which a Christian owes to God: she does not
advance her self in any way, but does confess her self a sinner: trusting in
the Lord for mercn, and the Lord grant every one of us so for to do.

She is very ready in the Scripture, is able to discourse with any of the
Clergy, she is so very ready in disputing of Scripture, and yet very small
Learning, when it pleased the Lord to ftrike her into this condition; and yet
now as ready as if she had gone seven years to the School: a mighty providence,
and a thing to be admired at; but the Lord is suffisient, and is able to do
much more then man is able to express.

But before I go any further, I do intend to give you a little more
satisfaction concerning this Damsels taste: for after it was known and spread
abroad in the Country, the thing being so very strange that the Country was
very hard of beleiving it to be true, as some do to this (...) (will not
believe) but all I can say to such as these, I pray God that they have a true
faith to believe in Jesus Christ; for as for my own part, my conscience tells
me, I ought to believe it, for when I was with her, I could not conceive any
way to the contrary. But indeed the hard belief of some men is not to be
marvelled at: for in the time of our Savior Jesus Christ, when he walked on
the earth. I say there was many that would not believe him, which I shall speak
more of hereafter.

But now to give you a little more satisfaction concerning this Damsels Fast,
as I told you before, some of the head of the Gentry which lives near the
Damsel, caused twenty Maids to be chosen out of several Towns thereabouts, to
wake and watch with her, for to see how she lived, that they might be the
better satisfied in the truth; and these twenty Maids did watch and wake with
her, every one her turn: and when they had done, they all agreed that she
received no food, but as they wet her lips with Spring Water in a Spoon: which
is a great satisfaction to many, yet some as I told you before, very hard of
belief; but since that tune for a further trial, the most worthy and honorable
Earl of Devonshire, for a further and more full satisfaction, he has sent
fourteen Maids to wake and watch with her, that he might be the more satisfied
in the truth; these Maids wake with her by two at a time, for four and twenty
hours, and so every two did so, till they had waked seven nights and seven
days, and when they had so done, they certified that she did receive no mortal
Food, but only the wetting of her lips with Spring water in a spoon: and as it
is very credably reported, this has given him very good satisfaction, and he
does believe it to be true.

Indeed it is a very strange and miraculous wonder; nay, it may be called, A
Wonder of all Wonders, for the like was never heard of before, neither in our
days, nor in our Forefathers days: No, not since the Lord created man; but we
may assure our selves that it is the Will of the Lord, for to let us see his
handiwork, for to try whether we do believe that there is a God that can work
strange and wonderful works; and yet there is some so hard of belief, that will
not stick to say; I mean concerning this Maid; that there is some desembleation
in it, and will find some scornful Word or other concerning it; Nay, some will
not stick to say, that there is Witchcraft in it.

But as for such as those I desire not to spend no rash judgment upon them,
but leave them in the imagination of their own hearts: but as for my own part,
I fully believe as the Word says, as you may find it in the 28. Chap. of the
Prophet Isaih, and about the 29. Verse. the Words be these: This also comes
forth from the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in
working: But indeed in these days men's hearts be so deceitful that it is hard
to find any, that his heart and tongue agrees together: for many in these our
days which does make a fair (...) that they be very Religious people, and fears
the Lord in an out (...) to the World, and yet I say, such as they, I can hear,
does spend their judgment very rashly concerning this Maid, which I here have
spoken off: which is contrary to the Word of God: But as for such as those, I
would desire them to look in the 29. Chapter of Isaiah, and about the 13. Verse
and consider with themselves whether they be (...) or no, of that deep
Hypocrisy, as the Lord calls it in the Contents of that Chapter, as you may
sind in the 13. Verse. Wherefore the Lord said, forasmuch as this people draw
near me with their mouth, and with their lips does honor me, but have removed
their heart far from me* and their fear toward me, is tought by the Precept of
Men: And fear we may see now the Lord was angry with this people in those days,
which made such a fair outward show with their lips, but yet their hearts was
contrary; indeed I would desire you to look into the 14. verse of that same
Chapter, and there you may find it very plain; to understand the cause why the
Lord does work such great and mavelous works; for as I have read it unto you
in the 13. Verse, he challenged them for their Hypocrisy; Therefore behold I
proceed to do a mavelous work among this people, even a mavelous work and a
wonder; And indeed the Lord may, for any thing that I know, have spoken the
very same words to us here in these our Nations; for to be sure no Nation in
these days could be deeper plunged in that deadly sin of Hypocrisy, then we:
for in the 13. verse, you may understand that the Lord calls desembleation, a
deep Hypocrisy, in these Words, They honor me with their lips, but have
removed their heart far from me: and I pray God there be not too many such now
adays: which may be a great cause of the Lords working this great and marvelous
work here among us, now in this sinful Nation; and has made his chosen Uessel
of this Damsel, for to work this great and marvelous work upon; and for any
thing that I know, may have spoken the very same words to her, as he spoke in
the 41. of Isaiah, and about the 9, and 10, Verses. The Words be these; I pray
you take notice, it is worth your observation: Thou whom I have taken from the
ends of the Earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, and said into
thee, thou art my Servant, I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away, fear
thou not for I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I will
strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee: yea, I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my Righteousness.

Oh! What comfortable speeches is here from the Lord to poor sinners? and as I
may say, why may not the Lord have spoken the very same words to this Damsel?
for truly I do fully believe that we may be bold to say, that the Lord has
made a chosen Uessel of her:

And by Gods help I will do my best endeavor to lay it open unto you in these
three Conditions.

And first of all, as the latter part of the 9. Verse says, I have chosen thee,
and not cast thee away; For certainly the Lord has chosen her for to work this
great and wonderful work upon:

For in the first place, he has brought her body into such a condition, as the
like was never known or heard of before since the creation of man; a body
preserved with life, and has not tasted of any mortal food not of fifty weeks,
and some more: and therein it makes me the bolder to say, I do believe she is
one of the Lords chosen Uessels.

Secondly, She has her speech as perfect for any to understand, as she had in
the time of her health, and speaks very hearty, considering her weak
condition of Body.

And thirdly, She has a far better and more perfect Memory then formerly she
had in the time of her health, and especially in discoursing of the Scriptures.

And these be my chiefest Reasons why I say that I do believe she is a chosen
vessel of the Lords.

But indeed, I do believe that if all the people were together, and did all the
best they could, I mean all that has been with her, and has seen her in this
condition: I say, if they all should do the best they can, they would have much
ado to persuade some to believe.

No, it is to be feared, some would rather give out some scornsin speeches,
despiseing any one which would persuade them to believe it for truth.

But I desire such to look into the 13. of the Acts of the Apostles, and about
the 41. verse. and there you shall find what is spoken concerning such as will
not believe the Wondrous Works of the Lord; I pray take notice, and these be
the words; Behold ye despisers, and wonder and perish, for I work a work in
your days, a work which you shall in no wise be ieve, though a man declare it
unto you.

And indeed I do believe this place of Scripture was never so much fulfilled
since it was Written, as it is now in our days, concerning this Maid, a Wonder
the like never known before in any age: and is too true that there is too many
Despisers, and I pray God the Words of this Text, do not too soon fall upon
some of them: for as the latter part of the Uerse says: They will not believe,
though a man declare it unto them. Nay, there be some which have been with the
Damsel, and has seen her, and yet they be very hard of belief: just like unto
those people which we read of in the Gospel, which would not believe the words
which our Savior Jesus Christ spoke to them face to face: No, but they laughed
him to scorn, as you may find it written in the eight of Luke, and about the
fifty second and fifty third verses: and yet for all they laughed him to scorn,
he let them see a wonderful strange work, which he wrought upon the body of
J(...) daughter, in raising her from death to life.

And now in these our days, he has been pleased to work a very strange work
upon this Maid which I have here spoken off, to see if we will believe, and not
to perish through our unbeleiving hearts: for he that has a stedlast heart to
believe in the Lord, be shall never fall: for the Lord will uphold him, as
David says, in the 37. Psalm, and the 24. verse Though he fall he shall not be
utterly cast down for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. Indeed, happy is
that man whom the Lord upholdeth: I pray God give us all grace so to lead our
lives, that we may deserve to call for his helping hand, and that we may desire
the Lord to lead us in the way of truth, as David said, in the 25. Psalm, and
the 5. Verse: Lead me in thy truth, and teach me, for thou are the God of my
Salvation, on thee do I wait all the day: And the Lord of his mercy give us an
grace to wait on the Lord day and night, for the good of our salvation.

And to draw to a Conclusion, I shall but only give you a Word or two in the
way of Exhortation, and I pray God it may take place in the hearts of all that
either reads it, or hears it read; for this I must needs tell you, if you do
desire to have mercy at the Hands of God, at the latter day, you must strive to
keep his Commandments: that is, to love one another: which is, I am afraid, a
very hard thing for a great many to do.

And agant, we should be pitiful one to another as brethren; having compassion
one of another, as you may find it Written in the 3. Chap. of the first Epistle
of Peter, and the 8. verse, in these words; Finally, be ye all of one mind,
having compassion one of another: Love as Brethren, be pitiful, be courteous:
indeed I would desire every Christian, to keep and obey these Commandments, as
for forth as they be able, for in so doing, we may come to be in love with God,
and know him: As you may find it in the 4. Chap. of the first Epistle of John,
the 7. and 8. verses. In these words, Beloved, let us love one another, for
love is of God, and every one that loves, is born of God, and knows God; He
that loves not, knows not God, for God is love.

O then let us (...) by all possible means to love one another as Brethren, and
then may we boldly say we love God, if we had but this brotherly love, and
would strive to keep his Commandments.

As you may find in the first Epistle of John, and the 2. verse. For he says
there, By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and
keep his Commandments.

And the Lord grant us all grace so to do.

And now to conclude, I desire every one to consider with themselves, what they
have heard here in this little Book; for although the Uollume be but small, yet
the matter is of a great ballew, for it conterus very much to the salvation of
man, though in some part of it, some may say it conterus worldly affairs: (...)
such I make this, although that my former part of this book, be but, as you may
say, worldly news: yet I say it may well be called heavenly matter: For so
strange a wonder was never heard on before: and my conscience tells me, I may
boldly say it is a fore (...) to bring us into the way of Repentance: Which I
pray God to give us all grace so to do; and that for Jesus Christ his sake.

And so the God of Peace, Love, and Unity, Bless, Guide, and Keep us all, this
time, hence forth, and for ever-more,

Amen.
I am yours in Christ, THOMAS ROBINS.

FINIS.

