News from Darby-shire. OR THE Wonder of all Wonders.

That ever yet was Printed, being a perfect and true Relation of the handy work
of Almighty God shown upon the body of one Martha Tailor now living about a
mile or something more from Backwell in Darby shire, hard by a Pasture commonly
called Hadin Pasture, this Maid as it has pleased the Lord, she has fasted
forty weeks and more, which may very well be called a wonder of all Wonders,
though most people which hear this may censure this to be some Fable, yet if
they please but to take the pains to read over the book, I hope that they will
be better satisfied and have some faith to believe.

This Maid is still alive and has a watch set over her by order of the Earl of
Devon-shire.

Fear not O Land be glad and rejoice for the Lord will do great things Jo. 2.
v. 21. And I will show Wonders in the Heavens, and in the Earth v. 30. Written
by me T. Robins. B. of D. a well wisher to the gospel of Jesus Christ. Oct. 13.
1668.

LONDON. Printed for T.P. at the three Bibles on London Bridge.

News from Darby-shire.
MY beloved Brethren, I beseech you all young or old, rich or poor, of what
degree soever you be, which reads or hears this little book I say I would have
you to give good attention unto it, for it is worth your observation: for as I
have styled it upon these words, which is Gods Love from heaeven, to sinners on
earth. So I hope by Gods assistance, I shall clearly prove it here unto you as
soon as I have declared the subject of this work, which I have taken in hand,
and now by Gods help I do intend to let you understand one of the strangest
wondrous works as I may call it wrought by the handy work of God in love to
sinners upon earth, the like never heard on before, I do believe since the Lord
created man, which I now shall declare unto you all within the County of
Darbyshire about a mile or some little more off Backwell near a place called
Overhadin, near to a Pasture commonly called Hadin Pastury in a little house
hard by the Mill, there lives a Damsel called Martha Tailor daughter to
William Tailor, a young woman about 19 years of age, this Maid it is which the
Lord i^ pleased to show his handy work upon, and a^ I may boldly say he has
sent down his spiritual love from heaven upon her: as by the grace of God I do
intend to make it plainly appear unto you, for when she was about 12 years old,
it pleased the Lord to strike her with a lameness in her limbs, about the smal^
of her back, and so she continued about the space of 6 years, which was a great
cause to make her stoop very much in her going, and toward the latter end of
those years, it pleased God to take her stomach from her: that she could not
eat as formerly she used to do.

But since Saint Thomas's day in one thousand six hundred sixty seven, she has
not taken any manner of food, bread, drink, or water, or any thing to preserve
mortal life, ever since the day aforesaid; which is from that day to this day
of my present writing, 40 weeks and upward, which is as I told you before as
strange a wonder as ever was since; the creation of man and a thing worthy to
be chronicled for a memorial to our seed hereafter and as I told you before my
conscience tells me I may boldly say it is Gods love from heaven to Sinners
upon earth, but before I pass any further I do intend to give you a little more
satisfaction concerning this Maids fasting which is manifestly made appear: for
some of the head of the Gentry of that country having a great desire to be more
fully satisfied in the truth, the thing being so wonderful and strange that
they scarce knew how to believe: so they thought good to make choice of twenty
maids to watch and wait with her, that they might be the better satisfied in
the truth: and so there was twenty Maids chosen and they did wait with her
every one her turn, and has satisfied for very truth that she does not receive
any kind of food into her body, but all that is done unto her, her mother
anointeth her lips with a feather and spring water, by reason of the hotness of
her breath, this was certified for very truth by these twenty maids when they
had done waiting with her and this I hope will serve to satisfy every true
believeing Christian that they may receive this wonderful strange story, as a
true story, and not as a fable, which I desire that every christian which hears
it to believe it for a truth for I my self which is the Author of this little
book would have you to understand that my belief is that I should be worse then
an infidel, if I should set out any such a miraculous thing as this if it were
a fable, and being so bold to join it with Gods word, no, far be it from me so
to do: for I know it to be true by the evidence of her neighbors, and diverse
persons and men of quality which has been with her, and does affirm it to be
true, yet something more I have to let you understand concerning this Maid,
which is very strange, considering her long fasting: and that is this for she
has her speech very perfect and has a great delight to talk and discourse in
the Scripture with any Scholar, there is very many of the Clegy does come unto
her far and near and has very much discourse, for she is very ripe witted
concering the word of God, and takes much delight therein. Also for her person
and complexion she is worn away so bare that she has very small left on her but
skin and bone, she has no belly to be seen, for her intrails are dried up
insomuch that you may see her back bone through the skin of her belly, nothing
she can be likned to but the picture of death, all her body over but only the
Lord keeps life in her her face is indifferent fresh and has some red in it,
her speech very perfect and plain as any of we: but her voice very small a very
strange thing unto man, but nothing is strange unto the Lord: for as we may
read in diverse parts of Scripture of many things which the Lord wrought and
brought to pass which is very strange to us, and was very strange to those
people in those days, Enoch lived nine hundred and five years, and Mathuselah
lived nine hundred sixty and nine years. Genesis 5.11.27. Which is very strange
to us, for now in our days it is much to hear of any man that lives one
hundred, but I believe not in our age that ever any was heard of that lived
ninescore which is a great deal short of nine hundred sixty nine: and yet I say
if we should hear of any to live so long, we should think it very strange, and
should think it deserved to be Chronicled: then much more I say ought this
miraculous wonder of this Maid to be kept in memorial which has lived above
forty weeks without tasting any manner of mortal food, Moses fasted forty days
and forty nights and neither eat bread nor drank water. Exodus 34.28 Which was
a mighty thing in those days and caused to be recorded in the Scripture,
because he fasted longer then any was known to do before, our Savior Jesus
Christ fasted forty days and forty nights. But now in our days he shows
greater miraculous wonders in preserving the life of this woman, without taking
any mortal food now forty weeks and more, which is already for every day that
our Savior and Moses fasted.

I say she has fasted for every day a week and more: and this is it makes me
the more bolder to say it is Gods love from heaven, to sinners on earth, for I
do fully believe that it is for love that the Lord bears to that poor creature,
which makes him to work this wonderful work upon her, for indeed I could wish
with all my heart, that I and every poor soul living were but in as good a
condition as the soul of that poor christian is in for this my conscience tells
me I may boldly say that she is fed with Angels food and the powers of Heaven
is with her, and the Angel of the Lord is her doorkeeper, and without doubt
there is a place provided among those blessed Angels, where she shall receive
life everlasting world without end.

For why may not the Lord have spoken unto her the very same words which he
spoke to Moses. And he said my presence shall go with thee, and I will give
thee rest Exodus 33.14. A blessed and a comfortable saying this was to have the
spirit of the Lord go along with sinners, and this we may be assured; this was
for love which the Lord bare to those people for they were but a stiff-necked
people, as he tells them in the third verse of this chapter, and yet out of his
love he promised to go with them and give them rest, for we may assure our
selves the Lord will give rest, wisdom, knowledge and understanding to all such
as he loves, as you may find in Proverbs the 7. and the 6 verse. For the Lord
gives wisdom out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding.

And now to draw toward a conclusion I desire to give you one word or two more
concerning the wondrous work of the Lord which I have termed to be Gods love
from heaven to sinners upon earth, as you may find it concerning Lazarus for
after he had been four days dead the Lord put life into him, as you may find in
the thirty ninth chapter of John.

Where he said to Martha take away the stone Martha the sister of him that was
dead, said unto him Lord by this time he stinketh for he has bin days dead,
but for all that Jesus says unto her, that if thou would believe, thou
should see the glory of God. Then they took away the store from the place
where the dead was laid. And Jesus lift up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank
thee that thou have heard me. And I know that thou hear me always: but
because of the people which stand by, I said it, that they may believe that
thou have sent me. And, when he had thus spoken, he cried with a loud voice,
Lazarus come forth. And he that was dead, came forth, bound hand and foot with
grave-cloaths, and his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus says unto
them, loose him and let him go. as you may find it in the 40 41. 42. 43. 44.
verses of the 11 chapter of John. Many of these wondrous works did our Savior
Jesus Christ show to the people in those days, yet as you may understand by
these words in the 42. v. The people was very hard of belief in those days,
and indeed it is to be feared that there is too many in these days, which will
be very loath to believe this wonderful work which he has wrought upon this
woman, nay there is many more places in the Scripture of very strange Miracles
which was done in those days I shall but only give you a hint of some of them,
because I am confined unto a small quantity of paper: but in the first place I
pray consider the great work of the Lord in the three children which he
preserved from the raging heat of the fiery Furnace as you may find in Daniel
the third, also Daniel delivered in the Lions den Daniel the 6. Jonas in the
Whales belly, with diverse more places in Scripture which is too tedious for to
set down in this small volumn, yet I call to mind one notable place where our
Savior raised Jarius daughter from death to life, and the people mocked him as
you may find in the 8 chapter of Luke and about the 49 v. and so on to the end
of the chapter. While he yet spoke there came one from the ruler of the house
saying to him, thy daughter is dead, trouble not the Master. But when Jesus
heard it, he answered him saying, fear not, believe only, and she shall be made
whole but in the 52 verse. And all wept, and bewailed her: but he said, weep
not, she is not dead, but sleeps. And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that
she was dead, but he ut them all out, and took her by the hand, and called,
saying, Maid, arise, And her spirit came again, and she arose straitway: and he
commanded to give her meat. And here you may see the Lord showed great love to
sinners upon earth, for all they laughed him to scorn as you may find in the 53
verse. Yet he was willing to work that mavelous work upon that young woman,
and raise her from death to life which was a very strange thing to man, to see
those which be dead to have life put into them again, and indeed this wonder
which I have here related to you is much after the same manner, for though she
yet never parted with life in this world, yet in considering the condition that
she is in now: I say she is much what as dead to this mortal life; having not
tasted any kind of mortal food, not of forty weeks and more, which may well be
counted a Wonder of Wonders to all men now living.

And so now to draw to a conclusion I will end with a word or two of
exhortation, desiring every christian to bear in mind this Damsel which I have
here spoken of, and to consider the Lord has not shown this handy work upon
her only for her own sin. O no, but as you may find in the 13 of Luke and the 5
verse. I tell you, Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
and so I pray God give us all grace so to do whilst we live in this world that
we may receive life everlasting in the world to come, world without end. Amen.

So the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with us all this time henceforth and
for evermore Amen.

Here follows a short prayer fit to be said by all sinners.
O Most gracious and most glorious Lord God give ear unto our Prayer, consider
our Petition and fulfill thy promise made of old to our forefathers, that when
two or three are met together thou art in the midst of them, so we desire that
thou would be pleased to be with us at this present time and to make answer
unto us: oh thou that art the God of peace, the God of love, the God of mercy,
we poor miserable and wretched sinners, do beseech thee to be merciful unto us,
and to all sinners: we confess O Lord we have rebelled against thee, and
according to thy most holy word we have most wickedly done these things, which
we should not have done, and we have left undone that which thou saidest we
should do, and the truth is not in us: but oh Lord have mercy upon us, have
mercy and deal not with us according to our desert for Jesus Christ sake, but
according to thy tender mercy blot out all our offenses, spare us O Lord and
forgive us, make us to become new creatures, take away from us our stony hearts
of unbeleif, and give us believing hearts of flesh, that we may believe, that
thou art the God that can work great and mavelous and wonderful works, thou
make the lame to go, the blind to see, the dum to speak, them that be in the
grave thou can raise them up and put life into them, and now O Lord thou have
shown thy handy work in a most wonderful manner upon the body of this our
Sister, in giving so long and large a time of repentance, for as thou have
given her body power and strength to keep so long a fast from mortal food, even
so oh Lord we desire too feed her soul with the spiritual food of thy blessed
kingdom, that when thou art willing that she and we shall change this mortal
life, then thou would be pleased to receive us into thy kingdom, and give us
that ever lasting life which never shall have end, Amen Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

