A True and Perfect RELATION Of the Great VICTORY Obtained over the DVTCH With
an Account of the Ships that was taken and sunk in the said Engagement.

ALSO The Names of their Men of War, their Commanders and Number of their Guns,
that were appointed for a Convoy to their SMYRNA Fleet.

LONDON, Printed for G. I. 1672.

A True and Perfect Relation of the Great Victory obtained over the Dutch, with
an Acconnt of the Ships taken and sunk in the said Engagement; also the Names
of their Men of War, their Commanders and number of their Guns that were
appointed as a Convoy to their Smyrna Fleet.
SIR,
I Have received yours from London bearing no date, which I impute to the too
hasty expectation of News from our Port, concering the late Engagement betwixt
the Dutch Smyrna Fleet, and our Squadron of Men of War, which on the thirteenth
of this Instant was Crucing off the Isle of Wight; to satisfy your curiosity
take it as follows; Upon Wednesday March the Thirteenth Sir Robert Holmes
with a Squadron of five Ships, crucing about the Isle of Wight met with the
Dutch Smyrna Fleet consisting of above fifty Sail, convoyed by six (...) War*
the names of the Ships in Sir Robert Holmes Squadron were first the Saint
Michael commande^ (...) Sir Robert Holmes as Admiral; the second the
Resoi(...)on, commanded by the (...) the third, the Cambridge commanded by Sir
Fretchevtie Holles as Reer-Admiral: the fourth, the Gloucester commanded by
Captain John Holmes Brother to Sir Robert Holmes; the Fairfax commanded by
Captain ^egge. Then about two a clock in the afternoon meeting with the
aforesaid Smyrna Fleet, shot to make them strike and lower their Top-sailes,
which they refused to do, with which refu^^l, our Ships shot Ball through and
through (...)* upon which they lowered their Topsails, but yet refused to
strike, upon which the Fight began, the Dutch throwing overboard a great many
of their heaviest Goods to lighten them, twenty of their Merchantmen carrying
from twenty to forty Guns apiece they made serviceable by sending men aboard
them in the night, so that there was as good as twenty eight Men of War,
notwithstanding this our five Ships maintained a fight with them till night,
and run through and through them, at which time there came to our assistance
three Ships more, viz. the York commanded by Captain Elliot, the Diamond
commanded by Captain Towlis, the Success commanded by Captain Watson, on
Thursday Morning early the Fight began again and continued all that day, about
noon Captain John Holmes borded their Rear-Admirall, its name was S. Patrick
formerly an English Ship, but our Seamen being too eager of the prise neglected
to stop the leak she being much shattered and torn, in a short time she sunk
down; about the Evening we took five of their richest Merchantmen and had
undoubtedly taken the rest had not the night parted us, and a very fresh gale
of wind rising in the night, gave then an opportunity of getting away: The whole
Fight was managed with a great deal of Courage and gallantry on our part,
considering the number of our Ships and the great number of the Dutch full
manned, for they had at least fifteen hundred Spanish Soldiers abord that was
going to the service of the Neitherland, it may be accounted as remarkable a
Victory as ere was obtained in the British Seas.

The loss of the Dutch was very considerable, not only as to the loss of Men,
but of Goods thrown over board, there was at least fifty Bayles of Silk taken
up by our Vessels, who went off from this Port the next Day, besides what Goods
sunk to the bottom. The five Ships taken are laden chiefly with several sorts
of rich Silks, and other Turkish Commodities: in their Reer-Admiral was sunk
abundance of Spanish Silver, that was sent from Spain to pay of their Soldiers
in the Netherlands. They had killed in their Reer-Admiral before she sunk (by
acknowledgement of some of the Ships Company) above one hundred and fifty
persons, and very many wounded: And it is thought that they could not lose less
than a thousand men in this Engagemen. Since this His Majesty has been pleased
to set forth His Declaration showing the Reasons that does induce him to wage
War with that Ungrateful and Insolent people the Dutch, who not above eighty
years since was the Poor Distressed States, and were ready to lie down at our
Feet for relief; these we succored, which now, like a viperous Brood, would
fly in the faces of those that gave them a Being: But their Ingratitude we do
not doubt will be sufficiently scourged, and they be brought again to
acknowledge their Keepers and Preservers of their Lives and Liberties, when His
Majesty's Royal Fleet united shall meet them, which will consist of above
Eighty Sail, commanded by his Royal Highness in person; and may well claim
the Title of the Invincible NAVY, for never such a Fleet for goodness of Ships,
brave Commanders, and Valiant Seamen ever plowed the Seas; in the mean time we
may leave them to provide for the safety of themselves and Country which never
was in greater danger, they being besieged on all sides with Enemies, viz. with
the French, the Prince Elector of Coloigne, the Bishop of Munster, and the King
of Danemarks Forces. So great a Crime is in Ingratitude, that Heaven will not
let it go long unpunished. What further News comes to my hand you shall be
sure to have an Account,

From your Friend, John Robinson.

From the Hague, March 29. S. N. Worthy Imployer,
IN obedience to your last commands I have sent you what News this place
affords; to satisfy your curiosity you may read this following abstract.

Diverse of our Smyrna Fleet are arrived in Zealand and in the Maes, together
with the Men of War, under whose Convoy they were, though extremely torn and
very much disabled; five of our Merchant men were taken by the English, two of
which were the richest in the Fleet, laden with Silks and other rich
Commodities, and were called the Landtman of Amsterdam, and the Vrede of
Rotterdam, besides our Rear-Admirall (being formerly an English Ship) was sunk
also one of our Men of War, mounted with 44 Guns and 50 men called the Little
Holland: Captain de Haes Admiral of this Fleet was killed in this Engagement,
with many of our Men, and many more wounded, who have been since brought a
shore at Rotterdam and other places. The men of War which served for Convoys to
the said Fleet were the Vlushing, Captain Adrian de Haes, carrying fifty Guns,
and two hundred and fifty Men. The Dort, Captain Thomas de Bois, carrying forty
six Guns and one hundred and seventy Men. The Eutrecht* Captain Cornelius
Everson, carrying forty eight Guns and two hundred and twenty Men. The
Hollandia, Captain Thomas Nes, carrying forty four Guns and one hundred and
fifty Men. The Delf, Captain Pourt, carrying thirty eight Guns and one hundred
and forty five Men. The Lion, Captain Lenny, carryin thirty four Guns and one
hundred and forty Men. The Centaur, Captain Thomas Alderson, carrying forty one
Guns and one hundred and twenty Men. The Friezland, Captain Jacob Anderson,
carrying thirty Guns and one hundred and ten Men.

The Mannick, a considerable Merchant man, mounted with thirty Guns, was so
torn and disabled, that with much difficulty they have brought her into Port;
Captain du Bois* Vice Admiral of this Fleet, has lost his right Arm, and many
of his men.

FINIS.

