THE HISTORY OF THE Caribby-Islands, VIZ. BARBADOS, St CHRISTOPHERS, St
VINCENTS, MARTINICO, DOMINICO, BARBOUTHOS, MONSERRAT, MEVIS, ANTEGO, etc. in
all XXVIII.

IN TWO BOOKS.

The First containing the NATURAL; The Second, the MORAL HISTORY of those
Islands. Illustrated with several Pieces of Sculpture, representing the most
considerable Rarities therein Described. WITH A CARIBBIAN-VOCABULARY.

Rendered into English By JOHN DAVIES of Kidwelly.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Thomas Dring and John Starkey, and are to be sold
at their Shops, at the George in Fleet Street near Clifford's-Inn, and at the
Mitre between Middle Temple-Gate and Temple Bar. 1666.

Whitehall, June 2. 1665. By Permission and License from the Right Honorable
Mr. Secretary Morice this Book may be Printed.

Jo. Cook.

To the Right Worshipful Sir EDWARD BYSCHE.
Most honored Sir,
YOu have sufficiently satisfied the World of the Curiosity you have for
whatever, in any measure, deserves it: You were pleased to give me a hint of
the Piece I here present you withal; and your recommendation of the Original
might well raise in me a hope of your readier acceptance of the Translation. It
is the noblest of humane Actions to vouchsafe a kind Entertainment to the
Distressed, whether Nature or Fortune has made them Calamitous. The equality
of Misery makes the Endurers of it most commonly the more compassionate; so far
as that those who have been first relieved charitably direct others to the same
Almoners.

Thus do I bring to your doors a company of poor Caribbians, to offer you their
Respects and Submissions, in the name of all those Islands, whereof their
Ancestors have been heretofore possessed in the Ocean of America: They are in
hopes, that neither the obscurity of their Origin, nor the harshness of their
Language, nor the barbarism of their Manners, nor their strange course of
Life, nor the cruelty of their Wars, nor their ancient Poverty, nor lastly the
unconstancy of their Fortune, will hinder your favorable Reception of them.
And what heightens this hope of theirs, is, an imagination, that you, who find
leisure to bestow your Eye and Thoughts on so infinite a Multitude of Volumes
as press from all parts of the World into your Library, may be pleased with
something that is done among them; and that the History of the Caribbies may
entertain you, not only with a delightful Variety, as to the divertisement of
the Sight, but also with many occurrences capable of exciting your Admiration.

What may be further said on their behalf, I leave to be expressed in their own
natural Rhetoric, and bethink me of making some Apology for my self; which is
only this, That the presumption of the present Address is in some measure the
effect of your Goodness and Candor, and that it had been but a necessary
expression of my Gratitude, had I many years since professed how much I am,

Most honored Sir, Your most humble and much obliged Servant, J. DAVIES.

THE PREFACE, Giving an account of both the Original and English Edition of
this Work.
THE Relations we have from remote Countries, for the most part, come attended
with this misfortune; that many times they are written by Persons, who, being
concerned therein, for some Reasons and Considerations only known to
themselves, make it their business to disguise the Truth, and represent things
otherwise than they are. Sometimes also we have to do with certain Writers,
who, in cold blood, and to gratify their own humor, would impose upon our
credulity, as it were out of a defiance of being disproved. And lastly, it is
our fate to receive Pieces of this nature from men little versed in study, and
so such as are not able to lay down things with the requisite exactness,
inasmuch as, upon many occasions, they take one thing for another, and relate
not things truly and naturally, though they have not any intention to deceive
us. On the contrary, it is a great advantage, when such Works are composed by
Authors, in whom these three conditions are found combining together; to wit,
That they are unconcerned; That they dally not with Truth; and, That they have
all the Requisites for the right framing of their Relations.

Those who shall cast their Eyes on the present History, are to expect therein
these advantages: For as to the two first of the forementioned Conditions, that
is, to comprehend them under one word, Sincerity, the Authors of this Work
presume to attribute it to themselves, since it is an Elogy any one may
innocently assume to himself, if his own Conscience give him not a check for so
doing: But for the third, which relates to the ability of the mind, though an
over-earnest pretention thereto may seem to proceed from a certain vanity and
self-confidence; yet when all circumstances shall be considered, the ingenuous
will easily be induced to allow them even that also.

For 1. The Relations they had to work upon came from Persons who had been
Eyewitnesses of what they delivered, dis-interessed, and of known integrity,
and endued with the abilities requisite to manage such a Work. 2. There was a
design of this History drawn at Paris, some years before it came abroad, and
then thought worthy publishing, by diverse intelligent men, to whom it was
communicated, who carefully read it over, and honored it with their Remarks.
Yet that it might come forth with greater exactness, it was laid aside, till
the observations of afterVoyages had added much to its perfection. So that if
the Public receive any satisfaction from this History, it will have reason
rather to congratulate, than quarrel at its delay; since it comes out now more
enriched and exact, than it would have been, at the first proffer of it to the
Press. For besides that many Observations and Relations came since to hand, the
Authors made also great advantages of the private Discourses they had with one
Father Raymond, especially as to the Moral part of the Caribbian History. For
this man having lived many years in those Islands, and had much conversation
with the Caribbians of Dominico, came by that means to be acquainted with their
Language, their Manners, and the most particular Customs of that Nation. From
the same F. Raymond they had also the Caribbian Vocabulary, which may be seen
at the end of the Book.

They thought fit to divide the History into two Parts, the Natural and the
Moral, in imitation of that of the excellent Josephus Acosta, and they hope the
Piece will be found such as to answer the Title; comprehending in the former
whatever is of the natural growth of the Country, as Plants, Fruits, Flowers,
Birds, Beasts, etc. and under the latter, whatsoever relates to their Manners,
Customs, Religion, Virtues, Vices, etc. Not that they would have it inferred
thence, that this Treatise should contain whatover might be written on the
subject of the Caribbies; nay they acknowledge, that both the Natural and Moral
part of this History might be much enlarged; but with this advertisement, that
if every part of the New-world were so diligently examined by Historians as
this has been, the Old-world would have a much more particular account
thereof, than it has at the present.

They have also thought it not beside their purpose, especially in the Moral
part of the History, to cite the Writings of diverse other well-known Authors,
not out of any design to enlarge the Volume, as some might happily imagine; but
to make a certain parallel between the Morality of our Caribbians, and that of
diverse other yet Barbarous Nations; which they conceived would not be
undelightful to some, even though they looked on them as so many digressions
from, or interruptions of the Carribbian History. But what censure soever may
be passed on them, they hope that if any shall think them not necessarily
relating to the main design of the Draught, they may nevertheless view them
with a certain pleasure, as the Drapery, consisting of Flowers and Fruits, etc.
for the greater ornament of the Piece.

Discourse is the image of the thought; but the Draught of a thing by way of
Painting or Graving represents the thing it self. From this consideration it
came, that this Piece is further adorned with several pieces of Sculpture, to
the end that the Idaeas of the things particularly treated of might be the more
thoroughly imprinted in the Readers mind, by a sensible demonstration thereof.

Thus much as to the Authors and Directors of the Original Edition. The
Publisher of the English has only these few Remarks to trouble the Reader
withal.

1. That possibly those of the English Nation, who are inhabitants in the
Caribbies, may have peculiar names for diverse of the Plants, Beasts, Birds,
Fishes, etc. mentioned in this Treatise, much different from those which the
Publisher has used. Some of them, upon consulation with such as had lived in
those parts he made a shift to get, and in all likelihood might have gotten
most of the rest, had not the breaking forth of the last years Contagion caused
most of the Inhabitants of London, to retire to their Country Habitations and
Friends.

2. The Reader is to note, that where some accident is said to have happened
four or five, or some other number of years since (as for instance, page 14.
where it is said in these words, that, two years since they were forced to quit
their Villages, etc.) it is to be referred to the coming forth of the Original
Edition, which was in the year M. DC. LVIII.

3. That whereas there might well be expected before this Work a Map of the
Caribby-Islands in general, as also particular ones of the most eminent
Islands, the Reader is to content himself with this satisfaction from the
Stationers, that if an accurate one of the whole, that is such a one as might
have been suitable to the other Embelishments of the present Work, could have
been procured, it should not have been wanting: With this further assurance,
that if what is done at the present meet with the reception expected, the next
Impression shall be furnished not only with the forementioned Map, but also
some other Pieces of Ornament, whereof the last years distraction, and want of
time now have obstructed the insertion.

Lastly, whereas many persons of worth (though more in the Original then in the
Translation) are mentioned in several places as Inhabitants of the foresaid
Colonies, there is only this to be said; that as the instancing of them adds
somewhat to the certainty of the Relations; so it may likewise serve to
undeceive many Europaeans, who are either so ill-informed of those Islands, or
so prejudiced against them, as to be persuaded, that, for the most part, they
are only the refuges and receptacles of Bankrupts and debauched persons; the
contrary being most certain; to wit, that they are inhabited by an infinite
number of Families of good repute, which live civilly and in the fear of God.

J. D.

THE HISTORY OF THE Caribby Islands.
THE FIRST BOOK. ^ontaining the NATURAL History of those ISLANDS.
CHAPTER I. Of the Situation of the Caribbies in general; the Temperature of
the Air, the Nature of the Country, and its Inhabitants.
BEtween the Continent of that part of America which lies Southward, and the
Eastern Quarter of the Island of St John Porto-Rico, there are certain Islands
making up together the Figure of a Bow, and so disposed that they cross the
Ocean, as it were by an oblique line.

They are by some called the Antilles of America, probably upon this account,
that they make a kind of bar before the greater Islands, which are called the
Islands of America: If so, the word should be Ant-Isles, as being composed of
the Greek word (...), which signifies opposite, and Isles or Isles: But the
English commonly call them the Caribby-Islands, and the Caribbies. There are
also who call them the Cannibal-Islands, from the names of the ancient
Inhabitants; and they are read in some under the name of the Camercane Islands.

These Islands were first discovered by Christopher Columbus, under the Reign
of Ferdinand and Isabella, King and Queen of Castile and Leon, in the year of
our Lord, One thousand four hundred ninety and two.

There are numbered of them in all twenty eight, lying under the Torrid Zone,
acounting from the eleventh degree of the Equator, to the nineteenth
Northward. Some Authors, as Linscot in his History of America, taking the name
of the Antilles in a more general signification, attribute it to the four
greater Islands, to wit, Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, and Porto-Rico, as well as
to these twenty eight.

The Air of all these Islands is temperate, and healthy enough, especially to
such as have lived any time in them. The Plague heretofore was not known in
these Parts, no more than it was in China, and some other places of the East:
But some years since most of these Islands were much troubled with malignant
Fevers, which the Physicians held to be contagious. That corruption of the Air
was occasioned by some Ships which came from the Coast of Africa; but now there
is no talk of any such Diseases.

The heats are not greater in these parts than they are in France during the
Months of July and August; and through a particular care of Divine Providence,
between eight and nine in the morning there rises a gentle East Wind, which
many times continues till four in the afternoon, refreshing the Air, and
allaying the soultriness of the heat. Josephus Acosta affirms, That in the
greater Islands of America this cooling wind blows about Noon. Thus through all
the compass of the Torrid Zone, the wise Disposer of humane concernments has
ordered cool and regular Winds, to alleviate the scorching heats of the Sun.

It is never cold in the Caribbies, and Ice is a thing was never seen in those
parts; nay, it would be accounted a kind of prodigy to find that where,

All things are clad in a perpetual green,
And Winter only in the Snow of Lillies seen.
But the Nights there are extremely cool; and if a Man be uncovered during that
time, he is apt to catch Colds, and great and dangerous pains in the Chest and
Stomach: Nay, it has been observed, That those who have exposed themselves
uncovered to that pleasing coolness, if they have escaped pains and gripings in
the Stomach, have turned pale, yellowish, and swelled up, and in a short time
lost the lively vermilion Complexions they had before. There are indeed others
attribute these effects to their feeding on Cassava, which is commonly eaten in
these Islands instead of bread, and may possibly have some quality not
consistent with the natural constitution of the Inhabitants of our Climates.
There is the same temperature in the night time at Peru, and in the Maldivas.
And those who have traveled to Jerusalem, and through all the hot Countries,
do affirm, That the greater the heats are in the day time, so much the colder
are the nights; the reason whereof is, that the great Vapors raised by the Sun
in the day time, being condensed at night, and falling down in Dew, do
extremely cool and refresh the Air.

The Aequinox lasts in these Islands near one half of the year, and all the
rest of it the longest days are fourteen hours, and the shortest nights ten.
And thus has the Divine Wisdom bestowed on those Parts of the World which lie
most exposed to the scorching beams of the Sun, long and cool nights, to
recover and restore to vigor what the too near approaches of that Planet had
dried up and almost blasted in the day.

Nor can the Year be here divided into four equal and distinct parts, as we do
in Europe: But the Rains, which are very frequent there from April to November,
and the great Droughts which reign all the rest of the Year, make the only
difference which may be observed between the Seasons.

Now how these different Constitutions and Temperatures of the Air should be
called, there is a great diversity of Opinions. Some considering, that as in
these Parts there is in a manner no Crepusculum or Twilight (which is a certain
competion of, or something between night and day) so neither is there any Spring
or Autumn to make a certain connection between Summer and a kind of Winter,
which they admit there. Others maintain on the contrary, That there is no just
reason that that part of the Year which goes under the name of Winter, should
be so called, in regard the Earth there is never covered with Frost or Snow,
which are the unwelcom attendants of Winter, but at all times clothed with a
delightful Verdure, and almost in all seasons crowned with Flowers and Fruits,
though in a different measure; whence they conclude, That the Year may be
distinguished into three different and equal parts, and those be called Spring,
Summer, Autumn; though not so easily distinguishable as happily they may be in
several parts of the World.

But the common expression of those people, who make up the Colonies now
planted in these Islands, is not consistent with this distinction; for they
take the season of the rains to be Winter, and that of the droughts, which is
fair, clear, and pleasant, to be Summer. It Is true, Lib. 2. c. 3.
Acosta quarrels at the Spaniards, for expressing themselves in that manner,
and taking those rainy months for Winter. He affirms, that the time of the
drought and fair weather is the true Winter in all the Torrid Zone, because
then the Sun is at the greatest distance from that Region; and on the contrary,
that the season of Rains and Mists ought there to be called Summer, by reason
of the nearness of that Planet. To speak properly and rigorously, there is some
reason we should comply with the sentiment of Acosta; yet inasmuch as not only
the Spaniards, but also many other Nations, express themselves otherwise, we
shall keep to their terms rather, especially in a thing of so little
consequence.

But how rainy soever this Season may be in the Carribies, those who have lived
there several years affirm, that there hardly passes a day, but the Sun is
seen. The same thing is said of the Island of Rhodes; whence Antiquity
dedicated it to the Sun, out of an imagination, that that Star had a particular
care of it.

The Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea is regulated in these Countries, as in our
parts; but it rises not above three or four foot at most.

The greatest part of these Islands are covered with several sorts of excellent
Woods, which being green at all times, afford a very delightful prospect, and
represent a perpetual Summer.

The Soil, in most places, is as rich and as pregnant as in any part of France;
Insomuch that all those Islands that are inhabited give not the Inhabitants any
occasion to repent them of the pains they take. In which particular, they
differ much from those Countries of New-France, where the poor Savages are so
put to it to get their subsistence, that their Children, going out of their
Hutts in the morning, and finding their Parents a hunting, are wont to cry out
as loud as they can, Come Tatous; come Castors; come Orignacs; calling thus to
the relief of their necessities those creatures, which yet come not in their
sight as often as they stand in need thereof.

The same inhabited Islands are also furnished with good sources of fresh
Water, Springs, Lakes, Brooks, Wells and Cisterns, and some of them have fair
Rivers. There are further in several places Mineral-waters, which are
successfully used, in order to the curing of diverse Diseases. Brimstone is got
out of the bowels of the Mountains in diverse places; and the bright silver
spangles which the Torrents and Rivers bring down along with them, and are
found in the sand, and the froth of their waters, after they have been
over-flown, are certain indicia and discoveries, that there is Crystal to be
had in them, and that there are also Mines of those precious Metals, which are
so much sought after by most men.

Those running waters, which deserve the name of Rivers, are never dried up,
even in the greatest droughts, and extremely well stored with Fish, for the
most part different from those seen in Europe. But there is such abundance on
the Seacoasts, that the Inhabitants will hardly take the pains to fish in the
Rivers.

The Vine thrives very well in these Islands, and, besides a wild kind of Vine
they have, which grows naturally in the Woods, and bears a very fair and large
Grape, there are in all the Inhabited ones great Gardens, with the Walks set
about with Vines; nay in some places perfect Vine-yards, as those in France,
which bear twice a year, and sometimes oftener, according to the cultivation
bestowed on them, with respect had to the Moon and convenience of the Seasons.
The Grape is excellent good, but the Wine made of it will not keep many days;
and therefore there is but little of it made.

As for Wheat, which grows in New-Spain as well as in any place of the World,
it grows no further then the blade in the Caribbies, and is only for the making
of Green-sauce, in regard that Grain requires winter, and the soil there being
too rank, it shoots forth too much at first, and there is not strength enough
left in the root to force it to staulk and knit in the ear. But if trial were
made of the sowing of Barley and Rye, and other Grains which require heat, its
probable they would thrive well. And yet, should they come to maturity, and
with great increase, the Inhabitants, being at little trouble to get Manyoc,
Potatoes, Turkey-wheat, and several kinds of Pulse, would not take the pains to
put them into the ground.

All the natural Provisions of these Islands are light, and of easy digestion;
in regard the Country being hot, the stomach ought not to be burdened, as may
be presumed in colder Climates. Upon this account it is, that such as are newly
come into these parts are advised to eat little, and often. Nor does what is
eaten breed much blood, and therefore Phlebotomy is not much used.

These Islands are inhabited by four different Nations; whereof the first are
the Indigenae, or Originary Inhabitants, who have lived there time out of mind;
and these are the Caribbians or Cannibals, of whom we shall give a perfect
account in the Second Book of this History. The other three are the English,
the French, and the Dutch. The establishment of these foreign Nations in those
parts happened about the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred twenty five,
since which time they have so increased, that the English and French are now
become a very numerous people; as will be seen more at large in the sequel of
this History.

CHAP. II. Of each of the Caribby-Islands in particular.
THat we may observe some order in the Description we intend of each of these
Islands in particular, we shall divide them into three Classes; whereof the
first shall comprehend those which lie toward the South, and are nearest the
Line; the second those which lie Northward; and the last, those which are
commonly called the Lee-ward Islands, which reach Westward from St.
Christophers, the best known of them all.

TABAGO.
THe first, and most Southerly of all the Caribbies is Tabago, or Tabac,
distant from the Equinoctial Northward eleven degrees and sixteen minutes. It
is about eight leagues in length, and four in breadth. There are in it several
pleasant Mountains, out of which arise eighteen Springs or small Rivers, which,
having drenched the Plains, fall into the Sea. It is conceived the air of it
would be healthy enough, if the Trees were cut down, and the ground opened.

The extraordinary height of the Trees growing in this Island argue the
fruitfulness of its soil. There are in this the five kinds of four footed
creatures, whereof there are but one or two in any of the other Islands. As 1.
a kind of Swine, not much furnished with bristles, which have a certain hole on
their backs. 2. Tatous. 3. Agoutis. 4. Opassums, and 5. Musk-Rats, all which we
shall describe in their proper place. Not to mention the Wood-Quists, Turtles,
Partridges, and Parrats, which are commonly seen there, it affords abundance of
other Birds, not known in Europe.

The Sea which encompasses this Island is abundantly furnished with all sorts
of excellent Fish. Sea-Tortoises come in multitudes to hide their Eggs in the
sand, which lies on the shoars. On the West and North side of it there are
Bays, where Ships may safely Anchor.

About sixteen years since, a Company of Burghers of Walcre in Zealand sent
thither 200 men, to plant a Colony there, under the States General of the
United Provinces, and called the Island, the New-Walcre. But the natural
Inhabitants of the Country, fearing the Neighborhood of those Foreigners,
massacred some of them, which forced the rest, who were troubled with sickness
and feared the treatment their companions had received, to retire elsewhere.
Whereupon the Island was along time destitute of Inhabitants, and frequented
only by some Caribbians, who, coming and going to their Wars, struck in there
to get necessary refreshments; as also by some French of the Islands of
Martinico and Gardeloupe, who came thither to fish for Lamantine and Tortoises,
at certain seasons of the year.

But now the Zealanders are reestablished there, and about three years since
Lampsen, an ancient Burgo-master of Flushing, and one of the States General,
ventured to people the Island anew. He brought thither, in his own Ships,
several gallant persons, who are likely restore the Colony which his
Countrymen had planted there before.

This Island lying next to the Continent of that part of America which lies
Southward, lies very convenient for a Commerce with the Arovagues, the Calibis,
the Caribbians, and several other Indian Nations; and the keeping together of a
considerable force of men, which might be easily sent over into the Continent,
and lay the foundations of a powerful Colony.

GRANADA.
THe Island of Granada, lying at twelve degrees and sixteen scruples on this
side of the Line, does properly begin the Semicircle of the Antilles. It is in
length about seven leagues, the breadth not the same in all places, reaching
North and South like a Crescent. The French became masters of it about six
years since. They had at the beginning great contestations with the Caribbians,
who, for some months, disputed the possession of it with them by force of
arms. But at last Monsieue Parquet, Governor of Martinico, who had resolved,
at his own charge, to make an establishment there, obliged them, out of a
consideration of their own concernments, grounded principally on the great
advantages they received from the Neighborhood of the French, to leave him
quietly possessed of it.

The ground produces all manner of the Country provisions, as Sugarcanes,
Ginger, and excellent Tobacco. The air is very healthy. It is well furnished
with Springs of fresh water, and places of good Anchorage for Ships. It has
also abundance of fair Trees, some excellent for their fruit, others for their
fitness for building. There is good Fishing all about it, and the Inhabitants
have also good Fishing and Hunting in and about three little Islands, called
the Granadines, lying North-East from it. The first Governor of this place
was, Monsieur Le Comte Governor of Martinico, who was succeeded by Mon. dela
Vaumeniere. It has since been bought by the Count of Serillas, of Mons.
Parquet.

BEKIA.
THe Island of Bekia is distant from the Line twelve degrees and 25 scruples.
It is ten or twelve leagues about, and would be fruitful enough, if it were
cultivated. There is in it a good Haven for Ships; but inasmuch as it is not
furnished with fresh water, it is not much frequented, unless it be by some
Caribbians of St. Vincent's, who sometimes go thither a fishing, or to dress
some small Gardens they have up and down there for their diversion.

St VINCENT.
THe Island of St. Vincent is the most populous of any possessed by the
Caribbians. Its Altitude is sixteen degres North from the Line. Those who have
seen the Island Ferro, or Fietro, one of the Canaries, affirm, that this is
much of the same figure. It may be about eight leagues in length, and six in
breadth. There are in it several high Mountains, between which are very
fruitful Plains, if they were cultivated. The Caribbians have many fair
Villages, where they live pleasantly, and without any disturbance. And though
they have a jealously of the strangers that live about them, and stand on their
Guard when they come to their Roads, yet do they not deny them the Bread of the
Country, which is Cassava, Water, Fruits, and other Provisions, growing in
their Country, if they want them, taking in exchange, Wedges, Hooks, and other
implements of Iron, which they much esteem

BARBADOS.
THe Barbados, which is the same that is called by the French Barboude, lies
between the 13 and 14 degree, North from the Equator, and Eastward from St.
Alousie, and St. Vincent. The English, who planted a Colony there in the year
M. DC. XXVII. allow it to be about 25 leagues in compass, but greater in length
then breadth. There is in the whole Island but one River, which truly deserves
that name: but the Country lying low and even, there are, in several places,
Pools and Reservatories of fresh water, which supply the scarcity of Springs
and Rivers. Most houses have also Cisterns, and Wells which are never dry.

At the first Cultivation the Earth promised not much; but experience has
evinced the contrary, it plentifully producing Tobacco, Ginger, Cotton, and
especially Sugarcanes, insomuch that, next to St. Christophers, it is the most
frequented by Merchants, and the most populous of all the Antilles. About the
year 1646. they accounted in it about twenty thousand Inhabitants, not
comprehending in that number the Negro-Slaves, who were thought to amount to a
far greater.

There are many places in this Island, which may justly be called Towns, as
containing many fair, long, and spacious Streets, furnished with a great number
of noble Structures, built by the principal Officers and Inhabitants of this
flourishing Colony. Nay indeed, taking a full prospect of the whole Island, a
man might take it for one great City, inasmuch as the houses are at no great
distance one from another; that many of those are very well built, according to
the rate of Building in England; that the Shops and Storehouses are well
furnished with all sorts of Commodities; that there are many Fairs and Markets;
and lastly, that the whole Island, as great Cities are, is divided into several
Parishes, which have very fair Churches. The most considerable of the
Inhabitants think themselves so well, that it is seldom seen they ever remove
thence.

This Island is very famous in all parts, by reason of the great abundance of
excellent Sugar it has afforded these many years. It Is true, it is not so
white as that which comes from other parts, but it is better esteemed by
Refiners, because it has fairer grain and yields more, when it is purified.

St LUCY's.
ST Lucy's Island lies at 13 degrees. 40 scr. on this side the Line. It was
heretofore frequented only by a small number of Indians, who came to fish
thereabouts. But some time since, the French of Martinico came and kept them
company. There are two high Mountains in the Island, which are very cold: They
are seen at a great distance, and are called by the French, Les Pitons de St.
Alousie. At the descent of these Mountains, there are pleasant Valleys covered
with great Trees, and watered with Springs. The air is conceived to be healthy,
and that the soil will be fruitful, when it shall be a little better discovered
then it is yet.

MARTINICO.
THe Island of Martinico, which the Indians called Madanina, lies at the
altitude of fourteen degrees and thirty scruples on this side the Line. It is
about sixteen leagues in length, of an unequal breadth, and about forty five in
compass. The Soil of it is pleasant, which makes it at this day one of the most
populous of all the Caribbies.

The French and Indians are jointly possessed of it, and have lived a long time
in very good correspondence. Mons. Parquet is the present French Governor of
it.

Of all the Caribbies this is the most uneven Island, that is, the most full of
Mountains, which are very high, and intermixed with inaccessible Rocks. The
fruitful parts of it consist in certain round Hills or eminences; as also in
very delightful skirts of Mountains, and some Plains or Valleys, which are
extremely pleasant.

The Mountains of it are not to be inhabited, and serve for the feeding and
retreat of wild Beasts, Serpents and Snakes, whereof there is great abundance.
Yet are these Mountains well furnished with wood, which, in bigness and length,
exceed any in Europe, and bears fruit and food for the wild Boars and Birds.

As for the Hills and skirts of Mountains, they are for the most part,
inhabitable; and of a good soil, but very troublesome to manure. For some of
them are so high and steepy, that people can hardly work on them without
danger, or at least without holding by a Tobacco-stalk, or some Tree with one
hand, that they may work with the other.

The Tobacco which grows on these eminent places is ever the best, and esteemed
above that which grows in the Valleys, and bottoms, which have not so much
presence of the Sun. For the Tobacco, which grows in bottoms, and places
encompassed with Woods, is ever full of yellow-spots, as if it were burnt, and
neither takes well, nor keeps well. These enclosed places are also unhealthy,
and those who work in them contract an ill color, and the new-comers, who are
not accustomed to that air, do sooner, in these, then in any other places,
catch that griping of the Belly, which is so common in these Islands.

There being two different Nations in this Island, it is accordingly divided
between them, to wit, the Indians, the natural Inhabitants of the Country; and
the French, who laid the foundations of this Colony in July, in the year 1635.
under the Conduct of Mons. Desnambuc, who brought them from St. Christophers,
and left them in quiet possession of this place.

That part of the Island which is inhabited by the Indians is comprehended in
one quarter, which is called the Cabes-terre, without any other distinction.

The part occupied by the French, and called Basse-terre, is divided into five
quarters, which are by them called, La Case du Pilote, La Case Capot, Le
Carbet, Le Fort St. Pierre, and Le Prescheur. In each of these Quarters there
is a Church, or at least a Chapel, a Court of Guard, and a Magazine for Arms,
about which are built several large and fair Storehouses, both for the
Commodities that are imported, and those of the growth of the Island.

The Quarter of the Case du Pilote is so called from a Savage Captain, who had
sometimes lived there, and gloried much in the name Pilot, which the French had
given him. He discovered to Mons. Parquet, the engagements which those of his
Nation entered into against him.

In the Quarter of Case Capot, there is a very noble Savanna, (thus they call
in the Islands pleasant Meadows and Pastures) which has, on the one side the
River called Capot, and on the other, many fair Edifices.

The Carbet Quarter has its name from the ancient Inhabitants, who sometime
had there one of their greatest Villages, and a public House which they called
Carbet, a name yet common to those places, where they have their meetings. The
French Governor lived in this Quarter a long time, having built a noble
Brick-house, near the Haven, in a pleasant bottom, refreshed by a considerable
River, which falls down out of the Mountains. The Indians, who never had seen
Structure of any such material, looked on it at first with a great
astonishment, and having attempted to shake it, by the strength of their
shoulders, but not stirring it, they were forced acknowledge, that if all Houses
were so built, the Tempest which they call the Hurricane would not prejudice
them. But since, the Governor not having his health perfectly there, he made a
present of it to the Jesuits, together with the Gardens about it, as also the
rarities and curiosities of the Country, and several other habitations
dependent on it, and a great number of Negro-slaves, who cultivate them.

Fort St. Pierre, or St. Peter's Fort, is the place where the Governor now
lives. There are in it several great pieces of Cannon, some of Brass, some of
Iron. This Fort commands all the Haven. About a stones cast from the
Governors, stands the fair College of the Jesuits, situate on a pleasant
River, which is thence called, The Jesuits River. This Structure is of
Freestone and Brick, very delightful to the eye. The Avenues also want not
their temptation, and, all about it, are Gardens and Orchards, producing
whatever is most delicious of the growth of the Islands; as also several
Plants, Herbs, Flowers and Fruits brought thither from France. There is also a
Vineyard, which yields yearly good store of Wine.

The Le Prescheur, or the Preachers Quarter, contains an even low part of the
Country, very considerable for its extent, and several high Mountains, upon the
skirts whereof, there are a good number of fair Habitations.

Between the Cabes-terre, and the Basse-terre, there is a kind of bottom, where
is abundance of that Wood by which the Tobacco climes up. There they have also
the Reeds, wherewith the Hutts are Palisado'd; as also the wild Mahot, the bark
whereof serves for several things about the house.

Most of the Houses in this Island are of wood, very convenient, and delightful
to the eye. The most considerable are built on certain eminences. That
advantageous situation contributes much to their health who live in them, for
the air is clearer then that of the Valleys. It also adds much to the beauty of
those pleasant Structures; and causes a very divertive prospect.

The best Haven of this Island lies between Carbet and St. Peter's Fort. It is
more safe then any of the neighboring Islands, as being encompassed with high
Mountains, which secure the Ships lying in it from the violence of all winds.

Between Case du Pilote, and a bottom called Culde Sac des Salines, there is a
Rock, running about half a league into the Sea, which is called the Diamond,
from its figure, and is a retreat for an infinite number of Birds, and among
others Wood-quists, which breed in it. It is hard getting up to it, yet some
visit it, as they pass by, when the young ones are fit to eat.

There is another place on the same side as the Diamond, into which Ships are
brought, to be refreshed, and mended. The Sea there is always calm, but the air
not healthy, in regard the Seamen commonly catch Fevers, which yet are not
very dangerous, inasmuch as they shake them off, as soon as they depart thence.

Besides the Torrents, which in times of rains fall down with great violence,
and the inundations of this Island, there are nine or ten considerable Rivers
which are never dry. Their sources are at the ascent or foot of the highest
Mountains, and having watered the Valleys they fall into the Sea. They are
prejudicial to the places near them, in regard that when they overflow, they
root up Trees, undermine rocks, and make a desolation over the Fields and
Gardens, carrying along with them, the houses which lie in the plain Country,
and whatever opposes the impetuosity of their course. This inconvenience has
obliged the Inhabitants of this Colony to take up their habitations on the tops
of those little Mountains, wherewith their Island is richly furnished; for they
secure them from these inundations.

But what is most considerable in this Island, is the multitude of the
Inhabitants possessing it, who are thought to amount to nine or ten thousand
persons, not comprehending in that number the Indians and Negroes, who are near
as many. The mildness of the Government and the advantageous situation of the
Island contribute much to the advancement of it and the multiplication of its
Inhabitants. For most of the French and Dutch Ships, bound for America, so
order their course, that they may touch here, rather then at any other of the
Islands: and as soon as they have cast Anchor in any of the Havens, to take in
the refreshments necessary for them, they set a shore their Passengers, if they
be not expressly obliged to bring them to some other place. Nay it has often
happened that whole Families, which had left France, with a design to pass over
into some of the other Islands which lie beyond this, and are not inferior to
it, either as to Air or Soil, being wearied out with the inconveniences of a
long Voyage, have settled here to avoid exposing themselves to the same again.

Among the great multitude of people which make up this Colony, there are many
persons of worth and quality, who after their honorable employments in other
parts of the world, have at last made choice of this place, for their repose
and retirement. Among these are particularly to be mentioned Mons. Courcelas,
Lieutenant General under the Governor, a person who by his excellent conduct
has gained the affections of both Inhabitants and Strangers; Mons. Le Comte,
and Mons. de L' Oubiere, as being the principal Officers.

At the beginning of our Description of this Island, we said, that the French
and Indians lived there a long time together in good correspondence. But the
Letters that came thence lately, giving an account of the state of it, affirm,
that about four years since, the Caribbians made an insurrection, and have
continued a War with the French ever since; that since that time, those
Barbarians had done great mischiefs in the French Quarters; and that neither
the height of the Mountains, nor depth of the precipices, nor yet the horror of
vast and dreadful solitudes, which till then had been accounted an impenetrable
wall, lying between the several divisions of both the Nations, hindered not
their falling upon them, and filling their habitations with fire, massacres,
desolation, and whatever the implacable spirit of revenge could suggest to them
of greatest cruelty, to feed their rage, and satisfy their brutality.

Of the occasions of this Rupture there are several accounts given. Some
attribute it to Mons. Parquet's establishing of French Colonies in the Islands
of Granada and St. Lucy, without the consent of the Caribbians, who thereupon
took occasion of discontent. Others affirm that they took up Arms, to revenge
the deaths of some of their Nation, Inhabitants of the Island of S. Vincent,
whom they believe to have come to their end by drinking some poisoned
Strong-water which had been brought them from Martinico.

Immediately upon the breaking forth of this War, and the first devastations
made by the Caribbians in one of the French Quarters (which, according to their
custom, was by a base surprise) those who envied the glory of those Colonies,
and their progress and establishment in those Islands, scattered their
malicious reports, That the French would never be able to keep under those
Barbarians; That those of the same Nation, who live in Dominico and S.
Vincent's, had secretly applied themselves to all their Allies of the
Continent, to incite them to engage in an unanimous War against the French;
That the more easily to effectuate that design, and make their Party stronger,
they had gone so far as to treat of a Peace with the Arovagues, their ancient
Enemies; And, That they had so far engaged all these Salvages in their Quarrel,
that they were resolved with a joyntforce to fall upon the French, and overrun
them with their multitude.

It is not certainly known whether there were really any such Association
against them or not; but certain it is, that the effects ^of it appeared not;
and that after the first Irruptions of the Caribbians of Martinico into the
French Quarters, which were indeed with some advantage of the Barbarians, they
have been so unsuccessful in their Enterprises since, and worsted so with the
loss of the chief amongst them, that about two years since they were forced to
quit their Villages, and leave their Gardens to the disposal of the Victorious,
and retire for safety into Woods, and inaccessible Rocks and Mountains. So that
the World is now persuaded of the contrary, viz. That if those Barbarians shall
make any further attempt to recover themselves out of that wretched
Consternation in which they live, by the force of Arms, they will in all
likelihood be forced either to quit the absolute possession of the Island to
the French, or accept of such Conditions of Peace as they can obtain, to renew
the ancient Alliance, which they have been but too forward to break.

CHAP. III. Of the Islands which lie toward the North.
THe Islands we intend to describe in this Chapter, lying more toward the
North, are consequently more temperate. They are also more frequented than
those of Tabago, Granada, and S. Alousia, in regard the Ships which have
refreshed themselves at Martinico, and fall down thence to S. Christophers, may
visit them one after another, without any diversion out of their Course.

DOMINICO.
THe Island of Dominico lies at the altitude of 15 degrees and 30 minutes. It
is conceived to be in length about 13. Leagues, and not much less in breadth,
where it is at the greatest. There are in the midst of it several high
Mountains, which encompass an inaccessible bottom, where may be seen from the
tops of certain rocks an infinite number of Reptiles, of a dreadful bulk and
length.

This Island is inhabited by the Caribbians, who are very numerous in it. They
have a long time entertained those who came to visit them with a story of a
vast and monstrous Serpent, which had its abode in that bottom. They affirmed
that there was on the head of it a very sparkling stone, like a Carbuncle, of
inestimable price; That it commonly veiled that rich Jewel with a thin moving
skin, like that of a man's eyelid; but that when it went to drink, or sported
himself in the midst of that deep bottom, he fully discovered it, and that the
rocks and all about received a wonderful luster from the fire issuing out of
that precious Crown.

The supreme Person of this Island was heretofore one of the most considerable
among those of the same Nation. For when all their Forces marched out to Battle
against the Arovagues, their common Enemies of the Continent; he had the
conduct of the Vanguard and was known by a particular mark which he had about
him.

When any French Ships come near this Island, there are immediately seen
several Canows, in each whereof there are three, or but four Indians at the
most, who come to direct them to the Havens, where they may safely Anchor. They
commonly bring along with them some of the Country Fruits, whereof having
presented the Captains and other Officers with the choicest, they proffer the
rest in exchange for Fishinghooks, grains of Crystal, and such trifles, as they
account precious.

MARIGALANTA.
THe Island of Marigalanta lies at the altitude of 15 degrees. and 40 minutes. It
is a flat Country, and well furnished with wood, which argues it would be
fertile enough, if it were once reduced to culture. It has always been
frequented by the Indians, as well in order to Fishing, as for some small
Gardens which they have in it.

The last Letters from the Carribies brought news that Mons. d'Howel, Governor
of Gardeloupe had lately peopled this Island, and built a Fort in it to keep
under certain Indians, who would have opposed his design, and had killed twenty
of those whom he had sent thither at first to discover the Country; and that
upon that accident he had sent over thither three hundred men, who retreated in
the night time to a great Vessel they had in the road, till such time as the
Fort was made tenable. The Caribbians of Dominico, the better to continue the
good correspondence there is between them and the Inhabitants of Gardeloupe,
who are their next Neighbors, affirm they had no hand in that Massacre, and
excused themselves to Mons. d' Howel, imputing it to those of their Nation, who
live in the other Islands.

SAINTS.
BEtween Dominico and Gardeloupe there are three or four small Islands very
near one another, commonly called the Saints: They are at the same Altitude as
Marigalanta, West from which they lie, and are as yet desert and unhabited.

The Island of Birds lies more West then the forementioned, at fifteen degrees,
and forty five minutes. It has that name from the infinite number of Birds,
which breed in it, making their Nests even on the Sea-shoar: They are for the
most part easily taken with the hand, not fearing men in regard they seldom see
any. This Island lies very low, and is hardly perceived till one be very near
it.

DESIRADO.
THe Island Desirado was so called by Christopher Columbus, as being the first
discovered by him of all the Caribbies, in his second Voyage into America. And
as he called the first place he discovered of this new World San Salvador,
whereas before it was called Guanahani, which is one of the Lucayos, at the
altitude of 25 degrees and some minutes; so he called this Desirado, from the
obtaining of his Desire. It lies ten Leagues from Gardeloupe, North-east, and
from the Line 16 degrees and 10 minutes. The soil of this Island is good; and
consequently it will not be long ere it be Inhabited.

GARDELOUPE.
GArdeloupe is one of the greatest and noblest Islands of any possessed by the
French in the Caribbies. It was heretofore called by the Indians Carucueira;
but the Spaniards gave it the name by which it is now known. Some would have it
precisely at 16 Degrees; others add thereto 16 minutes. The Circumference of it
is about 60 Leagues, and, where broadest, about nine or ten in breadth. It is
divided into two parts by a little Arm of the Sea, which separates the
Grand'terre from that which is properly called Gardeloupe. The more Easterly
part of this latter is called by the French Caebes-Terre, and that toward the
West Basse-Terre.

That part of it which is called the Grand'-Terre has two Salt Pits, where the
Seawater is converted into Salt, as in several other Islands, by the force of
the Sun, without assistance of Art.

That part which is inhabited has in several places, especially toward the
middle of it, diverse high Mountains, whereof some are full of bare and dreadful
Rocks, rising out of a Bottom, encompassed with many inaccessible Precipices;
others are covered with delightful Trees, which are to them at all times a kind
of pleasant Garland. At the foot of these Mountains there are several Plains of
a vast extent, which are refreshed by a great number of pleasant Rivers, which
occasioned heretofore the Spanish Ships to touch there, to take in fresh water
for the continuance of their Voyage. Some of these Rivers when they are
overflown bring down pieces of Wood that have passed through the Sulphur-mines,
that are in one of the most remarkable Mountains in the Island, which
continually casts up smoke, whence it is called the Sulphur-Mountain. There are
also in it Springs of hot water, which have been found by experience good for
the Dropsy, and all Indispositions proceeding from a cold cause. There are
between these two parts of the Land two great Gulphs, whence those Inhabitants
who delight in Fishing may at any time take Tortoises, and several other
excellent Fish.

The French first planted themselves in this Island in the year M. DC. XXXV. M.
M. du Plessis and l' Olive were the first Governors of it, with equal
authority; but the former dying seven months after his arrival, and the other
becoming unfit for Government by the loss of his sight, there was sent over
Mons. Auber, one of the Captains of St. Christophers, who chanced to be then at
Paris. This Colony owes its conservation and welfare since to the prudence and
conduct of this worthy Governor, who signalized his entrance into that Charge
by the Peace he made with the Carribians, and several good Constitutions in
order to the welfare of the Inhabitants, whereof we shall give a more
particular account in the second Book of this History.

Monsieur d' Howel is now Lord and Governor of this Island, which is yet better
since his establishment, for the number of the Inhabitants is much increased,
and they have built very fair Houses, and brought such Trading thither, that
now it is one of the most flourishing and most considerable Islands of the
Caribbies.

There are in it very fair Plains, wherein the ground is ordered by the Plough,
a thing not to be seen in any of the other Islands. And after the Plough, it
bears Rice, Turky-wheat, the Manioc, whereof Cassava is made, Potatoes, nay, in
some places Ginger and Sugarcanes, with great increase.

The reformed Jacobins, or White-Friers, are possessed of some part of the best
Land in this Island, on which they have many delightful Plantations. The good
condition wherein they are is to be acknowledged an effect of the care of the
R. Father Raymond Breton, who, amidst many great difficulties, preserved them
to his Order.

In that part of the Island, which is called Basse-terre, there is a little
Town which grows daily bigger: It has already several Streets adorned with
many handsome houses of Timber, most of two Stories, of a convenient structure
and delightful to the eye. Besides a fair Parish Church, there are in it a
College of Jesuits, and a Monastery of Carmelites, brought thither lately by
the Governors means; as also several Storehouses, well furnished with
Provisions and Commodities, requisite for the subsistence of the Colony.

The Governor lives in a Castle, not far from the Town. It is built
apiece, having at each corner Spurs and Redoubts of Masons work, of such
thickness as to bear the weight of several great Pieces of Brass, which are
mounted there. A little beyond the Castle there is a very high Mountain which
might somewhat incommodate it; but the Governor not omitting any thing that
might contribute to the ornament or security of the Island, has planted some
great Pieces there, and to prevent surprise of an Enemy, he has made a kind of
Citadel there, which is at all times furnished with Provisions and Ammunition.
The Cabes-terre has also a considerable Fort, which secures the whole Quarter;
it is called St. Mary's Fort.

Many persons of quality have made their retirement into this Island, and have
set up a great number of Sugar-Mills.

ANTEGO.
THe Island of Antego lies at the Altitude of 16 degrees, and 11 minutes,
between the Barbados, and the Desirado. It is in length about six or seven
leagues, the breadth not the same in all places; The access of it is dangerous
for Shipping, by reason of the rocks which encompass it. It was conceived
heretofore, that it was not to be inhabited, upon this presumption, that there
was no fresh water in it: but the English, who have planted themselves in it,
have met with some, and have made Ponds and Cisterns, which might supply that
defect. This Island is abundant in Fish, most sorts of wild Fowl, and in all of
tame Cattle. It is inhabited by seven or eight hundred men.

MONT-SERRAT.
THe Island of Mont-Serrat received that name from the Spaniards, upon the
account of a certain resemblance there is between a Mountain in this, and that
of Mont-Serrat, which is not far from Barcelona; and it has kept the name ever
since. It lies at the Altitude of 27 degrees. It is about three Leagues in
length, and almost as much in breadth, so that it seems to be almost of a round
figure. It Is conceived there are in it between six and seven hundred men.

What is most considerable in this Island is a very fair Church, of a
delightful Structure, built by the contributions of the Governor and
Inhabitants. The Pulpit, the Seats, and all the Joyners and Carpenters work
within it, are of the most precious and sweet-scented-wood growing in the
Country.

BARBOUTHOS.
THe Island which the English call the Barbouthos, lies at the Altitude of 17
degrees, and 30 minutes. It lies very low, and is in length about five leagues,
lying North-East from Mont-Serrat. The English are the Inhabitants of it, and
the Colony may amount to between four and five hundred men, who find whereupon
to subsist conveniently.

It is subject to this annoyance, which is also common to the Islands of Antego
and Mont-Serrat, that the Caribbians of Dominico, and other places, do many
times commit great spoils in it. The enmity and aversion which those Barbarians
have conceived against the English Nation in general, is come to that height,
that there hardly passes a year but they make one or two irruptions, in the
night time, into same one of the Islands it is possessed of; and then, if they
be not timely discovered, and valiantly opposed, they kill all the men they
meet, ransack the Houses and burn them, and if they can get any of the Women or
Children, they carry them away Prisoners into their own Territories, with all
the Booty they have a mind to.

ROTONDA.
THe Island called Redonda, or Rotonda, from its round figure, lies at the
altitude of 17 degrees, and 10 minutes. It is a very little one, and at a
distance seems to be only a great Tower, and taking a prospect of it one way, a
man might say it were a great Ship under sail. It is of easy access on all
sides, by reason the Sea about it is deep, and without rocks or shelves, which
might be dangerous to shipping.

NIEVES.
THe Island called Nieves, otherwise Mevis, lies at the altitude of 27 degrees,
and 19 minutes, Northward. It is not above six leagues about, and in the midst
of it there is but one only Mountain, which is very high, and covered with
great Trees up to the very top. The Plantations are all about the Mountain,
beginning from the Seaside, till you come to the highest part of it, the
ascent being commodious enough. This Island may easily be compassed either by
land or water. There are in it diverse springs of fresh water, whereof some are
strong enough to make their way to the Sea: Nay there is one spring, whereof
the waters are hot and mineral. Not far from the source there are Bathes made,
which are frequented with good success, in order to the curing of those
diseases for which the waters of Bourbon are recommended.

The English, who planted themselves there in the year M. DC. XXVIII. are still
the Inhabitants of this Island, and they are now thought to be between three
and four thousand men, who subsist and live handsomely, by the trade they drive
in Sugar, Ginger and Tobacco.

This Island is the best governed of any in the Caribbies. Justice is there
administered with great prudence by a Council, consisting of the most eminent
and most ancient Inhabitants of the Colony: Swearing, Thieving, Drunkenness,
Fornication, and all dissolutions and disorders are severely punished. In the
Year M. DC. XLIX. Mr. Lake, a knowing person and fearing God, had the
Government of it. He is since departed this life.

There are in this Island three Churches, which have nothing extraordinary, as
to Structure, but are very convenient as to the performing of Divine Service.
For the security of the Vessels that are in the Road, and to prevent the
invasion of an Enemy, there is a Fort built, wherein are several great Pieces
which command as far as the Sea. It secures also the public Storehouses, into
which all the Commodities that are imported, and necessary for the subsistence
of the Inhabitants, are disposed. And thence it is, that they are afterward
distributed to those private persons who stand in need thereof, provided those
who have the oversight of them think them solvent persons, according to the
time and price agreed upon, and ordered by the Governor and Council.

A further recommendation of this Island, is, that it is divided only by a
small arm of the Sea from that of St. Christophers, the noblest and most famous
of all the Caribbies. Having given but a short Description of the other
Islands, what we shall give of this, as being the chiefest, will be somewhat
larger. For which reason, we shall assign it a Chapter by it self.

CHAP. IV. Of the Island of St. Christopher.
ST Christophers was so called by Christopher Columbus, who finding it very
pleasant, would needs give it his own name. He was engaged to give it this name
from a consideration of the figure of its Mountains, the Island having on its
upper part, as it were upon one of its shoulders, another lesser Mountain, as
St Christopher is painted like a Giant, carrying our Savior upon his, as it
were a little Child. Its altitude is at 17 degrees, 25 minutes.

It is about 25 leagues in compass. The Soil being light and sandy, is apt to
produce all sorts of the Country Fruits, as also many of the choicest growing
in Europe. It lies high in the midst, by reason of some very high Mountains,
out of which arise several Rivers, which sometimes are so suddenly overflown
through the rains falling on the Mountains, so as that there is none seen at
the extremities of them, or in the Plains, that the Inhabitants are many times
surpised by those Torrents.

The whole Island is divided into four Cantons, or Quarters, two whereof are
possessed by the English; the other two by the French; but in such sort, as
that people cannot cross from one quarter to the other, without passing over
Lands of one of the two Nations. The English have in their part a greater
number of little Rivers then the French; but in requital, the latter have more
of the plain Country, and Lands fitter for cultivation. The English also exceed
the French in number; but the latter have more fortified places, and are better
armed. The French have four Forts, well furnished with great Pieces, which
carry a great way into the Sea; and one of them has regular works, like a
Citadel. The most considerable next that lies at the Haven, or Anchoring-place,
called Basse-terre. There is in both a constant Guard kept: And to prevent the
differences which might happen between two different Nations, each of them upon
the Avenues of their Quarters has a Guard which is, renewed every day. The
English have two fortified places, whereof one commands the great Haven, and
the other a Descent, not far from Point de Sable.

This Island is furnished with a fair Salt-pit, lying on the Seaside, which the
Inhabitants commonly call Cul-de-Sac. Not far thence, there is a small Point of
Land, which reaches out so far toward the Island of Nieves, that it is not
above half a league of Sea between the two, insomuch that there have been those
who have swam from one to the other.

It is conceived there is a Silver-mine in St. Christophers; but in regard the
Salt Pits, Woods, Havens, and Mines are common to both Nations, no body looks
after it: Besides, such an enterprise would require a great stock, and an
infinite number of Slaves. The true Silver-mine of this Island is Sugar.

A man may easily compass the whole Island by Land, but cannot pass through the
midst of it, by reason of several great and steepy Mountains, between which
there are dreadful precipices, and springs of hot water: Nay there are some
springs of Sulphur, which has occasioned one of them to be called, the
Sulphur-Mountain. Taking the Circumference from without, the body of the Island
seems to extend it self, by a gentle descent, down to the Seaside, and is of
an unequal breadth, according as the Mountains dilate their skirts more or less
toward the Sea, or the more the Sea advances, and forces the land against the
Mountains. The Soil, as far as it is cultivated, that is, to the steepy ascent
of the Mountains, is divided in a manner about into several stages or stories,
through which there are drawn fair and spacious ways, in a strait-line, as much
as the places would permit. The first of these lines of communication begins at
about a hundred paces from the Seaside; another three or four hundred paces
higher, and so ascending to the third or fourth, whence a man may take a very
pleasant prospect of all the Plantations from thence downwards.

Every Stage, which makes a kind of girdle, or enclosure, greater or lesser
about the Mountains, according to the greater or lesser distance of it from the
Mountains, has also its ways, which like so many crossing streets afford an
easy access to those who live higher or lower; and this with such a noble
symmetry, that when a man compasses the Island by Sea, he cannot imagine any
thing more delightful, then to see that pleasing verdure of so many Trees,
which are planted along the highways, and are the divisions between the several
Plantations. The prospect is such, that the eye can hardly be wearied with it:
If it be directed upwards, it is terminated by those high Mountains, which are
crowned with a perpetual verdure, and clothed with precious Woods: If
downwards, it is entertained by the delightful prospect of Gardens, which taken
in from those places where the Mountains are inaccessible, are thence by a
gentle and easy descent continued to the Seaside. The delightful bright-green
of the Tobacco, planted exactly by the line, the pale-yellow of the
Sugarcanes, when come to maturity, and the dark-green of Ginger and Potatoes,
make so delightful a Landscape, as must cause an extraordinary recreation to the
unwearied eye. What very much adds to this delight, is, that in the midst of
every Plantation, or Garden, there may be seen several fair houses of different
structures, particularly those which are covered with red or glazed slate,
contribute a greater luster to that pleasant perspective. And in regard there
is a perpetual ascent in the Island, the lower stage or story deprives not the
sight of the pleasure arising from the prospect of that which lies at a greater
distance; but a man may at one grasp of the eye, as it were in an instant,
behold all those delightful divisions, all those ways which look like so many
walks of an Orchard, planted with several sorts of Trees; all those Gardens
regularly beset with diverse Fruits; and all those Edifices, which for the most
part are not distant one from another above a hundred paces. In a word, so many
agreeable objects offer themselves to the eye, at the same intuition, that it
is at a kind of loss on which most to fasten it self.

There is indeed a certain necessity, for the greater convenience of the
Inhabitants, and easier managing of their employments, that their houses should
be distinct one from another, and placed in the midst of that piece of ground
which they have to manure. The French, besides the houses they have thus
disposed at certain distances, have, in their Quarter of Basse-terre, a Town
which grows bigger daily, and whereof the Houses are of Brick and Timber. It
lies near the Haven, where commonly Ships lie at Anchor. The most considerable
of the Inhabitants, and Foreign-Merchants have Storehouses there.

The French and Dutch Merchants, who reside there constantly, are well
furnished with excellent Wines, Aqua-vitae, and Beer, all sorts of Stuffes, of
Silk, or Wool, fit for the Country, and generally all the refreshments, which
being not of the growth of the Island, are yet necessary for the better
accommodation of the Inhabitants. All is sold at a reasonable rate, and in
exchange for the Commodities growing in the Country. In the same place live
several sorts of Tradesmen, whose employments are necessary to Commerce and
civil Society. There is also a Hall for the administration of Justice, and a
fair Church able to contain a very great Congregation: The Structure is of
wood, raised on a foundation of Freestone: Instead of Glass-windows there are
only turned Pillars, after the fashion of a Balcony. It is covered with red
Slate.

The Capuchins for some years had the oversight of the said Church, and the
charge of the Souls, as to the French, over the whole Island: but in the year
one thousand six hundred forty and six, they were disengaged from that
employment by the unanimous consent of the Inhabitants, who civilly dismissed
them, and received in their stead Jesuits and Carmelites, who have very fair
Houses and Plantations, which are manured by a great number of Slaves belonging
to them, through whose means they are very handsomely maintained. The R. F.
Henry du Vivier was the first Superior of the Jesuitical Mission.

His Excellency the General has also built a very fair Hospital, in a very
healthy place, where such sick persons as are unable to effect their recovery
at their own houses, are attended, and maintained, and visited by Physicians
and Surgeons, till they are restored to their former health. Strangers also who
fall sick in the Island are received in there. Order is also taken that Orphans
be disposed into convenient houses, where they are brought up and instructed.

There are many noble Structures built both by the the English and French; but
the most magnificent of any is the Castle of the French General, the particular
Description whereof we shall nevertheless forbear, in regard it makes not much
to the Natural History often he Caribbies.

Of the English building the most considerable are those of the late Mr.
Warner, first Governor General of this Nation; Mr. Rich's, his successor; Mr.
Everard's, and Col. Geffreyson's, which may well be ranked among the most
noble, and best accomplished of any in the Caribbies.

The English have also built in this Island five very fair Churches, well
furnished within with Pulpits, and Seats, of excellent Joyners work, of
precious wood. Till the late Times, the Ministers were sent thither by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, to whose Diocese it belongs.

CHAP. V. Of the Lee-ward Islands.
ALL the Islands lying West from St. Christophers are commonly called the
Lee-ward Islands, inasmuch as the constant wind of the Caribbies is an
East Wind, with some point of the North, and that there is seldom any West or
South Wind. Of these there are nine principal ones, whereof we shall give an
account in this Chapter, according to the order they are placed in the Map.

St EUSTACE.
THe Island of St. Eustace lies North-West from St. Christophers, at the
altitude of seventeen degrees, and forty minutes. It is about five leagues in
compass. To speak properly, it is but a Mountain rising up in the midst of the
Ocean, much like a Sugar Loaf, which is thought to be the figure of Mount
Tabor, and the Pic of Teneriffe, save that the last named is incomparably
higher. The Colony inhabiting it, consisting of about sixteen hundred men,
acknowledge the Sovereignty of the States General, who have granted the
Government of it to Mons. Van Ree, and his Associates, Merchants of Flushing in
Zealand.

This Island is the strongest, as to situation, of all the Caribbies, for there
is but one good descent, which may be easily defended; so that a few men might
keep off a great Army: But besides this natural Fortification, there is in it a
strong Fort which commands the best Haven, the Guns of it carrying a good
distance into the Sea.

The Inhabitants have neat houses, and those well furnished, as their
Countrymen have in Holland. Only the very top of the Mountain is covered with
Wood; all the compass is manured. It can hardly be credited what quantities of
Tobacco it has heretofore and still does yield.

Though the top of this Mountain seems to be very picked, yet is there a kind
of bottom of a large extent, affording a retreat to a great number of wild
Beasts. The Inhabitants are very industrious in keeping on their Lands all
sorts of Poultry, as also Swine and Conies, which breed exereamly.

There are no Springs in this Island; but there are now few Houses but have a
good Cistern to supply that defect: There are also Storehouses so well
furnished with all things requisite to life, and the accommodation of the
Inhabitants, that many times they have wherewith to pleasure their Neighbors.
The Inhabitants live decently and Christianly, and cannot justly be reproached
with those crimes which some have imposed upon them. There is in the Island one
Church, which has from time to time been supplied with very able Pastors; of
whom one was Mr May, who, among other Writings, put out a Learned Commentary on
the most difficult places of the five Books of Moses, wherein there are many
curious Observations of Nature.

St BARTHOLOMEW.
THe Island of S. Bartholomew lies North-east from S. Christophers, at the 16.
degree of Altitude: It has but little ground fit for manuring, though it be it
be a considerable compass: The Governour-General of the French, de Poincy,
peopled it at his own Charge about fifteen years since: It affords several
sorts of excellent Trees, which are much esteemed; an infinite number of Birds
of several kinds; and a kind of Limestone, which is fetched thence by the
Inhabitants of the other Islands. There is no safe coming in for Ships of great
burden, by reason of the many Rocks which encompass it. Such persons as are
inclined to solitude cannot dispose themselves to a fitter place for it than
this is.

SABA.
THe Island of Saba lies North-west from S. Eustace's, at the altitude of 17
degrees and 35 minutes: A man would think it at a distance to be only a Rock;
but the Colony of S. Eustace, which sent over men to manure ^t, has found in
it a pleasant Valley, able to employ many Families, who live contentedly in
that delightful retirement. Only Shallops can come near it. The Fishing about
it is very plentiful: Nor is there any want of other Refreshments that are
necessary.

St MARTIN.
THe Island of S. Martin lies at the Altitude of 18. degrees and 16 minutes: It
is about seven Leagues in length, and four in breadth: There are in it excellent
Salt-ponds, which had obliged the Spaniard to build a Fort in it, the better to
secure the possession of it; but about nine years since he demolished the Fort
and quitted the Island: Which being observed by Monsieur de Ruyter, who
commanded one of the Ships which Monsieur Lampsen commonly sends into America,
and who then sailed by this Island, he went to S. Eustace's to raise men, whom
he brought thither, and took possession of it in the name of the States General.

The news of the Spaniards departure thence coming at the same time to the
French General, he presently dispatched thither a Ship very well manned, to
recover the right and pretensions of the French, who had been possessed of the
said Island before the usurpation of the Spaniard: Since the French and Dutch
have divided it, and live very friendly together. The French have there about
300 men. The Salt-ponds are in the Dutch-Quarter. The Dutch are more in number
than the French: Lampsen and Van Ree are the Directors of the Colony. They have
very fair Houses, large Storehouses, and a considerable number of Negroes, who
are their perpetual Slaves.

There is no fresh water in this Island, but what when it rains is received
into Cisterns, which are common enough. There are several little Islands about
this, very convenient for the divertisements of the Inhabitants. There are also
Ponds of salt water, which run up far into the Land, in which are taken
abundance of good Fish, especially Sea-Tortoises. There are in the Woods
Wild-Swine, Quists, Turtles, and an infinite number of Parrots. There are also
several Trees, out of which distill several sorts of Gums: but the Tobacco
which grows here being esteemed beyond that of any of the other Islands, the
Commerce of it is so much the more considerable. The French and Dutch have
their distinct Churches in their several Jurisdictions. Monsieur des Camps, the
present Pastor of the Dutch Church was sent thither in September, 1655. by the
Synod of the Walloon Churches of the United Provinces, under whose spiritual
inspection this Colony is.

SNAKE.
THe Island named the Snake, is so called from its figure; for it is a long
tract of earth, but very narrow, winding almost about near S. Martins Island,
whence it is very plainly perceived. There is not any Mountain in it, the
ground lying low and even. Where it is broadest there is a Pond, about which
some English families planted themselves about seven or eight years since, and
where they plant Tobacco, which is highly esteemed of those who are good judges
in that Commodity. The Island lies at 18 degrees and 20 minutes on this side
the Line.

SOMBRERO.
THe Island Sombrero lies in the midst of those Banks which lie about the
Channel, through which the Ships bound for Europe do pass. It lies at 18
degrees and 30 minutes. The Spaniards called it Sombrero, from its having the
figure of a Hat. It is not inhabited.

ANEGADO.
A Negado, which lies under the same degree as Sombrero, is also desert, and of
dangerous access.

VIRGINS.
THe Virgins, greater and lesser, comprehend several Islands marked in the Map
by that name. There are numbered in all twelve or thirteen of them: They reach
Eastward from St. John de Porto-Rico, at the altitude of 18 degrees, North of
the Line. Between these Islands there are very good Anchoring places for
several Fleets. The Spaniards visit them often, in order to Fishing, which is
there plentiful. There are also in them an infinite number of rare both Land
and Seafowl. They afford so little good ground, that after a trial made thereof
in several places, it was concluded, that they deserved not Inhabitants.

Ste CROIX.
THe last of all the Caribbies of the Lee-ward Islands is the Island of Sante
Croix, or the Holy Cross. It lies at 18 degrees and some minutes. The
Caribbians who were forced thence by the Spaniards, call it Ayay: It was much
esteemed among them, because it was the first Island that Nation possessed
themselves of when they came from the North to seek a convenient habitation to
lay the foundations of their Colonies, as shall be represented particularly in
the Second Book of this History.

The Soil of this Island returns with good interest whatever is sown in it:
there are in it fair and spacious Plains, of a black earth, and easy to be
manured: there are also several fair and precious kinds of Trees good for Dying
and Joyners work. The Air is good, but the Waters not so wholesome, if drunk
immediately after they are drawn: To take away the ill quality they have, they
are put to rest a certain time in earthen vessels, which makes them good; and
thence it is conceived that the bad quality proceeds from their mud, as is
observed in those of the Nile.

This Island is now possessed by the French, who have raised it to a great
height after its several changes of former Masters. The French General supplies
it with Inhabitants at his own charge.

It may be nine or ten Leagues in length, and near as much in breadth, where it
is broadest. The Mountains are neither so high nor shuffled so near together,
but that people may get up to the tops of them, and that there is good ground
enough besides to find work for many thousands of men.

CHAP. VI. Of Trees growing in these Islands, whose Fruit may be eaten:
OF the Trees growing in these Islands some bear good Fruits, which contribute
to the nourishment of the Inhabitants; others are fit for Building, Joyners
work, or Dying: There are some also very successfully used in Medicine, and
some which only delight the Smelling by their sweet scent, and the Sight by
their ever verdant Boughs and Leaves.

Of those which bear Fruits fit for Food, and may be seen in Europe, there are
only here Orange Trees, Pomegranate-trees, Citron-trees, and Lemon-trees, the
bulk and goodness whereof far exceeds those of the same kinds growing elsewhere.

ORANGE.
OF Oranges there are two kinds, yet of the same figure, and distinguishable
only by the taste: some are sweet, others sharp, both extremely delicate. The
sharp are a great convenience to housekeeping, for they are used instead of
Verjuyce and Vinegar; but the sweet excel in goodness: Some indeed call the
China-Orange, the Queen of Oranges, and real Musk-balls under the color and
figure of Oranges: But however some may celebrate the delightful sweetness of
the China-Oranges, there are others prefer the excellent taste and picquancy of
our American-Oranges.

POMEGRANATE.
THe Pomegranate-trees grow also excellently well in all these Islands, and
bear Fruits fair to the Eye and pleasant to the Taste. In many places these
Trees serve for Palisadoes about Courts, borders of Gardens, and the Avenues of
Houses.

CITRONS.
OF Citrons there are three kinds, different as to bigness, and which
consequently are not all called Citrons. The first kind, which is the fairest
and largest, is called Lime: it is only good to be preserved, having very
little juice; but preserved, it is excellent. The second kind is the Lemon,
about the bigness of the Citron brought from Spain: but its juice is little, in
comparison of its bulk. The little Citron, which makes the third kind, is the
best and most esteemed: it has a very thin skin or pellicle, and is full of a
very sharp juice, which gives an excellent taste to Meats, and a picquancy to
several Sawces: it is a particular Fruit of America. Some curious persons have
in their Gardens a kind of very sweet Citrons, both as to their peel and juice,
which as to bigness and taste come not behind those which grow in Portugal.

All other Trees growing in the Caribbies have their Leaves, Flowers, Fruit,
and Bark, of a Figure, Taste and Color different from those of our Countries.

GOYAVIER.
TO begin with the Fruit Trees; there is some account made of the Goyavier,
which comes near the figure of the Laurel, save that the Leaves are softer, of
a brighter green, and more cottened on the lower-side. The Bark of this Tree is
very thin and smooth: It shoots forth at the roots several suckers, which if
not taken away, will in time make a thick wood about it, as far as there is any
good ground. Its branches, which are thick and well furnished with leaves, are
laden twice a year with little white Flowers, which are followed by several
green Apples, which become yellow, and of a good smell when they are ripe. This
Fruit has on the top a little posie like a Crown, and the meat within is
either white or red, full of little kernels, like those of a Pomegranate;
whence the Dutch call it the sweet Pomegranate: It is about the bigness of a
Pearmain, and ripens in one night.

Being eaten green, it is astringent: whence it is used by many against
Bloody-Fluxes: but being ripe it has a quite contrary effect.

PAPAYER.
THe Papayer is a Tree which grows without boughs, about 15 or 20 foot high,
big proportionably to its height, hollow and spongious within, whence it is
used to convey Springs and Rivulets to diverse places. There are two kinds of
it; one commonly found in all the Islands. The leaves of it are divided into
three points, much like the leaf of the Fig Tree: They are fastened to long
tails, as big as a man's thumbs, and hollow within. They shoot out of the top of
the Tree, and bending downwards, they cover several round fruits, about the
bigness of the great Quince-pear, which grow round the boal to which they are
fastened.

The other kind is particular to the Island of Sante Croix. It is fairer, and
has more leaves then the former: but what causes it to be more esteemed is its
Fruit, which is about the bigness of a Melon, and of the figure of a woman's
breast, whence the Portughese call it Mamao.

There is this particularly remarkable in these Trees, that they bring forth
new fruits every month in the year. The flower of both kind is of good scent,
and comes near that of Jessemine. The Fruit of the latter is accounted among
the choicest entertainments of the Islands, in as much as being come to
perfection it has a firm substance, and may be cut in pieces like a Melon, and
is of a very pleasant taste. The rind is yellow, intermixed with certain green
lines, and within it is full of little seeds, round, viscous, and soft, of a
picquant taste, and approaching that of Spice. This fruit fortifies the
stomach, and helps digestion.

MOMIN.
THe Momin is a Tree grows up to the bigness of an Appletree, and bears a large
fruit of the same name. It Is true, the Islanders commonly call it Corasol,
because the seeds of those they have was brought from Corasol, an Island
possessed long since by the Dutch, who have there a good Fort, and a numerous
Colony, which has spread it self into several other Islands near it. This Fruit
is like a little Cucumber not fully ripe; the rind of it is always green, and
enameled with several small partitions like scales: if it be gathered in its
maturity it is within as white as cream, and of a mixture of sweetness and
sharpness, which much heightens the taste of it. This Fruit is extremely
cooling, and pleasant to the palate: In the midst of it lies the seed, which is
of the bigness and figure of a Bean, very smooth, and of the color of a
Touchstone on which a piece of gold had been newly tried; for it seems to
sparkle with little golden veins.

JUNIPA.
JUnipa, or Jenipa, being the same Tree which the Brasilians call Janipaba, and
the Portuguez, Jenipapo, grows up to the bigness of a Chestnut-tree, the
boughs of it bowing down toward the ground, and making a pleasant shade: The
leaves of it are long, like those of a Wallnut-tree: It bears a kind of flower
like those of Narcissus, and they are of a good scent. The wood of it is solid,
and in color of a pearly gray. The Inhabitants cut down these Trees while they
are yet young, to make stocks for Muskets and Firelocks, in regard the wood
being easy to be wrought, may be excellently polished. Every month it is
clothed with some new leaves: It bears a kind of Apples, which being ripe seem
to have been baked in an Oven, about the bigness of an ordinary Apple: Falling
from the Tree they make a noise like that of a gun discharged: which proceeds
hence, that certain winds or spirits pent up in the thin pellicles which
enclose the seed, being stirred by the fall, force their way out with a certain
violence. Whence it may be concluded, that it is the same Fruit which the
Indians in New-Spain, by a barbarous name call Quant la Lazin.

These Junipa*apples eaten without taking away the little skin within them, are
extremely binding. This Fruit is much sought after by Hunts-men, in regard that
being sourish it quenches thirst, and comforts such as are wearied by
traveling. The juice of it dies a very dark Violet, though it self be as clear
as rock-water: nay when it is applied twice to the same part of the body which
a man would dye, it makes the place appear black. The Indians use it to
fortify the body, and to make it more supple before they go to the wars. They
are also of a persuasion that this color renders them more terrible to their
enemies. The tincture this Fruit gives cannot be taken away with Soap; but
after nine or ten days it disappears of it self. The Swine which eat of this
fruit when it falls off the Tree, have the flesh and fat of a violet color, as
has been found by experience. The same thing has been observed in the flesh
of Parrots, and other Birds, when they have eaten of it. There may be made of
these Apples a drink pleasant enough, yet such as is only used among the
Indians and Hunts-men, who have no settled habitation.

RAISIN.
THe Raisin-tree, or Vine, which the Caribbians call Ouliem, grows up to a
midling height, and creeps in a manner along the ground on the Seaside: but in
good ground, it grows up high, as one of the most delightful Trees of the
Forest. The leaves of it are round, and thick, intermixed with red and green.
Under the bark of the trunk, having raised a white soft substance about two
inches thick, a man finds a wood of a violet color, solid, and fit for
excellent pieces of Joyners work. It bears in its branches such fruits, as when
they are ripe might be taken for great violet Grapes; but in stead of kernels,
every Grape has under a tender pellicle, and under a very small substance,
which is a little sowrish, cooling, and of a good taste, a hard stone like that
of a Plumb.

ACAJOV.
THere are three kinds of Trees known by the name of Acajou; but of those, only
that we shall here describe bears any fruit: It Is a Tree of no great height,
spreading its branches down toward the ground: The leaves of it are fair and
large, closing to a roundness before, and divided by certain veins. The flowers
of it at the first shooting forth are white, but afterward they become
incarnate, and of a purple color: They grow in tuffes and bushes, and they
send forth so sweet a scent, that it is easy to distinguish the Tree which
bears them: These flowers fall not till they are thrust off by a kind of
Chestnut, much after the form of an Ear, or a Hares kidney. When this Chestnut
is come to its growth, there is framed under it a very fair Apple, somewhat
long, which is crowned with that as a crest, which as it ripens becomes of an
Olive-colour, while the Apple puts on a thin delicate skin of a lively
Vermilion. Within it is full of certain spungious filaments, which yield a kind
of sweet and sharp juice extremely good to quench thirst, and accounted very
good for the stomach, as also in swoonings and fainting, being qualified with a
little Sugar: But if it chance to fall on any Linen, it makes a red stain
therein, which continues till such time as the Tree brings forth new flowers.

The Indians make an excellent drink of this fruit, which being kept some days
inebriates as soon as the best Frenchwine would. The Nut which is above, burnt,
yields a caustic oil, which is successfully used to mollify, nay to take away
Corns, and the callousness of the feet. If it be cracked there is within a
kernel, covered with a thin pellicle, which being taken away it is of an
excellent taste, and its virtue is to warm and extremely to fortify the
Stomach.

This Tree bears but once a year; whence the Brasilians number their age by the
Nuts growing on this Apple, laying up one for every year, which they keep very
carefully in a little basket for that purpose. If an incision be made at the
foot of this Tree there will come forth a clear and transparent Gum, which many
have taken for that which is brought out of Arabia. The seed of the Tree is in
the Nut, which put into the ground grows without any trouble.

ICACO.
THe Icaco is a kind of small Plumb-tree which grows after the form of a Briar;
the branches of it are at all times laden with small long leaves: Twice a year
they are dressed with abundance of pretty white or violet flowers, which are
followed by a little round fruit, about the bigness of a Damsin, and that being
ripe, grows either white or violet, as the flower had been before: This fruit
is very sweet, and so loved by some Savages living near the Gulf of Hondures,
that they are called Icacos from their much feeding on these Plumbs. Those who
have traveled among them have observed, that when these fruits are ripe they
carefully secure the propriety thereof to themselves, and to prevent their
Neighbors, who have none in their Quarters, from spoiling the Trees, have
Guards set on the Avenues of their Country, who with Club and Dart oppose such
as should attempt their disturbance.

MONBAIN.
THe Monbain is a Tree grows very high, and bears long and yellowish Plumbs,
which are of a scent good enough: But the stone being bigger then all the meat
about it, they are not much esteemed, unless it be of some who mix them in the
drinks of Ouicou and Maby, to give them a better taste. The Swine feeding in
the Woods are always fat when these fruits are ripe; for there falls abundance
of them under the Trees as they ripen, which are greedily devoured by those
creatures. This Tree yields a yellow Gum, which casts a stronger scent then the
fruit. The branches thrust into the ground easily take root; whence it comes
that they commonly set those Closes with them where they keep Cattle.

The Courbary for the most part grows higher, more leavie and bigger then the
Monbain. It bears a fruit the shell whereof can hardly be broken, and it is
about four fingers long, two broad, and one thick: Within the shell there is
two or three stones covered with a soft meat, as yellow as Saffron. It is of a
good taste; but if much of it be taken it extremely clogs the stomach, and
hinders respiration. The Savages in case of necessity make a drink of it, which
well ordered is not unpleasant, that is, when it is well boild with water. The
wood of this Tree is solid, of a color inclining to red. The Tree being old
yields a Gum which is hardened by the Sun, and will continue clear, transparent
as yellow Amber, and of a good scent. Some Indians make Buttons of it, of
several fashions, of which they make Bracelets, Neck-laces, and Pendants, which
are handsome, glittering, and of a good scent.

INDIAN FIG TREE.
THere is in most of these Islands a great Tree, which the Europeans have
called the Indian Fig Tree, because it bears a small fruit without any stone,
which in figure and taste comes near the French Fig: Otherwise it has no
resemblance to our Fig Trees; for besides that the leaf is of a different
figure, and much narrower, it grows in some places to such an excessive bulk,
that there are of them such as many men put together cannot encompass, in
regard the Trunk, which commonly is not even in its circumference, shoots forth
on the sides from the very root to the place where the boughs begin, certain
excrescencies which reach four or five foot about, and which by that means make
deep cavities, standing like so many Neeches. These Excrescencies which are of
the same substance with the body of the Tree, are also enclosed with the same
bark as covers it, and they are seven or eight inches thick, proportionably to
the Trunk they encompass. The wood of this Tree within is white and soft, and
there are commonly cut out of those long pieces which shoot forth out of the
Trunk, Planks for Flooring, Doors and Tables, without any fear that the Tree
should dye: For, in a short time it so easily recovers the prejudice it had
received, that it can hardly be perceived there was any thing taken from it.
All those who have lived in the Island of Tortoises, which lies North from
Hispaniola, have seen in the way which leads from the Plains of the Mountain to
the Village, which the French call Milplantage, one of these Trees which may
well afford shelter to two hundred men under the shade of its branches, which
are always laden with leaves very thick and bushy.

SERVICE-TREE.
THere is in these Islands a kind of Service-tree much different from that in
France; for it is of an excessive height, pleasant to the eye, and adorned with
fair leaves and branches. It bears a pleasant fruit, round as a Cherry, of a
yellowish color, spotted with little round spots; when it is ripe it falls off
of it self: It tastes like a Sorb-apple, and thence it came to be so called: It
is much sought after by the Birds.

The PRICKLY-PALM.
ALL these Islands have Palms, nay some have four several sorts of them. One is
called the Prickly or Thorny-Palm, having that name from the prickliness of it,
the boal, branches, and leaves being furnished with prickles very sharp, and so
dangerous, that whoever is pricked thereby will be troubled a long time, if a
present remedy be not applied: Those which encompass the trunk are flat, about
the length of a man's finger, of the figure of a Tooth-pick, smooth, and of a
tawny color inclining to black. The Negroes before they come near it make a
fire about the foot of the Tree to burn up the prickles, which are as so much
armor to it. Its fruit consists in a great tuft, which contains several
greyish, hard and round Nuts, within which are kernels good to eat. Of this
kind of Palms some Negroes get a sort of Wine by making incisions in the
branches. It is probably the same Tree which the Brasilians call Ayri.

FRANC-PALM.
THe second kind is the Franc-Palm: It is a strait Tree of extraordinary
height. The roots of this Tree are above ground, round about the stock two or
three foot high, and about the bigness of a Hogshead: These roots are small
proportionably to the height of the Tree they sustain; but they are so
confusedly shufled one within another, that they afford it a substantial
support. One thing particular to this Tree is, that it is bigger above then
below: While it is young the bark is tender, of a dark-grey color, and marked
at every foots distance with a circle, which discovers very near how many years
it has been in the ground: But when it is come to its full growth, it is all
over so solid and smooth, that there is nothing to be seen. The top of it is
adorned with several fair branches chanell'd, and smooth, which have on each
side an infinite number of leaves, green, long, narrow and very thin, which add
much to its beauty. The tenderest of these branches, which are not yet fully
blown, start up directly from the middle of the Tree, while the others which
bend downwards all about make it as 'twere a rich and beautiful crown.

This Tree disburthens it self every month of some one of its branches, as also
of a bark which is loosned from below, which is four or five foot long, about
two broad, and of the thickness of tanned leather. The Inhabitants of the
Islands call this bark Tache, and they use it for the covering of their
Kitchins, and other places belonging to their habitations, as they make use of
the leaves neatly tied together in little sheaves to cover their houses.

We have purposely ranked the Palms among the Fruit Trees of these. Islands, in
regard all of them, the Latanier only excepted, contribute somewhat to the
nourishment of men. For if the Prickly-Palm before described, afford Wine, this
bears on the top of its trunk, and as it were in its heart, a whitish marrow or
pith, very tender and savory, tasting like a small Nut, if eaten raw, and being
boiled, and seasoned with the thin and white leaves which encompass it, and are
as it were so much linen about it, it may be numbered among the most delicious
dishes of the Caribbies. The French call that marrowy substance, and the leaves
enclosing it, Chou de Palmiste, Palm-Cabbage, for they put it into the Pot
instead of Cabbage, and other Herbs.

Cleave the trunk of this Tree in two, and take away, as may easily be done, a
certain filiamental and soft matter, which lies within, the remaining wood,
which is by that means made hollow, and a good inch thick, makes excellent long
gutters, which will last a great while. They are used also to cover with one
piece only the roof of the Cazes, and to convey water to any place. Turners and
Joyners make of this wood, which is almost black and easily polished, several
excellent pieces which are naturally marbled.

Pliny writes of Trees so prodigiously high, that an arrow could not be shot
over them: and the Author of the General History of the Indies speaks of a Tree
so high that a man could not cast a stone over it. But though the Palm we now
describe much exceeds all the other Trees of the Caribbies, yet dare we not
affirm it to be of such an extraordinary height, since that from the foot of
the Tree there may be easily observed a fair branch, which rising out of the
top of the trunk, is always turned toward the Sunrising. It is renewed every
year, and when it is come out of its case, it is enameled with an infinite
number of little yellow flowers, like golden buttons, which afterward falling,
their places are supplied by certain round fruits, about the bigness of a small
Hens egg. They are fastened together as it were in one cluster, and that these
flowers and fruits might be secured against the injuries of the weather, they
are covered above by a thick bark, which on the outside is hard and of a
greyish color, but within of a kind of Vermilion-guilt, closing upwards like a
Pyramid. This precious fan is nothing else but the case which kept in the
flowers before they were fully blown, and being opened below spreads it self
into a hollow figure in the midst, and pointed at the extremities, the better
to cover both the flowers and the fruit.

LATANIER.
THe third kind of Palm is called the Latanier: This grows up to a considerable
height, but not very big. In stead of branches, it has only long leaves, round
above, and spread at the extremity like a fan. They are fastened to certain
great stalks which come out of certain filaments that encompass the top of the
trunk, like a thick piece of Canvass, red and very clear. These leaves tied up
in little bundles serve to cover the Cazes, and of the rind which is raised
from above the tails or stalks, may be made Sives, Baskets, and several other
little curiosities, which the Indians account the best of their Household Stuff.
Of the wood of this Tree, as also of that of the Franc-Palm, they make Bows,
the Clubs they use in fighting, in stead of Swords, Azagayes, a kind of little
sharp Lances, which they dart at their enemies with the hand, and they sharpen
therewith the points of their Arrows, which by that means are as piercing as if
they were of Steel.

COCOS.
THe fourth kind of Palm, and the most excellent of all is that which is called
Cocos, that famous fruit of which Historians tell such miracles. But it is to
be observed that the Cocos of the West Indies grow not near to the height of
those in the East Indies, the trunk commonly not exceeding twenty or twenty
five foot in height, of a bigness proportionable thereto. It is better
furnished with branches and leaves then the Franc-Palm. The Islands of Monaca
and Routam, at the Gulf of Hondures, are famous for their abounding with these
Trees. The Island of S. Bartholomew of the Caribbies have also of them, and
thence they were brought to S. Christophers.

The fruit grows upon the very trunk, at the shooting forth of the branches. It
has the form of a Nut, but is without comparison much bigger; for one of them
sometimes weighs about ten pound. From the first bearing the Tree is never
found without fruit, for it bears new every month. The shell is so hard and
thick that it may be polished, and figures engraved upon it, and made into
Cups, Bottles, and other Vessels. It is encompassed with a thick covering which
is all of filaments.

When the Coco-nut is opened, there is first met with a meat, white as snow,
which is extremely nourishing, and tastes like an Almond: There is so much of
this marrowy substance in every fruit as may well fill an ordinary dish. It is
very firmly fastened within the shell, and in the midst of it there is a large
glass full of liquor, clear and pleasant as perfumed Wine: so that a man may be
well satisfied with one of these fruits at a meal. It is only this water which
is turned into seed, and among other virtues has that of clearing the face of
all wrinkles, and giving it a bright and Vermilion color, so it be washed
therewith as soon as the fruit is fallen from the Tree.

Who desires a particular account of the Cocos and its uses, as well in Physic
as Housekeeping, may read the large description of it made by Francis Pyrard,
in his Treatise of the Animals, Trees, and Fruits of the East Indies.

Some from the neerness of the names do sometimes confound the Cocos with the
Cacao, which grows in the Province of Guatimala, near New-Spain, which is also
a famous fruit all over America, for its being the principal ingredient in the
composition called Chocolate. This drink taken moderately causes Venery,
Procreation and Conception, and facilitates Delivery, preserves Health, and
impinguates: It helps Digestion, Consumption and Cough of the Lungs, Plague
of the Guts, and other Fluxes, the Green Sickness, Jaundise, and all manner of
Imflammations and Oppilations: It cleanses the Teeth, and sweetneth Breath,
provokes Urine, cures Stone and Strangury, expells Poison, and preserves from
all infectious Diseases; all which virtues are attributed to it by several
creditable Authors.

The Cacao which was to be seen in the Caribbies, in the year one thousand six
hundred forty nine, in a Garden of an Inhabitant of the Island of Sante Croix,
which was then in the hands of the English, is a Tree much like an Orange-tree,
save that it grows not up so high, and that it has larger leaves. It is
commonly planted in shady places, even under other Trees, that they may keep
off the heat of the Sun from it, which might otherwise occasion the withering
of its leaves. Its fruit is about the bigness and near the figure of an Acorn,
or a middle sized Olive, and grows in great long cods, or husks, which are
streaked in several places with little partitions along the sides.

CHAP. VII. Of Trees fit for Building, Joyners-Work, and Dying.
WE have hitherto given an account of those Trees, whose Fruits contribute to
the subsistence, and refreshment of the Inhabitants: we shall now treat of the
most considerable in order to the Building of Houses, and Furnishing of them by
the help of the Joyner. Which done, we shall speak of all those other Trees of
several colors, whereof the Dyer may make use in his Profession.

ACAJOU.
THere are few of the Islands but afford good Trees for the Carpenters and
Joyners-Work. Of these one of the most considerable is the Acajou, which grows
to that excessive height, that the Caribbians will of one trunk make those long
Shallops called Pyrages, which are able to carry fifty men. It shoots forth
many branches which grow very close together, by reason of the abundance of
leaves they are laden with. The shade of this Tree is very delightful; nay
some affirm that it contributes to their Health who repose themselves under it.

There are two sorts of Acajou, which differ only in the height of the trunk,
and color of the wood. The wood of the most esteemed is red, light, of a good
scent, and easily wrought. It has been found by experience that it receives no
prejudice from the Worm; that it rots not in the water when it has been cut in
season; and that the Chests and Cabinets made of it communicate a good scent
too, and secure the Clothes kept in them from Vermin, which either breed in,
or get into those made of other wood. Hence some have imagined it to be a kind
of Cedar: There are also made of it Shingles for the covering of Houses. Some
Masters of Ships who Trade to the Caribbies many times bring thence Planks of
this wood, which are of such length and breadth that there needs but one to
make a fair and large Table.

The other kind of Acajou is of the same figure, as to the outside, as that
before described; but it grows not up so high, and the bark and pith taken
away, the wood is white: Newly felled it is very easily wrought; but left
abroad in the air, it grows so hard that there can hardly be any use made of
it. The Inhabitants use it only for want of other, because it is subject to
worms, and putrifies in a short time. If an incision be made in the trunks of
these Trees, they will yield abundance of Gum, whereof there might be a good
use made, if any trial had been made of it.

ACOMAS.
THe Acomas is a Tree grows up to the height and bulk of the Acajou, and is no
less esteemed by Carpenters and Joyners. Its leaves are smooth and long enough:
It bears a fruit of the bigness of a Plumb, which come to maturity, is of a
yellow color, pleasant to the eye, but too bitter to be mansmeat. The
Wood-Quists grow fat on it at a certain time of the year, and during that time,
their flesh is of the same taste as the fruit they have eaten. The bark is of
an Ash Color, and very rough, the wood heavy and easily polished, and
according to the places where it grows, the heart of it is red, or yellowish,
or inclining to violet. If the bark be opened, there will come forth a milky
liquor, which grows hard like Gum.

ROSE-WOOD.
THe wood called Rose-wood is ^it not only for the Carpenter, but also for the
Joyner; and therefore is numbered among the most considerable. And here we
cannot but acknowledge, that if the ancient Inhabitants of the Caribbies had any
design to make a firm setlement of themselves there, they might find not only
things requisite for their subsistence, but also delicacies and curiosities, as
well in order to their nourishment and clothing, as to the building of their
Houses, and the furnishing of them when they are built. But the flattering
imaginations of a return into the place of their birth, whereof most have their
hearts full, induce them to a neglect of all those considerable advantages
which these Islands present them withal, and an indifferency, if not a
contempt, for that abundance of precious things which they so liberally
produce. For not to say any thing at present how easily they might makes
Stuffes of the Cotton growing here; how they might keep all sorts of Fowl, and
tame Cattle, which breed there as abundantly as in any place in the World, they
might, no doubt, enrich themselves very much by several sorts of precious wood,
through the Trade they might drive into several parts of Europe, since they
think not fit to make use of them in order to the better accommodation of their
habitations. The description we shall make of some of these rare Trees in this
and the next Chapter will make good this Proposition.

Of these, as we said before, the Rose-wood is to be ranked among the chiefest.
This Tree grows to a height proportionable to its bigness. The trunk of it is
commonly so strait, that it is one of the greatest ornaments of the Caribbian
Forests. It is covered with many fair boughs, and those laden with soft
leaves, downy on one side, and near as long as those of a Wallnut-tree. During
the season of the Rains it bears white flowers, of a good scent, which growing
in bushes, or as it were Posies, add very much to the natural beauty of the
Tree. These flowers are followed by a small blackish and smooth seed. The bark
of the boal is of a whitish-grey: The wood within is of the color of a dead
leaf, and when the Smoothing-plane and Polisher has passed upon it, there may
be seen several veins of different colors, waving up and down, which gives it
a luster, as if it were marbled: But the sweet scent it casts forth while it is
handled and wrought causes it to be the more esteemed, and procured it the name
it is now known by. Some have imagined, that that sweet scent, which indeed is
more pleasant then that of a Rose, should have given it the name of
Cyprian-wood, and indeed in some parts of the Caribbies it passes under that
denomination. This Tree grows in all the Islands after the same fashion, as to
the external figure; but the wood of it is marbled with diverse colors,
according to the difference of the soil where it had its production and growth.

INDIAN-WOOD.
THE Indian-wood is also a precious Tree, and of good scent: Of this there is
such abundance in the Island of S. Croix, and several others, that there are in
them whole Forests of it. It is not inferior to the Rose-wood, but grows bigger
and higher when it meets with good ground. The roots of it spread themselves
very deep into the ground, and the trunk is very strait: The bark is smooth,
thin, and even all over, of a bright silver-grey color, and in some places
inclining to yellow, which is a distinction between this Tree and all others:
It flourishes once a year, in the season of the Rains, and then it renews some
part of its leaves. The wood of it is very solid and weighty, whence it comes
that it may be polished, and some Savages make their Clubs of it. Having taken
off a Vermilion-pith which is under the bark, there appears the heart of the
tree, which is extreme hard, and of a Violet color, for which it is much
esteemed by the curious.

The good scent of this tree consists particularly in its leaves: they are of
the same figure with those of the Guava-tree, and when they are handled, they
perfume the hands with a sweeter scent then that of the Laurel: they derive to
Meat and Sauces so delicate a gusto, as might be attributed rather to a
composition of several Spices, then to a simple leaf: It is used also in the
Baths prescribed by Physicians to fortify bruised Nerves, and dry up the
swelling which remains in their Legs who have been in malignant Fevers.

Besides the Acajou, before spoken of, there are in these Islands several sorts
of trees whereof the wood is red, solid, weighty, and not subject to worms and
putrefaction. They are excellent for both Carpenter and Joyner.

IRON-WOOD.
BUt above all there is a particular account made of the Ironwood, so called,
because in solidity, weight, and hardness, it exceeds all those we have yet
described. This tree, which may be ranked among the highest and best
proportioned of any in these* Islands, is well furnished with branches, and
those with little leaves with sharp points, and divided near the stalk. It
flourishes twice a year, to wit, in March and September. The flowers of it,
which are of a Violet color, are succeeded by a small fruit about the bigness
of a Cherry, which as it ripens grows black, and is much sought after by the
Birds. The bark of the trunk is of a brownish color: The wood is of a very
bright red being newly felled, but lying abroad in the air it loses much of its
liveliness and luster. The heart of the Tree is of a very dark red, like that
of Brasil, and of such hardness that the wedges must be very sharp and well
tried before, to bring it to the ground. But the wood of it being fair to the
eye, solid, easy to be polished, and more incorruptible then either Cedar or
Cypress, it abundantly requites by all these excellent qualities the pains is
taken about it before there can be any use made thereof.

There is also another Tree known by the same name, but it is not comparable to
the former: It bears only small leaves, and when it flourishes, it is laden
with abundance of Posies, as it were, rising up above the branches like so many
Plumes of Feathers, which give it an extraordinary ornament. It is of a great
height, and the inner-bark is yellowish or white, according to the places where
it grows. All the wood of this Tree, the heart only excepted, which is very
small, very hard, and inclining to black, is subject to worms; whence it comes
that it is not commonly used, but for want of other.

There are in the Caribbies many Trees fit for Dying: The most esteemed and
best known are the Brasil-wood, the Yellowwood, the Green-Ebony, and the Roucou.

BRASIL-WOOD.
THe Brasil-wood is so called, because the first brought into Europe came from
the Province of Brasil, where it grows more abundantly then in any other part
of America. Of this kind of Tree there are not many in the Caribbies, and what
there is, is only in those Islands which are most furnished with dry rocks. The
trunk of it is not strait as that of other Trees, but crooked, uneven, and full
of knots like the White-Thorn. When it is laden with flowers there comes from
it a sweet scent, which fortifies the Brain. The wood of it is much sought
after by Turners; but the principal use of it is for Dying.

YELLOW-WOOD.
THe Island of S. Croix is the most famous of all the Islands for its abundance
in rare and precious Trees. There is one very much esteemed for its usefulness
in Dying: It grows up to a great height, and the wood is perfectly yellow. When
the English had the Island they sent much of it to their own Country. It is
called the Yellow-wood, from its color.

GREEN-EBONY.
THe Green-Ebony is commonly used in some excellent pieces of Joyners-work,
because it easily takes the color and luster of the true Ebony. But the best
use of it is for Dying, for it colors a fair Grass-green. The Tree is very
bushy by reason its root shoots forth a great number of Suckers, which hinder
it from growing so high and big as it might, if the sap were directed only to
the trunk. The leaves are smooth, and of a bright-green color. Within the
outer-bark there is about two inches of white inner-bark, and the rest of the
wood to the heart is of so dark a green that it inclines to black: but when it
is polished, there appear certain yellow veins which make it look as if it were
marbled.

ROUCOU.
THe Roucou is the same Tree which the Brasilians call Urucu. It grows no
higher then a small Orange-tree: Its leaves, which are pointed at one end, have
the figure of a heart: It bears flowers in color white, mixed with Carnation;
they consist of five leaves, in form like a Star, and about the bigness of a
Rose: They grow in little bushes at the extremities of the branches. These
flowers are succeeded by little husks, in which are enclosed several seeds
about the bigness of a small Pea, which being come to ripeness are of the most
bright and lively Vermilion color that can be imagined. This rich
Dying-Commodity which is enclosed in the said husk is so soft and viscous that
it sticks to ones fingers as soon as it is touched.

To get this precious liquor they shake in an earthen vessel the seeds unto
which it is fastened; then there is poured thereto warm water, in which they
are washed till such time as they have lost their Vermilion color; and then
when this water has rested a while, they dry in the shade the dregs or thick
Lie which is at the bottom of the vessel, and then it is made up into Lozenges
or little Balls, which are very much esteemed by Painters and Dyers when they
are pure and without mixture, as those are whereof we have now given the
description.

The wood of this Tree is easily broken: It is very good for firing, and if the
fire should be quite out, it is only rubbing for a certain time two pieces one
against another, and they will east forth sparks like a Fire-lock, which will
set fire on the Cotton, or any other matter susceptible thereof, that is laid
near to receive it. Of the Bark of it are made Lines which last a long time.
The Root of it gives a delicate gusto to Meats, and when there is any of it put
into Sauces, it communicates to them the color and scent of Saffron.

The Caribbians have of these Trees in all their Gardens, are very careful in
the ordering and keeping of them, and esteem them very highly, because from
them they have the bright Vermilion with which they make their Bodies red: they
use it also in Painting, and to give a luster and handsomness to those vessels
which they make use of in their houses.

There might well be numbered among the Trees fit for Dying most of those which
yield any Gums: For those who have had the curiosity to make a trial thereof,
have found by experience, that being mixed in Dying they heighten the darkest
and dullest colors, by a certain liveliness and luster which they communicate
thereto.

CHAP. VIII. Of Trees useful in Medicine, and some others, whereof the
Inhabitants of the Caribbies may make great advantages.
THe great disposer of all things, having assigned all Nations the limits of
their several habitations, has left no Country destitute of means requisite
for the convenient subsistence of the men placed therein; and that they might
be eyewitnesses of the in-exhaustible treasure of his ever to be adored
Providence, he has impregnated the Earth with the virtue of producing not only
the Provisions necessary for their nourishment, but also several Antidotes to
secure them against the infirmities whereby they might be assaulted, and diverse
sovereign Remedies for their recovery when they are fallen into them. Not to
make mention of any other part of the World, we may affirm it of the Caribbies,
that they have all these rare advantages in a very great measure: For they do
not only entertain their Inhabitants with a delightful variety of Fruits,
Roots, Herbs, Pulse, Wild-Fowl, Fish, and other delicacies for the Table, but
they also supply them with a great number of excellent Remedies to cure them of
their indispositions. And this the judicious Reader may easily observe all
through this Natural History, and particularly in this Chapter, where we shall
describe the Trees which are very useful in Medicine.

CASSIA-TREE.
THe Cassia-tree grows up to the bigness, and comes near the figure of a
Peach-tree, the leaves of it being somewhat long and narrow: They fall off once
a year, in the time of the great Droughts, and when the season of the Rain
comes in, it puts forth new ones: They are preceded by several Posies of of
yellow flowers, which are succeeded by long Pipes or Cods about the bigness of
a man's thumb, and sometimes a foot and a half, or two foot in length: They
contain within them, as in so many little Cells, that Medicinal Drug so well
known to the Apothecaries, called Cassia, which the Caribbians call Mali Mali.
Before the fruit is grown to its full bigness and length it is always green;
but as it advances to perfection and ripeness it becomes of a brownish or
Violet color, and so continues, hanging at the branches.

When the Fruit is ripe and dry, and the Trees which bear it are shaken by
great winds, the noise caused by the collision of those hard and long Cods
striking one against another is heard at a great distance: This frightens the
Birds, and keeps them from coming near it; nay such men as are ignorant of the
cause of that confused sound, if they see not the Trees shaking, and stirring
their branches and fruits, imagine themselves near the Seaside, and think they
hear the agitation of it, or take it for the clashing of Arms in an Engagement
of Soldiers. It Is the observation of all those who have visited that part of
St. Domingo where there are whole Plains, and those of a large extent, full
only of these Trees. It is thence, in all probability, that the seed of those
growing in the Caribbies was brought. Those sticks of Cassia which are brought
from America are fuller and more weighty then those which come out of the
Levant, and the Drug within them has the same effects and virtues.

The Flowers of the Cassia-tree preserved with Sugar gently purge not only the
Belly, but also the Bladder. The sticks of Cassia conserved while they are
green have also the same virtue. But the pulp taken out of the ripe fruit
operates sooner and more effectually. Many of the Inhabitants use it with good
success once a month, a little before meals; and they have found by experience
that this gentle Medicine contributes much to the continuance of their good
constitution.

MEDICINAL NUTS.
THe Medicinal Nuts, which are so common in all the Islands, grow on a small
Tree, which is for the most part used to partitions between the Gardens and
Plantations. If it were not hindered from growing, it would come up to the
height of an ordinary Fig Tree, which it somewhat resembles in figure. The wood
of it is very tender and pithy, and it shoots forth several bracnhes which
scamble confusedly about the trunk: They are laden with pretty long leaves,
green and soft, round below, and ending in three points.

Out of the wood and leaves of this Tree there comes a milky juice, which
stains Linen: nay there is no pleasure in being near it when it rains, for the
drops which fall from the leaves have the same effect as the juice: It bears
several yellow flowers consisting of five leaves, which when they are fully
blown look like so many stars. The flowers falling, there come in the places of
some of them little Nuts, which at first are green, then turn yellow, and at
last black, and a little open, when they are ripe. Within every Nut there are
three or four stones, in so many little cells, the rind whereof is blackish, in
bigness and figure somewhat like a bean. The rind being taken away, there is in
every one of them a white kernel of an oily substance, which is enclosed and
divided in the midst by a thin film or pellicle: These kernels are of a taste
pleasant enough, not much different from that of Small-Nuts: but if they be not
moderately eaten they will violently purge both upwards and downwards,
especially if the skin which encloses them, and the pellicle dividing them in
the midst be swallowed: To moderate their quality, and that they may be taken
with less danger, the way is to cleanse them of those skins and pellicles, and
put them for a little while upon the coals; then being beaten, or bruised, four
or five of them may be taken in a little Wine, as a vehicle or corrective.

The boughs of this Tree being cut off and thrust into the ground do easily
take root. The Portuguez extract an oil out of the kernels, which is good
enough for the uses of the Kitchen, and may also be useful in Medicine.

CINNAMON.
THe Tree which bears that kind of Cinnamon which is so common in all the
Islands, may be ranked among those which are useful in Medicine, since its
Aromatic Bark is sought after by all those who are troubled with cold
distempers, and successfully used to disburthen the chest of the viscous and
phlegmatic humors which oppress it. The sweet scent and perpetual verdure of
this delightful Tree have persuaded some that it was a kind of Laurel: but it
grows much higher, its trunk is also bigger, its branches larger, and its
leaves, which are not altogether so long, are much softer, and of a more lively
green. The bark of it, which is covered by an Ash-colored skin, is thicker,
and of a whiter color then the Cinnamon which comes from the Levant: It is also
of a sharper and more biting taste: but being dried in the shade, it gives a
pleasant taste to Meats.

The Islands Tabago, Barbados, and Sante Croix are accounted to be better
furnished then any of the rest with several sorts of wood, which experience
has found very useful in Medicine: For they afford Sandal-wood, Guaiacum, and
Sasafras, all which are so well known, that we need not in this place make any
particular descriptions thereof.

COTTON-TREE.
THere are several other Trees very common in all these Islands, whereof the
Inhabitants may make very considerable advantages. The Cotton-tree, called by
the Savages Manoulou-Akecha, may be ranked among the chiefest, as being the
most profitable. It grows up to the height of a Peach-tree, the bark is of a
brownish color, the leaves small, divided into three parts: It bears a flower
about the bigness of a Rose, under which there are three little green and
sharp-pointed leaves, by which it is encompassed. This flower consists of five
leaves which are of a bright yellow color, having toward the stem small lines
of a purple color, and a yellow button or crown encompassed with little
filaments of the same color: The flowers are succeeded by a fruit of an oval
figure, about the bigness of a small Nut with its shell: when it is come to
maturity it is all black on the outside, and opens in three several places, at
which appears the whitness of the Cotton lying within that rough covering:
there are in every of the fruit seven little beans, which are the seed of the
Tree.

There is another kind of Cotton-tree which creeps along the ground like an
unsupported Vine: this bears the best and most esteemed Cotton: Of both there
are made Cloths, and several cheap Stuffs, very useful in Housekeeping.

SOAP-TREE.
THere are two sorts of Trees which the Islanders use instead of Soap: one of
them has this quality in its fruit, which grows in clusters, round, yellowish,
and about the bigness of a small Plumb, which has also a hard black stone
within it that may be polished: It is commonly called the Soapfruit: the other
has the same virtue in its root, which is white and soft: both of them lather
as well as any Soap; but the former used too frequently burns the Linen. These
Trees are called the Soap-trees from the virtue they have to whiten Clothes.

The ARCHED-INDIAN-FIG-TREE.
THe Arched-Indian-Fig-Tree is a Tree thrives best in fenny places, and on the
Seaside: Its leaf is green, thick, and of a good length: the branches which
bend down to the ground, no sooner touch it but they take root and grow up into
other Trees, which afterward produce others, so that in time they spread over
all the good ground they meet with, which is by that means so hardly reducible
to bear other things, that it will yield no profit: under these Trees the wild
Boars, and other beasts are securely lodged. They are also in many places the
lurking-holes of the Inhabitants of the Islands, who having garrisoned
themselves within these Trees, defy all enemies: There is further this great
advantage made of them, that there being no Oaks in these Islands, their bark
is good for Tanners.

GOURD-TREE.
NOr may we forget the Gourd-tree, of which are made the greatest part of the
Houshold-vessels, used not only by the Indians, but the Foreigners who are
Inhabitants of these Islands: it is a Tree grows up to the height and bigness of
a great Apple Tree; its branches are commonly well-loaden with leaves, which
are long, narrow, and round at the extremity, fastened by bushes to the
branches, and sometimes shooting out of the trunk itself: It bears flowers and
fruits most months of the year; the flowers are of a greyish color mixed with
green, and full of small black spots, and sometimes violet: they are succeeded
by certain Apples, whereof there can hardly be found two on the same Tree of
equal bigness, and the same figure; and as a Potter shows the excellency of his
Art by making on the same wheel, and of the same mass of clay, Vessels of
different forms and capacity; so Nature shows here a miraculous industry, by
loading the same Tree with fruits different in their form and bigness, though
the productions of the same substance.

These fruits have this common, that they have all a hard woody bark of such a
thickness and solidity, that Bottles, Basins, Cups, Dishes, Platters, and
several other Vessels necessary to Housekeeping may be made thereof: they are
full of a certain pulp, which being ripe becomes of a Violet-colour, though
before it had been white: amidst this substance there are certain small flat
and hard grains, which are the seeds of the Tree. Those of the Inhabitants who
are most addicted to Hunting, in case of necessity, quench their thirst with
this fruit, and they say it has the taste of burnt-wine, but is too
astringent. The Indians polish the bark, and give it so delightful an enamel
with Roucou, Indico, and several other pleasant colors, that the most nice may
eat and drink out of the vessels they make thereof: Nay some are so curious, as
to think them worthy a place among the Rarities of their Closets.

MAHOT.
OF the Tree called Mahot there are two kinds, Mahotfranc, and Mahot-d'herbe:
the former is the more sought after, as being the stronger: it grows not very
big, in regard the branches creep along the ground: the bark is very thick, and
easily taken from the Tree: there are made of it long Laces or Points, which
are stronger then the Lines of Teil, which are used in many places: they are
commonly used to make up Rolls of Tobacco, and to fasten things about the
House: as for the latter Mahot, it is used where the former is wanting; but it
easily rots, and is not comparable to the other as to strength.

In a word, there are in these Islands several other Trees not known in Europe,
whereof* some only delight the eye, such as are that which is called Mappou,
and diverse kinds of thorny wood: others only satisfy the smelling by their
sweet scents: others have venomous qualities, as the Milkie-tree, as also that
whose root reduced to powder and cast into rivers inebriates the Fish; the
Mancenilier, which we shall describe in its proper place, and an infinite
number of others, the wood whereof is white, soft, and of no use, and have yet
got no names among the foreign Inhabitants of those parts.

CHAP. IX. Of other Trees growing in these Islands whose Fruits or Roots
contribute to the subsistence of the Inhabitants, or serve for some other uses.
IT has pleased the great Contriver of all things to divide that Element,
which we call Earth, into several Countries, each whereof he has endued with
certain advantages and conveniences not to be found in other places, that by
such a delightful variety of things he might make a more distinct and
remarkable demonstration of his own all-cherishing Providence. But it must be
acknowledged, that in the distribution which the Divine Wisdom has made of
its bounties, the Caribby-Islands have had a very large portion: For, to
confine our selves to the design we intend to prosecute, not only the greater
sorts of Trees, which we have described in the former Chapters, contribute to
the Shelter, Nourishment, Clothing, Health, and several other accommodations
of the Inhabitants; but there are also diverse shrubs, or lesser Trees, which
either shoot forth Roots, or bear Fruits conducing to the same purpose, as
shall be seen in the perusal of this Chapter.

MANYOC.
INstead of Wheat the Inhabitants make use of the root of a small Tree called
Manyoc, by some Manyot, and by others Mandioque, of which is made a kind of
Bread delicate enough, called Cassava: whence it is also sometimes called the
Cassava-tree. This root is so fruitful, that a small parcel of ground planted
therewith will feed more persons then six times as much sown with the best
Wheat could do: It shoots forth crooked branches about the height of five or
six foot, easy to be broken, and full of small knots: the leaf is narrow and
somewhat long: at nine months end the root comes to its maturity: Nay it is
reported, that in Brasil it grows to the bigness of a man's thigh in three or
four months. If the ground be not too moist the root may continue in it three
years without corrupting, so that there needs no Storehouse, o^ Garret to put
it up in; for it is taken out of the ground as it is spent.

To propagate this Root, you must take of the branches, and cut them in pieces
about a foot in length: then make trenches in your Garden with a Hoe, and
thrust in three of those sticks triangle-wise into the earth which had been
taken out of the trenches, and wherewith a little hill or tump had been raised:
this is called Planting by the trench. But there is another way of planting
Manyoc, much more expeditious and more easy, but the Manyoc is neither so
fair, nor so much esteemed as the other. The way is only thus, to make a hole
in the ground with a stick, and to thrust the Manyoc strait into it: care must
be had in the planting of it, that the knots be not set downwards, for if they
should the Manyoc sticks would not grow. The Indians never plant it otherwise;
but that it may ripen in its season, they observe a certain time of the Moon,
and see that the ground be not too moist.

There are several kinds of these shrubs differing one from the other only in
the color of the bark of their wood and of their root: Those which have the
bark greyish, or white, or green, make a very good tasted bread, and grow up in
a short time; but the roots they produce do not keep so well, nor thrive
comparably to those of the red or violet Manyoc, which is the most common, the
most esteemed, and the most advantageous in housekeeping.

The juice of this root is as cold as Hemlock, and so effectual a poison, that
the poor Indians of the greater Islands being persecuted with fire and sword by
the Spaniards, to avoid a more cruel death, made use of this poison to destroy
themselves. There is to this day to be seen in the Island of Hispaniola,
otherwise called S. Domingo, a place called the Cave of the Indians, where
there are the bones of above four hundred persons, who ended their lives there
with this poison, to avoid the cruelties of the Spaniards. But let this juice,
which is so venomous to all sorts of living creatures, rest four and twenty
hours after it is taken from the root, and it loses that malignant and
dangerous quality.

PALMA-CHRISTI.
THere are in these Islands an infinite number of the shrubs called
Palma-Christi or Ricinus; and they grow up so high, and so big in some places,
that* they would be taken for a different kind from those commonly seen in
Europe. The Negroes gather the seed, and extract an oil from it, wherewith they
rub their hair to keep themselves clear from vermin. The qualities attributed
to it by Galen and Dioscorides, confirm the use these Barbarians make of it:
the leaf of this shrub is sovereign for the healing of some kinds of Ulcers, as
being very attractive.

There grow in all these Islands two kinds of shrubs, or rather great Reeds,
spongy within, growing of themselves in fat ground near little rivulets, or in
Valleys not annoyed by winds. They are commonly called Banana-trees, or Planes,
and Figtrees, or Apple Trees of Paradise: These two kinds of shrubs have this
common to both.

1 That they grow of equal height, to wit about twelve or fifteen foot above
ground. 2 That their stalks, which are of a green color, shining, spongious,
and very full of water, shoot out of a great Onion, like a Pear, encompassed
with many little white roots, which fasten it to the ground. 3 That they have
shooting forth at the foot of the stems certain Scyons, which bear fruit at the
years end. 4 That when one stem is cut off for the getting of the fruit, the
most forward next that succeeds in its place, and so the shrub is perpetuated,
and multiplies so exceedingly, that in time it spreads over all the good ground
near it. 5 That the substance of both is very soft, and reducible into water,
which though extremely clear, yet has the quality of dying Linen and white
Stuffs into a dark brownish color. 6 That their Fruits lie at the top of the
stem, like great clusters or posies.
And lastly, that their leaves, which are about four foot or more in length,
and a foot and a half in breadth, may serve for Napkins and Towels, and being
dried make a soft kind of Couch or Bed to lie upon.

These two shrubs have this further resemblance, that which way soever their
fruit be cut when it is come to maturity, the meat of them which is white as
snow represents in the middle the form of a Crucifix, especially when it is cut
in thin slices. Hence the Spaniards are so superstitious as to think it a kind
of mortal sin to use a knife about it, and are scandalized to see any thing
employed about it but the teeth.

But there is this to be said particularly of the Banana-tree.

1 That its fruit is in length about twelve or thirteen inches, a little
bending toward the extremity, much about the bigness of a man's arm: whereas
that of the Fig Tree is but half as big, and about six inches in length. 2 The
Banana-tree has not in its posie or cluster above 25 or 30 Bananas at the
most, which do not lie over-close one to another; but the Fig Tree has many
times 120 Figs, which lie so close together that they can hardly be gotten
asunder. 3 The meat of the Bananas is firm and solid, and may be dressed either
by roasting it under the embers, or boiling it in a Pot with meat, or
preserved, and dried in an Oven, or in the Sun, and afterward easily kept: But
the ^ig being of a soft substance has not the same conveniences.
To get in these fruits, the trees, which it seems bear but once, are cut at
the very foot, and the great cluster is supported by a ^ork, that it may not be
bruised in the falling: But they are seldom cut till some of the fruits of each
cluster be turned a little yellowish; for that is a sign of their maturity, and
then being carried into the house, those which were green ripen by degrees, and
so they have every day new fruit.

The cluster is commonly as much as a man can well carry; nay sometimes it is
laid on a Leaver, and carried upon their shoulders between two, as that bunch
of Grapes which the Spies of the Israelites brought out of the Land of Canaan.
Some have thought this fruit so excellent and delicate, that they have imagined
it to be the same which God forbad our first Parents to eat of in Paradise:
accordingly they have named it Adams Fig Tree, or the Fruit-tree of Paradise:
the leaf of these Reeds being of the largeness we have before described, may
indeed be allowed very fit to cover the nakedness of our first Parents; and as
to the figure of the Crucifix which may be seen within the fruit when it is
cut, we leave it to find work for their profound speculations who busy their
thoughts in searching out the secrets of Nature.

There are some who affirm that the figure of a Cross is also marked in the
seed of the Herb commonly called Rue. The small Gentiana, or Cruciata, has the
leaves disposed in the form of a Cross upon its stalk; and it is to be
acknowledged that Nature, as it were sporting her self, has been pleased to
make several such representations in Plants and Flowers. Hence it comes that
some have the resemblance of Hair, others of Eyes, others of Ears, others of a
Nose, a Heart, a Tongue, a Hand, and some other parts of the Body: There are in
like manner diverse famous Plants which seem to represent several other things,
as Eagles, Bees, Serpents, Cats-clawes, Cockscombs, Bears-ears, Harts-horns,
Darts, and the like: whence many times those Plants derive their names from the
said resemblance. But of these it is besides our design to give any account.

CORAL-WOOD.
THere is also in several of the Islands a little shrub which bears a seed as
red as any Coral: it grows in bunches at the extremity of its branches, which
derive an extraordinary luster from it: But these little seeds have a small
black spot at one end, which disfigures them, and abates much of their esteem
with some; others on the contrary affirm that that diversity of colors makes
them more delightful to the Eye. This may be called the Coral-tree: The seeds
are used for Bracelets.

JASMIN and CANDLE-WOOD.
THe shrubs called by some Jasmin, and Candle-wood, may be numbered among those
that are considerable in these Islands: The former bears a small white flower
which perfumes all about it with its sweet scent; and thence it had the name:
The other casts forth so pleasant and sweet a scent when its wood is burnt dry,
and does so easily take fire, and gives so clear a flame, by reason of a
certain Aromatic Gum lying within it, that it is with reason sought after by
the Inhabitants for their firing, and to serve them for a Candle or Torch in
the night time.

CHAP. X. Of the Plants, Herbs and Roots growing in the Caribbies.
HAving in the former Chapters represented the Trees and Shrubs wherewith these
Islands are richly furnished; we come now to the Description of several rare
Plants, Herbs and Roots, whereby they are also abundantly supplied.

PYMAN.
THe Plant called by the French and others Pyman, or American Pepper, is the
same which the natural Inhabitants of the Country call Axi, or Carive; it grows
close like a little Briar without any prickles: the stem of it is covered with
an Ash-colored rind, and bears several little boughs laden with an infinite
multitude of leaves, which are pretty long, full of jags, and of a grass-green
color: Of these there are three kinds* differing only in the figure of the
husk or cod, or the fruit they bear. One bears only a little red button,
somewhat long like a Clove, within which there are very small seeds, much
hotter then the Spices brought from the Levant, and in a manner caustic, which
easily communicates that picquant quality to all things wherein it is used.

The second kind has a much larger and longer Cod, which when ripe is of a
perfect Vermilion color, and being used in Sauces, it makes them yellow, as
Saffron would do.

The third has yet a larger Cod then the precedent, which is thick enough, red
as any Coral, and not smooth in all parts: The seed, which is not so biting,
nor so spicy as those of the other two kinds, lies in the midst of it: Being
ripe it is one of the most delightful fruits that may be. The seed has been
brought over into France and other parts, and has come to perfection; but the
fruit is not so big as that of America. This cod and the seed within it is used
instead of pepper, because it communicates a certain picquancy to things, like
that spice: But the operations of them differ much; for after it has bitten
the tongue, and by its acrimony inflamed the palate, instead of fortifying and
warming the stomach, it weakens it, and causes coldness in it; or rather,
according to the opinions of some Physicians, it over-heats it, and by its
caustic virtue weakens it, causing coldness in it only by accident, inasmuch
as it disperses the radical moisture, which is the seat of heat. Whence it is
observed in the Islands, that those who ordinarily use it in their meat are
subject to pains in the chest, and apt to contract a yellow color.

TOBACCO.
THe Plant called Tobacco, from the Island Tabago, where, as some affirm, it
was first discovered by the Spaniards, had also the name Nicotianum from one
Nicot a Physician, who first used it in Europe, and sent it from Portugal into
France: It was also called Queen-herb, hence, that being brought from America,
it was presented to the Queen of Spain as a rare Plant, and of extraordinary
virtues. The Spaniards give it further the title of Holy-herb, for the
excellent effects they have experienced from it, as Garcilasso in his Royal
Commentary of the Tncas of Peru, lib. 11. chapter 25. affirms. Lastly, the French
call it Petun, though de Lery is much displeased at the name, affirming, that
the Plant he saw in Brasil, and which the Topinambous call Petun, differs very
much from our Tobacco. The Caribbians in their natural Language call it Youly.
Heretofore there were known in the Islands but two kinds of Tobacco-Plants,
commonly called by the Inhabitants Green-Tobacco, and Tongu'd-Tobacco, from the
figure of its leaf; but since there have been brought from the Continent the
seeds of Virinus, and the Tobacco of the Amazons, they are divided into four
kinds: The two former are of a great produce, but the two others are more
esteemed by reason of their sweet scent.

All these kinds of Tobacco-Plants grow in the Islands to the height of a man
and higher, if their growth be not checked by cutting off the tops of their
stems: They bear good store of leaves, which are green, long, downy on the
lower side, and seem in the handling as if they were oiled: Those which grow
toward the stock of the Plant are larger and longer, as deriving more
nourishment from the moisture of the root. At the tops they shoot forth little
branches, which bear a flower like a small Bell, which is of a clear violet
color: And when that flower is dry, there comes into its place a little
button, wherein is contained the seed, which is of a brownish color, and very
small.

There are sometimes found under the leaves and branches of this Plant the
nests of the little Birds called Colibris, which we shall describe in its
proper place.

INDICO.
THe material of which is made the Dying commodity called Indico is got from a
Plant which grows not above two foot and a half above the ground: It has but a
small leaf, of a grass-green color, inclining to yellow when it is ripe: The
flower is reddish: It grows from the seed, which is sown by trenches in a
straight line: It has a very bad scent, quite contrary to that growing in
Madagascar, which bears small flowers of a purple color mixed with white, which
smell well.

GINGER.
OF all the Spices of the Levant that have been planted in America only Ginger
has thrived, and come to perfection. It Is the root of a Plant which grows not
much above ground, having green long leaves like those of Reeds and
Sugarcanes: The root spreads it self, not in depth, but in breadth, and lies
near the surface like a hand encompassed by many fingers; whence the
Inhabitants of the Islands call it a Paw. This Plant may be propagated by the
seed, or, as is most commonly done, by certain small roots which grow like so
many strings all about the old stem and the greater roots, as there do about
Skirretts. It grows with ease in all the Islands, especially at S.
Christophers, many Inhabitants of which Island have planted it, and traded in
it with advantage, since Tobacco came to so low a rate.

POTATOE.
THe Potatoe is a root much like the Saligots growing in Gardens, which are
called Topinambous, or Jerusalem Artichokes, but of a much more excellent
taste, and more wholesome.

Those Topinambous or Artichokes, which are now not only very common in most
parts, but cheap, and slighted, as being a tteatment for the poorer sort, were
heretofore accounted delicacies: For in some extraordinary Entertainments made
at Paris by the Princes to certain Ambassadors, in the Year M. DC. XVI. they
were served up among the most exquisite dishes.

But the Potatoe is infinitely beyond it: It thrives best in a light ground,
somewhat moist, and well ordered: It shoots forth abundance of soft leaves, of
a very dark green, in figure like those of Spinach: They spring from certain
fibers which creep along the ground, and in a short time overrun the place
where it is sown. And if the ground be well ordered, these fibers within a
certain time frame diverse roots by the means of certain whitish filaments which
shoot forth below the knots, and easily fasten into the earth. It bears a
flower near the same color with the root, and like a bell, within which lies
the seed: But commonly to propagate this fruit they take only of these strings
or fibers, which lie scattered all over the ground, as we said, and thrust them
into ground prepared for them, and at the end of two or three months they will
have produced their root, which has this further virtue, that being cut into
small pieces, and thrust into the ground, it produces its root and leaf as
effectually as if the seed lay in each of its least parts.

These roots are of several colors, and in the same piece of ground there will
be some white ones, which are the most ordinary, some of a violet color, some
red as beetroots, some yellow, and some marbled: They are all of an excellent
taste: For, provided they be not full of water, and grew in a ground moderately
moist and dry, that is, participating of both, they taste like Chest-nuts, and
are a better nourishment then the Cassava, which dries up the body; for they
are not so dry. Some, as particularly the English, use these roots instead of
bread and Cassava, and to that purpose bake them under the Embers, or upon the
coals: For being so prepared they are of a better taste, and are cleared of
that windy quality which is commonly observed to be in most roots. But for the
most part they are boiled, or stewed in a great iron pot, into which there is a
little water put to keep the bottom from burning; then the pot-lid is set on as
close as may be, that they may stew by that smothered heat. This is the
ordinary treatment of the Servants and Slaves of the Country, who eat them out
of the pot with a sauce made of Pyman and juice of Oranges.

If this root were not so common it would be more esteemed. The Spaniards think
it a delicacy, and dress it with butter, sugar, nu^meg, and cinnamon: Others
make a pottage of it, and putting into it some fat, pepper and ginger, account
it an excellent dish: But most of the Inhabitants of the Islands trouble not
themselves so much about the dressing of it. There are some will gather the
tender extremities of the aforesaid strings, and having boiled them eat them as
a Sallet, like the tops of Asparagus or Hops.

ANANAS.
THe Ananas or Pineapple is accounted the most delicious fruit, not only of
these Islands, but of all America. It is so delightful to the eye, and of so
sweet a scent, that Nature may be said to have been extremely prodigal of what
was most rare and precious in her Treasury to this Plant.

It grows on a stalk about a foot high, encompassed by about 15 or 16 leaves,
as long as those of some kinds of Thistles, broad as the Palm of a man's hand,
and in figure like those of Aloes: they are pointed at the extremity, as those
of Corn-Gladen, somewhat hollow in the midst, and having on both sides little
prickles, which are very sharp.

The fruit which grows between these leaves, strait up from the stalk, is
sometimes about the bigness of a Melon: its figure is much like that of a
Pineapple: its rind, which is full of little compartiments like the scales of
fish, of a pale-green color, bordered with Carnation upon a yellow ground,
has on the outside several small flowers, which, according to the different
Aspects of the Sun, seem to be of so many different colors as may be seen in
the Rainbow; as the fruit ripens most of these flowers fall. But that which
gives it a far greater luster, and acquired it the supremacy among Fruit is,
that it is crowned with a great Posie, consisting of flowers and several
leaves, solid and jagged about, which are of a bright red color, and extremely
add to the delightfulness of it.

The Meat or Pulp which is contained within the rind, is a little fibrous, but
put into the mouth is turned all to juice: it has so transcendent a taste, and
so particular to it self, that those who have endeavored to make a full
description of it, not able to confine themselves to one comparison; have
borrowed what they thought most delicate in the Peach, the Strawberry, the
Muscadine-grape, and the Pippin, and having said all they could, been forced to
acknowledge that it has a certain particular taste which cannot easily be
expressed.

The virtue, or shoot by which this fruit may be perpetuated lies not in its
root, nor yet in a small red seed, which is many times found in its Pulp, but
in that Garland wherewith it is covered; for as soon as it is put into the
ground it takes root, shoots forth leaves, and at the years end produces new
fruit. It happens sometimes that these fruits are charged with three posies or
crowns, all which have the virtue of propagating their species: but every stalk
bears fruit but once a year.

There are three or four kinds of them, which the Inhabitants distinguish by
the color, figure, or scent, to wit, the White-Ananas, the Pointed, and that
called the Pippin, or Renette: This last is more esteemed then the other two,
inasmuch as being ripe it has as to the taste all the rare qualities before
described; it has also a sweeter scent then the others, and does not set the
teeth so much on edge.

The natural Indians of the Country, and the French who live in the Islands
make of this fruit an excellent drink, not much unlike Malmsey, when it has
been kept a certain time: there is also made of it a liquid Conserve, which is
one of the noblest and most delicate of any brought out of the Indies: they
also cut the rind into two pieces, and it is preserved dry with some of the
thinnest leaves, and then the pieces are neatly joined together again, and they
ice it over with Sugar, by which means the figure of the fruit and leaves is
perfectly preserved; and there may be seen in those happy Countries,
notwithstanding the heats of the Torrid Zone, a pleasant representation of the
sad productions of Winter.

In Physic the Virtues of it are these: The juice does admirably recreate and
exhilarate the Spirits, and comfort the Heart; it also fortifies the Stomach,
cures Queasiness, and causes Appetite: it gives present ease to such as are
troubled with the Stone, or stoppage of Urine; nay it destroys the force of
Poison. If the fruit be not procurable, the root will do the same effects. The
water extracted from it by distilling has a quicker and more effectual
operation; but in regard it is too corrosive, and offends the mouth, palate, and
uretory vessels, it must be very moderately used, and with the advice of an
able Physician, who knows how to correct that Acrimony.

SUGARCANES.
THe Reed which by its delicious juice supplies that substance whereof Sugar is
made, has leaves like those of other Reeds which grow in Marshes and near
Ponds, but only they are a little longer and sharper; for if they be not taken
with a certain care and slight, they will cut a man's hands like a Rasour. It
is called the Sugar-Cane, and grows up in height between five and six foot, and
two inches about: it is divided by several knots, which are commonly four or
five inches distant one from another; and the greater the distance is between
the knots, the more Sugar are the Canes apt to yield.

The leaves of it are long, green, and grow very thick, in the midst whereof
rises the Cane, which also at the top is laden with several pointed leaves,
and one kind of knot of them which contains the seed: it is as full as it can
be of a white and juicy pith, out of which is drawn that liquor that makes the
Sugar.

It thrives extremely in a fat soil, so it be light and somewhat moist: it is
planted in trenches made at equal distances one from another, either with a
Hoe, or a Plow, about half a foot deep: Having there laid the Canes, being ripe
they cover them with earth, and a little while after out of every knot shoots
forth a root, and out of that a stem which produces a new Cane. As soon as it
appears above ground, it must be carefully weeded all about, that the weeds
choke it not: but as soon as it has covered the ground it secures it self, and
keeps its footing as well as any Copse-wood might do, and it may last fifty
years without being renewed, so the main root be sound and not injured by the
worm; for if there be any jealousy of that, the remedy is to take up the whole
Plant as soon as may be, and to order it all anew.

Though the Canes be ripe at the end of nine or ten months, yet will they not
be any way prejudiced if continued in the ground two years, nay sometimes
three, after which they decay: But the best and surest way is to cut them every
year as near the ground as may be, and below the last knot or joint.

Those who cross the Fields when these Canes are come to maturity may refresh
themselves with the juice of them, which is an excellent beverage, and has the
same taste with the Sugar: But if it be taken immoderately it may occasion
fluxes and looseness, especially to such as are newly come into the Country;
for those who by a long abode there are in a manner naturalized, are not so
subject to that inconvenience.

There grow also in some of these Islands those neat and precious Canes which
are used in walking, naturally marbled, and enameled with several figures. The
sides of great Ponds, and all Fenny and Marshy places are also furnished with a
big sort of Reeds which grow up very high and very strait, whereof the
Inhabitants commonly make the partitions of their Houses, and use them instead
of Lats, for the covering of them. The Indians also make use of the tops of
these Canes in the making of their Arrows.

CHAP. XI. Of some other rare Productions of the Caribbies, and several sorts
of Pulse, and Flowers growing in those Islands.
HAving spoken of the Plants, Herbs, and Roots, considerable for their Leaves,
Fruits, or Virtues, we now come to treat of some other rare Productions of
these Islands, for the most part not known in Europe.

RAQVETTES.
THat which the French call Raquettes, from the figure of its leaves, which are
like a Racket, is a great thorny bush creeping along the earth, and not able to
raise it self to any height, in regard the stem, which is only a leaf grown big
in process of time, grows not much more then half a foot above ground; and
though it be big enough, yet is it not to be seen till the leaves, which are
green, heavy, ill-shap'd, and about an inch thick, and fastened one to another,
encompassing it, be first taken up: they are armed with prickles extremely
sharp and small; and upon some of these long and prickly leaves there grows a
fruit about the bigness of a Date-plumb, which has also on the outside
several very small prickles, which prick their fingers who would gather them:
being ripe it is red within and without, of a Vermilion color: the Hunts-men
of these Islands think it very delicate and refreshing; but it has this
property, that it colors a man's Urine as red as blood as soon as he has eaten
it; insomuch that such as are ignorant of this secret imagine they have broken
a vein: Nay some perceiving that alteration in themselves have taken their Beds
out of an imagination that they were very sick. Some report, that in Peru there
is a kind of Plumb which works the same effect: nay there are who affirm, that
they have observed as much after the eating of a Gelly of red Goose-berries.

Those who have described Tunal, which is so much esteemed for the precious
Scarlet-dye lying in its leaves, make it like the Plant we now describe, save
that they assign it no fruit. Some others have ranked it among those Thistles
which bear Figs, because the fruit is of that figure, and when it is open,
instead of a stone, it has only small seeds like those of the Fig.

There is also another kind of this Plant, whereof the fruit is white, and of a
sweeter, and more savory taste then the red we spoke of before: nay there is
yet another, which, no doubt, is a kind of Tunal, on which there have been seen
certain little worms in color like a Ruby, which dye Linen or Woollen-Cloth,
whereon they are crushed, into a very fair and lively Scarlet-colour.

TORCH.
THe Plant called by the Caribbians Akoulerou, some of the European Inhabitants
of these Islands call the Torch: it is a kind of great Thistle growing like a
great bushy Briar, furnished of all sides with prickles, extremely sharp and
small: there shoot forth in the midst of it nine or ten stalks without either
branches or leaves, growing up to the height of nine or ten foot, strait, and
channelled like so many Torches: they have also very sharp prickles, like so
many small Needles, which so secure them that they cannot be touched of any
side: the rind, and what is within it, is soft and spongy enough. Every Torch
bears at a certain season of the year, between the channels of the stalk,
certain yellow or violet flowers, which are succeeded by a fruit like a great
Fig, good to eat, and delicate enough. The Birds love it well, but they can
only peck at it flying, because the prickles hinder them from lighting on any
part of the Plant. The Indians get off the fruit with little forks or sticks
cleft at one end.

LIENES.
THere are several kinds of Plants which creep along the ground, or are
fastened to Trees; nay some which very much obstruct peoples passage through
the Forests: The Inhabitants call them Lienes; some are like a great Cable,
others bear flowers of several colors: nay some are laden with great brownish
husks a foot or better in length, four or five inches thick, and as hard as
Oak-bark, wherein are contained those curious fruits called Sea-Chestnuts,
which have the figure of a heart, and the pulp taken out, are made into Boxes
to keep Sneezing*powder, or any other sweet powder. The fruit, called by the
Inhabitants Lienes-Apples, grows on a kind of Willow, which is fastened to the
greater sort of Trees like Ivy: it is about the bigness of a Tennis-ball, and
covered with a hard shell, and a green outside, containing within it a
substance, which being ripe has the figure and taste of Gooseberries.

SEMPER-VIVUM.
THere are in these Islands several kinds of Herbs that never dye or wither,
whereof some grow on trunks of old Trees, as Missletoe does on the Oak; others
grow on the ground, and upon rocks. They have so much natural moisture, that
being plucked, and hung with their roots upwards in the midst of rooms, where
they are many times kept as rarities, and to recreate the eye, they lose
nothing of their verdure.

SENSITIVE PLANTS.
THere is in the Island Tabago a kind of Herb, which besides its perpetual
growing is also sensible, whence it is called the Sensitive Plant: it grows up
about a foot and a half in height, encompassed with a many leaves, in length a
foot or better, in breadth three fingers, jagg'd almost like those of Fern,
being at the extremities of a green color checkered with little brownish or
red spots. In the season of fruits there grows out of the midst of this Plant a
round flower, consisting of several leaves standing much after the same order
as those of the Marigold; but they are of a bright violet color, and being
handled have a good scent; the nature of this Plant is such, that if one pluck
off the leaves of it, or so much as touch them, the whole Plant withers, and
all the other leaves fall to the ground, as if it had been trod under feet; and
according to the number of the leaves that had been plucked off it will be a
longer or shorter time ere it recover that loss.

There grows such another at Madagascar, which the Inhabitants call Haest-vel,
that is, the Living-herb: but it is not the same kind as that which may be seen
in the Kings Garden at Paris; for that has a much lesser leaf, and it is
neither spotted nor jagg'd and which is more, it bears no flowers: besides, its
leaves being touched, close together by a certain kind of contraction; whereas
that we describe sheds its leaves on the ground.

There is also another kind of living or sensitive Plant in some of the other
Islands: it grows sometimes to the height of a shrub: it has many little
branches, which are at all times laden with an infinite number of long and
narrow leaves, which during the rains are enameled with small golden flowers,
like so many stars. But what makes this Plant esteemed one of the rarest and
most admirable of any in the world* is, that as soon as one would fasten on it
with his hand, it draws back its leaves, and wriggles them under its little
branches, as if they were withered; and when the hand is removed, and the party
gone away some distance from it, it spreads them abroad again.

Some call this Plant the Chaste Herb, because it cannot endure to be touched
without expressing its resentment of the injury. Those who have passed by the
Isthmus from Nombre de Dios to Panama relate, that there are whole Woods of a
Tree called the Sensitive-tree, which being touched the branches and leaves
start up, making a great noise, and close together into the figure of a Globe.

Some years since there was to be seen in the Kings Garden at Paris a
Sensitive-shrub, valued at a very great rate: But some body having advised the
putting of it in the bottom of a Well to keep it from the cold, and the
sharpness of Winter, it there miserably perished, to the great regret of the
Curious.

Of several sorts of PEASE.
THese Islands are also fruitful in bearing all sorts of Pulse, such as are
several sorts of Pease and Beans: The Savages call them by the general name of
Manconti.

The Pease are in a manner of the same kinds as those growing in Europe, those
only excepted, which are gathered from a little shrub, which is about the
height of Broom, and has small, green, and narrow leaves: it bears Pease in
cods or husks, which are fastened to its branches: they are green and less then
the ordinary ones, of an excellent taste, and so easily boiled, that they need
but a walm or two: they are called in the Islands, The Pease of Angola,
probably, because the seed was brought from that Country.

There is another kind known by the name of Pease, which yet have the figure of
Beans: they are small enough; and of this kind there are some white, some
black, some red or brown, all very excellent, and are ripe in three months.
These in S. Christophers are called English Pease.

BEANS.
OF Beans and Fasels there grow in the Caribbies several kinds, not to be seen
in the Western parts of Europe. The most common are white, to which the first
Inhabitants gave an undecent name, by reason of their figure: their fruit may
be eaten six weaks after they are planted: others are of several pretty
colors, as those which are called Roman-Beans, or Lombardy-Beans.

But the most considerable for their rarity are those called the Seven-years
Beans, because the same stalk bears seven years one after another, and spreads
it self over Trees, Rocks, and whatever it can fasten on; and what is to be yet
further admired is, that at all times during the said term of years it bears
flowers, green fruit, and ripe fruit: So that he who sees it,

-- -- may well admire
Spring, Summer, Autumn in one bough conspire.
The same thing is affirmed of a certain Tree in Egypt, called Pharaohs
Fig Tree, on which there may be seen at all times fruit fully ripe, fruit
ripening, and fruit newly knit. Orange Trees have the same advantage.

Plants useful in Physic.
OF Plants useful in Physic there are many kinds in these Islands, whereof the
virtues and temperament are not yet well known, and some others which are also
to be had from other places: Such as are Scolopendria, and a kind of Aloes, and
several sorts of Maidenhair. There are also some, whereof trial has been
made, and they have been endued with great virtues, among which the most
esteemed are the Sweet-Rush, the Balisier, and the Dart-Herb.

SWEET-RUSH.
THe Sweet-Rush is like other Rushes which grow near Ponds and Rivers, but it
has a round root about the bigness of a Small-nut, which casts a sweet scent
like that of the Flower-de-luce, and being dried in the shade, and beaten to
powder, has a miraculous virtue to help Women in Labor, if they take but a
small dose of it.

BALISIER.
THe Balisier grows bigger and higher, according to the soil it meets with, but
it thrives best in moist places: The leaves of it are so large that the
Caribbians, in case of necessity, cover their little Huts therewith. They are
also applied to abate and mollify the inflammations of wounds, and to make
baths for such as have had their Nerves crushed, or have contracted any other
weakness. The flower of it, which grows like a Plume of Feathers, consisting of
several yellow, or red cups, are succeeded by certain buttons, which are full
of seeds as big as Pease, and so smooth and hard that Beads are made of them.

DART-HERB.
THe Dart-Herb is a sad kind of Herb, for in the day time the leaves lie close
together, and in the night they are spread abroad: its leaves, which are of a
bright-green, are about six or seven inches long and three broad: the root of
it pounded, and applied on the wound, takes away the venom of poisoned Darts.

POT HERBS.
MOst of the Pot Herbs growing in several parts of Europe grow also in these
Islands. It Is true, there are some, as Cabbages and Onions will not bear seed;
yet is there no want of them. The Cabbages being ripe shoot forth many slips,
which transplanted produce others, which come to be as fair and as large as if
they grew from the seed. And for Onions, there are good store brought in the
Ships, which produce abundance of Chibols, and those only are commonly used in
Pottage, and with Pease.

MELONS.
THere is also abundance of ordinary Melons, the seed whereof is brought
thither from these parts: but by reason of the heat of the Country they grow
more easily ripe, the meat is firmer and of a better taste, and they have a
sweeter scent: And what is a greater advantage, they are to be had at any time
in the year.

WATER-MELONS.
THere grows in these Countries another kind of Melons, which are common in
Italy, but must needs be incomparably better in Egypt and the Levant. There
grow of them also in some parts of France, but they are naught: they are called
Water-Melons, because they are full of a sugared water, intermingled with their
meat, which ordinarily is of a Vermilion color, and red as blood about the
heart, wherein are contained their seed, which is also of the same color, and
sometimes black: their rind continues always green, and without any scent, so
that it is rather by the stalk then the fruit that their ripeness is to be
discovered: they are sometimes bigger then a man's head, either round, or oval:
they are eaten without Salt, and though a man feed liberally on them, yet do
they not offend the stomach: but in those hot Countries they are very cooling,
and cause appetite.

They plant also in these Islands Mays, otherwise called Spanish-Wheat or
Turkey-Wheat, all sorts of Millet, Cucumbers, Citrulls, Red-Parsnips, and other
Roots, all which are of an excellent taste.

LILLIES.
NOr is it to be doubted but that the flowers of these Countries are very
beautiful, and admirable for their scent: Among others, there is a kind of
White-Lilly that smells extremely well; for the scent of it is like that of
Jessemine, but so communicative of it self, that there needs but one flower to
perfume a whole Room. The round top and the leaves are like those of the
Lillies of France, but the flower has its leaves dispersed and divided into
little Labels, as if they had been cut with a pair of Scissers: there are also
other Lillies which differ in nothing from our Yellow and Orange-colour Lillies.

PASSION-FLOWER.
THere is another Plant in these Islands famous for the beauty of its leaves,
the sweet scent of its flowers, and the excellency of its fruit: The Spaniards
call it Grenadile; the Dutch, Rhang-Appel, and the French, La Fleur de la
Passion, that is, The Passion-Flower, because it bears that rare flower wherein
may be seen, not without admiration, some of the Instruments of our Blessed
Saviors Passion plainly represented. It Is true, some curious Persons, who have
attentively considered it do affirm, that they have observed therein a certain
resemblance of the Crown of Thorns, the Scourges, the Nails, the Hammer, and
the Pillar: but they add withal, that most of those things are therein
represented or figured much after the same manner as Virgins, Lions, and Bears
are seen among the Celestial Bodies; so that to find all these representations
of the Passion in those flowers, they say with Acosta in his History, Lib. 4.
Chapter 27. that there is some piety requisite to help on the belief of some of
them.

There are several sorts of them, all which have this common, that if they meet
not with some Tree to fasten themselves too, they creep along the ground as Ivy
does; that their flowers are displayed after Sunrising, and close again before
it sets; and that they bear a delicate and very refreshing fruit: but the
leaves, flowers, and fruits of some are so different, as to their outward
figure, that it is not to be wondered if the Authors who treat of this Plant,
imagining there had been but one kind, agree not in their descriptions thereof.
The Inhabitants of Brasil number seven kinds thereof; but in the Caribbies
there are but those two known, which are represented among the Sculps of this
Chapter.

One has very large leaves, which are divided into five lesser leaves, whereof
that in the midst is round at the top, and the four others pointed: its flower
being fully blown is bigger then a Rose; it is enclosed near the stem in three
little green leaves, the body consists of several other beautiful leaves,
whereof some are of a Sky-colour, checkered with little red pricks, which have
the figure of a Crown, and others are of a purple color: All this fair flower
is encompassed with an infinite number of small waving filaments, which are as
it were the beams of this little Sun among the flowers; they are enameled with
White, Red, Blew, Carnation, and several other lively colors, which contribute
an admirable grace thereto.

The other kind has also its leaves divided into five parts as the former; but
its flower, which is like a little bowl, bordered above with little white and
red strings, is not so large: within it is adorned with white pointed leaves:
there shoots as it were out of the heart of both these kinds of Passion-Flowers
a small round Pillar, which has on its chapter a button beset with three
grains, somewhat like Cloves. From this Pillar there issue out also five white
strings, which support little yellow knobs, like those which may be seen in the
cavity of the Lillies; and these they say represent our Saviors five wounds.

These flowers, which are of a sweet scent, falling off, the button that is on
the pillar grows so big, that it comes to be a fair yellow fruit, smooth, and
about the bigness of an ordinary Apple. The rind of it is as thick as that of a
Pomegranate, and it is full of a certain juice, very delicious to the taste,
among which there is a great number of kernels, which are black, and extremely
hard. This fruit is prescribed as a sovereign refreshment to such as are in
Fevers, and it has been found by experience, that it has a singular virtue to
retrive lost Appetite, to comfort the vital Spirits, and to abate the heat of
the Stomach. The Inhabitants of Brasil are very careful in the cultivation of
this Plant, using it as a singular ornament for the covering of their Arbours,
and other places in their Gardens; for its leaves and flowers make a very
delightful shade, and they make of the fruit a cordial syrrup, which is highly
esteemed among them upon this account, that besides the properties assigned it
in our description, it has also this remarkable quality, that those who are
once accustomed to use it shall never have an aversion against it. The rind of
this fruit, and its flowers being preserved, work the same effects as the juice.

MUSK-HERB.
THere is also an Herb called the Musk-Herb: the stalk of it is of a
considerable height, and it grows very thick and close together, as a little
Briar, or Bush without prickles: its leaves are long enough, and rough; the
flowers are yellow, very delightful to the eye, after the form of a Chalice, or
little Bell, which afterward becomes a button of a pretty bigness, and when it
is ripe, is of a white Satin color within, and of a Musk-colour without: the
seed contained within this button is also of the same brownish color; it has
the perfect scent Ch: 12.
Opassum p: 69.

p: 70 Tatous

Iavaris p: 70

Rocquet. p: 75

p: 71. Musk rat

p: 74 A great lizzard

p: 75. Anolis

of Musk when it is newly gathered. And thence is it called Musk-grain, and it
keeps that scent a long time, provided it be kept in a dry place, and in some
vessel where it may take no air.

In like manner, several other Herbs, several Shrubs, nay most of those Lienes,
or Withies which creep among the bushes, and fasten for their support on the
Trees growing in the Caribbies, bear flowers as fair and delightful to the eye,
as they are sweet and acceptable to the nostril: insomuch that many times as a
man crosses through the Fields, he may come to places where the Air is perfumed
all about.

CHAP. XII. Of five kinds of four-footed Beasts found in these Islands.
BEfore the Spaniards and Portuguez had planted Colonies in America, there were
not in those parts any Horses, Kine, Oxen, Sheep, Goats, Swine, or Dogs. But
for the better convenience of their Navigations, and supply of their Ships in
case of necessity, they left some of these creatures in several parts of that
newfound World, where they have since multiplied so exceedingly, that now they
are more common there then in any part of Europe.

Besides these Foreign kinds of Cattle, there were before in these Islands
certain sorts of four-footed beasts, such as are the Opassum, the Javaris, the
Tatau, the Agouty, and the Musk-Rat, whereof we shall here give the several
descriptions.

OPASSUM.
THe Opassum is the same creature which the Brasilians call Carigueya, about
the bigness of a Cat: it has a sharp Snout, the nether Jaw being shorter then
the upper, as a Pigs, the Ears long, broad, and strait, and the Tail long,
Hairless toward the extremity, and turning downwards: the Hair on the Back is
black intermixed with gray, and under the Belly, and about the Throat it is
yellowish: it has very sharp Claws, and thence does easily climb up Trees: he
feeds on Birds, and loves a Hen as well as the Fox does; but for want of prey
he can make a shift to live on fruits.

What is particular in this Creature, is, that by a remarkable difference it
has a purse or bag of its own skin, folded together under its Belly, in which
it carries its young ones, which it leaves upon the ground when it pleases, by
opening that natural purse: when he would leave that place, he opens it again,
and the young ones get in, and so he carries them with him wherever he goes.
The Female su^kles them without setting them on the ground; for her Teats lie
within that purse, which on the inside has a much softer skin then that which
appears without. The Female commonly brings six young ones; but the Male, who
has such another natural purse under his Belly, carries them in his turn to
ease the Female, but cannot suckle them. These creatures are common in
Virginia, and New-Spain: Nature having not thought fit to bestow on the Whale
the convenience of such a bag, gave her the invention of hiding her young ones
in her Throat, as Philostratus affirms. And the Weasil is so fond of her young
ones, that out of a fear they might be taken from her, she also takes them into
her mouth, and removes them from one place to another.

JAVARIS.
THere is also in some of these Islands, as at Tabago, a kind of wild Swine,
which are to be seen in like manner in Brasil, and Nicaragua: they are in most
things like the wild Boars in our Forests, but have very little fat: they have
short Ears, almost no Tail, and their Navels are on their Backs: some of them
are all black, others have certain white spots; their grunting is also more
hideous then that of tame Swine; they are called Javaris: This Venison is of a
taste good enough, but very hardly taken, in regard the Boar having a kind of
vent, or hole on the Back, by which he refreshes his Lungs, is in a manner
indefatigable; and if he beforc'd to stop, and be pursued by the Dogs, he is
armed with such sharp and cutting defensives, that he tears to pieces all those
that shall set upon him.

TATOUS.
THe Tatous, or Hedge-Hogs, which also are to be seen in Tabago, are armed with
a hard skaly coat, wherewith they cover and secure themselves as with armor:
They have a Head and Snout like a Pig, and with the latter they turn up the
ground: they have also in every Paw five very sharp Claws, which they use the
more readily to thrust away the earth, and discover the roots wherewith they
are fatten'd, in the night time. Some affirm, that their flesh is a very
delicate meat, and that there is a small bone in their Tails which helps
Deafness: It has been confirmed by experience, that it helps the Noise or
Humming, and cures the pain of the Ear, being thrust into it in a little
Cotton; some of these are as big as Foxes; but those which are in Tabago are
much less.

When these creatures are pursued, and when they take their rest, which they
commonly do in the day time, they close together like a bowl, and so dexterously
get in their feet, head and ears under their hard scales, that all parts of
their body are by that natural armor secured against all the attempts of both
Hunts-men and Dogs; and if they are near some precipice, they roll themselves
down without fear of receiving any hurt thereby. Linscot relates, that in the
East Indies, in the river of Goa, there was a Sea Monster taken which was
covered all over with scales as hard as any Iron, and when it was touched it
closed together, as it were into a ball.

AGOUTY.
THe Agouty is of a dark color inclining to black, having a rough, light hair,
and a little tail without any hair: it has two teeth in the upper jaw, and as
many in the nether: It holds its meat in the two fore-pawes, like a Squirrel:
the cry of it is, as if it distinctly pronounced the word Couye. It Is hunted
with Dogs, and its flesh, though tasting somewhat rank, is by many preferred
before that of Conies: When it is hunted it gets into hollow Trees, out of
which it is forced by smoke made, after it has cried strangely: if it be taken
young, it is easily tamed, and when he is angered the hair on his back stands
up, and he strikes the ground with his hind-feet, as Conies do: He is much
about the same bigness, but his ears are short and round, and his teeth as
sharp as a Rasour.

MUSK-RAT.
THe Musk-Rats have commonly their abode in Holes, or Berries in the ground,
like Conies, and they are much about their bigness; but as to their figure it
differs not from that of the great Rats which are to be seen elsewhere, save
that most of them have the hair of their belly white, like Dormice, and that of
the rest of their bodies black or tawny: there comes from them a scent sweet as
Musk, which causes a certain dejection of spirit, and makes such a strong
perfume about their holes, that it is very easy to find them out.

The Continent of America has many kinds of four-footed Beasts, which are not
to be found in any of the Islands.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Reptiles found in these Islands.
WE come now to treat of the Reptiles, which, being naturally enemies to cold,
must needs exceedingly multiply in these hot Countries: Besides, the vast Woods
and the Rocks of these Islands very much advance their production, in regard
they afford them secure retreats.

Several kinds of Serpents and Snakes.
THere are indeed very few venomous Beasts in the Caribbies, though there be
many Serpents and Snakes of several colors and figures: There are some nine or
ten foot long, and as big as a man's arm or thigh: Nay there has been
heretofore killed one of these Snakes, which had in her belly a whole Hen,
feathers and all, and above a dozen eggs, the Hen having been surpised as she
was sitting: Another was found that had devoured a Cat; whence a guess may be
made at their bigness.

But how prodigious soever they are, as to their bulk, yet are they not
venomous in most of these Countries: Nay some Inhabitants having of them on the
thatch of their houses, which is commonly of Palm-leaves, or Sugarcanes, drive
them not thence, because they force away and devour the rats. But we must
acknowledge withal, that there is an hostility between them and the Poultry. It
has been observed, that some of them have been so subtle, as, having surpised
a Hen sitting, not to meddle with her during that time; but as soon as the
chickens are hatched, they devour them, and kill the Hen, if they be not able
to swallow her down whole.

There are others very fair and delightful to the eye; for they are green all
over, save that under the belly they are of a very light gray: They are about
an ell and a half in length, and sometimes two; but, proportionably to that
length, they are very small, as being at most not above an inch about: They
feed either on Frogs, which they find near some brooks, or on Birds, which they
surprise on the Trees, or in their nests, when they meet with them.
Accordingly, this kind of Snake is accounted noble in comparison of the others;
for it subsists by its fishing and hunting. Some of the Inhabitants, who have
been used to see all these kinds of Snakes, handle them without any fear, and
carry them in their bosoms. Those who have traveled into Asia and Afric
affirm, that they have there met with somewhat of the like nature: For they
relate, that in Great Tartary there are mountains where may be seen Serpents of
a prodigious bulk, but not venomous at all, nay they are good meat: And that in
the Kingdom of Sir some of these Creatures have been seen playing with
children, who fed them with bread. It is said also, that in the Provinces of
the Antes, in the Kingdom of Peru, there are dreadful Snakes between 25 and 30
foot in length, which never hurt any body.

As to the Islands of Martinico and S. Alousia it is otherwise; for there some
are not dangerous at all, others are very much so: Those which are not, are
bigger and longer then the others; whence it comes, that those who know them
not are more afraid of them, then of such as should really be feared: Yet do
they not any harm; nay as soon as they perceive any body, they make all the
haste they can away; which has occasioned their being called the fugitive
Snakes. They are also easily distinguished from the others by the black and
white spots on their backs.

Of the dangerous Snakes there are two kinds: Some are gray on the back, and to
the feeling like velvet; others are all yellow or red, and dreadful to look
upon by reason of that color, though they be not more dangerous, nay happily
less then the former. Both kinds are great lovers of rats, as well as those
without venom; and when a Cott is much pestered with rats, it is strange if
there be not also Snakes about it. They are of different bigness and length,
and it is conceived the shortest are most to be feared: Their heads are flat
and broad, their jaws extremely wide, and armed with eight teeth, and sometimes
ten, whereof some are forked like a Crescent, and so sharp, that it is
impossible to imagine any thing more: And these being all hollow, it is by that
small channel that they disperse their poison, which lies in little purses on
both sides of their throat, just at the very roots of their teeth: They never
chew any thing they eat, but swallow it down whole after they have crushed and
made it flat. Some affirm, that if they did chew their food they would poison
themselves, and that to prevent that they cover their teeth with their gums
when they take their nourishment.

These creatures are so venomous in those two Islands, that when they have
stung any one, if there be not a present remedy immediately applied, the wound
within two hours will be incurable. All the commendation can be given them is
this, that they never sting any one if he do not touch either them, or
something on which they repose themselves.

LIZZARDS.
THere are also in these Islands several kinds of Lizzards: The greatest and
most considerable are those which some Indians call Iguanas, the Brasilians,
Senembi, and our Caribbians, Onayamaca: Being come to their full growth they
are about five foot in length, measuring from the head to the extremity of the
tail, which is as long as all the rest of the body; and for their bigness they
may be a foot about: their skins are of several colors according to the
different soils they are bred in. Hence it is probably that the Portuguez have
called them Cameleons, out of an imagination that they were a species of that
creature. In some Islands the Females are of a light green, checkered with
black and white spots, and the Males are gray: In others these last are black,
and the Females of a light gray, intermixed with black and green: Nay in some
places both Males and Females have all the little scales of their skin so
glittering, and as it were studded, that seen at a distance one would think
them clothed in rich cloth of gold or silver: They have on their backs prickles
like combs, which they force up, and let down as they please, and appear less
and less from the head to the end of the tail: They go on four feet, each
whereof has five claws which have very sharp nails: They run very fast, and
are excellent at the climbing of Trees: But, whether it be that they love to
look on men, or are of a stupid unapprehensive nature, when they are perceived
by the Huntsmen they patiently expect without stirring till they are shot: Nay
they suffer to be put about their necks that gin with a running knot, which is
fastened to the end of a pole that is often used to get them off the Trees
where they rest themselves: when they are angry, a certain craw they have under
their throat swells, and makes them seem the more formidable: Their jaws are
very wide, their tongues thick, and they have some very sharp teeth: they will
hardly let go what they have once fastened on with their teeth, but they are
not venomous at all.

The Females lay eggs about the bigness of those of Woodquists, but the shell
is soft: they lay them deep enough under the sand on the Seaside, and leave
them to be hatched by the Sun, whence some Authors have ranked them among the
Amphibious creatures. The Savages taught the Europaeans the way to take these
Lizzards, and by their own examples encouraged them to eat thereof: They are
very hard to kill, insomuch that some having received three shots of a Gun, and
thereby lost some part of their entrails, would not fall: And yet if a small
stick be thrust into their noses, or a pin between their eyes, where there is a
little hole into which the pin easily enters, they presently dye: The
Caribbians are very dextrous in the taking of them by a Gin with a running
knot, which they cunningly get about their necks: or having overtaken them by
running, they lay hold on them with one hand by the tail, which being very long
gives them a good hold, and before they can turn back to bite them, they take
them by the chine-piece of the neck, and then having turned their paws on their
backs, they bind them, and so keep them alive above fifteen days without giving
them any sustenance: Their flesh is white, and in some places over-laid with
fat: Those who are accustomed to it think it very delicate, especially the
lushious taste it naturally is of being taken away by good Spices, and some
picquant sauce; yet is it not safe to eat often thereof, because it over-dries
the body, and abates somewhat of the good constitution thereof: the eggs have
no white, but are all yolk, which makes the Pottage they are used in as
excellent as our Hens-egges might do.

Besides these greater forts of Lizzards, there are in these Islands four
others, which are much less; and these are called, Anolis, Roquets, Maboujats,
and Gobe-monches, or Flycatchers.

ANOLIS.
THe Anolis are very common in all the Plantations: they are about the bigness
and length of the Lizzards seen in France; but they have a longer head, the
skin yellowish, and on their backs they have certain blew, green and gray
streaks drawn from the top of the head to the end of the tail: their abode is
in holes under ground, whence in the night time they make a very loud and
importunate noise: In the day time they are in perpetual exercise, and they
only wander about Cottages to get somewhat to subsist on.

ROQUETS.
THe Roquets are less then the Anolis: their skin is of the color of a
withered leaf, marked with little yellow or blackish points: they go on four
feet, whereof the fore-feet are high enough: their eyes are very lively and
sparkling: their heads are always lifted up, and they are so active that they
perpetually leap up and down, like Birds when they would not make use of their
wings: their tails are so turned up toward their backs that they make a circle
and a half: They love to see men, and if they stay where they are they will
ever and anon be staring on them: when they are a little pursued, they open
their mouths, and put out their tongues like little Hounds.

MABOUJATS.
THe Maboujats are of several colors: those which have their abode in rotten
Trees, and fenny places, as also in deep and narrow Valleys into which the Sun
pierces not, are black and extremely hideous, which no doubt occasioned their
being called by the same name the Savages give the Devil: their bigness
commonly is little more then an inch, their length six or seven: the skins of
them all are as if they were oiled.

COBE-MOUCHES.
THose which the French call Gobe-Mouches, that is, in English Fly-cathers,
from their most ordinary exercise; and the Caribbians, Oulleouma, are the least
of all the Reptiles in these Islands: they are in figure like those the Latins
call Stel^^ones: some of them seem to be covered with fine gold or silver
Brocado; others with a mixture of green, gold, and several other delightful
colors: they are so familiar that they come boldly into rooms, where they do
no mischief, nay on the contrary, they clear them of Flies, and such Vermin.
This employment they perform with such dexterity and nimbleness, that the
sleights and designs of Hunts-men are nothing compared to those of this little
Beast; for he sculks down, and stand as it were Sentinel on a plank, or some
other thing that is higher then the floor, where he hopes the Fly will light;
and perceiving his prey, he keeps his eye always fixed upon it, putting his head
into as many different postures as the Fly shifts places; and standing up on
his fore-feet, and gaping after it, he half opens his little wide mouth, as if
he already devoured and swallowed it by hope: Nay though there be a noise made
in the room, and some body come near him, he is so attentive on his game that
he quits not his post; and having at last found his advantage, he starts so
directly on his prey, that he very seldom misses it. It i^ an innocent
divertisement to consider with what earnestness and attention these little
creatures shift for their livelihood.

Besides, they are so tame that they will come upon the Table while people are
eating, and if they perceive a Fly, they will attempt the taking of it even
upon their Trenchers who sit at Table, nay upon their hands or clothes; and
they are suffered to do so, because they are so smooth and cleanly, that their
passing over the meat creates no aversion to those who are to eat of it: in the
night time they bear a part in the Music made by the Anolis, and other little
Lizzards. And to propagate their species, they lay small Eggs as big as Pease,
which having covered with a little earth, they leave to be hatched by the Sun:
as soon as they are killed, which is very easy, by reason of their attention
in pursuit of their game, they immediately lose all their luster; the gold and
azure, and all the sparkling beauty of their skin vanishes, and they become
pale and earthy.

If any one of these Reptiles we have described might be accounted a kind of
Chamelion, it should be this last named, because it easily assumes the colors
of those things on which it makes* its ordinary residence; for those which are
seen about young P^l^-trees are all green, as the leaves of that Tree are:
those which frequent Orange Trees are yellow, as their fruit ^ nay* there have
been some, who having much used a Chamber where there was a Bed with Curtains
of changeable Taffata, had afterward an infinite number of young ones which
had their bodies enameled with several colors suitably to the furniture of
the place to which they had so often had access: some happily* would have this
effect attributed to the force of their little imagination; but we leave that
speculation to the more addicted to such curious disquisitions.

LAND-PIKES.
THere are also in several of these Islands certain creatures which have the
perfect figure, skin, and head of the Fish we call a Pike, and therefore may be
termed the Land-Pikes: but, instead of Finns they have four feet, which are so
weak* that they can only crawl along the ground, and wind their bodies as
Snakes, or to keep to our former comparison, stir as Pikes* after they are
taken out of the water. The largest are not above fifteen inches in length, and
proportionably big: their skin is covered with little scales which shine
extremely, and are of a silver-grey color: Some lovers of curiosities have
young ones in their Closets, which they were persuaded to receive for
Salamanders.

In the night time they make a hideous noise from under the rocks, and the
bottoms of hollow places where they are lodged: It is more sharp and grating to
the ear then that of Frogs and Toads; and they change their notes according to
the variety of the places where they lurk: they are seldom seen but a little
before night, and when any of them are met in the day time, their motion, which
is such as we before described it, is apt to frighten the unwary beholder.

SCORPIONS and other dangerous Reptiles.
THere are also in these parts Scorpions* like those commonly seen in France,
and other places: but they have not so dangerous a venom: they are yellow,
gray, or dark-colour'd according to the different soils in which they are bred.

Some who have broken up fenny places for Wells or receptacles for water, have
often met with a most hideous kind of Lizzards: They are in length about six
inches: the skin of their back is black, and beset with small gray scales,
which by their extraordinary shining, a man would think were oiled: their
bellies are also scaly, as well as their backs, but the skin which covers it is
of a pale yellow: their heads are small and picked: their mouths are wide
enough, and furnished with several teeth, which are extremely sharp: they have
two little eyes, but not able to endure the light of the day, for as soon as
they are taken out of the ground they immediately endeavor to make a hole in
it with their paws, which have each of them five hard and crooked claws,
wherewith they break the ground just as the Moles do, and so make their way
whither they please: they are very destructive in Gardens, gnawing the roots of
Trees and Plants: their biting is also as venomous as that of the most
dangerous Serpent.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Insects commonly seen in the Caribbies.
NOt only the Heavens, and other vast, and more excellent parts of Nature
declare the glory of their Almighty Maker; but even the least and most
despicable of his productions do also discover the work of his hands, and raise
their minds who attentively consider them to a grateful admiration of the
greatness of his power, and an humble acknowledgment of his Sovereignty: Out of
a persuasion therefore that there are some who delightfully search into the
secrets of Nature, and contemplate the wonders of God, who out of his
inexhaustible treasures has endued the most inconsiderable of his creatures
with so many rich ornaments, occult qualities, and rare beauties, we shall
bestow this Chapter on the consideration of certain Insects commonly seen in
these Islands, all which have some peculiar properties, as so many beams of
glory to raise them from their natural lowness into some esteem.

SNAILES.
AMong the Insects which abundantly swarm in these hot Countries there is a
kind of Snailes, called by the French Soidats, that is Soldiers, because they
have no shells proper and peculiar to themselves, and make them not of their
foam Ch: 14.
p: 78. Soldier

p: 77. Land pike

p: 83 Palm worm

p: 89 Horned: fly.

p: 76 Fly Catcher

A Monstrous spider p: 83

p: 84. Flying Tiger.

or slime, as the ordinary Snail does, but as soon as they are produced out of
some corrupted matter, or otherwise, they have this instinct (to secure the
weakness of their little bodies against the injuries of the air, and the
attempts of other Beasts) to seek out some empty habitation, and to take
possession of such a shell as they find most convenient for them, within which
they fit and accommodate themselves, as Soldiers, who having no settled
habitation take up their quarters in other men's houses, according to their
necessities, and the then present posture of their affairs.

They are commonly seen in the shells of Periwincles, or great Sea-Snails,
which they find on the shore, whither they are cast by the waves upon the death
of the fish which had been the first inhabitant thereof: but indeed these
little Soldiers are found in all sorts of other shells cast up by the Sea, nay
even the shells of the Liene-nuts, and some have took up their quarters in the
claws of great dead Crabs. They have this further industry, that as they grow
bigger they shift shells according to the proportion of their bodies, and take
a larger, into which they enter, quitting the former: so that they are of
several forms and figures, according to the diversity of the shells they
possess themselves of: It is probably of these Soldiers that Pliny speaks,
under the name of a kind of small Crab, to which he attributes the same
properties: their bodies are very tender except their heads and claws: they
have instead of a foot, and for a defensive weapon some instrument that is like
the claw of a great Crab, wherewith they close the entrance of their shells,
and secure their whole body: it is all jagged within, and it holds so fast
whatever it fastens on, that it takes away the piece with it. This Insect
marches faster then the common Snail, and fouls not with its foam or sliminess
the place over which it has passed.

When this Soldier is taken he grows angry, and makes a noise: to make him
quit the habitation he has taken up, there needs only to set him near the
fire, and immediately he forsakes his Quarters: if it be presented to him to
get into it again, he goes in backwards: when there are many of them met
together with an intention at the same time to quit their former lodgings, and
to take up new ones, which they are all much inclined to do, they enter into a
great contestation, there happens a serious engagement which is managed with
the said clasping instrument, till at length the weaker is forced to submit to
the victorious, who presently possesses himself of the shell, which he
afterward peaceably enjoys as a precious conquest.

Some of the Inhabitants eat of them, as the common Snails are eaten in some
parts among us: but they are more fit for Physic then Food; for being got out
of their shells there may be extracted from them an oil, which is excellent for
the curing of cold Gouts, and is very successfully used to mollify the hard
and callous parts of the body.

There are besides, two other sorts of small Snails which are very beautiful:
One is flat, after the fashion of a Scotchmans Bonnet, and of a dark color:
The other is sharp, and turned like the Vice of a Press, and has small, red,
yellow, or blew streaks or lines, for which they are much esteemed by the
curious.

GLO-WORMES.
THere are in these Islands several kinds of great Flies of diverse figures and
colors: but we must assign the first place to those which the French call
Mouches Lumincuses, and we may English Glo-wormes: Some Savages call them
Cucuyos, and the Caribbians by a name not much differing from it, Coyouyou.
This Fly is not recommendable for its beauty, or figure, as having nothing
extraordinary as to either, but only for its luminous quality: they are of a
dark color, and about the bigness of a Locust: it has two hard and strong
wings, under which are two lesser wings very thin, which appear not but when it
flies; and it is then also it may be observed that under those lesser wings
there is a brightness, like that of a Candle, which enlightens all about it:
besides, the eyes of this Insect are so luminous, that be it ever so dark, it
flies any where in the night, which is the time that this glittering light may
be seen.

It makes no noise flying, and lives only on flowers which it gathers off the
Trees. Being taken between ones fingers, it is so smooth and slippery, that by
the little endeavors it makes to recover its liberty, it insensibly gets away:
Being kept in captivity it conceals all the light it has under the wings, and
communicates only that of its eyes, but even that very weakly in comparison of
the brightness it sheds being at liberty: it has no sting, nor any claw for
its defense: The Indians are glad to have of them in their houses, for they
serve them instead of Lamps: but indeed of their own accord, in the night time,
they come into those rooms which are not kept too close.

There are in these Islands certain shining Worms, which also fly. All parts
of Italy, and all the other parts of the Levant, are also full of them.

But how famous soever these little Stars of the East may be, yet are they but
small sparkles in comparison of the great fire which these flying Torches of
America cast forth: For they do not only guide the Traveller by showing him his
way in the night, but with the assistance of this light a man may easily write,
and read the smallest Print that may be. A Spanish Historian relates, that the
Indians of Hispaniola, having these Flies fastened to their hands and feet,
they served them instead of Torches to go a hunting in the night time: it is
affirmed also by others, that some other Indians extract that luminous liquor
which these Flies have in their eyes and under their wings, and that they rub
their faces and breasts therewith in their nocturnal meetings, which makes them
appear in the dark to the beholders, as if they were covered with flames, and
like dreadful apparitions.

These Flies are easily taken in the night time; and that is done by turning a
lighted stick in the air: For as soon as those which at the close of the
evening are ready to come out of the woods perceive that fire, imagining it to
be one of their companions, they immediately fly to the place where that light
appears to them, and so they may be either struok down with a Hat, or flying of
themselves against the lighted stick, they fall to the ground, not knowing
where they are.

Nor will it be amiss to insert in this place what a learned and curious French
Gentleman, one Mons. du Montel, from whose generous liberality came several
other remarks which enrich this History, lately writ to a friend of his
concerning these Flies.

Being in the Island of Hispaniola, (says he) I have often at the beginning of
the night walked about the little Huts we had set up for our abode there while
our Ship was repairing, to consider how that the Air was in some places
enlightened by those little wandering Stars: But the most pleasant sight of all
was, when they came near those great Trees which bear a kind of Figs, and were
not far from our Huts; for sometimes they flew about them, sometimes they would
be within the thick boughs, which for a time obscured and eclipsed those little
Luminaries; yet so as that their beams might ever and anon be seen to break
through, though weakly, the interposed leaves: those pretty interruptions of
light came to us sometimes obliquely, sometimes in a straight line, and
perpendicularly: Afterward those glittering Flies extricating themselves out
of the obscurity of those Trees, and coming nearer us, we had our pleasure
heightened by seeing them on the adjacent Orange Trees, which they seemed to set
a fire, gilding those beautiful fruits, enamelling their flowers, and giving
such a luster to their leaves, that their naturally delightful verdure was
extremely increased by the pleasant combination of so many little lights. I
wished my self at that time the Art of Painting or Drawing, that I might
represent a night enlightened, and as it were turned into day by so many fires,
and so pleasant and luminous a piece of Landscape. Think it not much that I am
so long about the story of a Fly, since Du Bartas sometime gave it a place
among the Birds, and in the fifth Day of his first Week speaks very nobly of it
in these terms:

New-Spain's Cucuyo in his forehead brings
Two burning Lamps, two underneath his wings;
Whose shining rays serve often in darkest night,
The Embroiderer's hand in royal works to light:
The ingenious Turner with a wakeful eye
To polish fair his purest Ivory:
The Usurer to count his glist'ring Treasures:
The learned Scribe to limne his golden measures.
If five or six of these Flies were put into a vessel of fine Crystal, no
doubt, the light of them would be answerable to the Poets description, and be a
living and incomparable Tortch. But it is to be noted, that these Flies shine
not at all when once they are dead, their light being extinguished with their
lives.

PHALANGES.
TO come to the other kinds of great Flies to be seen in these Islands, and
which some call Phalanges, besides the Cucuyos there are some that be much
bigger, and of a strange figure: There are some have two snouts like that of an
Elephant, one turning upwards, the other downwards: Some others have three
horns, one rising out of the back, and the other two out of the head: The rest
of their body, as also their horns, is black, and shines like Jet. There are
some have one great horn about four inches in length, much after the fashion of
a Wood-cocks bill, very smooth on the upper side, and covered with a certain
downiness on the lower, which horn rising out of their back reaches in a direct
line to the head, on which there is another horn, like that of the horned
Beetle, which is as black as Ebony, and transparent as glass: The whole body is
of the color of a withered leaf, smooth, and flourished like Damask: their
head and mouth are like those of an Ape; they have two large, yellow, and firm
eyes, a wide mouth and teeth like a little Saw. Hear what account our curious
Traveller gives of it.

I have seen, says he, one kind of these great Flies, which I thought
extremely beautiful: It was about three inches in length: the head of it was
azure, not unlike that of a Grasshopper, save that the two eyes were as green
as an Emerald, and encompassed by a small white streak: the upper side of the
wings was of a bright violet color, damask'd with several compartiments of
carnation, heightened by a small natural thread of silver: the compartiments
were disposed with such an exact observance of Symmetry, that a man would think
that the Compass and the Pencil had in the doing of it employed all the rules
of Perspective, and the Shadows of Painting: The nether part of the body was
of the same color with the head, save that there were six black feet neatly
bending toward the belly: When the wings, which were hard and solid, were
spread abroad, there might be seen two other lesser wings which were thinner
then any silk, and as red as Scarlet. This kind of Fly I saw in the Island of
S. Croix, in the custody of an English Gentleman, and I immediately writ down
this description of it. I thought at first it had been artificial, because of
that lively Carnation color, and the string of silver; but having taken it
into my hands, I acknowledged that Nature must certainly have been in an
excellent good humor, and had a mind to divert her self, when she bestowed such
sumptuous robes on that little Queen among the Insects.

PALMER-WORM.
THere is a Worm, or Vermin in English called a Palmer, in French Millepied,
(thousand footed) from the almost infinite multitude of its feet, which are as
bristles under his body, and help him to creep along the ground with incredible
swiftness, especially when he finds himself pursued: This kind of Insect in the
Caribbies is about six inches long: The upper part of his body is covered all
over with swarthy scales, which are hard and joynted one within another, like
the Tiles of a House: but what is dangerous in this creature, is, that he has a
kind of claws both in his head and tail, wherewith he twitches so home, and so
poisons the place wounded, that for the space of four and twenty hours, and
sometimes longer, the party hurt feels a very sharp pain.

SPIDERS.
THere are in several of the Islands certain great Spiders, which some have
ranked among the Phalanges, by reason of their monstrous figure and bigness,
which is so great, that when their legs are spread abroad they take up a larger
place then the Palm of a man's hand: their whole body consists of two parts,
whereof one is flat, and the other of a round figure, smaller at one end, like
a Pigeons egg: They have all of them a hole on their back, which is, as it
were, their Navel: their mouth cannot easily be discerned, because it is in a
manner covered over with hair, which commonly is of a light gray, but sometimes
intermixed with red: it is armed with two sharp tushes which are of a solid
matter, and of a black color, so smooth and shining, that some curious persons
have them set in gold for Tooth-picks, and are highly esteemed by those who
know they are endued with a virtue to preserve from pain and all corruption
those parts that have been rubbed therewith.

When these Spiders are grown old they are covered all over with a swarthy
Down, which is as soft and as close as Velvet: their body is supported by ten
feet, which are a little hairy on the sides, and have below certain small
points like bristles, which help them to fasten more easily on those places up
which they would climb: All these feet issue out of the forepart of the
Insect, having each of them four joints, and at the ends they are armed with a
black and hard horn, which is divided into two parts like a fork.

They every year shift off their old skin as the Serpents do, as also the two
tushes which serve them for teeth, and are their defensive arms; those who meet
with these precious exuviae may therein observe the perfect figure of their
body, such as it is represented among the Sculps of this Chapter.

Their eyes are very little, and lie so deep in their heads that they seem to
be only two small points: they feed on Flies and such vermin, and it has been
observed, that in some places their Webs are so strong, that the little Birds
caught in them have had much ado to get away: the same thing is affirmed of the
Spiders which are found in the Bermudez, Islands inhabited by the English: It
is probable they are of the same kind.

FLYING-TYGER.
THere is another Insect called by some the Flying-Tyger, because its body is
checkered with spots of several colors, as the Tiger is: It is about the
bigness of the horned Beetle: The head is sharp, and has two great eyes as
green and sparkling as an Emerald: his mouth is armed with two hard hooks
extremely sharp, with which he holds fast his prey, while he gets out the
substance of it: The whole body is covered with a hard and swarthy crustiness,
which serves him for armor: Under his wings, which are also of a solid matter,
there are four lesser wings which are as thin as any silk: It has six legs,
each whereof has three joints, and they are bristled with certain little
prickles: In the day time he is continually catching other Insects; and in the
night he sits on the Trees, whence he makes a noise like that of the Cigales.

BEES, and some other Insects.
THe Bees which are in the Islands, differ not much from those of the Southern
part of America, but both kinds

Ch: 15.
American Swallow p: 89.

Eagle p: 93.

Flammant p: 88.

The Colibry or Humming bird p: 93

Craw-fowle p: 87

Caat p: 88.

Pintado p: 89.

are less then those of Europe: Some are gray, others of a dark color, or
bluish: these last make most wax, and afford the best honey: they all have
their abode in the clefts of rocks, and hollow Trees: their wax is soft, and so
black that no Artifice can whiten it: but in requital their honey is much
whiter, sweeter, and clearer then any we have in these Countries: They may be
handled without any danger, for they have in a manner no stings.

There are also in these Islands horned Beetles or Bull-flies, and an infinite
number of Grass-hoppers, and Butter-flies, the sight whereof very much delights
the eye. There are withal both on the ground, and in the air, several very
troublesome and dangerous Insects, which extremely annoy the Inhabitants: But
of these, and some other inconveniences, we shall give an account in the two
last Chapters of this first Book.

CHAP. XV. Of the more considerable kinds of Birds which may be seen in the
Caribbies.
ALL the works of God speak the magnificence of the Worker, the disposal of
them declares his wisdom, the Earth is full of his productions: but we must
acknowledge that of all the Creatures, not endued with any thing above a
sensitive life, the Birds do more loudly then any publish his goodness and
Providence, and by the sweet harmony of their singing, the activity of their
flight, and by the lively colors and beauty of their feathers excite us to
praise, and glorify that Sovereign Majesty which has so advantageously
adorned and embellished them with so many rare perfections. Having therefore in
the precedent Chapters treated of the Trees, Plants, Herbs, Four-footed Beasts,
Reptiles and Insects which the Caribby Islands do plentifully produce to
furnish the Earth, we shall in this Chapter describe the rare Birds which
inhabit the Air of these pleasant Countries, and enrich the perpetual Verdure
of so many precious Trees wherewith they are crowned.

FREGATES.
AS soon as any Ships come near these Islands, several Birds which frequent the
Sea come to them, as if they had been sent to enquire whence they came: When
the Seamen perceive these Visitants they are satisfied that it will not be
long ere they shall see Land: Yet are they not to flatter themselves with that
hope till they see them coming in great Companies; for there is one kind of
them which many times fly above two hundred leagues from Land.

The French have bestowed on them the name of Fregates, Frigots, because of the
continuance and lightness of their flight. Their body is about the bigness of a
wild Drake's; but their wings are very much larger, and they make their way
through the air with such swiftness, that in a very short time they will be out
of sight: There are several kinds as to their feathers; for some are all black,
others all gray, save only the belly and wings, in which there are some white
feathers: They are excellent good at fishing; and when they perceive a fish
lying even with the water, they fail not, yet as it were only sporting
themselves, to seize it, and immediately devour it: They have a strange
dexterity in taking the flying Fishes; for as soon as they perceive that that
delicate prey makes the water to rise and bubble a little, and is just upon the
taking of its flight, to avoid the cruel pursuits of its Sea-enemies, they
place themselves so directly on that side on which they should make their
sally, that as soon as they are out of the water they receive them into their
Beaks, or Claws: So these innocent and unfortunate fishes, to avoid the teeth
of one enemy, many times fall into the claws of another who gives them no
better quarter.

The Rocks which are in the Sea, and the little un-inhabited Islands are the
places where these Birds make their abode and their nests: The meat of them is
not much esteemed; but their fat is carefully kept, it having been found by
experience that it helps the Palsy, and all sorts of cold Gouts.

FAUVES.
THe Birds which the French call Fauves, that is, Fallow, by reason of the
color of their back, are white under the belly: they are about the bigness of
the Poule d'eau, but for the most part so lean that they are valued only for
their feathers: their feet are like those of Wild-Ducks, and their beaks sharp
as those of Wood-cocks: they live on small fishes, as the Frigots do; but they
are the most stupid of any Sea or Land-Fowl in the Islands; for, whether it be
that they are soon weary of flying, or take the Ships for moving rocks, as soon
as they perceive any one, especially if it be near night, they immediately
light in them, and suffer themselves to be taken without any trouble.

HERONS, and several other Sea and River-Fowl.
THere are seen near these Islands, and sometimes at a great distance from them
in the Sea, certain Birds perfectly white, whose beaks and feet are as red as
Coral; they are somewhat bigger then Crows: they are conceived to be a kind of
Herons, because their tails consist of two long and precious feathers, by which
they are distinguished from all other Birds frequenting the Sea.

Among the Birds frequenting Rivers and Ponds there are found in these
Countries Plovers, Duckers, Moore-hens, or Coots, Wild-Ducks, and Wild Geese;
as also a kind of Ducks, which having the whole body as white as snow, have
their beaks and feet as black as may be; and a kind of Herons of an admirable
whiteness, about the bigness of a Pigeon, but beaked like a Wood-cock: they
live on fish, and delight in sandy places, and on rocks: They are much sought
after for that precious Plume of fine Feathers, soft as any silk, which is had
from them: but inasmuch as all these are common in other places, we may forbear
the descriptions thereof.

CRAW-FOWL.
THere is in all these Islands a large Bird which lives only on fish: it is
about the bigness of a great Duck, and the feathers are of an Ash Color, and
hideous to the eye: it has a long and flat beak, a great head, small eyes deep
set in his head, and a neck short enough, under which hangs a kind of craw or
bag so big that it may contain a great pale of water: From which description we
may call him the Craw-Fowl, as the French have properly termed him,
Grand-gosier: These Birds are commonly found upon Trees on the Seaside, where
they lie in ambush to discover their prey; for as soon as they perceive a fish,
as it were between wind and water, so as that they have them at advantages,
they fall upon it, and seize it: they will swallow down great fishes whole:
they are also so attentive on their fishing, that having their eye continually
fixed on the Sea whence they expect their prey, they are easily shot, and become
it themselves to others: they are a stupid and melancholy kind of Bird,
suitably to their employment: they are so excellently well sighted, that they
discover fish at a great distance in the Sea, and above a fathom under water;
but they stay till they be come up almost even with it before they offer at
them: their flesh is not to be eaten.

COOT.
THe Islands called the Virgins are of the Caribbies the best furnished with
abundance of Sea and Land-Fowl: for besides the forementioned, whereof they
have good store, there is a kind of Coot, or Moor-hen, admirable for the beauty
of its feathers: they are no bigger then Pigeons, but have a much longer beak
of a yellow color, are higher set, and their legs and feet are of a bright
red: the feathers of the back, wings and tail are of a shining carnation
intermixed with green and black, which serves for a foil to set off the beauty
of the other colors: Under the wings and on the belly their feathers are of a
golden yellow: their neck and breasts are adorned with a delightful mixture of
all the colors they have about their bodies; and their head, which is very
small, and beset with two little sparkling eyes, is crowned with a tuft of
several little feathers of several pleasant colors.

FLAMMANS.
THe Ponds and fenny places which are not much frequented are the retreats of
several great and beautiful Birds about the bigness of wild Geese, and of the
same figure with those which the Dutch call Lepelaer, from the form of their
beak, which has the resemblance of a spoon: They have long necks, and their
legs are of such length, that their bodies are about three foot from the
ground: But they differ as to color, inasmuch as when they are young their
feathers are white, as they grow it becomes of a murrey color, and when they
are old of a bright carnation; from which color the French took occasion to
call them Flammans: There are of these Birds seen near Montpelier in France,
which have the lower part of their body and under their wings of a carnation
color, the upper part black: there are in like manner in these Islands some
that have a mixture of black and white feathers in their wings.

They are seldom seen but in great companies, and their hearing and smelling is
so perfect, that they smell the Huntsmen and Firearms at a great distance: To
avoid all surprises they pitch in open places, and in the midst of Fens, whence
they may at a great distance perceive their enemies; and there is always one of
the party upon the guard while the rest are searching in the waters for their
livelihood; and as soon as he hears the least noise, or perceives a man, he
takes his flight, and gives a cry for a signal to the rest to follow him: when
the Hunts-men who frequent Hispaniola would kill some of these Birds, which are
there very common, they take the wind of them, that the smell of the powder may
not easily be carried to them, then they cover themselves with an Ox-hide, and
creep on their hands and feet till they come to a place whence they may be sure
to kill. By this slight these Birds, who are accustomed to see the wild Oxen
that come out of the Mountains to the watering-places below, become the prey of
the Hunts-men. They are commonly fat, and a delicate meat: Their skins are
kept, which are covered with a soft down, to be put to the same uses as those
of Swans and Vultures.

SWALLOW of America.
SOme years since there was brought to a curious Person living at Rochel a Bird
about the bigness of a Swallow, and like it, saving that the two great feathers
of the tail were a little shorter, and the beak turned downwards like a
Parrot's, and the feet like a Duck's: It was black, save only that under the
belly there was a little white like our Swallows; in fine it was so like them,
that it may well be called the Swallow of America. We have assigned it a place
among the Sea and River-fowl, inasmuch as its feet discover its subsistence by
the waters. And in regard it is so rare a Bird that no Author that we know of
has spoken of it, we thought fit to give a Sculp of it, the draught whereof
was taken from the living Bird.

LAND-FOWL.
BEsides all these Birds, which have their subsistence out of the Sea, Rivers
and Ponds, there are in these Islands abundance of Partridges, Turtles, Ravens,
and Wood-quists, which make a strange noise in the Woods: There are also three
sorts of Hens; some, ordinary Hens, such as are in these parts; others, like
Turkies; others, a kind of Pheasants, which are called Pintadoes, because they
are as it were painted with colors, and have about them small points like so
many eyes on a dark groundwork.

There are also Black-birds, Feldivars, Thrushes, and Hortolans, in a manner
like those of the same name among us.

As to the other Birds which are peculiar to the Forests of the Caribbies,
there are so many kinds, and those so richly adorned, that it must be
acknowledged, that if they are not comparable to those of Europe, as to their
singing, they very much excel them in the bravery of their feathers; as will
appear by the descriptions we shall make of some of the more considerable.

ARRAS.
THe Arras are a kind of Birds extremely beautiful, about the bigness of a
Pheasant, but as to the figure of the body they are like Parrots: They have all
heads big enough, sprightly and steadfast eyes, crooked beaks, and a long tail
consisting of very fine feathers of several colors, according to the
difference of the Islands where they are bred. There are some have their heads,
the upper part of the neck, and the back, of a bright sky-colour, the belly,
the lower part of the neck, and the wings of a pale yellow, and the tail all
red: Others have almost all the body of a flame-colour, save that they have in
their wings some feathers which are yellow, azure, and red. There are yet
others have all their parts diversified with a mixture of red, white, blew,
green and black, that is, five lively colors, making a delightful enamell:
They commonly fly in companies: A man would think them very daring and
confident; for they are not startled at the discharging of guns, and if the
first shot has not hurt them, they will continue in the same place for a
second: but this confidence is attributed rather to a natural stupidity then
courage. They are easily tamed, and may be taught to speak, but their tongues
are too thick to do it so plainly as the other kinds of Parrots, to wit the
Canides, and ordinary sort of Parrots, called by the French Perrigues. They are
such enemies to cold, that they are hardly brought over Sea alive.

CANIDES.
THe Canides are much about the same bigness with the precedent, but of a much
more beautiful plumage, and therefore the more esteemed. Monsieur du Montell,
who has made many Voyages into America, and visited all the Islands, and saw
one of them in that of Corassao, gives us this account of it. It deserves to be
numbered, says he, among the most beautiful Birds in the world. I took so
particular notice of it, having had of them in my hands many times, that I have
the Idaeas of it still fresh in my memory. Under the belly, wings, and neck, it
was of a waving Aurora-colour, the back and one half of the wings of a very
bright sky-colour, the tail and greater feathers of the wings were mixed with a
sparkling carnation, diversified with a sky-colour, as upon the back a
grass-green and a shining black, which very much added to the gold and azure of
the other plumage: But the most beautiful part was the head, covered with a
murrey down, checkered with green, yellow, and a pale blew, which reached down
wavingly to the back: The eyelids were white, and the apple of the eye yellow
and red as a Ruby set in Gold: it had upon the head a certain tuft or cap of
feathers of a Vermilion red, sparking like a lighted coal, which was
encompassed by several other lesser feathers of a pearl color.

If it were recommendable for all these extraordinary ornaments, it was much
more for its familiarity and innocence; for though it had a crooked beak, and
that the claws with which he held his meat and brought it to his beak were so
sharp as to take away whatever it fastened on, yet was it so tame as to play
with little Children and never hurt them; and when one took him into his hand,
he so contracted his claws, that the sharpness of them could not be felt. He
had this quality of a dog, that he would lick with his short and thick tongue
those who made much of him and gave him something he liked, put his head to
their cheeks to kiss and caress them, and expressing his acknowledgments by a
thousand pretty insiouations, he would suffer himself to be put into what
posture one would, and took a certain pleasure in diverting those he thought
his friends: But as he was mild and tractable to those who were kind to him, so
was he as mischievous and irreconcilable to such as had injured him, and he
could distinguish them from others, and make them feel the sharpness of his
beak and claws.

He spoke the Dutch, Spanish and Indian Language, and in the last he sung Airs
as a natural Indian: He also imitated the cries of all sorts of Poultry and
other creatures about the house: he called all his friends by their names and
sirnames, flew to them as soon as he saw them, especially when he was hungry:
If they had been absent, and that he had not seen them a long time, he
expressed his joy at their return by certain merry notes: when he had sported
himself till they were weary of him, he went away, and perched himself on the
top of the house, and there he talked, sung, and played a thousand tricks,
laying his feathers in order, and dressing and cleaning himself with his beak:
He was easily kept; for not only the bread commonly used in that Island, but
all the fruits and roots growing there, were his ordinary food; and when he had
more given him then he needed, he carefully laid up the remainder under the
leaves wherewith the house was covered, and took it when he had need. In a
word, I never saw a more loving or more amiable Bird: 'Twas a Present for any
Prince if he could have been brought over the Sea. This Bird had been brought
from the Caribby Islands to Mons. Rodenborck then Governor of the Fort and
Dutch Colony, which is in the Island of Corassao.

PARROTS.
IN all these Islands almost there are Parrots, which the Indians in their
Language call Koulehuec, and they are seen in companies like Starelings: The
Hunts-men rank them among the Wild-fowl, and think not their pains and powder
ill spent to kill them; for they are as good and as fat as any Pullet,
especially when they are young, and have corn and fruits to feed upon: their
bigness and plumage differs according to the difference of the Islands,
insomuch that the ancient Inhabitants know by their bulk and feathers what
places they were bred in.

There is an admirable kind of them in one of the Islands called the Virgins:
they are no bigger then that Bird which the Latins call Upupa, the English a
Whoope, and almost of the same figure: But their feathers are of such a strnnge
diversity of colors, as extremely pleases the eye: they are apt to speak very
distinctly, and imitate whatever they hear.

PARAQUITOES.
THe Paraquitoes are a small kind of Parrots, no bigger then Black-birds, nay
some exceed not the bulk of a Sparrow: They are all green, save that under the
belly and the extremities of the wings and tails they are a little yellowish:
they are taught to speak and whistle, but retain somewhat of their wildness; for
they will bite hard if they be angered: If they can get loose they will into the
Woods, where they starve; for being taken young and kept in Cages where they
have their meat made ready for them, they cannot pitch on those Trees which
bear food fit for them.

TREMBLO.
IN some Islands, especially Gardeloupe, there is a little Bird called Tremblo
from its perpetual trembling, or shaking of the wings, which it a little opens:
it is about the bigness of a Quail, the feathers of a darker gray then the Lark.

SPARROW of America.
THe Islands of Tabago and Barboudos, being the more Southerly of all the
Caribbies, are furnished with several sorts of beautiful Birds not to be found
in the more Northerly: Among the rest there is one no bigger then a Sparrow is
very remarkable for the beauty of its plumage; for his head, neck and back are
of so bright and sparkling a red, that when a man has him fast in his hand,
and shows only his neck or back, he might be taken even at a small distance for
a lighted coal: Under the wings and belly he is of Sky-colour, and the feathers
of the wings and tail are of a dark red, checkered with little white points
disposed at an equal distance one from another, which have the figure of the
apple of his eye: he has also the beak and note of the Sparrow, and therefore
we thought fit to call him the Sparrow of America.

EAGLE of Orinoca.
THere crosses over from the Continent a kind of large Bird, which may be
ranked among the chiefest of the Birds of Prey that are in the Caribbies: The
first Inhabitants of Tabago called him the Eagle of Orinoca, because he is
about the bigness, and differs not much in figure from the Eagle, and that this
Bird, who is but a Passenger in that Island, is commonly seen near the great
River of Orinoca, in the Southerly part of America: All his feathers are of a
light gray marked with black spots, save that the extremities of his wings and
tail are yellow: he has a quick and piercing sight: his wings are very long;
his flight steady and swift, considering the weight of his body: he feeds on
other Birds, on which he furiously fastens his tallons, and having mastered
them he tears them in pieces, and devours them: yet does he show so much
generosity that he never sets upon the weaker sort, and such as are not able to
defend themselves; but he engages only against the Arras, the Parrots, and all
those which as himself are armed with crooked beaks, and sharp tallons: Nay it
has been observed, that he falls not on his game while it is on the ground, or
lodged in a Tree, but stays till it has taken its flight, that he may engage
it in the open air with equal advantage.

MANSFENY.
THe Mansfeny is also a kind of small Eagle, which, as the other, lives by
prey, but has not the courage of the forementioned; for his hostility is only
against Wood-Quists, Doves, Chickens, and other lesser Birds, which are not
able to oppose him.

There are moreover in these Islands abundance of other Birds of different
kinds, whereof most have yet no names among the foreign Inhabitants of those
parts.

COLIBRY.
WE will conclude this story of the Caribbian Fowl, with an account of the
Colibry, or as it is otherwise commonly called by English Writers the
Humming-Bird, a Bird admirable for its beauty, bulk, sweet scent, and manner of
life; for being the least of all Birds, he gloriously confirms the saying of
Pliny, that, Natura nusquam magis quam in minimis tota est: Nature is ever
greatest in its least productions. Some of these Birds are no bigger bodied
then some of the greater sorts of Flies: Some are of so beautiful a plumage,
the neck, wings and back represent the Rainbow, which the Ancients called
Iris, the Daughter of Admiration: There are others have such a bright red under
their neck, that at a distance one would think it were a Carbuncle: The belly
and under the wings are of a gilt-yellow, the thighs as green as an Emerald,
the feet and beak as black as polished Ebony, and the two little eyes are two
Diamonds set in an oval of the color of burnished steel: The head is of a
grass-green, which gives it such a luster, that it looks as if it were gilt:
The Male has a little tuft, in which may be seen all the colors which enamel
that little body, the miracle of the feathered Commonwealth, and one of the
rarest productions of Nature: He lets fall and raises up when he pleases that
little crest of feathers wherewith the Author of Nature has so richly crowned
him, nay all his plumage is more beautiful and shining then that of the Female.

If this Bird be miraculous as to his bulk and plumage, he is no less as to the
activity of his flight, which is such, that proportionably the greatest Birds
make not their way through the air with so much force, and make not so loud a
noise as this little Colibry does by the agitation of wings; for a man would
think it a little whirlwind raised of a sudden in the air, and blowing in his
ears: And in regard he takes a pleasure to fly near those who pass by, he
sometimes by his sudden surprisal frightens those who hear him before they see
him.

He lives only on the Dew which he sucks from the Flowers of Trees with his
tongue, which is much longer then his beak, and hollow as a small reed, and
about the bigness of a small needle: He is very seldom seen on the ground, nor
yet standing on the Trees, but suspended in the air, near the Tree whence he
has his nourishment: He is born up by a gentle agitation of his wings, and in
the mean time he draws to him the dew which stays longest at the bottom of the
flowers halfblown: It Is pleasant to look on him in that posture: For spreading
abroad his little crest, a man would think he had on his head a crown of
Rubies, and all sorts of precious stones; and the Sun adding somewhat to the
natural luster of his plumage makes him look as if he were a composition of
precious stones animated, and flying in the air: In those places where there
are most Cotton-trees is commonly the greatest store of Colibris.

Though his plumage lose much of its beauty when he is dead, yet is there so
much left, that some Ladies have worn them for Pendants: Nay some have imagined
they became them better then any other.

This miraculous Bird is not only extremely delightful as to his colors, but
there is one kind of it which having recreated the eye, satisfies also the
nostril by the sweetness of his scent, which is like that of the finest Musk
and Amber.

He commonly makes his nest under a small branch of some Orange-tree, or
Cotton-tree, and as it must be proportionable to the smallness of his bulk, he
so covers it among the leaves, and so industriously secures it against the
injuries of the weather, that it is in a manner imperceptible: he is such an
excellent Architect, that to prevent his being exposed to the Easterly and
Northerly Winds, which are the ordinary winds in those parts, he places his
nest toward the South: It consists on the outside of little strings taken
from a Plant called Pite, and wherewith the Indians make their cordage: These
little strings or filaments are as small as a man's hair, but much stronger: He
ties them and weaves them one into another so closely about the little forked
branch which he has chosen for the perpetuation of his species, that the nest
being thus among the leaves, and hanging under the branch, is, as we said
before, both out of sight and out of danger: Having made it strong and
fortified it on the outside with these filaments, and by some little bits of
bark and small herbs interlaced one within another by a miraculous artifice, he
furnishes it within with the finest Cotton, and the Down of certain little
feathers softer then any silk: The Female commonly lays but two eggs which are
oval, about the bigness of a Pea or small Pearl.

To what is abovesaid we shall add the account given of it by our noble
Traveller ( du Montel) in his familiar Relations to a friend of his: There are,
says he, sometimes found the nests of the Colibris under the branches of those
Plants of Tobacco which are suffered to grow as high as they can for seed. I
remember a Negro of ours showed me one of them, which was very neatly
fashioned, under one of those branches: Nay being in S. Christophers, an
Englishman showed me one of them, which was fastened to one of the Reeds that
sustained the covering of a Hut. I saw also one of these nests, together with
the eggs, which was fastened to a branch that had been cut off to adorn the
Closet of a curious person, who had also the Male and Female dried and
preserved entire; and there it was that I attentively considered both the Nest
and Bird; and having admired the operations of Divine Providence in that little
creature, how could I less then be astonished at the miraculous Architecture of
the Nest, which though built with an unexpressible artificel, was nevertheless
performed only with his little beak?

There are of these Birds seen in most of the Caribby Islands, but according to
the diversity of the Islands they also differ as to bigness and plumage: The
most beautiful and least as to bulk are in the Island of Aruba, which depends
on the Dutch Colony at Corassao.

It might happily be here expected we should speak of the singing of this Bird,
and that having entertained the sight with its beauty, and the smelling with
its scent, it should also satisfy the ear with its harmonious music: Some
affirm that there is a kind of them that sings at a certain season of the year:
But it is probable that what is called the singing of the Colibry, is only a
little noise like that of the Cigale, which is always the same note. But though
it should not sing at all, it is endued with so many other extraordinary
advantages of Nature, that it may be ranked among the most beautiful, and most
excellent of Birds.

Those who have lived at Brasil do unanimously affirm, that there is in those
parts a little Bird called Gonambuch, of a shining white color, whose body is
no bigger then that of a Hornet, and as to a clear and distinct note is nothing
inferior to the Nightingale: It Is possible it may be a kind of Colibry, as
indeed some do make it; yet is it not comparable, either as to beauty of
feathers or scent, and other transcendent qualities, to that whose description
we have here made.

Those have come nearer the mark who have affirmed that this masterpiece of
Nature is a kind of those little Birds, which some Indians call Guaraciaba, or
Guacariga, that is to say, Sunbeam, and Guaracigaba, that is, Hair of the Sun:
The Spaniards call it Tomineios, forasmuch as having put one of them with his
nest into a pair of Scales wherewith gold is weighed, it commonly weighs not
above two of those little weights, which the same Spaniards call Tominos, that
is, four and twenty grains.

Some have been of opinion that some of these excellent Colibris were at first
Flies, which were afterward transformed into Birds: Others have written that
the Caribbians called these Birds Renati, or Newborn, because they sleep one
half of the year, as the Dormice do, and that they awake in the Spring,
recovering as it were a new life with that delightful season of the year: Nay
there are some affirm, that when the leaves fall they thrust their little beaks
into the trunks of the Trees, and there remain immovable, and as it were dead,
for six months, till the earth puts on a new livery of flowers: But these are
frivolous stories grounded on conjectures, which may be touched by the way, but
not admitted to any competion with the true account we give of our Colibry.

We will conclude this Chapter with a thing worthy observation, which yet
happens not in other parts, unless happily in

Ch: 16.
p: 94. Flying fishes

Ch: 16.
Sea Parrat p: 98

A Rock-fish p: 100

Bonite p: 99

Guiny, as Linscot reports: It is the wonderful instinct which God has
bestowed on all the smaller sorts of Birds in America, to preserve their
species; inasmuch as there being in the Woods a kind of long Snakes green and
small, which crawling up the Trees might wriggling themselves from branch to
branch devour the eggs of the Birds, which they are extremely greedy of: to
prevent the coming of these to their nests, all the lesser Birds, which are not
so well beaked as to make their party good against these enemies, make their
nests at the forked end of certain small filaments, which like Ivy growing on
the ground crawl up the Trees, and being come to the top, and not able to get
any higher, fall down again, and sometimes reach two or three fathom below the
branches. At the very extremity of these ligaments or filaments, by the French
called Lienes, the Birds fasten their nests with such strength and industry,
that a man cannot sufficiently admire either the materials or workmanship of
those little hanging edifices. The Parrots and other stronger Birds make their
nests in hollow Trees, or upon the boughs, as those in these parts do; for with
the offensive arms of their beaks and claws they are able to engage their
professed enemies the Snakes.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Sea and River-Fish of the Caribbies.
WE shall not promise so exact and full a History of the Fish of these Islands
as so ample a subject might require: but having already given an account of the
accommodations of these happy Countries, as to the Land, the order of our
Design requires that we should now speak of the productions of the Sea which
encompass them, and the Rivers that run through them. The business therefore of
this Chapter shall be to give a short description of the most excellent Fishes
wherewith they are plentifully furnished, in order to the subsistence of men;
that the consideration thereof may work in us the deepest acknowledgments
imaginable of that Providence which has displayed its miracles in the deep
waters, as well as on the dry land; and consequently that it is just that the
Heavens and the Earth should praise him, the Sea and whatever moves therein.

FLYING-FISHES.
THere are some who think what is said of the Flying-Fishes a pure fiction,
though confirmed by the relations of many famous Travelers: But what opinion
soever they may have thereof who believe only what they have seen, it is a
certain truth, that as soon as Ships have passed the Canaries, thence to the
Islands of America, there are often seen rising out of the Sea great numbers of
Fishes which fly about the height of a Pike above the water, and near a
hundred paces distance, but no more, in regard their wings are dried by the
Sun: They are somewhat like Herrings, but have a rounder head, and they are
broader on the back: their wings are like those of a Bat, which begin a little
below the head, and reach almost to the tail: It happens many times that in
their flight they strike against the sails of Ships, and fall even in the day
time upon the Deck: Those who have dressed and eaten of them think them very
delicate: Their forsaking the Sea their proper Element, is occasioned upon
their being pursued by other greater Fishes which prey on them; and to avoid
meeting with them they quit their proper Element, making a sally into the air,
and changing the^^ finnes into wings to eschew the danger; but they meet with
enemies in the air as well as in the water; for there are certain Sea-fowls
living only by prey, which have an open hostility against them, and take them
as they fly, as was said in the precedent Chapter.

SEA-PARROTS.
THere are also in these parts certain Fishes scaled like a Carp, but as to
color are as green as a Parrot, whence they are by some called Sea-Parrots:
They have beautiful and sparkling eyes, the balls clear as Crystal,
encompassed by a circle argent, which is enclosed within another as green as an
Emerald, of which color are the scales of their backs; for those under the
belly are of a yellowish green: They have no teeth, but jaws above and below of
a solid bone, which is very strong, of the same color as their scales, and
divided into little compartiments very beautiful to the eye: They live on
Shellfish, and with those hard jaw-bones they crush, as between two
millstones, Oysters, Muscles, and other Shellfish, to get out the meat: They
are an excellent kind of fish to eat, and so big, that some of them have
weighed above twenty pounds.

Ch: 16
Dorada p: 99:

Rock-fish p: 100.

Ch: 17
Espadon

Shark-fish p: 102.

Lamantin p: 103

Sea Cock p: 106.

Becune p: 106.



DORADO.
THe Dorado, by some called the Sea-Bream, by others the Amber-Fish, is also
common in these parts: it is called Dorado, because in the water the head of it
seems to be of a green gilt, and the rest of the body as yellow as gold, and
azur'd, as a clear sky: It takes a pleasure in following the ships, but swims
so swiftly that the must be very dextrous that shall take it either with the
iron-hook, or long staff with the casting-net at the end of it, which are the
instruments wherewith Seamen are wont to take great fishes: Nor can a man
imagine a fish better furnished for swimming then this; for he has the
forepart of the head sharp, the back bristled with prickles reaching to the
tail, which is forked, two fins of each side of the head, and as many under the
belly, small scales, and the whole body of a figure rather broad then big, all
which give him a strange command of the waters: some of them are about five
foot in length: Many account the meat of this fish, though a little dry, as
pleasant to the taste as that of a Trout or Salmon, so the dryness of it be
corrected with a little good sauce: When the Portuguez see these Dorados
following their Ships, they stand on the Bow-sprit with a line in their hand,
at the end whereof there is only a piece of white linen fastened to the hook
without any other bait.

BONITE.
THere is another Fish which commonly follows the Ships, called a Bonite: It is
big, and has much meat about it, and about two foot in length: The skin of it
seems to be of a very dark green, and whitish under the belly: It has scales
only on both sides, and there only two ranks of very little ones along a
yellowish line, reaching from one side to the other, beginning at the head to
the tail, which is forked: It is taken with great hooks cast out on the sides
of the Ship; which may be done without any hindrance to the Voyage: This Fish
is as greedy as the Cod, and taken with any baits, even with the entrails of
other fish: He is more common in the main Sea, then on the Coasts, and very
good meat eaten fresh; but much more delicate having lain a little while in
Pepper and Salt before it be dressed: Some conceive this to be the same fish
with another called by the French Thon, which is common on all the Coasts of
the Mediterranean Sea.

NEEDLE-FISH.
THere is a Fish without scales, four foot or thereabouts in length, called the
Needle-Fish: The head of it is sharp, a foot or better in length, the eyes
large and shining, and encompassed with a red circle: The skin of his back is
streaked with blew and green lines, and that under the belly is white intermixed
wi^h red: It has eight fins which somewhat incline to yellow, and a very sharp
tail, whence probably it came to be so called, as the figure of the head gave
the Dutch occasion to name it Tabac-pype, that is, Tobacco-pipe.

The Coasts of these Islands are furnished also with Carangues and Mullets,
which come sometimes into the fresh waters, and are taken in the Rivers; as
also Rock-Fishes, which are red intermixed with several other colors: They are
called Rock-Fishes, because they are taken near the Rocks. There are also a
kind of fish called Negroes, or Sea-Devils, which are large, and have a black
scale, but their meat is white and excellent good; and an infi^ite number of
Fish, which for the most part differ from those seen in Europe, and have yet no
names among us.

Nor are the Rivers behind hand in supplying the Inhabitants of these Islands
with abundance of excellent Fish: and if we may bring small things into
competition with great, they are proportionably to their extent as plentiful
thereof as the Sea it self. It Is true, there are not any Pikes or Carpes, nor
some other fish which are common in these parts; but there is great store of
others which are known only to the Indians, and whereof some are not much
different as to figure from ours.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Sea Monsters found in these Islands.
THose who have writ the History of Fish have ranked among the Whales all such
as are of extraordinary bigness, as they have comprehended under the name of
Monsters all those that are of a hideous shape, or living by prey are the
destructive Inhabitants of the Waters, as Lions, Bears, Tigers, and other wild
beasts are of the Earth: We shall treat in this Chapter of both, that is of all
those which are of a prodigious bulk, or dreadful as to their ugly shapes, or
to be feared by reason of the mischief done by them: So that we must for a time
descend into the abysses of the Main, where there are creeping things
innumerable, as the royal Prophet says, and both small and great Beasts; and
after we have contemplated the works of the Lord therein, rise up again to
celebrate his mercy toward the Children of Men.

ESPADON, or SWORD-FISH.
AMong the Sea Monsters that which the French call L'Espadon (a word signifying
a short sword) is one of the most remarkable: it has at the end of the upper
jaw a defensive weapon, about the breadth of a great Courtelas, which has hard
and sharp teeth on both sides: These defensives in some of them are about five
foot in length, and about six inches broad at the lower end, and palizadoed
with twenty seven white and solid teeth in each rank, and the bulk of their
bodies bears a porportion thereto: The head of this monster is flat and hideous
to behold, being of the figure of a heart: They have near their eyes two vents
at which they cast out the water which they had swallowed: They have no scales,
but a greyish skin on the back, and a white under the belly, which is rough
like a file: They have seven fins, two of each side, two on the back, and that
which serves them for a tail: Some call them Saw-fishes; some Emperors, because
there is an hostility between them and the Whale, which they many times wound
to death.

MARSOUINS.
THe Marsouins are the Sea-Hogs, or Porposes, which go together in great
companies, and sporting themselves leap up above the water, and following all
of them as many as are together the same course: They many times of themselves
come near enough to the ships, and such as are dextrous do now and then take
some of them: Their meat is of a dark color; the fattest have not above an
inch or two of fat: They have a sharp snout, a very broad tail, greyish skin,
and a hole upon the top of their heads, through which they breathe and cast out
water: They grunt almost like the Land-Swine: Their blood is hot, and their
entrails like those of a Pig, and they are much of the same taste; but their
meat is of hard digestion.

There is another kind of Porposes which have the snout round and hollow, and
from the resemblance there is between their heads and the frocks of Friars,
some call them Monksheads, and Sea-Monks.

REQUIEM.
THe Requiem, otherwise called the Shark-Fish, is a kind of Sea-Dog or
Sea-Wolf, the most devouring of all Fishes, and the most greedy of man's flesh:
He is much to be feared by such as go a swimming: He lives altogether by prey,
and commonly follows the ships to feed on the filth cast out of them into the
sea. These Monsters seem to be of a yellowish color in the water: Some of them
are of an unmeasurable length and bigness, and such as are able to cut a man in
two at one bite: Their skin is rough, and there are made of it soft files to
polish wood: Their heads are flat, and the opening of their mouth is not just
before the snout, but under it: Whence it comes, that to fasten on their prey
they are forced to turn their bellies almost upwards: Their teeth are very
sharp and very broad, being jagged all about like a Saw: Some of them have
three or four ranks of these in each jaw bone: These teeth lie within the gums,
but they make them sufficiently appear when there is occasion.

These cruel Sea-Dogs are attended by two or three small fishes, and sometimes
more, which go before them with such swiftness, and so regular a motion, that
they either advance or halt more or less according as they perceive the
Requiems do: Some call them Rambos, and Pilgrims, and the French Mariners, the
Requiems Pilots, inasmuch as those small fishes seem to be their convoys: They
are not much above a foot in length, and of a proportionable bigness: But their
scales are beautified with so many pretty and lively colors, that it might be
said, they were encompassed which chains of Pearl, Coral, Emerald, and other
precious stones: A man can hardly be weary of looking on them in the water.

It is in like manner affirmed, that the Whale wherever she goes has
marching before her a little fish like a Sea-Gudgeon, which from that service
is called her Guide: The Whale follows him, suffering her self to be led and
turned as easily as the Rudder causes the Ship to turn about; and in requital
of this service, whereas whatever else enters into the horrid Chaos of this
Monsters throat is immediately lost and devoured, this little fish makes it his
retiring, and his resting place; and while he lies there a sleep the Whale
stirs not, but as soon as he gets out she presently follows him: and if it
happen the said fish should be a little out of the way, she wanders up and
down, striking many times against the Rocks, as a Ship without a Rudder; which
thing Plutarch affirms that himself was an eyewitness of in the Island of
Anticyra. There is such another friendship between the little Bird called the
Wren and the Crocodile; and that Shellfish called the Naker lives in the same
manner with the Pinnothere, and *other Shellfish not much unlike a Crab, as is
affirmed by Montagne, lib. 2. ca. 12.

The meat of the Requiem is not good, and therefore not eaten, unless it be in
case of great necessity: yet is it conceived by some, that while they are young
they may be tolerable meat. Some curious persons do carefully save the Brains
found in the heads of the old ones, and being dried they keep it, and they say
it is very good for such as are troubled with the Stone or Gravel.

Some Nations call this Monster Tiburon and Tuberon: But the French and
Portuguez commonly call it Requiem, that is to say, Rest, happily, because he is
wont to appear in fair weather, as the Tortoises also do, or rather because he
soon puts to rest whatever he can take: His Liver being boiled yields a great
quantity of oil very good for Lamps, and the Skin of it is used by Joyners to
polish their work.

REMORA.
BEsides the Pilots before mentioned, the Requiems are many times accompanied
by another kind of little fishes called by the Dutch Sugger, because they stick
so close to the bellies of the Requiems as if they would suck them. The French
account it a kind of Remora, which name they have because they stick to the
Ship as if they would stop their course: They are about two foot in length, and
proportionably big: They have no scales, but are covered with an Ash-colored
skin, which is as glutinous as those of Eeles. Their upper-jaw is a little
shorter then the lower; instead of teeth they have little risings, strong
enough to break what they would swallow: Their eyes are very small, of a yellow
color: They have ^ins and a certain plume as some other Sea-fishes have, but
what is most remarkable in them, is, that they have on their heads an oval piece
made somewhat like a crown: it is flat and streaked above with several lines
which make it look bristly: It is by this part that these fish stick so closely
to the Ships and Requiems, that sometimes they must be killed ere they can be
gotten off: They are eaten sometimes, but in case of necessity, when other
better fish cannot be had.

LAMANTIN.
OF all the Sea Monsters that are good to eat, and kept for Provision, as
Salmon and Cod are in Europe, the most esteemed in these Islands is a certain
fish by the French called Lamantin, by the Spaniards Namantin and Manaty: It is
a Monster that in time grows to that bulk, that some of them are eighteen foot
in length, and seven in bigness about the middle of the body: His head has
some resemblance to that of a Cow, whence some took occasion to call him the
Sea-Cow: He has small eyes, and a thick skin of a dark color, wrinkled in
some places and stuck with some small hairs: Being dried it grows so hard that
it may serve for a Buckler against the Arrows of the Indians; nay some of the
Savages use it to ward off the blows of their enemies when they go to fight:
They have no fins, but instead thereof they have under their bellies two short
feet, each whereof has four fingers very weak to support the weight of so
heavy a body; nor has he any other defensive. This Fish lives on the grass and
herbage that grows about the Rocks, and on the shallow places that have not
much above a fathom of Seawater. The Females are disburthen'd of their young
ones much after the same manner as Cows are, and they have two teats wherewith
they suckle them: They bring forth two at a time, which forsake not the old one
till such time as they have no longer need of milk, and can feed on the grass
as she does.

Of all Fishes there is not any has so much good meat as the Lamantin; for
many times there needs but two or three to load a great Canow; and this meat is
like that of a Land creature, eating short, of a Vermilion color, not cloying
or fulsom, and mixed with fat, which being melted never grows musty: It is much
more wholesome eaten two or three days after it has been laid in salt then
fresh: These Fish are more commonly taken at the entrance of fresh water Rivers
then in the Sea. Some highly value certain small stones found in the heads of
these Monsters, as having the virtue reduced to powder to clear the Reins of
Gravel, and dissolve the Stone bred there: But the Remedy being violent, I
should not advise any to use it without the prescription of an experienced
Physician.

WHALES and other Sea Monsters.
SUch as Sail into these Islands do sometimes in their Course meet with Whales
which cast up water by their Vent to a Pikes height, and commonly show but a
little of their back, which looks like a rock above the water.

The Ships are also many times attended for a good way by certain Monsters
about the bigness of a Shallop, which seem to take a pleasure in showing
themselves: Some Seamen call them Souffleurs* that is, Blowers, for that ever
and anon these prodigious fishes put up some part of their head above water to
take breath; and then they blow, and cause a great agitation of the waters with
their sharp snouts: Some hold them to be a kind of Porposes.

SEA-DEVILS.
ON the Coasts of these Islands there is sometimes taken by the Fishers a
Monster which is ranked among the kinds of Sea-Devils, by reason of its hideous
figure: It is about four foot long, and proportionably big: it has on the back
a great bunch full of prickles like those of a Hedg-Hog: The skin of it is
hard, uneven and rugged, like that of the Sea-dog, and of a black color: The
head of it is flat, and on the upper part has many little risings, among which
may be seen two little very black eyes: The mouth which is extremely wide, is
armed with several very sharp teeth, two whereof are crooked and bent in like
those of a wild Boar: it has four fins, and a tail broad enough, which is
forked at the extremity: But what got it the name of Sea-Devil, is, that above
the eyes there are two little black horns, sharp enough, which turn toward his
back like those of a Ram: Besides that this Monster is as ugly as any thing can
be imagined, the meat of it, which is soft and full of strings, is absolute
poison; for it causes strange vomiting, and such swoonings as would be followed
by death if they be not soon prevented by the taking of a dose of good
Mithridate, or some other Antidote. This dangerous creature is sought after
only by the curious, who are glad to have any thing that comes from it to adorn
their Closets: And so it comes to pass that this Devil, who never brought men
any profit while it lived, gives a little satisfaction to their eyes after his
death.

There is another kind of Sea-Devil, no less hideous then the precedent, though
of another figure: The largest of this kind are not much above a foot in length
from the head to the tail: They are almost as much in breadth; but when they
please they swell themselves up, so as that they seem to be round as a bowl:
Their wide mouths are armed with many little but very sharp teeth, and instead
of a tongue they have only a little bone which is extremely hard: Their eyes
are very sparkling, and so small, and deep set in the head, that the ball
thereof can hardly be discerned: They have between the eyes a little horn which
turns up, and before it a pretty big string that has at the end of it a little
button: Besides their tail, which is like the broad end of an Oar, they have
two plumes, one on the back which stands as it were upright, and the other
under the belly: They have also two ^ins, one of each side over against the
midst of the belly, having at the extremities somewhat like little paws, each
whereof is divided into eight claws, which are armed with sharp nails: their
skin is rough, and prickly all over, like that of the Requiem, save only under
the belly: It is of a dark red color and marked with black spots: the meat of
them is not to be eaten: They may be easily flayed, and the skin being filled
with Cotton or dried leaves, finds a place among rarities; but it loses much of
its luster when the fish is dead.

BECUNE.
AMong the ravenous Monsters that are greedy of man's flesh, found on the Coasts
of these Islands, the Becune is one of the most dreadful: It is in figure much
like a Pike, but in length seven or eight foot, and proportionably big: He
lives by prey, and furiously fastens like a Blood-Hound on the men he perceives
in the water: He carries away whatever he once fastens on, and his teeth are so
venomous, that the least touch of them becomes mortal if some sovereign remedy
be not immediately applied to abate and divert the poison.

SEA-WOOD-COCKS.
THere is another kind of Becunes, by some called Sea-Wood-Cocks from the
figure of the beak, which is somewhat like a Wood-Cocks bill, saving that the
upper part is much longer then the lower, and that this fish moves both jaws
with like facility: Some of them are so big and long, that they are above four
foot between the head and the tail, and twelve inches broad near the head,
measuring side-wise: The head is somewhat like that of a Swine, but enlightened
by two large eyes which are extremely shining: It has two fins on the sides,
and under the belly a great plume rising higher and higher by degrees, like a
Cocks-comb, reaching from the head almost to the tail, which is divided into
two parts: Besides the long and solid beak it has, for which it is remarkable
among all fishes, it has two sorts of horns, hard, black, and about a foot and
a half in length, which hang down under his throat, and are particular to this
kind of fish; and these he can easily hide in a hollow place under his belly,
which serves them for a sheath: It has no scales, but is covered with a rough
skin, which on the back is black, on the sides greyish, and under the belly
white: It may be eaten without any danger, though the meat of it be not so
delicate as that of several other fishes.

SEA-URCHIN.
THe Fish found on these Coasts, and called the Sea-Urchin, well deserves that
name: It is round as a ball, and full of sharp prickles, for which it is
feared: Some call it the Armed Fish. They who take of them, having dried them,
send them as Presents to the Curious, who for rarity hang them up in their
Closets.

Ch: 18.
p: 109. Sea Unicornes

p: 112

Ch: 18
p: 115



CHAP. XVIII. A particular Description of the Sea-Unicorn which was cast ashore
at the Haven of the Tortoise-Island, in the Year 1644. and a pleasant Relation,
by way of Digression, of several beautiful and rare Horns brought lately from
Davis-streight; with an account of the Country, and the Dispositions of the
Inhabitants.
WE cannot better conclude the Account we had to give of the Sea Monsters, then
with a description of so remarkable and miraculous a Fish, as may justly
deserve a particular Chapter to treat of it: It is the Sea-Unicorn, which is
sometimes seen in those parts. There was cast ashore, in the year 1644. a
prodigious one, on the Coast of the Tortoise-Island, near Hispaniola: Monsieur
d^ Montel, having been an eyewitness thereof, gives us this curious
description of it.

This Unicorn, says he, was pursuing a Carangue, or some other lesser fish,
with such earnestness and impetuosity, that not considering that it needed a
greater depth of water then the other, it stuck with half the body dry on a
sand-bank, whence it could not recover the deeper waters ere it was destroyed
by the Inhabitants: It was about eighteen foot in length, being at the largest
part of its body about the bigness of a great Barrel: It had six great fins
like the ends of Galley-oars, whereof two were placed near the gills, and the
other four on the sides of the belly at equal distances; they were of a
Vermilion red color: all the upper part of the body was covered with great
scales about the bigness of a Crown-piece, which were of a blew color
intermixed with certain spangles of silver: near the neck the scales were
closer, and of a dark color, seeming as it were a collar: The scales under the
belly were yellow; the tail forked, the head somewhat bigger then that of a
horse, and near the same figure: It was covered with a hard and dark colored
skin; and as the Land-Unicorn has one horn in his forehead, so this
Sea-Unicorn had a very fair one issuing out of the forepart of his head, about
nine foot and a half in length: it was as strait as could be, and from the
place whence it came out it grew smaller and smaller to the very point, which
was so sharp, that being thrust hard it would enter into wood or stone, or some
more solid substance: It was at the place where it came out of the head about
sixteen inches about, and from thence to two thirds of the length it was like a
screw, or to say better, made waving like a wreathed pillar, save that the
channels grew smaller and smaller till they gently ended in a point, which was
two inches beyond the fourth foot. All that lower part had over it an
ash-colored skin, which was all over covered with a small soft hair, short as
plush, and of the color of a withered leaf, but under that it was as white as
Ivory. As to the other part, which seemed naked, it was naturally polished, of
a shining black, marked with certain small white and yellow strokes, and of
such solidity, that a sharp file could hardly get a little small powder from
it. It had no ears standing up, but two spacious gills, as the other fishes:
The eyes were about the bigness of a Hens egg; the Ball, which was of a
sky-colour enameled with yellow, was encompassed with a certain vermilion,
which had beyond it another as clear as Crystal: The mouth was wide enough,
and furnished with several teeth, whereof those before were extremely sharp,
and those toward the throat in both jaws were broad, and a little knobbed: The
tongue was of a length and thickness proportionable, and covered with a rough
skin of a vermilion color. What was further remarkable, is, that this fish had
upon the head a kind of crown, rising above the skin about two inches, and made
oval-wise, the extremities whereof ended in a point. Above three hundred
persons of that Island did eat of the meat of it, and that plentifully, and
thought it extremely delicate: It was interlarded with a white fat, and being
boiled it came up in fleaks like fresh Cod, but it had a much more excellent
taste.

Those who had seen this rare fish alive, and had with great Levers broken the
back of it, affirmed, that he had made prodigious attempts to thrust them with
his horn, which he turned with an inexpressible dexterity and nimbleness, and
that if he had had as much water under him as would have born him up, he would
have been too hard for them all. When the entrails were taken out, it was found
that he lived by prey; for there were within him the scales of several kinds of
fish.

What could be preserved of this miraculous Animal, especially the head, and
the precious horn fastened in it, hung up near two years at the Guard-house of
the Island, till Monsieur Le Vasseur, the Governor of it, presented one
Monsieur des Trancarts (a Gentleman of Xaintonge who had given him a visit)
with the Horn. Not long after, coming over in the same Ship with the Gentleman
who had that precious rarity put up in a long Chest, our Ship was cast away
near the Island of Fayala, one of the Assores, and all the Goods were lost, but
nothing so much regretted as the loss of that Chest.

There is in the Northern Seas another kind of Unicorns, which are many times
by the Ice carried to the Coast of Iseland: They are of so prodigious a length
and bulk, that most Authors who have written of them rank them among Whales:
They are not covered with scales as the formentioned described by us was, but
with a hard black skin like the Lamantin: They have but two fins on both sides,
and a large plume upon the back, which being narrower in the midst then at
either end, makes as it were a double crest rising up for the more convenient
dividing of the waters: they have three vent-holes a little below their necks,
at which they cast up the superfluous water they had swallowed, as the Whales
do: their heads are sharp, and on the left side of the upper jaw there comes
out a horn white all over as the tooth of a young Elephant, which horn is
sometimes fifteen or sixteen foot in length: It is wreathed in some places, and
streaked all over with small lines of a pearlcolour, which are not only on the
superficies of it, but run through the substance: The horn is hollow to the
third part, and all over as solid as the hardest bone.

Some will have this prominency to be rather a tooth then a horn, because it
rises not out of the forehead, as that we have spoken of, nor yet from the
upper part of the head, as those of Bulls and Rams, but out of the upper jaw,
in which it is set, as the teeth are in their proper places: Those who are of
this opinion say further, that it is not to be wondered these fishes should have
but one such tooth, when the substance out of which others should be produced
is quite exhausted in the making of that one, which is of such a prodigious
length and bigness as might suffice to make a hundred.

But whether this strange defensive wherewith these monstrous fish are armed be
called Tooth or Horn, certain it is that they use it in their engagements with
the Whales, and to break the Ice of the Northern Seas, wherewith they are
oftentimes encompassed: Whence it came, that some times there have been seen of
them such as by reason of the violent service they have been in, in disingaging
themselves out of those icy mountains, have not only had their horns blunted at
the point, but also shattered and broken off: The figures of both this kind and
that cast ashore in the Tortoise Island may be seen among the Sculps.

While we were ordering the foregoing story for the satisfaction of the
Public, a Ship of Flushing, commanded by Nicholas Tunes, wherein M. Lampsen,
one of the Deputies of that Province, in the Assembly of the States General,
and other considerable Merchants of the same Town were concerned, coming in
from Davis-streight, brought thence among other rarities several excellent
pieces of the Unicorns of the Northern Seas, of that kind we spoke of before;
and in regard the Relation sent us of that Voyage may very much clear up the
matter we treat of, we conceive the Reader will take it kindly to be
entertained with it, assuring himself he has it with the same sincerity as it
was communicated to us.

The Captain of whom we have this Relation, leaving Zealand at the end of the
Spring, 1656. with a design to discover some new Commerce in the Northern
parts, arrived at the end of June following in Davis-streight, whence having
entered into a River which begins at the sixty fourth degree, and ten minutes of
the Line Northward, he sailed to the seventy second, under which the Country we
intend to describe lies.

As soon as the Inhabitants of the Country, who were then a fishing, perceived
the Ship, they came toward it with their little Boats, which are so made as
that they carry but one person: The first who attempted it occasioned the
joining of so many others to them, that in a short time there was a squadron of
seventy of those little vessels, which parted not from the foreign Ship till it
had cast Anchor in the best Haven, where by their acclamations and all the
signs of friendship and good will that could be expected from a Nation so far
unacquainted with civility, they expressed the extraordinary joy they conceived
at its happy arrival: These little vessels are so admirable, whether we
consider their materials, or the strange industry in the making of them, or the
incomparable dexterity whereby they are conducted, that they may well be
allowed a place among the descriptions which this delightful digression shall
furnish us with.

They consist of little thin pieces of wood, whereof most are cleft like Hoops:
These pieces of wood are fastened one to another with strong cords made of the
guts of fishes, which keep them together in a figure fit for the uses to which
they are designed: They are covered on the outside with the skins of Sea-Dogs,
which are so neatly sewn together, and so artificially done over with Rozin
about the seams, that the water cannot make the least entrance into them.

These little Boats are commonly about fifteen or sixteen foot in length, and
they may be in the midst where they are biggest about five foot circumference;
from that place they grow smaller and smaller, so that the ends or extremities
of them are very sharp and plated as it were with a white bone, or a piece of
the Unicorns horn before described: The upperpart is flat and even, and covered
with leather as the rest, and the lower part is fashioned like the belly of a
great fish; so that they are very swift upon the water: they have but one
overture, or open place, which is just in the midst of the whole structure: It
is raised a little about with a small ledge of Whale-bone, and it is made fit
for the reception of one man, so as that being in it, his waste fills the hole.
When the Savages who invented these kinds of Boats would make use of them,
either to go a fishing or to divert themselves on the water, they thrust down
their feet and thighs in at the hole, and then sitting down they so fasten the
short Coat they have about them to the ledge which is about the hole, that they
seem to be graffed into the little vessel, and to be part of it.

Thus much of the figure and materials of these little vessels; let us now
consider the accoutrement of the men who have the conduct of them: When they
intend to go to Sea, they put over their other cloths a certain short coat,
which is kept only for that purpose: This Sea-coat consists of several skins
having the hair taken off, which are well dressed and set together, that a man
would think it to be all of a piece: It reaches from the crown of the head to
the Navel: it is rubbed over with a blackish gum, which is not dissolved in the
water, and keeps it from passing through; That Capuchon or part of it which
comes over the head, comes so close under the neck and upon the forehead, that
it leaves nothing but the face open: The sleeves are tied at the wrist, and the
lower part of the coat is fastened to the ledge, about the hole of the vessel,
with so much care and industry, that the body thus covered is always dry in the
midst of the waves, which with all their tossing can wet only the face and the
hands.

Though they have neither Sail, nor Mast, nor Rudder, nor Compass, nor Anchor,
nor any thing of all those conveniences which are requisite to make our Ships
fit for the Sea; yet will they undertake long voyages with these small vessels,
upon which they seem to be sewn: they have an experienced knowledge of the
Stars, and need no other guide in the night time: The Oars they use are broad
at both ends like a Surgeons palet, and that they may the more easily make
their way through the waves, and last the longer, they tip them with a white
bone which covers the edges of the wood; which ornament they fasten with pins
of horn, which they use instead of nails: The middle of these Oars is
beautified with a bone or precious horn, as well the ends, and by that place
they hold them that they may not slip out of their hands: They handle these
double Oars with such dexterity and nimbleness, that these small vessels will
outrun Ships that have all the advantages of sails, wind, and tide: They are
so confident in them, and so versed in the guiding of them, that they show a
thousand tricks in them, for the divertisement of the beholders: Nay sometimes
they will raise such waves, that the water will be all foamy, as if there had
been a great tempest; and then they seem rather like Sea Monsters coursing one
another then men: And to make it appear they fear not dangers, and that they
hold a good correspondence with that Element which feeds them, they show
several tricks, diving and rouling themselves in the Sea three or four times
together; so that they may be taken for perfect Amphibia.

When they intend to take voyages longer then ordinary, or are afraid to be
driven far into the Sea by some Tempest, they take with them in the hollow
place of their vessel a bladder full of fair water to quench their thirst, and
fish dried in the Sun or Frost to eat instead of fresh meat: But they are
seldom reduced to the necessity of using those provisions; For they have
certain Darts like little Lances, which are fastened to their Boats; these they
so dexterously cast at the fish they meet with, that they are very seldom
destitute of these refreshments: They need no fire to dress their meat, for on
the Land, as well as at Sea, they are wont to eat it raw: They also carry along
with them the teeth of certain great fishes, or pieces of sharp bones, which
serve them for knives to dress and cut the fish they take: Besides, another
advantage of these vessels is, that there can happen no mutiny in them, since
one and the same person is Master, Mariner, Purser and Pilot of it, who may
stop it when he pleases, or let go with the wind and water, when he would take
the rest necessary to retrive his spent forces: In this case he fastens his Oar
to certain straps of Hart-skin designed for that purpose, which are fastened to
the Boat, or else he ties it to a buckle which hangs before on his coat.

The Women have not the use of these little Boats; but that they may also
sometimes divert themselves on the water, their husbands, who are very fond of
them, bring them abroad in other vessels which are about the bigness of our
Shallops or Long-boats, and such as may carry fifty persons: They are made of
Poles tied together, and covered with Sea-Dogs skins, as the former: When it is
calm they go with Oars, when there is any wind they fasten the Mast to certain
Sails of Leather.

The Reader may see among the Sculps of this Chapter a Cut of one of these
Boats, with the person that conducts it sitting therein, which may render the
description we have given of it more intelligible and complete.

As to the Country where these excellent Navigators are bred, the degrees under
which we have placed it show it to be of a very cold constitution: It Is true, in
the months of June and July, which make the Summer of those parts, and are but
one continued day, (as December and January make but one night) the air is
warm, pleasant, and clear, but between those two seasons, the days growing
alternately longer and shorter, are attended with thick Mists, Snow, or
Icy-rains, which are extreme cold and tedious.

That part of the Country which lies near the Sea, is dry, and full of rough
and dreadful rocks; and when the Snow melts it is overflown in many places by
certain impetuous torrents lying between them: But when a man has traveled
one league of very bad way, he comes into pleasant fields, especially in the
Summer time: There are also mountains covered with little Trees, which
extremely recreate the eye, and feed abundance of Fowl and Wild-beasts; and
there are Valleys through which there run many clear and pleasant Rivers of
fresh water, which have strength enough to make their way into the Sea.

The Captain who commanded the Flushinger, from whose late Voyage we have this
Relation, being landed with some part of his men, and having made a diligent
observation thereof, he found there, among other things worth his notice, a
vein of a certain brownish earth full of shining spangles, as it were of
silver, wherewith he caused a barrel to be filled, that trial might be made
thereof: But having been in the crucible, it was found fit only to be put on
the covers of Boxes, and such pieces of Joynery, to which it adds much beauty
and luster: Yet is there some hope derived from this discovery, that upon
further trial there may be Silver-Mines found in these parts.

Though this Country be very cold, yet are there in it many beautiful and large
Birds of a black and white plumage, and some of diverse other colors, which the
Inhabitants flay that they may have their flesh to eat, and their skins to
cloth themselves withal: There are also Hearts, Elks, Bears, Foxes, Hares,
Conies, and abundance of other four-footed beasts, whose Furs are either black
or of a dark gray, very thick, long, soft, and besides the uses may be made
thereof as Furs, excellent for Hats.

Our Relation tells us that the Country is inhabited by two sorts of
Inhabitants, who live together in perfect friendship and good correspondence:
Some are of a very high stature, well-shap'd in their bodies, of a pretty clear
complexion, and very swift in running: The others are much lower, of a dark
Olive-colour'd complexion, and well proportioned as to their members, save that
they have short and big legs. The former spend their time in Hunting, whereto
their activity naturally inclines them, while the latter employ themselves in
Fishing: Both kinds have their teeth very white and close, black hair, lively
eyes, and their faces such as that there can no remarkable deformity be
observed in them: They are all of them so vigorous, and of so healthy a
constitution, that many of them being above a hundred years of age are very
active and laborious.

In their ordinary conversation they seem to be of a cheerful humor, courageous
and confident: They love those strangers who visit them, because they bring
them Needles, Fishinghooks, Knives, Hedge-bills, Wedges, and all the other
Implements of Iron they have need of, which they so highly esteem that they
will give their cloths, and what they account most precious for them: but they
have such an aversion from all novelty, as to feeding and clothing, that it
were hard to induce them to admit of any change in either: nay though they are
one of the poorest and most barbarous Nations under the Sun, yet do they think
themselves the most happy, and best provided for of any; and they are so well
conceited of their manner of life, that the civilities of all other people are
accounted by them unbeseeming, savage, and extremely ridiculous actions.

This high esteem they have conceived of their condition contributes not a
little to that satisfaction and tranquillity of mind which is legible even in
their countenances: besides that they are not disturbed by any vain designs
which might interrupt their quiet: They know nothing of those gnawing cares and
pinching distractions wherewith the inordinate desire of wealth torments the
greatest part of mankind. The conveniences of fair and sumptuous buildings, the
fame attending gallant actions, the delights of great entertainments, the
knowledge of excellent things, and what we think most advances the pleasure and
enjoyments of life, having not yet found the way into these Countries, their
thoughts accordingly are not troubled about the acquisition thereof: but to get
those things which are precisely necessary for their subsistence and clothing,
with as little trouble as may be, is the end of all their consultatations and
designs.

Their ordinary Exercises, nay indeed Employments, are Fishing and Hunting; and
though they have no Firearms nor Nets, yet ingenious and inventive Necessity
has inspired them with other ways whereby they effect their desires. They eat
whatsoever they feed on without any dressing, or any other sauce then hunger:
nay they laugh at those who boil fish or flesh, affirming that the fire takes
away the natural taste thereof, and what makes them acceptable to them.

Though they need no fire to dress their meat, yet they very much commend the
use of it, and their Caves are not destitute of it in the winter time; both by
its light to abate somewhat of the tediousness of that long night which reigns
in their Country, and by its heat the cold whereby they are besieged of all
sides: But when they take their rest, or are forced to go out of their Caves,
they put on a certain Fur, which by the excellent disposal of Divine Providence
secures them against the injuries of the cold, though they lay in the midst of
the snow.

The men's cloths, are a Shirt, a pair of Breeches, a short Coat, and a kind of
Buskins: The Shirt comes but a little below the Waste: It has a Capuchon, or
Cap annexed to it, to come over the head and neck: It is made of the bladders
of great fishes cut into long pieces of equal breadth, and very neatly sewn
together: It has no opening at the breast as ours have; but that it may not
rent when it is put on, the ends of the sleeves, the headpiece, and the bottom
of it are hemmed

Ch: 18.
p. 115

p. 116

in with a very thin black skin; as it is represented among the Brass-cuts.

The rest of their cloths, even their Buskins, are of several pieces cut
proportionably one to another, as their Shirts are; but they are of a stronger
stuff, to wit, Harts-skins, or Sea-dogsskins very well dressed with the hair
on: The clothes of the Savage whose pourtrait is to be seen among the Sculps,
taken by the Original, were of Leather of two several colors, the pieces were
cut of the same breadth, and put together so handsomely, that a white piece was
sewn between two dark colored pieces, which showed very prettily: The hair
which was on the outside was as smooth and as soft as Velvet, and the several
pieces were so neatly joined together, that a man would think by the outside
that the Garment was all made of the same skin. As to the fashion of the Coat,
and the external ornaments of the Savage, the Graver has so naturally
represented them in the Sculp, that we need not trouble the Reader with any
further description thereof.

The Savages inhabiting about the foresaid Straight never go abroad into the
Country but they have at their back a Quiver full of Arrows, and a Bow or a
Lance in their hands: Their Arrows are of several kinds, some are for the
killing of Hares, Foxes, great Birds, and all sorts of small Game; others for
Hearts, Elks, Bears, and other greater Beasts: The former are not above two or
three foot in length, and instead of iron at the top they put a small sharp
bone, which on one of the sides has three or four little hooks, so that it
cannot be taken out of the place wounded without widening the wound: The
latter, which are at least four or five foot long, have also at the end a sharp
bone jagged like the teeth of a Saw: They cast these latter with the hand; but
to give them the greater force, and make them do execution at a greater
distance, they fasten to their right arm a piece of wood a foot and a half
long, which on one side has a deep channel into which they put the buttend of
the Javelin, which being cast thence goes off with a greater violence.

They sometimes also carry in their hands a kind of Lance, of a tough and heavy
wood, which is tipp'd at the smaller end with a round bone, the point whereof
had been sharpened on a stone, or they strengthen it with the horns or teeth of
the fish before described: These Lances are seven or eight foot in length, and
beautifi*d at the butt-end with two little wings of wood, or Whale-bone, which
make them a little more sightly then they would be otherwise.

Besides the several sorts of hooks wherewith they take the smaller fishes
frequenting their Coasts, they have diverse kinds of Javelins, which with a
wonderful dexterity they dart at the great and monstrous fishes they take in
the Sea: And that those they have hurt with these Darts may not sink to the
bottom, and elude their expectation, there is fastened to the buttend of them a
thong of Harts-leather 25 or 30 fathom in length, and at the end of that thong
or line of leather there is a bladder, which keeping above water shows where
the fish is, and so they draw it to them, or gently drag it to land after it
has spent it self in struggling.

The young women differ not much in their clothes from the men; but the more
ancient are commonly clad with the skins of certain great Birds, whose feathers
are white and black, and very ordinary in those parts. These women have the art
to flay them so neatly, that the feathers stay in the skin: These clothes reach
but to half the leg: They are girt with a thong of leather, at which instead of
keys there hang a great many little bones as sharp as any bodkins, and about
that length: They wear neither Bracelets, nor Neck-laces, nor Pendants; nor
mind any ornament, save that they make a gash in each cheek, and fill it with a
certain black color, which as they think adds very much to their beauty.

While the men are a hunting or fishing they stay at home, and employ
themselves in making of Cloths, Tents, Baskets, and such things as are
necessary about the house: They are extremely fond of their little ones, and if
they be forced to change their habitations, or to accompany their husbands in
some journey, they either carry or lead them wherever they go, and to
recreate them by the way, and quiet them when they cry, they have little drums
covered with fishes bladders, on which they can make as good Music as any on
the Taber: They also beat them to frighten away the Bears, and other wild
Beasts which wander up and down near the Caves where these Savages pass over
the Winter with their families, and about the Tents where they are lodged in
the Summer. Among the Sculps of this Chapter there is the pourtraiture of one
of these women, to which we refer the Reader for further satisfaction.

Though these poor Barbarians cannot be imagined to study much Policy, yet have
they among them petty Kings and Captains, who preside in all their Assemblies:
They advance to these dignities those who have the handsomest bodies, are the
best Hunts-men, and the most valiant: These wear the richest Skins and more
precious Furs then their Subjects; and as a badge of their Supremacy they have
a certain badge which is sown before on their Coats, and when they go abroad
they are always attended by certain young men armed with Bows and Arrows, who
punctually execute their commands.

They have not the invention of building houses; but in the Summer they live in
the fields under Tents of Leather, which they carry along with them to be
pitched where they think it most convenient; and in Winter their abode is in
Caves, which are naturally made in the Mountains, or they have taken the pains
to make such.

They neither Sow nor Reap any kind of Grain in order to their subsistence: Nor
have they any Trees or Plants bearing fruits fit to eat, unless it be some
Straw-berries, and a kind of Raspices; but indeed their livelihood depends
wholly on their Fishing and Hunting: Fair water is their ordinary drink, and
their most delicate entertainment, as to drink, is the blood of Sea-dogs, and
that of Deer, and other Land-creatures, which they either kill or take in
Traps, at the setting of which they have an admirable industry.

The Winter being so long and hard in this Country, the Inhabitants must needs
suffer great inconveniences during that season, especially that tedious night
which keeps them in two whole months: But besides that in case of necessity
they endure hunger a long time, they have this foresight that in the Summer
they dry some part of their fishing and hunting, and lay it up with as much Fat
and Suet as they can get together, in order to their subsistence during that
comfortless time: Nay some affirm they are so successful in their hunting by
Moonlight, that they are seldom destitute of fresh meat, even during this long
Eclipse.

They desire not to see any other Country besides that they were born in, and
if a tempest or other accident chance to cast them upon some other, they
perpetually sigh after their own, and are never quiet in their minds till they
have recovered it: If they are denied or too long delayed that favor, they
will attempt it with the hazard of their lives, exposing themselves to the Sea
in their little Vessels without any other guide then the Stars, by which they
regulate their course.

Their Language has nothing common with any other in the World; there is a
Vocabulary of it, but not to be published till there be a further discovery
made of these parts; what is said here thereof being only by way of digression.

Nor has it been yet observed what Religion they have among them; but from
their, looking toward the Sun, and their pointing at him with a certain
admiration, lifting up their hands on high, it is inferred that they account
him a God.

The Ship from which we have this Relation, brought from Davis-streight several
considerable Commodities, whereof we shall here give a List, to show that the
cold which reigns in that Country is not so insupportable as to freeze up all
manner of Commerce in those parts.

1. Nine hundred Sea-dogs skins, most of them between seven and eight foot
long, spotted and waved with black, red, yellow, tawny, and several other
colors, which heightened their price beyond those commonly seen in Holland. 2.
Many rich Hides of Hearts, Elks, Bears, as also the skins of Foxes, Hares, and
Conies, whereof most were perfectly white. 3. A great number of precious Furs
of diverse kinds of fourfooted Beasts particular to that Country, and not known
yet by any name among us. 4. Several Packs of Whale-bone of extraordinary
length. 5. Some complete suits of Cloths of the Inhabitants of the Country,
whereof some were of the skins of Beasts, others of those of Birds, of the
fashion before represented. 6. Many of their Shirts made of Fishes Bladders
very neatly sewed; as also Caps, Gloves, and Buskins, Quivers, Arrows, Bows,
and other Arms used by them; as also some of their Tents, Bags, Baskets, and
other little pieces of Household Stuff. 7. A great number of those small Vessels
made to carry only one man: A great Boat or Shallop forty five foot in length,
which might conveniently carry fifty persons. 8. But the most rare and precious
Commodity was a very considerable quantity of the Teeth or Horns of the fishes
called Sea-Unicorns, which are thought to be the largest, the fairest and the
most exactly proportioned of any that have yet been seen.
Some of them were sent to Paris, and other parts of Europe, where they were
well received: Nor is it unlikely but that they will be much more highly
esteemed, when the admirable virtues they have in Physic are known: For though
their beauty and rarity may procure them the best places in the Closets of the
Curious; yet will they be more kindly received there, when some others have
found true what many famous Physicians and Apothecaries of Denmark and Germany,
who have made trial thereof upon several occasions, unanimously affirm of them,
to wit, that they expel poison, and have all the properties commonly
attributed to the Land-Unicorn's Horn.

Ch: 19.
Musical shell 125

Burgau p: 120

Sea-Trumpet p 122

Venus shell p: 121.

Lambis p: 121.

Casque p: 121.

Ch: 19.
Sea egg p: 126

Sea egg opened

p: 126 Sea-starre



CHAP. XIX. Of certain Shellfish, rare Shells, and other remarkable
productions of the Sea, found on the Coasts of the Caribbies.
TO dive into the deep Secrets of the Waters to take a view of all the
excellent Creatures sporting themselves therein, and observe the virtues and
occult qualities wherewith they are endowed, is a work might be expected from
that Wisdom which was communicated to Solomon, who treated of Trees, from the
Cedar in Libanon to the Hyssop growing on the Wall: For the watery Element is
furnished with such a miraculous plenty, that it abundantly produces not only
Fishes of several kinds fit for the sustenance of man, and those of
extraordinary bulk and monstrous figures, as has been shown in the precedent
Chapters, but also such a multitude of precious Shells, and other Rarities,
that we may well acknowledge that the Divine Wisdom has displayed all these
rich beauties of its inexhaustible Treasures, to show its Omnipotency in the
midst of the Waves, and gently to win us into an admiration of his Goodness and
adorable Providence, which humbles it self to descend into the Abysses of the
Sea to people them with some excellent Creatures not to be seen elsewhere, and
an infinite number of others bearing the Characters and Idaeas of the most
considerable Bodies that either adorn the Heavens, fly in the Air, or
embellish the Earth. Hence it comes, that there are found in the Waters, Stars,
Cornets, Trumpets, Purcelains, Trees, Apples, Chest-nuts, and all the
delightful curiosities which are so highly esteemed among men. But to begin
with the Shellfish, there are in the Seas about, and in the Rivers of the
Caribbies several kinds of them: The more particularly esteemed are the Homars,
the Sea-Spiders, and the Crabs.

HOMARS.
THe Homars are a kind of Crevices, of the same figure as those of our Rivers;
but they are so big that there needs but one to make a good large dish: Their
meat is white, and of a good taste, but a little hard of digestion: The
Inhabitants of the Islands take them in the night time upon the sands, or in
the Shallows near the low-water-mark; and with the assistance of a Torch, or
Moonlight, they catch them with a little iron fork.

SEA-SPIDER.
THe Sea-Spider is by some conceived to be a kind of Crab: It is covered with
two very hard scales, whereof the uppermost is somewhat ^ rough, and the
lowermost is more smooth, and jagged with sharp points: It has many legs or
claws, and a strong tail, sometimes about a foot in length: They are much
sought after by some of the Savages to be employed about their Arrows: When
this fish is dried in the Sun, the scale or shell of it becomes glistering, and
in a manner transparent, though naturally it be of an Ash Color.

CRABS.
THe ordinary Crabs of the Caribbies are of the same figure as those taken in
these parts: There is a great difference among them as to bigness, but the
rarest are those which live by prey: They are very common in most of the
Islands, but above all in those called the Virgins: They lurk under the stumps
and stocks of the Trees growing on the Seaside, and as it were imitating a
kind of Frogs, called the Fishing-Frogs, they discover from their lurking-holes
the Oysters and Muscles, which they prey upon; and the slight they use in the
taking of them is worth our notice. Having found by experience that their
Mordants or Claws are not strong enough to break the shells wherein those
delicate fishes are contained; and having observed that several times of the
day they open their shells to take the air, they diligently watch the time, and
having furnished themselves with a little round pebble, they hold it ready in
one of their claws, and coming to the Oyster or Muscle, let it fall so
cunningly into the half-open'd shell, that not being able to close again, the
fish becomes the prey of these subtle Crabs.

As to the Shells found in these Islands, in the Creeks and Nooks into which
they are cast by the Sea there are abunof them, and of several kinds: The most
sought after and most considerable are these.

BURGAU.
THe Burgau, which is of the figure of a Snail, being uncas'd out of the
outermost coat, presents to the eye a silver shell intermixed with spots of a
bright black, a lively green, and so perfect and shining a gray, that no
Enameller could come near it with all the assistances of his art. As soon as
the fish which had been lodged within this precious little Mansion has been
disseiz'd thereof, there is immediately seen a magnificent entry beset with
pearls', and afterward several rich appartements so clear, so neat, and
enameled all over with so bright a silver-colour, that there cannot in matter
of shell any thing be imagined more beautiful.

CASK.
THe Cask, or Headpiece, is of a different bigness proportionably to the heads
of so many fishes as had worn it; and it is so named from its figure: It is
lined within and at the edges, which are thick, flat and jagged, of a Satin
carnation color extremely bright and shining; and on the outside it is
fashioned like a neat Country-building, having many little risings which are
interlaced with a thousand compartiments, on which there may be seen a waving
pannache or feather of diverse rare colors.

LAMBIS.
THe Lambis has happily received that name because the fish which makes it move
has the figure of a great Tongue, which licks that glutinous moisture lying on
the rocks against which the waves of the Sea beat. This is one of the largest
sized shells that are: One of the sides is turned up, as it were to make the
greater discovery of the fair purple color wherewith it is beautified within:
But it must be acknowledged, that the shape being none of the handsomest, and
the outer coat prickled with several rough and sharp risings, it would hardly
be received into the Closets of the Curious, if Art taking off that outer coat
did not discover the beauty and smoothness of the divers-colour'd shell which
lay within that course shag: The fish which is lodged within the clefts of this
little moving rock is so big, that one of them will make a pretty round dish:
It may be served up to the Tables of the daintiest Palats, so it be well
dressed with good store of Pepper to correct its indigestion: The shells burnt
to powder and mixed with sand make a cement which defies rain, and all other
injuries of the weather. The Lambis yields a sound like that of a Huntsmans
horn, and is heard at a great distance; whence some of the Inhabitants of the
Islands use them to bring their people together to meals.

UENUS-SHELLS.
THe Venus-shells may justly be numbered among the rarest productions of the
Sea, whether we consider the delightful smoothness wherewith they are glazed
both within and without, or the diversity and liveliness of their colors:
Their jagged edges are turned inwards, and though all are not equally
beautiful, yet are they all of the same oval figure, gaping in the midst, and
turning in a little: But they are very different as to bigness and color.

The ordinary ones are of a gilt-yellow, checkered with little white or red
spots, so as that at a distance a man would think them little Pearls, or grains
of Coral: Of the rest, some are bluish, some as it were beset with stars, some
greyish, some like Crystal, and some colored like Agats, which are all
delightful to the eye.

But the most esteemed by the Curious are on the outside of a color between
coral and carnation, and of a silver-colour, or of a bright sky-colour within,
and a rich porphiry with small golden streaks: Those also are with reason well
esteemed, which on the upper part are of a bright green like an Emerald, and
within on the edges, and in the distances of a pearl-colour: The same account
is made of those which on the back are black as Jet, and all elsewhere of a
pale blew intermixed with little purple veins.

In fine, there are some have such a delightful mixture of colors, as if the
Rainbow had communicated some of its beauties to these little creatures: Nay
there are abundance of them so diversifi'd with odd figures and characters,
that it may be imagined Nature was in a very pleasant humor when she was
delivered of these miracles.

But the mischief of it is, that the Sea, which is possessed of them as her
most precious jewels, never parts with them but against her will: For if the
Winds did not enrage her, and shaking her bowels search into the bottom of her
Treasures, and force them thence, she alone would enjoy these beauties, and
never let us have any of them.

The Curious, to heighten their luster, place them according to their value and
esteem in several Cabinets, lined with green Plush, or some other rich stuff:
And after the example of the Flowrists, who call their Tulips and Gilly-Flowers
by the names of the Caesar's, and most illustrious Heroes, they in like manner
give them the titles of Emperors and Princes.

SEA-CORNETS.
THere are also seen in the Caribbies two sorts of those great Shells called
Sea-Cornets, which are turned at the end like a screw: Some are white as Ivory,
and not inferior to it in luster: Others are within of a shining pearl-colour,
and without of several fair and lively colors, which are sometimes like
scales, sometimes waving, falling one upon another from the edge of the wide
opening to the turned end, where they cease: If a little hole be made at the
small end of these Cornets, they become a kind of musical Instrument which
makes a sharp and piercing sound, and forced through the windings of the shell,
may be heard at as great distance as the smallest kind of Trumpet might be: But
there is a great secret in the sounding of it.

MOTHER of PEARL.
SHells do not only afford a pleasant divertisement which may excite men by a
consideration of those small, but admirable works of Nature, to bless the
Author thereof; but having cloyed the eye, they find somewhat to satisfy the
taste, and increase wealth: For Oysters, and other shellfish are welcome to
the greatest Tables; and the Naker or Mother of Pearl is big with that Pearl
which enriches the Crowns of Kings. It Is true, there is seen only the seeds of
these Pearls in the Caribbies, and that they are to be had in perfection only
at S. Margarets Island, and the South-part of America: But though this seed is
not hardened into great Pearls in the Caribbies, yet are not the shells wherein
it is found without their advantages; for the meat within them is for food, and
the two parts of the silver shell make so many Spoons, which may creditably
appear upon the Table.

It is not easy to determine whether the dew which falls in the Caribbies be
not fruitful enough to make the Mother-Pearl produce its fruit in perfection;
or whether after it has received that seed from the Heavens they miscarry, and
have not natural force enough to retain it: But not to enquire whence the
defect proceeds, it is most certain they have as strong an inclination to avoid
the reproach of sterility, as those fished for on the Coasts of S. Margarets:
For he who will be at the curiosity to observe their secret Loves from the
rocks, at the foot whereof they most delight to be, shall find, that at the
break of day they start up several times to the surface of the water, as it
were to do homage to the Rising-Sun; then of a sudden they open themselves upon
that soft bed, expecting the first beams of that all-enlivening Star: If they
be so happy as to receive some drops of the dew he causes to distill from the
Heavens at his rising, they immediately close their shells, lest any touch of
salt water come in, and corrupt that celestial sperm: And then they cheerfully
return to their deep cells.

A certain Author named Fragosus conceives, that the Pearls engender in the
meat of the Oyster, as the stone does in some living creatures, of a thick and
viscous moisture which remains of the aliment. Some learned Physicians who are
also of the same opinion, fortify it with what is affirmed by Josephus Acosta,
a very creditable Writer, to wit, that the Slaves who fish for Pearls, dive
sometimes twelve fathom deep in the Sea to take the Oysters which are commonly
fastened to the Rocks, that they get them thence by violence, and come up
laden with them: Whence they conclude, that it cannot be well maintained, that
those Oysters which are fastened to the rocks suck in the dew, and that thence
comes the generation of Pearls.

But not to enter into any contestation with these Gentlemen, nor yet
absolutely to reject their opinion which has its grounds, we may affirm, that
the true account given by Acosta of the fishing for Pearls makes nothing
against the opinion commonly received of their generation; for it is not
impossible but that the Mother-Pearls which have conceived of the Dew, feeling
themselves burdened with that precious fruit, have no great inclination to
appear ever afterward on the surface of the waters; and being satisfied with
the treasure they are possessed of, they from thenceforth fasten themselves to
the rocks, whence they cannot be gotten off without violence.

Of several other sorts of Shells.
THose who living in populous Cities would counterfeit Deserts, Rocks and
solitary Places, or in their Gardens raise little Hills, under which there
should be Grotts encompassed with all the most curious spoils of Sea and Land,
might find in most of these Islands what may satisfy their humor. This only is
to be feared, that abundance and diversity would puzzle their choice, and
occasion a certain contempt of them: There are on the Coasts of these Islands
an infinite multitude of several sorts of Shells, especially those of the
Sea-tops, Whelks, etc. which have no names among us, whereof some are of a
silver-colour, some full of stars, some sanguine, some green, some streaked
with carnation, some checkered with several sorts of colors, which make them
shine along the sands like so many precious stones: The Sun extremely heightens
their luster and beauty; and when after an extraordinary tempest the Sea has
enriched the surface of those shores with these little sparkling gems, the eye
is so dazzled at it, that a man cannot but acknowledge that Nature loves to make
different demonstrations of her power, and shows what she can do, when she
bestows so much beauty, and so many rich ornaments on these little
inconsiderable Creatures.

The Savage Islanders sometimes gather these little play-games of the Sea, only
for diversion sake, and having made holes in them put them on strings for
Neck-laces and Bracelets: But most of the Southern part of America have a far
greater esteem for them; for they drive a Trade with them, and they are in some
places the current Money, and those who have most shells are accounted the
richest. The Shells used for this purpose are of a pretty bigness, solid, and
of extraordinary luster; and to be current Money, they must be marked by
certain Officers, who ascertain the value thereof by certain little Characters
engraved on them.

MUSICK-SHELL.
THere is a very considerable Shell, which Mons. du Montel thinks may be found
in some of the Caribby-Islands, though he never saw any of that kind but only
at Corassao: It differs not much as to figure from the Venus-shells: It may be
called the Musical-shell, because on the outside of it there are blackish
lines, full of notes, which have a kind of key for the singing of them, so that
it might be said there wants only the letter to that natural pricking: The
forementioned Gentleman relates, that he saw some that had five Lines, a Key
and Notes, which made good Music: Some person had added the Letter, which it
seems Nature had forgotten, and caused it to be sung, and the Music was not
undelightful.

This might afford the ingenious many excellent reflections: They might say
among other things, that if according to the opinion of Pythagoras the Heavens
have their Harmony, the sweetness whereof cannot be heard by reason of the
noise made upon Earth; if the Air resound with the melody of an infinite number
of Birds who sing their several parts there; and if Men have invented a kind of
Music, after their way, which by the Ears recreates the Heart; it were but
just that the Sea, which is not always tossed and troubled, should have within
its territories certain Musicians to celebrate, by a Music particular to them,
the praises of their Sovereign Maker. The Poets might add, that these natural
tablatures are the same which the Sirens had in their hands, when they had
their melodious Consorts; and that being perceived by some eye which came to
disturb their recreations, they let them fall into the water, where they have
been carefully kept ever since: But leaving these imaginations to those they
belong to, let us pursue our design.

EYE-STONE.
THere is a little Stone found in these Islands, most commonly near the
Seaside, and sometimes at a good distance from the Sea, which from its virtues
may be termed the Eye-stone; but in regard the more common opinion will have it
to be a production of the waters, we shall treat of it in this place. Some of
these Stones are about the bigness of the larger sort of Brass-farthings; but
the least are most esteemed: A man would think, looking on them in the Sun,
that they were of those Pearls called Barroques cut in two, they are so clear,
transparent, and smooth: Some of them have red or bluish veins, which give
them a very delightful luster, according to the several aspects are cast on
them: They have the figure of a Snail engraved on that side which is even:
Being put under the eyelid, they roll about the ball of the eye, and it is
affirmed, that they strengthen and clear the sight, and force thence the motes,
or trash which might have fallen into it.

SEA-EGGES.
THere is found in the Island of S. Martins a production of the Sea, called
Sea-egges, or Sea-Apples, full of sharp prickles rising out of a dark-colored
skin: But when the fish which rouls them is dead, they lose all those prickles,
which become afterward of no use; and quitting that hard crustiness which had
encompassed them, they discover the whiteness of their shells, which are
intermixed with so many compartiments and little windings, that the needle of
the most ingenious Embroiderer would be much troubled to imitate them. These
Eggs should rather be called Sea-Urchins or Sea-Chestnuts; for while they are
living they have the figure and color of a little Urchin, which forms it self
like a ball, and is armed of all sides, the better to deal with his enemy: Or
they are like those rough prickles which encompass* the Chestnut while it is
upon the Tree.

SEA-STAR.
TO consider narrowly all the rarities to be seen in the Sea, it might be said,
that of whatever is excellent in the Heavens there is a certain resemblance in
the Sea, which is as it were the others looking-glass. Hence it comes, that
there are Stars to be seen in it, having five points or beams, somewhat of a
yellowish color. This Star is somewhat better then a foot diametre, and an
inch thick; the skin is hard enough, and full of little risings, which add
much to its beauty. If these Sea-Stars may not enter into any competition with
those of the Heavens, as to magnitude and light, they exceed them in this, that
they are animate, and that their motion is not forced, and that they are not
fixed nor confined to the same place: For the fish, which has taken up its
abode in this starry mansion, moves which way it pleases on the azure plains of
the waters while the weather is calm, but as soon as it foresees any tempest,
out of a fear to be forced to the Land, which is not fit to entertain Stars, it
casts out two little anchors out of its body, whereby it is so firmly fastened
to the Rocks, that all the violent agitations of the incensed waves cannot
force it thence. It is preserved alive by the means of the nourishment it takes
by a little hole, which is as it were its mouth, and lies just in the center of
its body. Some curious persons remove these Stars out of their watery Element,
and having dried them in the Sun make them the ornaments of their Closets.

SEA-TREES.
NOr can the sandy shelfs or sholes of those Rocks, which are covered with
water, endure the reproach of barrenness: For notwithstanding the saltness
whereby they are always enclosed, they make a shift to produce, among the grass
which is upon them, certain Trees which are immediately glazed with a
saltpeter, which renders them extremely white. Some conceive them to be a kind
of Coral. There are taken up of them of several figures, and so neatly made,
that the eye cannot be cloyed with considering the odness of their shapes.

SEA-FANS.
THere are also certain Pannaches, or Sea-Fans, or Sea-Feathers, which are, to
speak by way of resemblance, as it were the borders of that spacious liquid
Garden which never needs watering: They are woven very finely, and according to
the quality of the Rocks whereon they are rooted, they are of different
colors: This only were to be wished, that they had solidity enough to endure a
transportation from those Islands into these parts.

CHAP. XX. Of Ambergris; its Origin; and the marks of that which is good,
and without mixture.
Ambergris is found in greatest abundance on the Coasts of Florida, beyond
what is had of it in any other Country of America: Whence it comes, that the
Spaniards have built Forts there, to keep possession of the Land, and entertain
with the Indians, who inhabit it, the Commerce of that rich Commodity, which
they carefully gather since they have been acquainted with the value of it.
There has sometimes been taken up of it, after extraordinary tempests, on the
Coasts of Tabago, Barboudos, and some other of the Caribbies, as we have
received by very authentic Relations: Upon which assurance, it will be no
digression from the Natural History we treat of, if we perfume this Chapter
with the sweet scent of this Aromatic Drug, which certainly is the rarest and
most precious of all those productions which the Ocean has yet cast up out of
its vast and unexhausted bosom to enrich that new world.

The Maldives call Ambergris Panahambar, that is, Amber of gold, by reason
of its worth: The Inhabitants of Fez, Morocco, and the Aethiopians call it by
the same name as they do the Whale; whence it is probably conjectured, that
they thought it proceeded from the Whale. Most certain it is, that neither
Hippocrates, Dioscorides, nor Galen, ever heard any thing of Ambergris, no
more then they had of the Bezoar-stone, Guayacum, Sassafras, Sassaparilla,
Rhubarb, Mechoachan, and many other Drugs: Ambergris therefore is one of
those whereof the knowledge is wholly modern, and the origin not well known.

Some have imagined that this Amber, not known among the Ancients, is an
excrement of the Whales: Others are of opinion, that it comes from the
Crocodiles, in regard their flesh is perfumed: Some others are persuaded, that
they are pieces of Islands and fragments of Rocks concealed in the Sea, and
carried away by the violence of the waves, forasmuch as there are sometimes
found pieces of this Amber which weigh a hundred pound, and of the length of
sixty handsbredths, and that, as is affirmed by Linscot, in the Year M. D. L.
V. there was a piece found near Cape Comorin, which weighed thirty hundred
weight. There are also those who conceive it to be a kind of Sea-foam, which
gathers together and grows thick after a certain time by the agitation of the
Seawater, and is hardened by the heat of the Sun.

But the most probable conjecture is, that it is a kind of Bitumen engendered at
the bottom of the Sea; and when it comes to be extremely agitated by some
extraordinary tempest, it lets go this Bitumen, and forces it toward the
shores: for indeed it is commonly found only after some great tempest.
Philostratus in the life of Apollonius affirms, that the Panthers which are
near the Mount Caucasus are very much delighted with the sweet scent of that
place: But certain it is, that of all creatures the Birds are very great lovers
of this Ambergreece, and that they will scent it at a great distance: Wherefore
as soon as the tempest is laid it must be sought after and taken away,
otherwise it will be devoured. Nor is it the sweet scent of it, but the ill,
which causes the Birds to flock to it; for this precious and admirable perfume,
when it is fresh and soft, and newly come out of the Sea, smells very strong,
and those creatures which run to it do but as they would do to some carrion;
for the scent of it is like that of rusty bacon, and it is likely for that
reason that it was so long ere 'twas known and used: The Ancients judged of its
virtue by its ill scent, fit rather to injure the heart then refresh it, and so
they rejected it as unprofitable, nay hurtful. Besides it is not so commonly,
nor in so great quantities found toward the Coasts of Greece, nor yet in
Europe; and there were but very few Voyages heretofore made into the Indies.

The Foxes do also think it a good dish, and eat much of it: In those Countries
where much of it is gathered, these creatures wait at the Seaside, and having
discovered any, they immediately devour it: But having kept it a while in their
bellies, they cast it up again before it be any way digested; yet does it lose
some of its virtue and sweet scent: Whence it comes, that this kind of
Ambergris is less esteemed then the other, and used only in perfumes.

It will not be amiss hereto give the marks whereby the true Ambergris is to
be distinguished from the adulterate, since those who have written of it, as
Garcias, Monard, Scaliger, Ferdinand Lopez, Clusius, and others, speak very
little thereof, and assign not the essential marks of it.

It is in the first place to be observed, that Ambergris is generally
distinguished into that which comes from the Levant Seas, and that which comes
from the Western Sea: That which is taken up on the Coasts of the Levant,
especially on those of Barbary, where there is much, and in great pieces had,
is for the most part black, and cannot be dried so well as to be reduced to
powder, as that of the West, let what will be added to promote the
pulverization of it: It is also more easily melted by the fire, has not so
sweet a scent, and is of a lower value: There is little of the Amber brought
into these parts, in regard it is not much esteemed, and not very useful either
as to Physic, or Perfumes.

The Ambergris of the West, whereof the best is that found on our Coasts, is
commonly of an ash-colored gray, looking as if ashes were mixed with wax, yet
so as that the ashes appear distinctly, and are not perfectly mixed with the
wax: The upper part of it having raked along the shore, and lain more open to
the air, is commonly of a tawny color, or at least not so white as it is
within, hard and solid like a crust, and sometimes full of sand and little
shells: which happens hence, that being soft as Bitumen or Pitch, such filth
easily sticks to it; and that abates somewhat of its price, but not of its
goodness.

To know whether this Amber, which is of the best kind, be good, in the first
place consider the figure of it, which for the most part should incline to
roundness, inasmuch as all things that are any way soft being tossed to and fro
by the Sea are reduced to a certain roundness: It should be also somewhat
smooth, and of a dark color between a dark-grey and tawny: If it be very dry
it should be the lighter, proportionably to the bigness of the piece: Hereby it
may be judged whether there be any mixture of Scamony, Bitumen, Wax, Pitch, or
Rozin, all these adding much to its weight: By the same trial it may be known
whether there be any mixture of sand; as also whether it be not the black
Ambergris of the Levant.

If the Owners of it are unwilling to have the piece broken, take a needle
heated, and thrust it into the piece, and if it enter easily, conclude there
are no stones within it; and if you smell at the liquor which will come forth
by the heat of the needle whereby the Amber is melted, you will find it of a
scent not unlike that of gumm'd wax, but at last will end in an odor sweet
enough.

But the surest way is, having agreed about the price of the piece of Amber
conditionally it be good, to break it; so you will find whether there be any
small pebbles in it. The Amber, as we said before, must be of an ash color,
having small specks, as our Water-nuts: When it is fresh it is of a darker
color then when it is very dry: but if it differ not much from that color,
and be not too black nor too white, it matters not; above all it should appear
of a mixed color: Take also a little out of the middle of the piece, or from
that part which you think worst, and put it on a knife heated in the fire, and
it will presently melt like wax, and if the knife be very hot what was put upon
it will be quite consumed.

When you have thus melted it, observe whether it has the scent we mentioned,
which cannot be well known but only to such as have made trial thereof, because
it is particular thereto; and by that means you will also discover whether
there be any mixture in the Amber: You may also while it is melting put a
little upon your hand, and spreading it you may see whether there be any
mixture: It should stick so fast to your hand that it can hardly be got off:
When it melts it becomes all of one color, though before it seemed to be mixed,
and inclines to that of some kind of Rozin: It should not dissolve in either
water or oil; not but that there is a way to dissolve it in either of them, by
the addition of a certain ingredient, which those who know it would not have
discovered: Nor should it be reduced to powder, unless being very dry it may be
scraped or grated, and be mixed with some fine powder: It also sticks much to
the Mortar, which therefore must be often made clean: The black will never be
reduced to powder, neither this, nor any other way.

The difference between the black and the gray consists chiefly in the color,
which inclines to that of black pitch, and not mixed with whitish-grey seeds,
but all over alike: The black is also softer and more weighty, and smells more
like Bitumen.

Ch: 21.
Tortoise. p: 133

Crocadile. p: 13^

Sea Feather. p: 127.

Sea Tree p: 127.



There is a third kind of Ambergris, which is white, the rarest, as
Ferdinand Lopez affirms, but not the best as he accounts it. On the contrary,
it is the most inconsiderable of any, and there being no account made of it,
there is very little transported: But this is indeed some of the other kinds of
Ambergris, which having been devoured and digested by Birds that have very
hot stomachs, turns white, as most of the excrements of Birds are: That which
has been devoured by Fishes, as it happens many times, is not much altered
either as to color or substance: which proceeds hence, that their stomachs are
not so hot as those of the Birds, and perhaps finding the Ambergris hotter
then their ordinary sustenance, and burdened therewith, they soon cast it up
again: But what had been eaten by the Fox is in a manner corrupted, and of
little value, by reason of the heat of his stomach. This white Ambergris is
like salted or pickled Suet, easily melted, and smells like tallow; whence some
conceive it is but some kind of suet so ordered.

Having given the marks of the right Ambergris, we shall omit the
adulterations of it, because they are almost infinite: Nor shall we treat of
its use in Physic, its excellent qualities, and especially the sweet scent it
gives to liquid Conserves, and all other things wherein it is used: Of these
some other Books lately come forth, and experience may satisfy the curious
Reader.

CHAP. XXI. Of certain Creatures living partly on Land, partly in the Waters,
commonly called Amphibia, which may be found in the Caribby-Islands.
WE shall begin with the Crocodile, by the Islanders called Cayeman: It is a
very dangerous Monster, which sometimes grows to an extraordinary bulk and
length: The Skeletons of several of them being frequently brought into these
parts, we shall not be so large in our description thereof, as otherwise we
might.

This Creature keeps in or near the Sea, and in the Rivers of the Islands that
are not inhabited, and sometimes on the Land among the Reeds, very hideous to
look on: It is conceived to live a long time, and that its body increases in
all its dimensions to the very last day: Whence it is not to be wondered, if
there have been seen of them some which were eighteen foot in length, and as
big about as a Hogshead: It has four feet well armed with crooked claws: The
skin, which is covered all over with scales, is so hard on the back, that a
bullet from a Musket shot at him shall hardly make any impression on it: but if
he be hurt under the belly, or in the eyes, he is soon gone: His lower jaw is
immovable, but has so wide a mouth, and so well set with sharp teeth, that he
makes nothing to divide a man in two.

He runs fast enough on land; but the weight of his body causes him to make so
deep a track in the sand, as a Coach-horse might do; and having no vertebrae in
the backbone, no more then the Hyaena's, he goes straight forwards, not being
able to turn his vast body, but with much difficulty; so that the better to
avoid his pursuit, a man need only turn several times a side.

Those which are bred in fresh water do so smell of Musk while they are alive,
that the air is perfumed a hundred paces about the place where they are: nay
the water retains somewhat of the same smell. This observation of the sweet
scent of the Crocodile may, by the way, discover the error of Pliny, who
imagined that of all living creatures only the Panther had a sweet scent with
it, as he somewhere affirms, though in another place he writes, that the
entrails of the Crocodile smell very sweet, and that proceeds from the
odoriferous flowers on which he feeds: Now this musky scent of the Crocodile of
America is enclosed in certain glandules in the Emunctories, which he has
under the thighs, and which being taken thence keep the said smell a long time:
It may be imagined that God has bestowed this scent on them, that men and
other creatures, which many times become the prey of these cruel Monsters,
might by the scent discover the place where they lurk, and avoid them.

Those which have their abode in the Sea have no smell of musk, but both kinds
are very dangerous, and to be dreaded by such as either go to wash themselves,
or are forced to cross some river by swimming: This dreadful Monster has a
strange slight to make his prey of Oxen and Cows: One of them will lie lurking
at those places of the Ponds and Rivers where those creatures are wont to
water, and finding one at his advantage, he half-shuts his eyes, and floats on
the face of the water, as if it were a piece of rotten wood; by which means
getting nearer and nearer to the poor beast which is a drinking, and is not
aware of him, he immediately fastens on him, taking him by the lips, and
forcing him under water, he drowns him, and then feeds on him: He takes men
also by the same slight, as is affirmed by Vincent le Blanc, who has a
Relation of the servant of a Consul of Alexandria, who going to take one of
these cruel beasts, thinking it had been a piece of wood, was drawn by it to
the bottom, and never seen afterward.

There are abundance of these monstrous Crocodiles in those Islands, which from
them are called the Islands of Cayeman, and not frequented but only in the time
of Tortoise-fishing: For having picked out the best meat out of the Tortoise,
and a great deal cast away, the Crocodiles come in great numbers in the night
time to feed on the entrails and carcases left on the sand: So that those who
are watching for the Tortoises are obliged to carry about them great wooden
Leavers to keep off those Cayemans, which they many times kill, having first
broken their backs with those Leavers.

These creatures have a whitish fat, which was heretofore used by Physicians in
fluxions proceeding from a cold cause; it being hot, and consisting of subtle
parts: Upon the same account were such as had Fevers rubbed therewith upon the
approach of their fits, to cause sweating: Many other properties are attributed
to the Crocodile by Pliny, in order to the curing of diseases: Some are very
desirous to get certain little stones, like little bones, which are in his
head, and having reduced them to powder, they use them to clear the Reins of
Gravel: Some also affirm, that the sharpest teeth of this Animal, which are on
the side of each jaw, cure the Toothache, and preserve the teeth from
corruption, being only rubbed every day therewith: There are in like manner in
the heads of Dragons, and Toads, stones good against several diseases: So the
cruel Requiems, by us before described, afford a remedy against the Stone and
Gravel. Thus has it pleased the wise Author of Nature, that we should have
some advantages from those creatures which are otherwise most pernicious.

The Chinese have a way to take and tame these Crocodiles, as some Historians
affirm: And when they have bred them a certain time, and made them fat enough,
they kill them, and feed on them: But the Europeans who have tasted thereof,
affirm, their flesh, though white and delicate, is not pleasant to the taste,
as being too lushious, sweetish, and retaining much of the musk.

TORTOISES.
THere are taken in these Islands several sorts of Tortoises, for there are
Land-Tortoises, Sea-Tortoises, and Freshwater-Tortoises, which are of different
figures: The Caribbians call them all by the name of Catallou; but when they
speak of the Land-Tortoises, they add the word Nonum, which in their Language
signifies the Earth, or that of Tona, that is to say, of the River or Water.

The Sea-Tortoises are commonly divided by the Islanders into three kinds, that
which the French call Tortue Franche, that called Caouanne, and the Carets:
They are all of them almost of the same figure; but the meat only of the first
kind is good to be eaten, unless it be in case of necessity, and for want of
other provision; so that of the two last, only the shell is of value.

The Tortue-Franche, and the Caouannes are commonly of so vast a bulk, that the
upper shell is about four foot and a half in length, and four in breadth: Which
is not to be much admired, since that in Maurice-Island there are some which
having four men on their backs, are nevertheless able to go. Aelian relates,
that the Inhabitants of Taprobana cover their houses therewith: And if we may
credit Diodorus Siculus, certain Nations of the East Indies convert them into
Boats, in which they will cross a great arm of the Sea that lies between them
and the Continent.

These Amphibious creatures seldom come to Land, but only to dispose of their
Eggs, in order to propagation: To that end they make choice of a very light
sand which they find on the Seaside, in some place not much frequented, and to
which they may have easy access.

The Islanders, who at a certain season of the year go to the Cayeman-Islands,
to make provision of the meat of Tortoises which come to land there in infinite
numbers, affirm, that they make their recourse thither from all parts within a
hundred leagues and more to lay their eggs, by reason of the easiness of the
access, the shore being flat, and covered with a soft sand: The Tortoises come
to land about the latter end of April, and their landing continues till
September, and then may they be taken in abundance; which is thus performed.

At the close of the evening some men are set ashore, who lying on the sands
without making any noise, watch the Tortoises when they come out of the Sea to
lay their eggs in the sand; and when they perceive that they are got a good
way from the Seaside, and hear them making a deep hole in the sand with their
claws, into which being a foot and a half deep, and sometimes more, they lay
the eggs, they come and surprise them at that employment, and turn them
upside-down; and being in that posture they are not able to recover themselves,
but continue so till the next day that they are brought thence in Shallops to
the Ships: When they are thus turned upside-down, they are observed to shed
tears, and are heard to sigh. It Is generally known that the Stag weeps when he
is put to his extremities: And it is almost incredible what cries and groans
proceed from the Crocodiles about the Nile, and what tears they shed when they
find themselves taken.

The Seamen of those Ships which go to the Cayeman-Islands to take in their
loading of Tortoises, may every night in less then three hours turn forty or
fifty of them, the least whereof weighs a hundred and fifty pound, and the
ordinary ones two hundred pound; nay some of them will have two great pails
full of eggs in their bellies: These eggs are round, and about the bigness of
a Tennis-ball; they have white and yolk like Hens-egges, but the shell is not
so hard, but soft, feeling as if it were wet parchment. The Fricasseys and
Omeletts made of them are good enough, but a little drier then those made with
Hens-egges. There is so much meat about one Tortoise as may well maintain sixty
persons a whole day: When they are desirous to eat of them, they cut off the
shell which is under the belly from that on the back, unto which it is joined
by certain gristles which are easily cut: What Tortoises are taken by the
Seamen in the night, finds them work all day to cut into pieces and salt them.
Most of the Ships which come to these Cayeman-Islands, after they have taken in
their loading, that is, after six weeks or two months continuance there,
return to the Caribbies, where they sell that salted Tortoise; and it becomes
the sustenance of the ordinary sort of people, and the slaves.

But the Tortoises that have escaped, having laid their eggs at two or three
several times, return to the place whence they came, the eggs which they have
covered with sand on the Seaside being about six weeks after hatched by the
heat of the Sun, and not by their looking on them, as Pliny, and some of the
Ancients imagined: as soon as the young Tortoises have broken the shells
wherein they were enclosed, they make their way through the sand, and get out
of the grave which gave them birth, and by an instinct of nature go straight to
the Sea to the old ones.

The meat of this kind of Tortoise is as dainty as any Veal, so it be fresh,
and kept but one day: It is intermixed with fat, which when it is dressed is of
a greenish yellow: It is of easy digestion, and very wholesome, whence it comes,
that those sick persons who cannot recover in the other Islands are carried to
that purpose to the Cayemans in the Ships that go for Tortoises; and commonly
having refreshed, and purged themselves with that diet, they return thence
perfectly recovered. The fat of this kind of Tortoise yields an oil, which
while it is fresh is good enough to fry withal, being stale it is employed in
Lamps.

CAOUANNE.
THe Tortoise called the Caouanne is of the same figure as the precedent, save
that the head of it is a little bigger: This stands upon the defensive when
people come near to turn it; but the meat of it being black, full of strings,
and of ill taste, there is no account made of it, but only where other is not
to be had; the oil also got from it is good only for Lamps.

CARETS.
THe third kind of Sea-Tortoise, called by the French Caret, differs from the
two others in bigness, as being much less, and that it lays not its eggs in
the sand, but in a kind of gravel which is mixed with small pebbles: The meat of
this Tortoise is not pleasant, but the eggs more delicate then those of the
other two kinds: It would be as little regarded as the Caouanne, were it not
sought after for its precious shell: It consists of fifteen greater and lesser
leaves or pieces, ten whereof are flat and even, four a little bending, and
that which covers the neck, made triangle-wise, hollow like a little buckler:
All the shells of an ordinary Caret may weigh three or four pound; but there
have been some taken whose shells have been so large and so thick, that all
together have weighed about six or seven pounds.

Of the shell of this kind of Tortoise are made Combs, Cups, Boxes, Cases,
Cabinets, and so many excellent things of great price: It also enriches
Household Stuff, the borders of Lookingglasses and Pictures, and is used now in
the covering of Pocketbooks of Devotion. To get this precious shell, they put a
little fire under the upper shell which consists of so many pieces; and as soon
as they feel the heat they are easily taken off with the point of a knife.

Some affirm, that this kind of Tortoise is so vigorous, that its shell being
taken away it will get another if it be immediately cast into the Sea. The most
plentiful fishing for these Tortoises is at the Peninsula of Jucatan, and
several little Islands within the Gulf of Hondures: So that honest Pirard was
ill-inform'd, who in his Treatise of the Animals and Fruits of the East Indies,
Chap. 2. affirms, that this kind of Tortoise is to be found only in the
Maldivos and the Philippine-Islands.

It is affirmed by some, that the oil of this kind of Tortoise helps all
kinds of Gouts proceeding from cold causes: It is also very successfully used
to strengthen the Sinews, to take away the pain of the Reins, and cure all cold
Fluxions and Distempers.

Having given so particular an account of the Tortoises, it will not be amiss
to add thereto the manner how they are fished for, and how all the great
fishes of the Caribbies are taken.

How the Tortoises and other great Fishes are taken in the Caribbies.
THe Sea-Tortoises are not only taken upon the sand, as we showed before, but
also by means of an Instrument, which is a pole about the length of a
half-pike, at the end whereof there is fastened a nail pointed at both ends,
which is square in the midst, and about the bigness of a man's little finger:
Some make notches on that side of it which stands out of the wood, that it may
take faster hold when it is entered into the shell of the Tortoise.

In the night time, the Moon shining and the Sea calm, the Master-fisher being
in a little boat with two others, one at the oar to turn it of any side as fast
as ever he can, that the boat may go much faster and with less noise then if it
were rowed; the other is in the midst of the Canow or Boat, holding the line
which is fastened to the nail, and in a readiness to draw it it as soon as the
instrument has done execution on the Tortoise.

Being thus provided, they go where they think to find of them; and when the
Master-fisher, who stands up on the forepart of the Canow, perceives one of
them by the glittering of the Sea, which by getting up ever and anon to the
face of the water it causes to foam, he directs him who guides the little
vessel to make to the place where he would have him, and being gently got near
the Tortoise, he violently darts the instrument into its back: The nail
piercing the shell, gets also a good way into the flesh, and the wood keeps up
above the water: As soon as the fish finds it self hurt, it sinks down to the
bottom with the nail sticking fast in the shell: And the more it strives and
struggles, the more it is entangled. At last having wearied it self, and spent
its forces in striving by reason of its loss of blood, it suffers it self to be
easily taken, and is either taken into the Canow, or drawn to the shore.

After the same manner they also take Lamantins, and several other great
fishes; but instead of the nail there is put into the wooden instrument a great
hook, or a small dart of iron made like that of a sharp lance: On one side of
that piece of iron there is a hole, through which there passes a line, which
is also woond about the dart, so that when it is darted into the fish, the line
easily is let loose, that it may have the liberty to tumble up and down in the
water, and when it has spent its forces, and reduced to extremity, if it
cannot be gotten into the Canow, it is easily drawn to the shore, where they
divide it into quarters.

Land-Tortoises, and Fresh-water-Tortoises.
THe Land-Tortoises are found in some Islands near the fresh water Rivers,
which are least subject to inundations, or in the ponds and fenny places that
are farthest from the Sea: They are covered all over with a hard and solid
shell, which is not to be raised by several pieces or leaves, as those of the
Sea-Tortoises, and it is so thick in all parts, that it secures the Animal
living within it from any hurt, and will not be broken even though the wheels
of a laden Cart should go over it. But what is yet more strange, is, that the
creature never finds this moving lodging too narrow for him; for it grows
larger proportionably as the body of the possessor grows bigger: The upper
covering is in some of them about a foot and a half in length: it is of an oval
figure, somewhat hollow like a Buckler, and on the outside has several
streaks, which as it were divide it into so many compartiments, with a certain
observance of Symmetry: All these intermixtures are laid on a black ground,
which in several places is enameled with white and yellow.

This kind of Tortoise has a very ugly head, like that of a Serpent: It has
no teeth, but only jaws, which are strong enough to break what it would swallow
down: It is supported by four feet, somewhat weak to sustain the weight of its
body; nor does it upon pursuit trust much to them: For if he be not near some
river or pond into which he may cast himself, he places all refuge and safety
in the covering of his mansion, under which like a Hedg-hog he immediately
draws in his head, feet and tail, upon the first apprehension of any danger.

The Female lays eggs about the bigness of those of Pigeons, but a little
longer: Having covered them with sand, she leaves them to be hatched by the
Sun. Though there be some who hold that the meat of these Land-Tortoises is of
hard digestion, yet those who have eaten thereof rank it among the most
delicate dishes of America: The Physicians of the Country advise those who are
inclined to Dropsies to use it often for a preventive: They have also found by
experience, that the blood of these Tortoises dried and reduced to powder takes
away the poison of Vipers and Scorpions, being applied to the wound: It is also
certain, that the ashes of their shells mixed with the white of an egg cures
the chaps in Nursing-womens nipples; and if the head be powdered therewith, it
prevents the falling of the Hair.

CHAP. XXII. Containing the particular Descriptions of several sorts of Crabs
or Crab-fish, commonly found in the Caribbies.
THere are found in all the Caribby-Islands certain Crabs or Crab-fish, which
are a kind of amphibious Crevices, and very good meat, whereas those of Brasil
are unpleasant, in as much as they smell of the Juniper-root. Accordingly the
Indian Inhabitants very highly esteem theirs, and make them their ordinary
entertainment: They are all of an oval figure, having the tail turning in under
the belly: Their bodies, which are covered all over with a shell hard enough,
is supported by several feet which are all full of little prickles, which
facilitate their climbing up to those places whither they would get up: The two
fore-feet are very big, and of those one is somewhat bigger then the other: The
French call these two fore feet or claws, Mordants, significantly enough,
forasmuch as with these they twitch and secure whatsoever they have fastened
on: The forepart which is somewhat broader, and stands up higher then the
other, has standing a little out two eyes, which are solid, transparent, and
of several colors: Their mouths are armed with two little white teeth disposed
on each side like a pair of sharp pincers, wherewith they cut the leaves of
Fruits, and the roots of Trees on which they feed.

TOURLOUROU.
THere are three kinds of them, differing in bigness and color, of which the
least are those commonly called Tourlourous: They have a red shell marked with
black-spots; they are pleasant enough to the taste, but in regard there is much
picking work about them, and but little to be gotten from them, and that it is
conceived they incline people to the bloody flux, they are used only in case of
necessity.

WHITE-CRABS.
THere are others all white, and have their abodes at the foot of Trees on the
Seaside, in certain holes which they make in the ground, into which they
retreat, as the Conies do into their Clappers or Hutches: These are the biggest
of all the kinds, nay there have been those taken which have had in one of
their claws as much meat as an egg might contain, and as delicate as that of
the River-Crevices: They are seldom seen in the day time; but in the night they
come in multitudes out of their holes to feed under the Trees; and it is then
that they are taken with the help of a Lanthorn or Torches: They delight very
much to be under the Arched-Indian-Fig-tree, and other Trees which are on the
Seaside, and in the most fenny places: If a man shall search into the ground,
or in the sand to get them out of their lurking places, he shall always find
half their bodies in water, as most of the other amphibious creatures are.

PAINTED-CRABS.
BUt those of the third kind, which as to bulk is between the two others before
mentioned, are the most beautiful, the most to be admired, and the most
esteemed of all: They are indeed much of the same figure with the precedent;
but according to the several Islands, and different soils wherein they are
bred, they are painted with so many colors, and those so beautiful and lively,
that there cannot be a greater divertisement then to see these creatures at
midday creeping under the Trees where they seek for their sustenance: Of some
of them the bodies are of a violet color intermixed with white: others are of a
bright yellow interlaced with several small greyish and purple lines, which
begin at the mouth and are drawn down over the back: Nay there are some which
upon a dark-colour'd ground are streaked with red, yellow and green, which
makes the richest mixture of colors that can be imagined; looking on them at a
little distance a man would think, that all those delightful colors wherewith
they are naturally enameled, were not yet fully dry, such is their brightness,
or that they were newly varnished over to give them the greater luster.

These Painted Crabs are not like the white ones, which dare not appear in the
day time; for these are to be seen morning and evening, and after the rains
under the Trees, where they recreate themselves in great companies together:
They will also suffer a man to come near enough to them; but as soon as they
perceive him make any attempt to take them (which is best done with a little
wand, it being too dangerous to employ the hands) they make their retreat
without turning their backs on those that pursue them, and as they go back they
show their teeth, and opening their defensives, which are those two Claws or
Mordants they have in their feet, they therewith defend their whole body, and
they ever and anon strike them one against another to frighten their enemies:
And in that posture they get into their forts, which are commonly under the
root, or in the cleft of some rotten Tree, or that of some rock.

These Crabs have this natural instinct, to go every year about May, in the
season of the rains, to the Seaside to wash themselves, and disburthen
themselves of their eggs, in order to the perpetuation of their species: They
come down from the Mountains in such multitudes, that the highways and woods
are covered with them; and they have this strange direction given them, that
they take their way toward that part of the Island where there are Creeks and
descents, whereby they may the more easily come to the Sea.

The Inhabitants are at that time very much annoyed by them, in regard they
fill their Gardens, and with their little Mordants they cut the Pease and young
Plants of Tobacco: They observe such an order in this descent, that they look
like an Army marching in rank and file: they never break their ranks, and
whatever they meet with by the way, Houses, Mountains, Rocks, or other
obstacles, they attempt to get over them, that they may go on still in a strait
line: Twice a day they make a halt, during the greatest heat, both to feed and
rest themsleves a while: But they make greater journies in the night then in
the day, till at last they get to the Seaside.

When they are upon this expedition they are fat, and good to eat; the Males
being full of meat, and the Females of eggs: And indeed during that time, a
man may have of them at his door: Nay sometimes they come into the houses if
the palizadoes be not close enough, and that they meet with a place to get in
at: The noise they make in the night time is greater then that of the Mice, and
keeps people from sleeping: When they are come to the Seaside, having rested
themselves a little, and considered the Sea as the nurse of their young ones,
they approach so near it, that they wash themselves three or four times in the
little waves which gently rise and fall on the sand: then having retired into
the Woods or neighboring Plains to recover their weariness, the Females return
a second time to the Sea, and having washed themselves a little, they open
their tails, which are commonly thrust up under the belly, and shake out the
eggs fastened thereto into the water: After which having once more washed
themselves, they return in the same order in which they came thither.

The strongest of them soon recover the Mountains, every one making to the
quarter from whence he came, and by the same way through which he had passed
before: But then, that is, in their return, they are for the most part so weak
and lean, that they are forced to make some stay in the next fields they come
at to refresh themselves, and retrive their former vigor before they can get
up to the tops of Mountains.

As to the Eggs thus committed to the Sea, having been cast up by it on the
softer kind of sand, and warmed some time by the beams of the Sun, they are at
last hatched, and become little Crabs, whereof there may be seen millions about
the bigness of a large farthing, getting into the neighboring bushes till such
time as they are strong enough to get to the old ones in the Mountains.

Another considerable thing in these Crabs, is, that once a year, to wit, after
their return from the Sea, they are under ground for the space of six weeks, so
that there is not one of them to be seen: During this time they change their
skin or shell, and become wholly new: They work out the earth so neatly at the
entrance of their retreats, that there is no hole to be seen; which they do to
prevent their taking of any air; for when they put off their old coat, their
whole body is as it were naked, being only covered with a very thin pellicle,
which grows thicker and harder by degrees, till it come to the solidity of the
shell they had put off.

Monsieur du Montel relates, that he purposely caused some places to be dug
where it was likely there were of them hidden: Having met with them, he found
them wrapped in leaves of Trees, which no doubt was their sustenance, and
served them for a nest during that retirement; but they were so weak and unable
to endure the air, that they seemed as it were half dead, though fat enough,
and excellent meat, and as such highly esteemed by the Inhabitants: Close by
them he found the shell they had put off, which seemed to be as entire as if
the animal had been still within it: And what was strange, though he looked
very narrowly, yet hardly could he find any hole, or cleft at which the body of
it might get out of that prison: But having viewed it very exactly, he found a
little disjunction near the tail, at which the Crab had slipped out.

They are commonly dressed as the Crevices in these parts are; but the more
delicate will take the time and pains, after they are boiled, to pick out all
that is good in the claws, and to extract a certain oily substance which is in
the body, and by some called Taumaly, and to fry all together with the eggs of
the female, putting thereto a little of the Country Pepper, and some juice of
Oranges; and this makes it one of the most dainty dishes in the Caribbies.

In these grounds where there are many of the Trees called Manchenillos, the
Crabs which feed under them, or eat of the fruit, have a venomous quality,
insomuch that those who eat thereof fall dangerously sick: But in other parts
they are wholesome enough, and as the Crevices in Europe are numbered among the
delicacies: Such as are careful of their health open them them before they eat
thereof, and if they be black within they think them dangerous, and use them
not.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Thunder, Earthquakes, and the Tempests sometimes happening in
the Caribbies.
AS there is hardly any face so beautiful, but that it may be subject to some
defect, spot or mole; so these Islands having all the excellencies and
advantages before represented, have also some imperfections and defects which
take off much of their luster, and abate of the enjoyments and pleasures they
might otherwise afford: We shall give a short account of the principal
inconveniences happening there, and the remedies which may be applied thereto.

THUNDER.
OF those Thunder may be named in the first place, which though never heard on
the Coasts of Peru, is in these Islands so frequent, and in many places so
dreadful, that by its terrible claps it forces the most confident into terror
and astonishment.

EARTHQUAKES.
Earthquakes do also sometimes produce very sad effects, and shake the very
foundations of the Earth so violently, that they make a man reel in those
places where he might think himself most safe: But through Gods goodness these
happen very seldom, and in some places the agitation is not so great.

HURRICANE.
WHat is most to be feared is a general conspiracy of all the Winds, which goes
about the Compass in the space of 24 hours, and sometimes in less. This is that
which is called a Hurricane, and happens commonly in the months of July,
August, or September: at other times there is no fear of it. Heretofore it
happened but once in seven years, and sometimes seldomer; but within these few
years it has happened once every two years, nay in one year there happened two
of them: Nay not long after Monsieur Auber was sent to command in chief at
Gardeloupe, there were three Hurricanes in one year.

This kind of Tempest is so violent, that it breaks and unroots Trees, deprives
those it takes not away of all verdure, makes desolate whole Forests, removes
Rooks from the tops of Mountains, and casts them into the Valleys, overthrows
Houses, carries away the Plants it has forced out of the Earth into the Sea,
makes a general waste of all it meets with in the Fields; and in a word, leaves
famine all over the Country, which groans a long time after that disaster, and
will be a long time ere it recovers the ruins occasioned thereby.

Nor does the Hurricane all this mischief only by Land, but it raises withal
such a tempest on the Sea, that it seems to be mixed and confounded with the Air
and the Sky: It breaks to pieces the Ships that happen to be on the Coasts at
that time, casting some upon the shores, and swallowing others into the Abysses
of the Deep: So that those which escape shipwreck at such a time, are extremely
obliged to acknowledge the great mercy of God toward them.

Those who observe the signs preceding this Tempest, have particularly noted
these; That a little before it happens the Sea becomes of a sudden so calm and
even, that there appears not the least wrinkle on her face; That the Birds by a
natural instinct come down in multitudes from the Mountains, where they make
their ordinary abode, to retire into the Plains and Valleys, where they keep on
the ground to secure themselves against the injuries of the cruel weather which
they foresee coming; And that the Rain which falls a little before is bitter
and salt, as the Seawater.

It is not many years since that there happened a memorable example of this
Tempest upon several Ships lying in the Road of S. Christophers laden with
Tobacco, and ready to set sail; For they were all broken to pieces and cast
away, and the Commodities wholly lost: Whereof there followed another strange
and unexpected accident, which was, that most of the fish upon the Coast was
poisoned by the Tobacco: The Sea seemed in a manner covered with those poor
creatures, which turned upside-down and languishing floated on the face of the
water, and came to dye on the shore.

Nor are these disasters particular only to the New-World, but there have been
seen in France, and other places such dreadful Tempests as might well be
accounted Hurricanes. In the year M. D. XCIX. there rose near Bourdeaux such a
violent wind, that it broke and unrooted most of the great Trees which were
able to resist, especially the Wall-nut-trees, whose boughs are commonly very
large, and transported some of them above five hundred paces from the place
where they grew: But the weaker Trees which gave way were spared: The Palace of
Poictiers received much hurt; diverse Steeples were battered, and that of
Cangres near Saumur quite blown down: Some persons on horseback in the fields
were carried above sixty paces out of their way: For the space of six or seven
leagues, as far as it blew, there was nothing but ruin and confusion.

[To this place may be reduced, among others, that Tempest which happened here
in England at the removal out of this world of the late Usurper Oliver Cromwell;
the mischiefs whereof are yet fresh in men's minds; as also that in February,
1661.]

To give an example of a Hurricane that showed its malice here in Europe,
particularly on the Sea, we shall add the Copy of a Letter from a Merchant of
Rochel to a Correspondent of his at Rouen, dated January the 30th, M. DC. XLV.

We have been in a very sad condition these two days, by reason of the
extraordinary Tempest which began Saturday night last, the 28th of this month,
and continues yet: We see from our Walls between thirty and forty Ships cast a
way, and forced to the shore, most English bottoms, and abundance of
Merchandise lost: One of these Ships of 200 Tun burden was cast near a
Windmill, which is twelve foot higher then any tide was ever seen; for the
Tempest was not only in the Air, but it also forced the Sea much beyond its
ordinary limits, insomuch that the spoil it has done by Land very much exceeds
the loss of the Ships. All the Salt on the low Marshes was carried away; all
the Wheat on the lower grounds and reduced marches overflown: And in the Isle
of Ree the Sea crossed it from one side to the other, spoiled abundance of
Vineyards, and drowned much Cattle. In the memory of man the Sea never came up
so high; nay it came to some places almost a league within the Land: So that
those who have been at S. Christophers affirm, that the Hurricanes happening
there are not more dreadful then this Tempest was here: The wind was
North-west: The loss both on Sea and Land is valued at five hundred thousand
Crowns: It Is conceived there is as much Salt lost as would have freighted two
hundred Ships of three hundred Tun a piece. There are also lost some Dutch
Ships near the Isle of Ree, at Bourdeaux, and Bayonne, which were very richly
laden. Whence it appears that these Tempests are as violent in Europe as those
so much feared in the Caribbies.

But in those parts, some to secure themselves from these Storms forsake their
houses, out of a fear to be overwhelmed in their ruins, and make their abode
in Caves and the clefts of Rocks, or lie flat on the ground in the open fields,
till they be over: Others run to some house near them, which they think so
strongly built, as that it may elude the shocks of that Tempest; for now there
are in the Caribbies many structures that in a manner defy the violence
thereof: Nay there are some will get into the little Huts built by the Negroes,
in imitation of those of the Caribbians; for it has been found by experience,
that these Hurts, being round and having no place open but the door, and
whereof the Rafters stand upon the ground, are commonly spared when the highest
houses are removed from one place to another, if not quite overthrown by the
impetuous agitation of the winds raising this Tempest.

CHAP. XXIV. Of some other Inconveniences of the Country, and the remedies
thereof.
BEsides the Thunder, Earthquakes and Hurricanes, which shake the very
foundations, and blast the beauty of the Caribby-Islands, there are some other
Inconveniences which much annoy the Inhabitants, though not so much to be
feared as the precedent. These we have reserved to be the subject of this last
Chapter, wherein out of the desire we have to contribute all lies in us to the
well-being and satisfaction of those amiable Colonies, we shall propose the
remedies which the experience of the ancient Inhabitants, and the judgment of
several eminent Physicians have found most proper and effectual to secure them
from those dangerous consequences.

MOUSTICOES, and MARINGOINS.
THere is then, in the first place, a sort of very small Flies, by some called
Mousticoes, which are felt commonly before they are seen: But in that little
weak body there is so sharp and venomous a sting, as causing an importunate
itch that will not be satisfied till the skin be scratched off, the wound
degenerates into a dangerous Ulcer if some remedy be not applied.

There is another kind somewhat bigger, and making a noise like that of the
Flies, seen in these parts near ponds and fenny places, by some of the
Inhabitants of the Caribbies called Maringoins: They do the same effect with
the former, being armed with a little sting which pierces through clothes, nay
through the Hammocks, or hanging-beds on which people rest themselves: But both
kinds have this particular to them, that they never do any mischief, but they
beforehand proclaim a war, and sound a charge with their little Trumpet, which
many times does more frighten then their stinging hurts.

To avoid the annoyance of these two little Insects, the Inhabitants place
their houses on a little eminency, give them air on all sides, and cut down all
the Trees which may hinder the East Wind, which is the ordinary wind blowing in
those Islands, and which drives away these wicked and importunate enemies:
Those also who have their lodgings and beds very close are not so much troubled
therewith.

But if notwithstanding these precautions any be annoyed thereby, they need
only take Tobacco in the room, or make a fire that shall smoke much, and these
disturbers of men's rest will be gone: And if they have stung any one, and he be
desirous to be rid of the itch which follows, let him only wet the place stung
with Vinegar, or the juice of the lesser kind of Citron, and he shall have ease.

WASPES and SCORPIONS.
WAspes also and Scorpions are common in most of these Islands: These Vermin
are of the same figure and as dangerous as those of the same kinds in most
parts of Europe: The stingings of Waspes are helped by the juice of Rue-leaves,
and perfectly cured by a fomentation of the sovereign remedy against all sorts
of poisons, which is given out under the famous name of Orvictan; and that of
Scorpions has its remedy in the beast it self, which must be crushed upon the
place affected, or for want thereof, recourse must be had to the oil called
Scorpion-oyl, which should be common in all those parts where these Insects are
so.

MANCHENILLO.
IN most of these Islands there grow certain Trees called by some
Manchenillo-trees, beautiful to the eye, bearing leaves like those of
Crab-trees, and a fruit called Manchenillo, like an Appius-apple; for it is
streaked with red, extremely fair, and of a pleasant scent, insomuch that one
can hardly forbear tasting it if he be not beforehand acquainted with its
dangerous quality; for though it be sweet in the mouth, yet is it so fatal that
being eaten it sends a man to sleep, not for 24 hours, (as a certain seed of
Peru, and an herb in the East, whereof Linscot speaks at large) but so as never
to awake again; so that it is much worse then those Almonds of Mexico, which
smell like musk, but being eaten leave a taste of rottenness behind them; as
also then the fair Apples of Sodom, which being opened yield only soot and
ashes; for if a man have the mischance to be deceived in them, it is without
any hazard of his life: But these venomous Apples may be compared to the
Indian-nut which grows in Java: It is somewhat like a Gall, and at the first
eating thereof it tastes like a small Nut; but afterward it causes mortal
gripings, and is a most dangerous poison: There is also in Africa a Tree called
Coscoma, which bears deadly Apples: The Tree of the Maldivas, named Ambou,
bears a fruit no less deceitful and pernicious: And near Tripoly in Syria there
are certain large Apricocks, which are fair to the eye, and very savoury to the
palate; but the subsequent qualities of them are many times mortal, or at best,
cause long and painful diseases to such as have eaten of them.

There grow Manchenillo-Trees on the Seaside and the banks of Rivers, and if
the fruit fall into the water, the fish eating thereof will certainly dye; nay
though it continue long in the water, yet will it not rot, but is covered with
saltpeter, which gives it a solid crustiness, as if it were petrified. In
those Islands where this Tree grows in abundance the Snakes are venomous, it
being supposed by some, that they sometimes suck the fruit of it: Nay the Crabs
which feed under these Trees contract a dangerous quality from them, as we said
elsewhere; and many have been sick after the eating thereof: Whence it comes,
that when these fruits fall to the ground, such as are careful of their health
will forbear the eating of Crabs.

Yet do not the Snakes or Crabs wholly live on this fruit, but feeding under
the Tree they draw the infection thereof to themselves, especially if they suck
the venom of its fruit. It may well be, that what is mortal to some creatures
is not so to all; and that these Insects often feeding on this poison, do by
custom and continuance turn it into their sustenance, as is reported of
Mithridates: And so they may infect such as eat thereof, receiving themselves
no hurt thereby.

Under the bark of the trunk and boughs of these Trees there is contained a
certain glutinous water, which is white as milk, extremely malignant and
dangerous: There being many of them along the highways, if one should
carelessly break one of their branches, that milk or rather poison comes forth,
and falls upon him: If it light on his shirt, it makes an ugly stain as if it
were burnt; if on the skin, and the place be not immediately washed, it will be
all blistered: but if it should chance that a drop of this caustic and
venomous water should fall into the eye, it will cause an insupportable
inflammation, and the party shall lose his sight for nine days, after which he
will have some ease.

The dew, or rainwater, having continued a while on the leaves of these Trees,
produces the same effect, and if it should light on the skin, it would scorch
it like Aquafortis: So that it is almost as bad as the drops of rain falling
under the Line, which are so contagious, as those who have felt them affirm,
that if they fall on the hands, face, or any uncovered part of the body, there
immediately rise up bladders and blisters with much pain; and if the party do
not presently shift his cloths, his body will be full of wheals all over; not
to mention the worms which are bred in the cloths.

Nay the very shade of these Trees is prejudicial to men, and if a man rest
himself under them, the whole body swells after a strange manner. Pliny and
Plutarch mention a Tree of Arcadia no less dangerous; and those who have
traveled into the East Indies affirm, that there is an herb named Sapony,
which causes their death who lie upon it. But what heightens the ill quality of
the Manchenillo-Tree, is, that the meat dressed with a fire made of its wood
derives a certain malignity from it, which burns the mouth and throat.

Nor are the Savages of these Islands ignorant of the nature of the
Manchenillo; for the composition wherewith they are wont to poison their arrows
has in it, among other ingredients, the milk of this Tree, and the dew falling
from it, and the juice of the fruit.

To cure, in a short time, the swelling and blisters rising on the body after
sleeping under the shade of these Trees, or receiving the rain or dew falling
from their branches, as also those occasioned by the milk within the bark,
recourse must be immediately made to a kind of Snails, whereof we have spoken
before, under the name of Soldiers, and let the party take a certain clear
water which is contained within their shell, and apply it to the place
affected: this remedy immediately allays the venom of that scorching liquour,
and puts the party out of all danger: The oil extracted without fire from the
same Snail operates the same effect. But if any shall happen to eat of the
fruit of these venomous Trees, he must use the remedies prescribed hereafter,
to expel the venom of Serpents, and all other poisons.

WOOD-LICE.
THere is also a kind of Ant, or worm, which has a little black spot on the
head, all the rest of the body being white: They are bred of rotten wood, and
thence some call them Wood-lice: Their bodies are softer then those of our
ordinary Ants, and yet their tooth is so sharp, that they gnaw wood, and get
into such coffers as lie near the ground: And in less then two days, if they be
not destroyed, there will get in such abundance, that linen, clothes, paper,
and whatever is within them will be eaten and devoured; nay they gnaw and eat
the posts which sustain the ordinary hutts, insomuch that if some course be not
taken they will at last fall down.

To prevent the breeding of these Insects, and the mischief done by them, there
are these cautions: At the building of houses not to leave any wood on the
ground to rot, out of which they may breed: To burn the ends of those pieces of
wood that are planted in the ground: As soon as any of them are perceived, to
cast scalding water into the holes which they have made: To hang up Chests and
Coffers in the air with cords, as they are forced to do in several parts of the
East Indies, that they may not touch the ground: And lastly, to keep the rooms
very clean, and leave nothing on the ground. It has also been observed, that
the rubbing of their haunts with the oil of that kind of Palma-Christi
wherewith the Negroes rub their heads to avoid vermin, has prevented their
coming any more that way. The oil of Lamantin has the same effect, and if it
be poured on their rendezvous, which is a kind of Ant-hill made up of their own
ordure, and fastened about the forks which sustain the hutts, they immediately
forsake it.

RAVETS.
ANother dangerous vermin are the Ravets, of which there are two kinds: The
bigger are almost like Locusts, and of the same color; the others are not half
as big: Both kinds have their walks in the nightime, get into Chests if they
be not very close, foul all things wherever they come, and do mischief enough,
yet not so much, nor in so short a time, as the Wood-lice. They are called
Ravets, because like Rats they gnaw whatever they come at: They are no doubt
the same which de Lery calls Aravers, according to the Language of the
Brasilians. This vermin has a particular malice to Books, and their covers.
The Wood-lice are as good, if they can get at them; but they are to be
commended in this particular, that they have a respect for the letters, and
only nibble about the margents; for whether they cannot away with the ink, or
for some other reason, it must be an extraordinary famine that shall force them
to feed on the impression, or writing* But they are very great lovers of linen
above any thing, and if they can get into a Chest, they will desire but one
night to make work enough for many Sempstresses for a month.

As to the Ravets, though they be not so quick at their work, yet they spare
nothing but silk and cotton-stuffs; nay they have no stomach to silk or cotton
even while it is raw; insomuch that if the Chests be hung up in the air, and
the cords be done about with cotton, as soon as they find their little feet
fastened in it, they immediately endeavor to get away, and turn somewhere
else. Such as dwell in houses of brick or stone are not troubled with the
Wood-lice, but with all their care they have much ado to avoid the mischief
done by the Ravets: Yet has it been found by experience, that they cannot
endure sweet scents, and that they would not willingly get into Chests made of
Cedar, and those excellent sweet woods which are common in all these Islands.
At Cairo they put the pedestalls of Cabinets in vessels full of water, to
prevent the creeping up of the Ants. This easy secret might produce the same
effect in the Caribbies to keep off the Woodlice and Ravets, nay also the Ants,
which are there also extremely troublesome.

CHEGOES.
BUt what is most to be feared in all these Islands is a certain kind of little
worm, no bigger then a hand-worm, which breeds in the dust, in the sweepings
cast out into the dunghill, and such unclean places: These are commonly called
Chegoes. They get into peoples feet, and under the nails of their toes; but if
they get any further, and are not taken away in time, they will get into all
the other parts of the body. At first they only cause a little itching, but
having once got through the skin, they cause an inflammation in the place
affected, and though very little when they entered it, come in time to be as big
as a pea, and produce abundance of nits, which may breed others; and so many
times ulcers are bred in the places whence they are taken.

The Savages, as they relate who have lived among them, have a certain gum,
wherewith having rubbed their feet, especially under the nails, they are not
annoyed with this vermin: But such as know not that secret are advised to have
their feet searched by those who have the skill to discover and take out those
dangerous Insects, as soon as they feel the least itching; at which work the
Indians are very expert and fortunate. Those who take out these Chegoes must
have a care that they break not the bag wherein they are enclosed; which if
they do, some of their little eggs will remain behind, which will infallibly
breed others. It is conceived also, that the Roucou, which the Caribbians use
to make themselves more beautiful, more nimble, and more active to run, has a
secret virtue to keep off all these vermin.

It is also a good remedy often to sprinkle salt water about the room; not to
go barefoot; to wear stockings of Goats-leather; and to keep ones self very
clean: For commonly only such as are careless of themselves, and slovenly, are
much troubled with them. These little worms are the same with those which the
Brasilians call Tons, and some other Indians Nigas.

Those who have Ulcers caused by these little worms, either for want of taking
them out skilfully or in time, are among the French called Malingres. These
Ulcers come also many times after some little scratching, which at first seems
to be little or nothing: But afterward, the party may well wonder to see it as
big as the palm of a man's hand; for the Ulcer must have its course: Nay some of
them, though little, yet are very hard to be cured. Of these Ulcers there are
two kinds; one round, the other uneven: The round Ulcer is harder to cure then
the other, for it is encompassed with dead flesh, which makes it the worse; for
till that dead and loose flesh be removed, the Ulcer cannot be cured: Therefore
as often as the wound is dressed, that dead flesh must be quite cut away, which
causes extraordinary pains.

Among the remedies for the healing of these Ulcers, there are used
Verdi-greece, Aquafortis, the spirit of Vitriol, and burnt Allom, which eat
away the dead flesh: They use to the same end the juice of the lesser Citron,
which is extremely sharp; and when the wound is foul, it makes it clean, and
look well: True it is, the pain which the party feels when the wound is rubbed
therewith is so great, that he would rather pitch on any of the other remedies;
but they do not heal so soon: There is also an Unguent made of common honey, a
little sharp Vinegar, and the powder of Verdi-greece, which cures Ulcers in a
short time: And to prevent them, let not any one make slight of the least hurt
or scratch that happens in any part of the body whatsoever, especially the feet
or legs, but to apply a plaster thereto, to take away the heat which may be in
the wound; and in case there be no other remedy procurable, to put some
Tobacco-leaves to it, and to use the juice of Citron and Vinegar, to take away
the itch which remains after the stinging of the Mousticoes and the Maringoins,
rather then to make use of the nails.

In the sixth Chapter of this History, we said there were Serpents and Snakes
in the Islands of Martinico and St. Alousia, which have a dangerous venom: We
shall here assign the Remedies which may be successfully used in order to the
taking away thereof. In the first place, be it observed, that they are to be
used both inwardly and outwardly: Inwardly to comfort the heart, and dissipate
the venomous quality which might prevail over it, there are successfully used
Treacle, Mithridate, the Confection of Alkermes, Egyptian-Balm, Peru-Balm, Rue,
Scordium, Scorzonera, Vipers-grass, Angelico, and Contrahierva: But above all,
the party stung must take down in a little Burrage-water, Bugloss-water, or
some other liquor, the powder of the Liver and Heart of Vipers, the weight of a
Crown-piece: In a word, he must use all those things which fortify the heart,
and revive and refresh the spirits: Outwardly there are to be applied all the
Remedies which have the virtue to draw and disperse all manner of venom: Such
are Cuppingglasses applied upon the scarified wound, as also all hot and
attractive Medicaments, such as are Galbanum, Ammoniacum, the fomentation of
wine boiled with the root of Dragon-wort, or the leaves of Mug-wort, Garlic,
Onions, Pigeons dung, the blood of Land-Tortoises dried and reduced to powder,
and the like.

It is also not only requisite, but very safe, as soon as may be to bind up the
member affected, a little above the place where the party was stung, and
immediately to make an incision, nay indeed to take away the piece, or at
least, as soon as it is scarifi'd to apply thereto the outermost feather of a
Chicken or Pigeons wing to take away the venom; and that Chicken or Pigeon
being dead, to take another, till there be no venom left to be drawn.

It were also to be wished, that all the Inhabitants of the Caribbies were
furnished with that excellent Antidote, approved in so many places in France,
which is known under the famous name of Orvietan, and sold at Paris at the
New-bridge end, in the street called Rue Dauphine, at the sign of the Sun: For
that admirable secret, among many other rare qualities, has the virtue to
drive away the venom of all sorts of Serpents, and to allay the force of the
strongest poisons: Such as have been stung by venomous Serpents are to use it
thus.

Take of it about the bigness of a Bean, dissolved in wine; and after
scarification made on the place stung, and drawing blood by the Cupping-glass,
apply thereto a little Orvietan, and let care be taken that the Patient be kept
awake at least for twelve hours after. This sovereign remedy loses nothing of
its goodness, though it be kept many years, so it be put up in a place not too
hot, where it may be dried up; and if it be, it may be reduced to its
consistence with Mel rosatum; it may be also had in powder.

As to the diet to be observed during the use of this remedy; the Patient must
abstain from all meats that inflame the blood, or cause melancholy: He must
also forbear purging and bleeding, for fear of drawing the venom inward; unless
some of the nobler parts be in danger, in which case he may purge abundantly,
and use baths, and things good to open the pores, and cause sweating.

If a person be reduced to such an extremity as that none of the forementioned
Antidotes can be procured, let him make use of this which is very common and
easily got: Let him who has been bitten or stung by any venomous creature
immediately eat the rind of a raw Citron, for it has the virtue to secure the
heart from the venom: if it may be done, the place hurt must be bound as hard
as can be endured, a little above the biting or stinging; then it must be
scarifi'd, and let there be often applied thereto a man's fasting spittle; and
if the beast which has done the mischief can be had, cut off the head of it,
and pound it till it be reduced to a kind of Unguent, which must be applied hot
to the wound: This is the ordinary remedy used by the natural Inhabitants of
Brasil to free themselves from the violent poison of that dangerous and
monstrous Serpent, which in their Language they call Boicinininga, and the
Spaniards Cascavel.

The last Letters we received from Martinico assure us, that some considerable
families lately come from Brasil with their Negroes to live in that Island,
acquainted the inhabitants with several Herbs and Roots growing in the
Caribbies, as well as Brasil, which are excellent to allay the venom of all
kinds of Serpents and poisoned Arrows.

The forementioned remedies may also be used against the venom of the Becune,
and all the other dangerous fishes. They may also be successfully employed to
prevent the pernicious effects of the juice of Manyoc, the Manchenillo-tree,
and the stinging of Waspes, Scorpions, and all other venomous Insects.

SEA-FOAM.
THose who go a fishing, or to wash themselves in the Sea, do sometimes meet
with a certain foam which the wind blows to and fro like a little bladder, of a
purple color, of a different figure, and beautiful to the eye; but what part
soever of the body it shall stick to, it immediately causes in it a very
grievous pain, extremely sharp and burning: The readiest remedy that can be
apyly'd to alleviate that stinging pain, is, to anoint the place affected with
the oil of the Acajou-nut, mixed with a little good Aqua-vitae; for one heat
takes away the other.

RATS.
MIce and Rats were creatures heretofore unknown to the Caribbians; but now
since the coming in of so many Ships to those Islands, and the casting away of
diverse of them in the very Roads, where they afterward rot, they have got to
land, and are so multiplied, that in some places they do abundance of mischief
among the Potatoes, Pease, Beans, and particularly that kind of Wheat which is
called Turkey-wheat: Nay did not the Snakes destroy them, and search for them
in their holes under ground, in the clefts of rocks, nay even in the coverings
of houses, which consist of Palm-leaves, or Sugarcanes, it would no doubt be a
very hard matter to secure Provisions from them. Now indeed there are Cats in
these Islands, which give them no quarter; nay, Dogs are taught to hunt them,
and it is no small diversion to see how subtle they are to find them out, and
expert in the hunting and killing of them.

Nor is this inconvenience particular to the Caribbies; nay it is much worse in
Peru; for Garcilasso, in his Royal Commentary, affirms, that these pestilent
creatures being extremely numerous in those parts commit very great spoils,
ransacking the places through which they pass, making the Fields desolate, and
gnawing the Fruits even to the stalks, and roots of the Trees.

The Inhabitants of the Islands have an invention which they call Balan, to
keep the Rats from eating their Cassava, and other Provisions. This Balan is a
kind of round hurdle, or happily square, consisting of several stakes, on which
they place the Cassava after it has been dried in the Sun: It is fastened at
the top of the Hut, hanging down by a Witth or Cord; and that the Rats may not
come down along the Cord, and so get to the Balan, they put the Cord through a
smooth gourd which hangs loose in the midst of it, so that the Rats being come
to that place, being not able to fasten their feet in it, and fearing the
motion of the Gourd, are afraid to venture any further: Were it not for this
secret, the Inhabitants would find it a hard task to keep their provisions.

Thus has the wise Author of Nature been pleased, by an admirable equipollence
of perfections and imperfections, that those Countries which have some
advantages above others should also be subject to those inconveniences that are
not to be found elsewhere. Thus has the Divine Providence, whose business it
is liberally to supply the exigencies of his Creatures, placed the preservative
near the poison, the Remedy walking as it were hand in hand with the Disease,
and so laid open to Man the inexhaustible Treasures of Grace and Nature, to
secure him against the injuries of Air, the outrages of the Seasons, the
violence of Poisons, and whatever the Earth produces that is most dangerous,
since it became envenomed by the first Transgression.

The End of the First Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Caribby-Islands.
THE SECOND BOOK. Comprehending the MORAL History of those ISLANDS.
CHAPTER I. Of the Establishment of those Inhabitants who are Strangers in the
Islands of S. Christopher, Mevis, Gardeloupe, Martinico, and some other Islands
of the Caribbies.
IN the precedent Discourse we have given a full account of whatever might
relate to the Natural History of the Caribby-Islands; our design leads us now
to that part of the History which we call the MORAL, wherein we are to treat of
the Inhabitants of the said Islands, of whom we have occasionally made mention
in the Description we have given of those places in the precedent Book. In the
first place we shall speak of those Inhabitants thereof who are Strangers, or
Europeans, yet only so far as the prosecution of our Design requires; which
having dispatched, we shall descend to a more large and particular
consideration of the Indians, the natural and originary Inhabitants of the
Country; a task which requires a more ample deduction, and a more exact and
curious disquisition, upon this presumption, that there has yet been very
little published upon that subject.

The Spaniards, grounding their Title upon the Donation of Pope Alexander the
sixth, and some other apparent Reasons and Pretenses, presume that the right of
Navigation into the late discovered part of the World, which is called America,
and of establishing and settling Colonies there, whether it be in the Continent,
or in any of the Islands, properly belongs to them, exclusively to all others.
But not to urge that the vanity of that arrogant presumption is sufficiently
discovered of it self, and that it would prove a great digression from the
design of our History to engage our selves in a particular disquisition of that
Controversy, we need only say, that Bergeron, a learned and curious Author,
has so exactly handled this Question, and so clearly shown the absurdity of
that chimerical pretense, in his Treatise of Navigations, that it would be lost
labor for us to insist upon it, or to think of any thing new that can be
produced upon that account. Accordingly all Christian Kings and Princes have
always disputed thar pretended Right with the King of Spain, as unanimously
concluding that he had unjustly attributed the same to himself: Nor have they
engaged against him only by words and writings, but have effectually prosecuted
their own pretensions, and from time to time sent Fleets into America to setle
Plantations there, and to take into their possession several parts of that new
World; wherein the most successful have been the English, the French, and the
Dutch.

But it is to be observed, that of all the Colonies which these three European
Nations have planted in America, those that settled themselves in the
Caribby-Islands are of greatest account, and the most frequented by Merchants,
as being the most advantageous upon the score of Trade. The English and French,
as may have been noted in the first Book of this History, are the most
considerable in those parts, and have divided between them the greatest, the
richest, and the most populous of all those Islands.

We may further affirm it as a thing generally known, that these Nations have
not in their several establishments followed the inhumane and barbarous maxims
of the Spaniards, nor after their example unmercifully exterminated the
originary Inhabitants of the Country; for if they found any of them in actual
possession of the Lands where they lived, they have for the most part preserved
them therein, and contracted alliances with them. Yet must it be acknowledged
that the the Caribbians have had very great differences with the English, and
that the said differences have continued a long time; but the ground of their
quarrels proceeded from some occasions of discontent which the Caribbians
received from some particular persons of that Nation, which represented in a
Body has disapproved their procedure, and upon all emergencies has expressed
it self so far dissatisfied therewith, as to desire that they should be treated
with the same humanity, moderation, and Christian mildness, as those greater
and flourishing Colonies of Virginia and New England, that are under the
jurisdiction of the said English, have hitherto used toward the natural
Inhabitants of that part of America which lies more Northerly, where they have
established themselves; for it is known that the English hold so sacred and
perfect a correspondence with them, as has opened a way for their instruction
in the Mysteries of Christian Religion, and the planting of a great number of
fair Churches amongst those poor Barbarians.

But above all, this is most certain, that when the French established
themselves in the Islands* of Martinico, Gardeloupe, and Granada, it was done
with the consent of the most considerable persons among the Caribbians, who
thereupon disowned those of their Countrymen who would have obstructed the
said establishment: Nay such was their earnestness therein, that they employed
all their Forces and Councils to oppose the designs of the others, and to
secure the French in the peaceable possession of what they had before granted
them. This proceeding absolutely clears the French of being guilty of the same
violences which are charged upon the Spaniards, and makes it appear, that the
setlement of the former in those Islands was not like that of the latter in
those places where they have the opportunities to establish themselves. And if
it be objected to the French, that they have forced the natural Inhabitants out
of S. Christophers and Gardeloupe, and that even at this present there is a War
between the said Nation and those of Martinico; it may be answered, that when
the French peopled these Islands, they proposed to themselves no other design
then the edification and instruction of those poor Barbarians, and that if
contrary to their first intention they had been forced to use a severe hand
toward some particular persons, and to treat them as enemies, they were
themselves the occasion of their own misfortune, by being the first Aggressors,
and guilty of previous violations of the sacred Laws of Alliance, which they
had contracted with them, and engaging themselves in sanguinary counsels, such
as would have smothered their Colonies ere they were fully settled, had there
not been a timely discovery made thereof.

The English and French Colonies had their beginning at the same time, which
was in the year One thousand six hundred twenty and five: Monsieur Desnambuc, a
French Gentleman, of the ancient House of Vauderop, and a Captain under the
King of France in the Western Seas, and Sir Thomas Warner, an English
Gentleman, jointly took possession of the Island of S. Christophers on the same
day, in the names of the Kings of France and Great Britain, their Masters, that
they might have a place of safe retreat, and a good Haven for the reception of
such Ships of both Nations as should be bound for America; that Island being
furnished with all the advantages whereof we have given a full account in the
Chapter particularly designed by us for the description of it; upon which score
it was visited by the Spaniards, who often put in there for refreshments, both
as they were inward and outward bound in their long Voyages: Nay sometimes they
left their si^k there to be looked to by the Caribbians, with whom they had
made a peace upon those terms.

These two Gentlemen therefore considering with themselves, that if they were
possessed of that Country they might the better incommodate their common enemy
in America, the Spaniard, and have withal a convenient and secure habitation,
in order to the establishment of the Colonies they intended for those Islands,
became Masters of it, and left men therein to keep it: But before they parted
thence, having some grounds to fear that there might be some secret
intelligence between the Indians and the Spaniards, or that in their absence
they might execute the resolution, which by the persuasion of certain Sorcerers
(a sort of people in great esteem among the Indians) they had undertaken, which
was to put to death all the Strangers who were come into their Country, they in
one night rid their hands of all the most factious of that Nation, and not long
after forced all the rest, who had got together into several Bodies, and
intended to stand upon their guard, to retire to some other places, and to
leave that to their disposal.

Things being thus ordered, Desnambuc returns into France, and Sir Thomas
Warner into England, where their conquest and all their proceedings thereupon
were approved by the Kings their Masters; and having obtained a permission to
carry over some recruits of men, they came back to the Island in the quality of
Governors and Lieutenants, under the Kings of France and Great Britany.

But Desnambuc before he went over to cultivate and prosecute his conquest
imagined to himself, that the most likely way to have a powerful support in
France, such as should concern it self in the preservation of that Island, and
so to secure and promote his designs, would be to get together a Company of
persons of Authority, which should have the direction and signiory of the said
Island, and what others might afterward be conquered and reduced under the
jurisdiction of the King of France; upon this provision, that the said Company
should have a care, and make it their earnest business to supply the Colony
with men for the keeping and cultivation of it; as also with Ecclesiastics to
be maintained by allowances from the said Company; and lastly to build certain
Forts there for the security of the Inhabitants, and to furnish them with
Canon, Powder, and all sorts of Ammunition; in a word, to maintain a sufficient
Arsenal, wherein should be all things in readiness to oppose the Enemy.

This Company, or Society, was established in the month of October, in the
year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred twenty and six, as well for the
Government of S. Christophers, as those other Islands which are adjacent
thereto, and was approved by the King of France. Since that time it has been
further confirmed, and favored with some new Concessions, and very
advantageous privileges obtained from his most Christian Majesty the eighth of
March, one thousand six hundred forty and two, for all the Islands of America
lying between the tenth and thirtieth degree on this side the Equator.

Desnambuc having thus ordered his affairs in France, returns to S.
Christophers with a recruit of three hundred men, which the Gentlemen of the
Company newly erected had raised, in order to the advancement of that Colony:
He brought over a^^o along with him a considerable number of gallant
Volunteers, who looked on it as no small honor to run fortunes with so famous
an Adventurer, and to participate of his honorable hazards, out of a
confidence in process of time of reaping the fruit of his Conquests. They got
all safely to S. Christophers, about the beginning of the year, M. DC. XXVII.
and though they had suffered much during their Voyage, and were most of them
either sick or much weakened, yet were they not discouraged by those
difficulties, but reflecting that the noblest enterprises are many times
attended by great inconveniences, and that Roses cannot be gathered without
thorns, they immediately fell to work, and having in a short time learned of
those whom they found in the Isle what they were to do in order to their
further establishment, they behaved themselves answerably to the generous
designs of their Captain, who on his part more and more encouraged them by
words and example.

How the Island was to be divided between the two Nations had been designed
before that Voyage; but the particular Articles of the Division were solemnly
agreed to and concluded on the 13th of May, in the said year, M. DC. XXVII. For
to the end that every one might employ himself with some assurance upon his own
stock, and that no differences might arise between the French and the English,
M. Warner being returned from England some time before the arrival of
Desnambuc, where he had also recommended his affairs to the direction of a
Company which undertook the advancement of his enterprises, they divided the
whole Island between them, and set those Boundaries to their several divisions,
which are remaining to this day, but with this particular provision that
Fishing and Hunting should be equally free to the Inhabitants of both Nations,
and that the Salt-ponds, the more precious kinds of Timber fit for Dying, or
Joyners-work, Havens and Mines should in like manner be common.

Nay it was further agreed upon by certain Articles concluded on both sides,
that a good correspondence should be maintained between them, as also for the
preventing of all jealousies, and avoiding the occasions of disputes and
contestations, which might easily arise between people of different humors:
They further made a Defensive League for the mutual relief of each other, if
occasion should require, against the attempts of the common Enemy, or any other
who should endeavor to disturb the peace and quiet which they hoped to enjoy
together in those parts of the Country where they had planted themselves.

These things thus settled, the two Governors betrayed a certain emulation in
carrying on the establishment of their Colonies; in the prosecution whereof it
is most certain the English had very considerable advantages above the French
to compass their designs: For besides that that Nation, which is as it were
nursed up in the bosom of the Sea, can better endure the hardship and
inconveniences of long Voyages, and is better versed in the making of new
Plantations; the Company which was established at London for the management of
that of S. Christophers, made such generous provisions, that at its first
setlement it might be supplied with Men and Provisions, such as should be
necessary for their subsistence, and took so particular a care of all things,
that it was from time to time refreshed with new recruits, and whatever it
might stand in need of at the beginning, that it visibly prosper'd and advanced
while the French, which was unfurnished with all those assistances, seemed to
pine and languish, nay indeed would have quite fallen away if the affection
which it had for its chief Director, and the high esteem it had conceived of
his valor had not kept it up.

While therefore the French Colony was reduced to these extremities, and in a
manner subsisted only by its courage, that of the English being in a good
plight and condition, spread it self into a new one, which planted it self in
the Island of Mevis, which is divided from S. Christophers only by a small arm
of the Sea, as we have said elsewhere: But if the small number whereto the
French were reduced permitted them not to make the like progres^es, their
Governor Desnambuc had in the mean time the opportunity to make several useful
regulations for the better setlement of it: Of these we shall not think it
besides our design to insert here some few of the principal Articles, to the
end the memory of them may be preciously preserved for the instruction of
posterity.

In the first place, taking it into his consideration, that by peace and
concord small things come to be great, and that division distracts and
disperses the greatest, he ordered that all the Inhabitants of the Island who
were subject to his jurisdiction should maintain a perfect union among
themselves, and that he pressed and recommended to them upon all occasions as
the Pillar of their little State, and the sacred Channel through which they
were to expect the blessings both of Heaven and Earth abundantly to flow upon
them: And whereas it is impossible that in mutual conversation there should not
happen many things which might oftentimes offer some violence to that amicable
correspondence, if some present provision be not made to the contrary, he
desired that such differences might be with the soonest either decided or
smothered, and all be reconciled with meekness, and that if possible before the
setting of the Sun.

Another command of his was, that his people should be faithful to their trust,
and free, and sincere in all their affairs; obliging and charitable toward
their Neighbors, and as religious and punctual in the observance of the
promises they had made, as if they had been put into writing, and sealed and
delivered before witnesses, or Public Notaries.

And that their being continually employed about their Plantations might not
cause them to forget the business of War, and out of a distrust they would
degenerate in point of courage, through a long and undisturbed quiet; and that
if occasion should require they might be able to handle their Arms, and make
use of them with dexterity, he appointed certain days for the exercising of
them, that they might thereby be minded of the Rules of Military Discipline,
and ordered, that though all professed the cultivation of the earth, yet that
they should have the generous looks and demeanors of Soldiers, and that they
should at all times have about them the Badges and Liveries of that kind of
Life, and so never be seen out of their Quarters without Firearms, or at least
a Sword.

But if he required them to be thus qualified, to the end that when occasion
served they might make their enemies sensible of their valor and courage; he
on the other side obliged them to be mild and courteous one toward another,
and that the stronger should not take their advantages of the weaker. Thence it
came that he made this commendable order, which is still in force in all those
Islands; to wit, that Masters should not take Servants for any longer term then
three years, during which time they should be obliged to treat them with all
gentleness and moderation, and exact of them only such services as were
rational and answerable to their strength.

Nay his care and tenderness was very remarkable toward such as were newly
brought into the Country: To the end therefore that at their arrival they might
be supplied with all things requisite to secure them against the injuries of
the air, and that their labor might not be hindered through want of convenient
lodging, he desired, that as soon as the place which they had designed for
their building was uncovered, all the Neighborhood should help them in the
raising of it up: This commendable Institution was so well received, and so
carefully practiced, that all the Inhabitants generally acknowledged the equity
of it, and took a certain pleasure in making a voluntary contribution of their
pains and cares upon that occasion: Some went to cut down such Timber as might
be necessary; others were to find Reeds and Palm-leaves for palizadoes and
covering; the ablest Architects planted the forkes, raised the couples, and
fastened the covering, and all seemed to be kindly concerned in the work, so as
that the narrow structure was in a few days become tenantable, yet without any
charge to the owner, save only to see those charitable assistants supplied with
the ordinary drink of the Country, as long as they were at work upon his
account.

In fine, he had a particular aversion against those idle persons who are
basely content to live by the sweat and labor of others, as the Drones do on
the Honey which the laborious Be had brought into the common Treasury. But to
retrive in our days a little glimpse of the Golden Age, so much celebrated by
the Ancients, he incited all the Inhabitants to be liberal, and apt to
communicate to one another the goods which God had plentifully bestowed on
them, and to express their charity and hospitality toward all those who came
to visit them, that so there might afterward be no occasion to setle Inns and
Victualling-houses among them, as being places which for the most part served
only for retreats to slothful, debauched, and di^^^lute persons; and the
disorders and excesses committed therein were so great, as in time might hasten
the desolation and ruin of the whole Colony.

But while the French Governor was thus taken up with the ordering of his
little Republic, and kept up the spirits of his people with the expectation of
sudden recruits, the Gentlemen of the Company not much differing in
constitution from many of that Nation who think of reaping as soon as they have
disposed the seed into the ground, were for their parts in a continual
expectation of some Ships laden with the richest and most precious Commodities
of America, that so they might be reimburs'd with interest what they had laid
out upon the first embarquing, and till that return were come, they thought of
nothing less then running themselves into new charges. The Governor having
seriously taken it into consideration, that all the Letters he had sent to
those Gentlemen upon that occasion had not obtained any favorable answers from
them, thought it would be his best course, ere the Colony were reduced to
greater extremities, to come over to them in person, and by a second Voyage
undertake the solicitation of that relief, upon which the safety of their
first advancements, and the subsistence of the French in that Island wholly
depended. This good design, which the zeal he had for the glory of his Nation
had inspired him withal, proved as fortunate as he could have wished it: For
being come to Paris, he was so prevalent in representing the importance and
necessity of that Recruit to the Gentlemen of the Company, that they granted
him three hundred men, and Ships furnished with all necessary Provisions for
their transportation to S. Christophers.

This Recruit so impatiently expected by the Colony, happily arrived about the
beginning of August, M. DC. XXIX. and it was received with so great joy by them
who had so long stood in need of it, that now they thought nothing should
obstruct the execution of their designs. But it seems the prosperities of this
life are of a short continuance; they had hardly solac'd themselves two months
in the enjoyments of that happiness, ere there comes upon them a powerful Fleet
from Spain; Dom Frederick de Toledo, who had the command of it, had received
express order from his Catholic Majesty, that before he fell down to the
Havanna, Carthagena, and the other more eminent Ports of America, he should
touch at S. Christophers, and force thence all the English and French, who had
planted themselves there some years before.

The first act of hostility committed by this Naval force, which consisted of
four and twenty great Ships of burden, and fifteen Frigots, was the seizure of
some English Ships then lying at Anchor near the Island of Mevis; which done,
it came and cast Anchor in the Road of S. Christophers, within Cannonshot of
the Basse-terre, where Mons. de Rossey had the command in chief. The Forts of
both the Colonies were not yet in such a condition as to stand out a siege,
they were unfurnished with Provisions, and all the Ammunition, as to Powder and
Shot, in the whole Island could not amount to much; nay though both the Nations
should have joined all their forces together, yet could they not have opposed
so great an Army: But their courage in some measure supplied all those defects;
for that the Enemy should not brag of his having compassed his designs without
some opposition, Desnambuc dispatched out of the Cabes-terre, where he began to
fortify himself, all his most experienced Soldiers, in order to the relief of
the place which was threatened by the Enemy, and the English sent thither four
of their best Companies.

These Forces being come to the appointed Rendezvous, were jointly employed
with the Inhabitants of that Quarter to entrench themselves along the
Seacoast, to make a more vigorous resistance against the Enemy, and oppose his
landing; and no doubt they would have put him to some trouble, had they been
well commanded, and that first earnestness had not received some remission by
the fright which so seized the heart of de Rossey that he would have suffered
them to land, and make their approaches without any resistance, if a young
Gentleman, Nephew to Mons. Desnambuc, and elder Brother to Mons. Parquet the
present Governor of Martinico, had not get leave to pass over the Works, and
to engage the first Company of the Enemy that appeared upon the sands: He was
seconded by some Volunteers, who would needs participate of the glory of that
action; but he went before them all, both as to courage and resolution; for he
so gallantly engaged him who had the command of the party, that he killed him,
and several others of the most valiant about him, who had the confidence to
make trial of his valor: But being afterward forsaken by those who had
followed him in that encounter, he was overpowered by number, knocked down,
and carried into one of the enemies Ships, where after all remedies applied in
order to his recovery he died, to the great regret of both sides, as bemoaning
the misfortune of such a miracle of generosity and resolution.

During this encounter, which should have been maintained with more gallantry
by those who were in actual possession of the Island, the General of the
Spanish Fleet immediately gave order, that all the Ships should at the same
time send out their Shallops full of Soldiers well armed, which got a shore in
very good order: This added not a little to the fright de Rossey was in before,
inasmuch as being far from entertaining any thoughts of opposition, out of a
fear of being oppressed by that multitude, he thought it his only way to make
an honorable retreat before his people were encompassed of all sides. This
resolution tumultuously taken was grumbled at by those who wished the Enemy had
more dearly bought the desolation of their Colony; but such a general
consternation was there in that fatal conjuncture, that it was carried, they
should take their way toward the Cabes-terre, and that there it should be
taken into futher consideration what were best to be done in order to the
common safety.

The Spaniard perceiving that the French had quitted their Fort and their Works
without making any great resistance, imagined there might be some design in
that retreat, and that it had been made purposely to draw him into some
Ambuscado laid for him in the Woods. This suspicion kept him from prosecuting
his victory, and so occasioned his stay in the Quarter of the Basse-terre till
he had a better account brought him of the state of the whole Island, and
himself had considered what was most expedient for him to do, in order to a
more sudden and punctual execution of his Commission.

While the Enemy continued in this suspense, and considered with himself how to
compass his designs with least danger, Desnambuc extremely surpised at so
sudden a change, and so unexpected success, endeavored to comfort his own
people, and to encourage them to express their constancy in the supporting of
that miscarriage. He thereupon took occasion to remonstrate to them, That the
disgrace was not past remedy; That it was not to be imagined the enemy would
stay in the Island so long as to force all the Inhabitants out of it; That he
had affairs of greater weight, which called him elsewhere; That he would not
easily be drawn into the Forests, which it was absolutely necessary he should
pass through ere he could come into his Quarter; That they might put themselves
into such a posture of defense as should not only give a check to his progress,
but also force him to signalize his invasion with his own blood; And lastly,
that there were in his way some places so fortified by Nature, that a few men
might force him to find his way back again.

This advice was very solid, and might have prevailed somewhat with those to
whom it was given, but the terror wherewith their spirits were prepossessed,
and the consternation was so general, that it was not weighed as it deserved.
The business therefore being taken into deliberation, it was concluded, that
the Island should be deserted, and that the Colony should transport it self to
some other place which might give less occasion of jealousy to the Spaniard,
and lie more out of the ordinary course of his Fleets. Desnambuc foreseeing
that what pretencesoever might be made for the taking of that resolution, it
would still be chargeable with somewhat of cowardice and baseness, such as
should blast the opinion conceived of the gallantry of the French, and of a
sudden smother the great hopes which some had of the advancement of their
Colony, could not be persuaded to give his approbation thereto. However, though
he were of a contrary sentiment, that it might not be said he forsook in so sad
a conjuncture those whom he had brought thither through so many Seas and
dangers, he complied with their humor, and embarked himself with them in
certain Ships which chanced to be in the Haven; and so to avoid a greater
disorder, doing his own inclinations a violence, he only assured them that he
should one day reproach them with the little esteem they made of his
remonstrances.

The Quarters where the English had themselves were also in a great disorder;
they had intelligence brought them, that the enemy was become master of all the
Basse-terre; That he had demolished the Fortress of the French, after he had
removed the pieces that were in it; That he had already burnt all their Huts,
and made havoc of all the Plantations of the Quarter. They were in perpetual
expectation when he should come, and fall on them with all his forces, and in
that apprehension some endeavored to make their escape by Sea, or shelter
themselves in the Mountains, while others somewhat more courageous were
consulting how to send Deputies to Dom Frederic, to entreat him to admit of
some accommodation: But all the Answer they received, was an express command
immediately to depart the Island, which if they did not, they should be treated
with all the rigor which the Law of Arms permits to be used toward those who
against all right possess themselves of what belongs not to them.

To facilitate the departure which Dom Frederic had so imperiously commanded,
he gave order that those Ships which his Fleet had taken away from the English
near the Island of Mevis should be restored to them, and that they should
embarque without any delay, and immediately set sail for England. But whereas
it was impossible those Vessels should contain so great a number of people, he
permitted the supernumerary to continue in the Island till they had a
favorable opportunity for their transportation.

These things dispatched, Dom Frederic weighed Anchor, in order to the
continuation of his Voyage, but as soon as the Fleet was out of sight, the
English who had been left behind in the Island began to rally, and took a
resolution courageously to carry on the setlement of their Colony.

While these things were in agitation at S. Christophers, the French who had
left it at the beginning of the distraction had suffered so many inconveniences
at Sea, partly through want of Provisions, and partly by reason of contrary
Winds, that they were forced to put in at the Islands of S. Martin and
Montserrat, after they had by the way touched at that of Antego. They wished
themselves so happy, as that they might have settled in any of those places; but
they looked on them as dreadful Deserts in comparison of that out of which they
had been so unhappily forced: The pleasant Idea of that was still before their
eyes, it was the continual subject of their regret; and the delightful
remembrance of that pleasant abode, to the recovery whereof they were by Divine
Providence re-invited by ways unknown to them, raised in them a desire to be
informed what condition the Spaniard had left it in, since they were then so
near it: To satisfy that commendable curiosity, they sent one of their Ships
to S. Christophers, which returning gave them an account, that the Enemies
Fleet was gone; and that the English who were left behind were courageously
employed in rebuilding their Hutts, planting Provisions, and repairing their
desolations.

This unexpected good News revived their decayed hopes, and heightened the
courage of those who were most cast down, so that there needed not many
arguments to persuade them to a return into that delightful Country which was
already possessed of their hearts and tenderest affections.

Being arrived there, every one resumed his former place, with a resolution to
make an absolute setlement; but the Famine, which pressed hard upon them, would
no doubt have checked the progress of all these promising designs, and they
would have been crushed by the extraordinary labors which they were at the
same time obliged to undergo, as well in rebuilding their houses, as planting
things necessary for their subsistence, if in those pressing extremities God
had not directed thither for their relief some Ships belonging to the United
Provinces, which, finding what a deplorable condition they were in, generously
supplied them with provisions, clothes, and all things necessary; nay to put an
absolute obligation upon them, they had no other security for their
satisfaction then their bare words.

The French, having thus s^^sonably overcome the inconveniences which they had
^^^uggled with from the first beginning of their establishment, employed
themselves so earnestly afterward in their Plantations, that, through the
blessing of God on their l^bours, the Earch furnished them with Provisions, and
Tobacco in such abundance, that they honestly satisfied their charitable
Creditors, and in a short time were better accomm^dated with all things then
they had b^^^ before their d^f^at by the Spaniards: Yet were they still in wa^^
of Men to carry on their Enterprises, and the Commerce which b^^^^ to be
established among them. To remedy that, Desnambuc, who found his constancy
attended with so good success, thought it the surest and most likely expedient,
to per^^t the principal Inhabitants of the ^^^^ny to return into France to make
Levies there, and to bring over what numbers they should raise on their own
charge. This prudent advice being accordingly put in execution, the Island was
in a few years supplied with abundance of gallant persons, who brought it into
reputation.

The English Colony made also a shift in a short time to make up all the
b^eaches it had received by the invasion of the Spaniards: The Company at
London, which had undertaken the direction of it, sending over continual
supplies of Men and refreshments, the two Quarters whereof the English were
possessed in the Island of S. Christophers became too narrow to maintain so
great a multitude, insomuch that besides the Island of Mevis, which they had
peopled before their defeat by the Spaniards, they grew so powerful, as in less
then four years to spread themselves into new Plantations in the Islands of ^he
Barbouthos, Mountserrat, Antego, and the Barbados, which are grown very
numerous there, and famous for the Trade of the rich Commodities they are
furnished with, as may be seen by the particular descriptions we have given
thereof in the precedent Book of this History.

What Colonies the Dutch have in the Caribby-Islands were established some time
after those of the French and English, and their establishments were not upon
the account of the States, but upon that of some particular Companies of
Merchants, who, the better to carry on the Trade which they have in all the
Islands whereof the English and French are possessed, were desirous to have
some places of safe retreat for the refreshment of their Ships. The most
ancient of those Colonies which have any dependence on the States General of
the United Provinces, is that in the Island of S. Eustace: It was established
much about the same time that Sir Thomas Warner settled that of Mont-serrat,
which was in the Year M. DC. XXXII. It is considerable upon this account, that
it is a place naturally well fortified; as also for the number and quality of
the Inhabitants, the abundance of good Tobacco which it still yields; and for
several other remarkable advantages, whereof we have given an account in the
fifth Chapter of the former Book.

Monsieur Desnambuc expressed no less earnestness and generosity in the
dilatation of his Colony then other Nations did in that of theirs; but having
not been so seasonably relieved as was requisite at the beginning, and his
designs having been many times checked by several unhappy obstructions, he had
this further displeasure, to see diverse of the most considerable Islands
possessed by others before he was in a condition to put in for a share, and
dilate his Conquest beyond the limits of S. Christophers. He had a long time
before cast his eye on that of Gardeloupe, as being one of the noblest and
greatest Islands of all the Caribbies; but while he was taking order for the
transporting of men thither, he was prevented in his design by Monsieur de l'
Olive, one of the principal Inhabitants of his own Colony, who making his
advantage of a Voyage he had made into France about some private affairs of his
own, as he pretended, joined with Monsieur du Plessis, and some Merchants of
Dieppe, for the establishment of a Colony there by Commission from the Company
which had the direction of the Islands of America.

These two Gentlemen being made joint Governors of the Island of Gardeloupe,
and invested with equal authority, arrived there the 28th of June, M. DC. XXXV.
with a Company of five hundred men, who presently after their arrival were
pressed with a famine, and diverse diseases, which took away a great number of
them. It is conceived that the former misfortune happened to them upon this
occasion, that they had planted themselves at their first landing in those
parts of the Island where the soil was most barren, and unfit for cultivation
of any in it, and that they had upon too light grounds entered into a War with
the Caribbians, the originary Inhabitants of the place, who might have
plentifully furnished them with most of the provisions necessary for their
subsistence at the beginning, till the earth and their own industry had
supplied them better. Diseases were the consequences of that unwholesome
nourishment which hunger forced them to make use of for want of better: whereto
this may be added, that the ground being not reduced to culture, the air was
the more easily corrupted.

Du Plessis reflecting on the misfortunes and inconveniences which daily fell
one in the neck of another upon that unsettled Colony, and having just grounds
to fear that other yet greater might happen to it, took it so much to heart,
that he dyed out of pure grief, in the seventh month after his arrival. The
loss of him was much regretted by all the French, who had always expressed a
great submission to his advice, and much love and respect to his person. He was
a man of singular prudence, of so affable and obliging a disposition, that he
gained the affections of all that treated with him.

After the departure of Monsieur du Plessis, de l' Olive became sole Governor.
This latter was a Person of an humor as active and stirring as that of his
Colleague was gentle and moderate; and he so much harkned to the violent
counsels of some restless spirits, who like so many pestilent Ear-wigs were
continually putting him upon new projects, that he soon after engaged himself
in that fatal War against the Caribbians, which had almost proved the
destruction of that newly-planted Colony. True it is, that at first he pressed
so hard upon them, as to force them to leave him the absolute possession of
Gardeloupe; but in regard that to compass the designs which he had framed to
himself from the time of his arrival he was necessitated to commit several
cruelties, such as the very Barbarians themselves would not have exercised upon
their greatest enemies, it proved such a blast to his reputation, that the
approvers of his conduct were only some sanguinary persons and Desperadoes.

The poor Caribbians which the Governor had forced out of the Island of
Gardeloupe retreated into that of Dominico: Those of the same Nation who were
possessed of the latter entertained them kindly, and to give them a greater
assurance how much they were sensible of their misfortune, they proffered to
join with them to revenge by the way of Arms the injury which had been done
them; a proffer too obliging to be refused. Their forces being thus united,
they made several incursions into Gardeloupe, and became such goads and thorns
in the sides of the French, that they were forced to give over the culture of
Tobacco, nay indeed the planting of those provisions which were necessary for
their subsistence, to the end they might always be in Arms, to prevent the
attempts and designs of those subtle enemies, whom they had by their own
imprudence so much exasperated against them.

This cruel War, which lasted near four years, reduced the Colony to great
extremities, and brought it to so deplorable a condition, that it was out of
repute in all places; and upon its being continually pestered by the incursions
and depredations of the irreconcilable Caribbians, it was concluded to be at
no great distance from its utter destruction. The French being brought to this
lowness, it pleased God that the Governor de l' Olive lost his sight,
whereupon the Gentlemen of the Company sent over Monsieur Auber to be Governor
of it, who remedied all the precedent disorders, appeased all troubles, and
settled that Peace which afterward brought in Trading and plenty of all things;
as we shall show more at large in the third Chapter of this Moral History.

As soon as M. Desnambuc had received intelligence that Gardeloupe was
inhabited, he resolved with the first convenience to setle himself in some
other of the best Islands which were yet at his choice; and to prevent a second
supplantation, finding that he had about him a considerable number of resolute
persons, and furnished with all provisions of War, and what was necessary for
the belly, and all things requisite for the prosecution of such enterprises, he
went in person to take possession of the Island of Martinico, which having
done, he left there for his Lieutenant Mr. du Pont, and for Commander in chief
Mr. de la Vallee. Not long after dying at S. Christophers, he left all his
Estate, and Titles of what kind soever, which he had in Martinico, which he had
peopled at his own charge, to M. Parquet his Nephew, who is the present Lord
and Governor of it, as we have said elsewhere.

This Gentleman was a person of much gallantry, of easy access, familiar with
all, and master of a happy kind of insinuation, such as gently forced the love
and obedience of those who were under him. It is related of him, that the
English having gone a little beyond the boundaries which by the mutual
agreement concluded between both Nations had been set for the distinction of
their several Quarters, he went to those of the English, attended by a small
number of persons, and spoke with the English Governor, who expected him with
a considerable number of Soldiers: But he behaved himself with so much courage
and resolution, and gave such good reasons, intermixed with menaces, for what he
did, that the English Governor granted him what he desired. That accident
shows how careful he was to preserve the Rights and Privileges of his Nation;
and what he did then had this further consequence, that the two Governors were
ever afterward very good friends.

CHAP. II. Of the Establishments of the French in the Islands of S.
Bartholomew, S. Martin, and Sante-Cruce.
AFter the death of Monsieur Desnambuc, one Monsieur du Halde, who was his
Lieutenant in that Government, was nominated to be Governor in Chief by the
Gentlemen of the Company: But not long after, the said du Halde coming over
into France, Cardinal Richelieu, whose care extended to the most remote places
where the French had any thing to do, undertook the conservation and
advancement of that Colony in America, out of an endeavor to render the name
of France as glorious in that part of the new World, as it was here. To carry
on that design he thought it requisite that the Islands should be supplied with
a Governor accordingly: Having therefore some while sought for a person fit
for that Employment, one eminent for his conduct, prudence, generosity, and the
experience requisite for so great a charge, he at last pitched upon Monsieur de
Lonvilliers Poincy Knight, a Gentleman of a very ancient House.

The Cardinal presented this excellent Person to King Lewis the XIII. who
approving the choice, invested him with the Charge of Governor, and
Lieutenant General under his Majesty in the Islands of America: Whereupon
Letters Patents were granted him in September M. DC. XXXVIII. That quality had
not been given to any of those who had preceded him in the Government of those
Islands.

In the Year M. DC. XXXIX. the said new Governor setting sail from Diep about
the midst of January, arrived about a month after at the Caribbies, and was
first received at Martinico by the Inhabitants in Arms. He afterward went to
Gardeloupe and S. Christophers; but his noblest reception was at the latter:
All the French Inhabitants being in Arms received him in the quality of General
with universal applause, and he was conducted to the Church, attended by his
Gentlemen and Guards, where Te Deum was sung.

Immediately upon his reception the Island began to put on a new face, and
within a short time after things were visibly changed from better to better;
insomuch that he not only answered but exceeded the expectations of his Majesty
and the Cardinal. One of the first things he did, was to give order for the
building of Churches in several Quarters of the Island: He took care that the
Priests should be well lodged and maintained, that they might not be diverted
from the employments of their Function: He made such provisions in the
administration of justice, as rendered it expeditious, and without Fees, by
means of a Council consisting of the most prudent and experienced among the
Officers of the Island: His vigilance reformed and prevented the disorders
which easily creep in among persons shuffled together from diverse places, and
of different humors: His prudence in composing and settling matters of greatest
difficulty was equally admired by those who were under his Government, and his
Neighbors of other Nations. That greatness of mind, which successfully guided
him to the accomplishment of all his designs, made him dreadful to all restless
and dis-satisfy'd spirits: His affability, easiness of access, and his kind
entertainment toward Strangers, brought Trading and plenty into the Island;
and his goodness and liberality justly gained the hearts and affections of the
French: In a word, his Generosity signalized in many occurrences as well in
France, during the noble Employments he had in his Majesty's Armies, as in
America since his Government there, in the preservation, dilatation, and
reduction of so many considerable places, wrought such a terror in the
Spaniard, that he never since proffered to oppose his glorious Enterprises.

Having settled S. Christophers in good order as to Trading, and all other
Concerns, and made it the most flourishing Island of all the Caribbies, as we
have represented it in the fourth Chapter of the precedent Book, he afterward
extended the French Colony into those of S. Bartholomew, S. Martins, and Santa
Cruce, whereof we have given an account in their proper places, yet so as we
still have many considerable circumstances to deliver concerning the Conquest
of the Island of Santa Cruce, which we shall here take occasion to insert.

The Island of Santa Cruce has been subject to many Masters in a short time,
and for many years together the English and Dutch had some contestations about
the propriety of it: At last they made a division of it between them; but in
the Year M. DC. XLIX. the English having observed that they much exceeded the
Dutch in number, forced them to depart the Island. But they also continued not
long Masters of it; for soon after the Spaniards who were Inhabitants of the
Island of Porto-Rico made an incursion into it, burnt their houses, put to the
sword all the English they found in Arms, and ordered the rest with their
baggage and wives to be transported to the Barbouthos.

Having thus laid the Island desolate, as they were setting things in order for
their returning aboard their Vessels, and to take their course back to
Porto-Rico, there arrives thither a Ship from the Islands of S. Eustace and S.
Martins, wherein there were a considerable number of men, who having received
intelligence of the defeat of the English, and imagining that the Spaniards
were gone, would have revived the pretensions of the Dutch to that Island: but
the Spaniards having the advantage, as being ten to one, the Dutch were forced
to accept of such terms of accommodation as the others were pleased to give
them. The crafty Spaniards had indeed promised them good quarter, but their
design was to transport them to Porto-Rico to their Governor, who, according
to the Spanish humor, would not have treated them over-christianly.

But as good fortune would have it, just as the Spaniards were preparing for
their return with the Dutch Prisoners, who had so unfortunately fallen into
their hands, two French Ships well manned, and furnished with all sorts of
Provisions and Ammunition, arrived in the Island, sent thither by the French
General de Poincy, to send the Spaniard packing thence, and take possession of
it for the King of France. This relief came in very seasonably for the
deliverance of the surpised Dutch; for the Spaniards, perceiving the French
landing cheerfully and in good order, and making a considerable Body of gallant
men, and ready to fight, immediately let go their Prisoners; and after a short
capitulation, the French sent them an express order to be gone aboard their
Ships, with a menace that if they did not, they would fall upon them as
Enemies, and that they were not to expect any Quarter. The Spaniards thought it
their best course rather to comply then stand to the hazard of an engagement,
though they much exceeded the French in number.

The French General taking it into his consideration, of what importance the
Island in time might be, especially in order to the facilitation of other
acquests of greater concernment, thought it worthy his endeavors to secure
what he had so fortunately possessed himself of, and thereupon sent a prudent
and experienced Governor to command there under him: The person he pitched on
for that Employment was Monsieur Auber, Major of the Island of S. Christophers,
who had exercised that Charge with great approbation for many years together;
but now he was advanced to the quality of Governor of that Island: He died in
the exercise of that Charge, to the great regret of all the Inhabitants, after
he had settled the Island in good order, recovered its ruins, and laid the
foundations of a Fort which he had designed himself for the security of such
Ships as should afterward come into the Haven, and to defeat the hopes of the
Spaniards to make any more incursions there, This reduction of the Island under
the power of the French, as we have described it, happened in the Year M. DC. L.

The Dutch had built a very fair Church upon a pleasant ascent of this Island,
in the form of a Cross, which may still be standing, if the Spaniards, who
should have a respect for that sacred Sign which was on the top of the Steeple,
have not ruined it. The French are obliged for that House of Prayer to the
devotion and zeal of a certain Company of Merchants belonging to Flushing, who
first peopled the Island by a Commission from the States General.

The present King of France being informed of all the glorious actions done in
those parts by Monsieur de Poincy, and considering how necessary his continual
residence in America was, granted him new Letters Patents, whereby he confirmed
him in the Charge of Governor and Lieutenant General in those places; and the
Queen, during her Regency, gave him a great commendation for his noble
Enterprises, and Fidelity to the Kings service.

In the Year M. DC. LI. the French Governor, with the Kings consent, treated
with the Gentlemen of the Company we mentioned before, and having re^mburs'd
them all the charges they had been a^ in the establishment of that Colony,
purchased to himself the Seigniory and Fee-simple of the Islands of the
Christophers, S. Bartholomew, S. Martin, Santa-cruce, and (...) Islands, and
that in the name, and for the benefit of ^is Order of Malta; and it is one of
the noblest, richest, and most honorable S^^g^iories of any that Order enjoys
under the Sovereignty of his Majesty of France: And since that time the said
King has made an absolute bequest of all those Islands to the Order of Malta,
reserving to himself the Sovereignty thereof, and the homage of a Crown of
Gold, to be presented at every change of King, of the value of a thousand
Crowns; as it appears by the Letters Patents dated in March, M. DC. LIII.

Monsieur du Parquet, Governor of Martinico, did the like for the Islands of
Martinico, Granada, and Sainta^ousia: Monsieur d' ^^well, Governor of
Garacloupe, did the same thing for the Islands of Gardeloupe, Marigalanta,
Desirado, and the Saints. The two last mentioned are not yet inhabited^ but he
has purchased the Seigniory of those places by way of advance, that others
might not without b^each of civility possess themselves thereof: For it is to
be observed, that the Company which had the direction of the Islands of
America, but is now dissolved, had obtained of the King all the Islands of the
Caribbies, as well those then inhabited, as those in process of time to be so:
So that these Gentlemen, who have treated with the Company, would needs have
mentioned in their Grant, some Islands which are not yet inhabited, yet lie
near and very convenient for them, insomuch as when they shall have men enough
in their other Islands, they will be the more easily transplanted into those,
unless the English or Dutch chance to be beforehand with them: For it is a
general Rule, That a Country destitute of Inhabitants belongs to him who first
possesses himself of it; so that neither the King of France's Grant, nor yet
that of the Company does any thing more then secure those Gentlemen against the
pretentions of such of their own Nation as might oppose their designs.

Thus of all the Islands which the French are possessed of in America the King
of France reserves to himself the Sovereignty, and M. M. de Poincy, du Parquet,
and d' Houel have the Seigniory thereof, without any acknowledgment of the
Company, which has absolutely quitted all its pretentions to the said
Gentlemen.

As for the English Governors of S. Christophers, Sir Thomas Warner dying,
after he had gloriously established his Countrymen in the Caribbies, and left
the Island of S. Christophers inhabited by twelve or thirteen thousand English,
Mr. Rich, who was the principal Captain in the Island, was advanced to that
Charge; and this latter also dying, Mr. Everard was advanced to the Government,
which he still exercises with general approbation, as we had occasion to show
when we treated of the Island of S. Christophers.

At the first coming of the foreign Nations into the Islands, they were lodged
much after the same manner as the natural Inhabitants of the Country, in little
cotts and hutts made of the wood they had felled upon the place as they cleared
the ground. There are still to be seen, in several of the newlyplanted
Colonies, many of those weak structures, which are sustained only by four or
six forks planted in the ground, and instead of walls are encompassed and
palizado'd only with reeds, and covered with Palm or Plantane* leaves,
Sugarcanes, or some such material: But in all the other Islands, where these
Nations are better settled and accommodated, there* are many very fair houses of
Timber, Stone, and Brick, built after the same manner as those in their own
Countries, save that for the most part they are but one or two Stories high at
the most, that they may the more easily resist the winds, which sometimes blow
in those parts with extraordinary violence. Of these Edifices we have spoken
already in several places of the precedent Book, when we gave a particular
account of the several Islands.

But we have this particularly to add here, that the English* are the best
accommodated for Lodgings of any of the Inhabitants of those Islands, and have
their houses well furnished, which is to be attributed to their constant abode
in their Colonies, where they endeavor to get all conveniences as much as if
they were the places of their birth: They are also most of them married, whence
it comes that they take greater pains to supply themselves with all things
requisite, then those are apt to do who lead single lives, as most of the
French do.

We had an intention to conclude this Chapter with the course taken by M. Auber
to make up a peace with the Caribbians, upon his taking possession of the
Government of Gardeloupe; but in regard the discourse is somewhat long, and may
conduce much to the discovery of the humors and dispositions of those Indians,
of whom we are to treat more at large in this second Book, we thought it better
disposed into a Chapter apart.

CHAP. III. Of the Establishment of the French Colony in the Island of
Gardeloupe, consequently to the Peace concluded with the Caribbians of
Dominico, in the Year M. DC. XL.
THe first among the French who took possession of the Island of Gardeloupe,
landed there in the Year 1635. by order from a Company of Merchants of the City
of Deep, which, under the Authority of the General Company of the Islands of
America constituted at Paris, sent thither two Gentlemen, du Plessis and de l'
Olive, to command there upon their account: But the former dying some few
months after his establishment, and the other becoming unfit for the government
of a new-planted Colony, through the loss of his sight, and his continual
indispositions, as we have mentioned in the precedent Chapters, the French
Governour-General took order that the Inhabitants of that Island should be
supplied with all things necessary: For it is probable they would have
absolutely forsaken it, had not the said Governor sent over recruits of
Auxiliaries to them, under the conduct of Vernade and Sabouilly, to oppose the
designs of the Caribbians, who with much animosity disputed the possession of
it with them: So that if that Colony is not obliged for its establishment to
the General de Poincy, this at least must be acknowledged, that its
preservation and subsistence was the effect of his care. He accordingly
approved and confirmed, in the Kings name, the nomination which the Company of
the Islands had made of M. Auber to be Governor of that Island.

This new Governor took the Oath of Allegiance before the General, the 20th of
October M. DC. XL. but before he fell down to S. Christophers, the Ship which
had brought him out of France into America casting Anchor near Dominico, many
of the Savages, who had observed the Ship at a distance, and concluded from the
expressions of friendship which had been made to them, that they had no enemies
in that Vessel, grew so confident as to come into it. It fortunately happened,
that those who had come out upon the discovery were some of the chiefest
Captains of the Island: M. Auber resolved to make all the advantage he could of
that opportunity, imagining it might conduce very much to the making of an
alliance with that people, which had been exasperated and incensed against the
French by the violences and cruel usage of de l' Olive, one of his Predecessors
in that Charge, as also by the ill conduct of those who commanded the Recruits
which the General had sent over for the security of the Island: And having
withal an inkling that those of that Nation are easily drawn in by kindnesses
and little Presents, he omitted nothing which he conceived might promote his
design.

He thereupon acquainted them, that he was newly come from France, and that he
was sent over to be Governor of Gardeloupe; that he had been* much troubled to
hear of the, differences which for some years had continued between them and
the French; that he was come with an intention to make a friendly composure
thereof; and that he would be their Companion and good Neighbor, and live with
them, as their late old friend M. du Plessis had done. These proffers were
interrupted now and then with glasses of Aqua-vitae, which he ordered ever and
anon to be presented to them.

These Savages finding so free and cordial a reception, after they had
discoursed a while among themselves, in the Language they speak, concerning
their military affairs, which is understood only by the most ancient Conductors
of their Enterprises, resolved to accept of the proffer which had been made
them, and to renew the ancient amity, by renouncing whatever might tend to the
prosecution of that bloody War which had so much incommodated both parties. But
before they would promise any thing, they asked Monsieur Auber, whether l'
Olive, Sabouilly, and all those who had followed their violent courses, should
be forced to depart the Island? Whereto it being answered that they should,
they replied, that it must necessarily be so, and that otherwise they should
still have an animosity against the French, saying, l' Olive and Sabouilly are
not good for the Caribbians: Those were their words. Whereupon M. Auber having
assured them that their desires should be satisfied, and that for his part he
would be good to them, if they on their parts would be good; which they
promised to be. These things concluded, he gave them a very noble treatment,
bestowed some Presents among them, and dismissed them the most satisfied people
in the world.

From the road of Dominico M. Auber went to Gardeloupe, where having disposed
his equipage he returned to S. Christophers, to give the General an account of
what had past, who was well satisfied with the choice which the Company had
made of him for that Employment.

Being returned to his Government, he was gallantly received by all the
Inhabitants, who esteemed him for his experience in whatever might contribute
to the advancement of newlyplanted Colonies, as also out of a persuasion, that
his prudence would remedy the disorders past, and his generosity oppose the
present difficulties, and undertake all things requisite for the quiet and
welfare of the Island; and his mildness and affability would gain him the
affections of all there, as they had done at S. Christophers, where he had been
accounted one of their best Captains. His Commission was read and published two
Sundays together, at the head of all the Companies of the Island.

The War which had been fomented between the Savages and the French by the ill
counsel of some restless spirits, and the credulity of the precedent Governor
who had harkned thereto, together with the differences, jealousies and
animosities which those boutefeus had raised among the principal Inhabitants of
the Island, had rendered it the most desolate of all the Colonies of America:
Want of provisions had reduced many to so great extremities, that life grew
wearisom to them, and death was the object of their wishes: The continual fear
they were in of being surpised by the Savages, obliged them to be always in
Arms, and to leave their Gardens and Plantations uncultivated; and the
insupportable treatment they received from some Officers who abused their
Authority, had brought them to the threshold of inevitable destruction.

But as soon as M. Auber had assumed the Government, by the unanimous
acclamations of all the Inhabitants, and brought them the news of an assured
peace, which he had concluded with the Savages their neighbors, and hoped very
suddenly to see confirmed by all the assurances could be expected from a Nation
so unciviliz'd as that of the Caribbians, the disturbers of the public
tranquillity were dispersed, and the well-affected found themselves in safety
under the prudent conduct of so worthy a Governor, who used all possible
endeavors to bring the Island to a perfect setlement: Insomuch that the Colony
seemed to have put on a new face; Justice began to flourish; the unity and
labors of the Inhabitants retriv'd the plenty, trading, and peace, which had
been forced thence before; and the pious example of the Commander in chief had
the expected influence over all the members of that Colony.

Though he had motion'd a Treaty of peace with the Savages, yet did he conceive
it expedient, for fear of a surprise, that the Inhabitants should still keep
their Guards: Accordingly he planted Sentinels in all those places where the
Caribbians might most easily land without being discovered: He changed the
Guards, and placed them in other more advantageous places; and he thought it
prudence to keep under those who would have ruined the first foundations he had
laid of the firm peace and alliance with those reconciled enemies, charging the
former by express prohibitions to forbear all acts of hostility, that they
might not by their particular animosities obstruct the general agreement
wherein all the Inhabitants were so much concerned.

The said Governor taking further into his consideration, that the Islands
were to subsist by Trading; that nothing puts a greater slurre upon them then
the bad Commodities vented therein; and that Tobacco was the only Commodity at
that time of any esteem at Gardeloupe; and that several persons put off what
was not merchantable, which procedure had caused the Island to be slighted by
Foreigners, who upon that account had forborne sending any Ships thither; he
appointed certain persons who well understood the management of Tobacco, and
these carefully examined the making up of it, and had order to cast into the
Sea what was decayed, or wanted those qualities it ought to have to be
allowable.

This good order taken, as well in order to military affairs as policy, brought
the Island in a short time into a flourishing condition; and the report of its
amendment occasioned the coming thither of many Merchants, and invited a great
number of considerable families to setle themselves there.

But to return to the Savages who had visited M. Auber in his Ship at his first
arrival, and had treated with him about a peace, upon the conditions
beforementioned; they were no sooner got home into their Country, where they
were expected with much impatience, upon this score, that they had continued a
great while in the Ship, but they celebrated all over the Island the noble
entertainment they had received from the Governor newly come from France. The
considerable Presents he had bestowed on them was an authentic assurance of
his goodness and liberality. To this they added, that their enemies, l' Olive
and Sabouilly, being ordered to depart Gardeloupe, they had made a peace with
that brave Companion, who had treated them so kindly, that he was worthy of
their alliance. That he might take no further occasion of distrust, they urged
the necessity there was that they should forbear making those incursions into
Gardeloupe which they had been wont to make in the time of War: And that when
certain news came that the new Governor was fully established in his
Government, they would give him a visit, carry him Presents, and solemnly
confirm that peace which was likely to prove so advantageous for the future.
The Caribbians, who had lost many of their men in the former engagements
against the French, and grew weary of dealing with such expert enemies, were
glad to hear what was proposed to them by the principal Captains in their
Country: So that they approved all that had passed between them and the French
Governor, and behaved themselves as they should do in order to the
confirmation of the peace.

About the space of five months the Savages punctually observed the promise
they had made to M. Auber, of not giving any further disturbance to the French:
Imagining that time sufficient to let all the Inhabitants of Gardeloupe know
what alliance had been contracted at the road of Dominico, they resolved to
send thither a solemn Deputation, to confirm the peace, and wish the Governor
all prosperity. There was a great competition among the Savages who should be
honored with a Commission of so great importance: They resolved then, to
satisfy the most eminent among them who were competitors for that Embassy, to
pitch upon two of their most ancient and most renowned Captains, and to give
each of them a considerable Convoy, consisting of the choice of their bravest
Officers and Soldiers: And that there might be no jealousy among the
Captains, they thought it fit they should depart in two several Piragas, each
of them with his retinue, and in such order as that one should precede the
other by one day.

The chiefest of these Ambassadors was called Captain Amichon, a person very
considerable among them, and he was accompanied by thirty of the most active
and most expert of Dominico. M. Auber was wont to say, that he had never seen
any Savages so well shaped and active as they were. These Savages therefore,
relying on the promise he had made them in the Road, landed at Gardeloupe,
where hearing by the Guards that M. Auber was in the Island, and in good
health, they confidently landed, and desired to see him, having in the mean
time left some of the less considerable of their party to look to the Piraga.
While some went to acquaint the Governor with the arrival of these Deputies of
Dominico, Captain Amichon, who was to be the Speaker, dispatched away two of
his retinue laden with the best fruits of their Country, which they had
brought along with them for a Present.

The French Governor was extremely glad to hear of their arrival, and having
immediately commanded all those of his household and the whole Quarter not to
give them the least occasion to fear any ill treatment, he would needs go
himself to meet them, with a countenance which sufficiently expressed how
welcome they were. We shall not trouble our selves to insert here the Speech
and Complements made by Captain Amichon at this first interview: He was one of
those who had visited M. Auber in his Ship, so that he easily knew him again.
He immediately gave him to understand, that he was come to confirm what they
had resolved together at the Road of Dominico concerning the peace; and that
all the Caribbians of his Country were desirous of it. The French Governor in
answer thereto, made them sensible as well by his Interpreter as his
countenance, that for his part he would inviolably observe that union, provided
they were not the first breakers of it. Having afterward brought them to his
house, and knowing that good cheer was the best seal could be put to that
Treaty of peace, he called for some Aqua-vitae, and ordered to be brought what
was most delicious in the Island: At last he crowned the Entertainment with
Presents of all the curiosities most in esteem among the Savages. And that all
the Deputies might participate of the good cheer and liberality of the
Governor, those who had been treated went to relieve those who were left
behind to look to the Piraga, who also in their turn received the same
treatment and Presents which the others had had. Captain Amichon forgot not,
according to the custom they observe toward their friends, to take M. Auber's
name, and to give him his own.

Having been thus civilly received and treated, they returned very joyfully to
their Piraga, and set sail toward their own Island: They met at a certain
rendezvous, which they had agreed upon before they had left Dominico, with the
other Piraga, which brought over the other Ambassador, whose name was Captain
Baron, with his retinue. This second Captain understanding from the former what
reception he and his retinue had at Gardeloupe, got thither the next day. This
Baron had been a great friend of M. du Plessis, who dy^d Governor of
Gardeloupe, but having equal authority with M. de l' Olive, his Colleague, who
after du Plessis death imprudently engaged the French into a War with the
Savages.

This Captain then, who had often visited M. du Plessis, and remembered the
friendship he had born him, being satisfied of the generosity of the French,
went ashore with his Company, and was conducted to the Governor's, who treated
him with the same ceremonies as he had done the former: But when he came to
hear that the Captain had been intimately acquainted with M. du Plessis, and
that there had been a familiar correspondence between them, he treated him with
greater testimonies of affection then he had done the others, and entered into
a particular friendship with him, receiving his name, and giving him his own.
Thus was the latter Deputation dismissed with greater satisfaction then the
former, and promised to continue their visits for the future: But both of them
gave a large account at their Carbetts, of the civilities and good
entertainment of the new Governor.

Captain Baron, who had been so kindly received at his first visit, staid not
long ere he made a second: At the latter the Governor showed him one of M. du
Plessis Sons, to whom the Captain made a thousand caresses, in remembrance of
his Father, whom he called his Companion, and the Friend of his Nation. True it
is, that Gentleman had insinuated himself into the affection of those
Barbarians; who had a respect for his merits and excellent endowments.

After this visit, and several others which the Caribbians daily made, M. Auber
would be assured of them by Hostages, that they would observe the alliance: To
that purpose he applied himself to Captain Baron, with whom he had contracted a
greater friendship then with the others, and whom he called his Companion, as
succeeding to the alliance there had sometime been between him and M. du
Plessis. M. Auber asked him one day, whether he thought it not rational, that,
to be assured of those of his Nation, he should require some of their children
to be delivered up to him as Hostages? The Captain, who was of a judgment and
understanding much beyond the ordinary rate of Savages, immediately replied,
that the mutual safety was to be procured upon equal conditions; and that if
they delivered up some of their children to the French, it was but just the
French should do the like with them. He thereupon presented to M. Auber some of
his own children who had accompanied him; and the other accepting of the
proffer, made choice of one of them, a young lad, whose countenance and
demeanor was somewhat more pleasing and attractive, in a word, one who was in
several respects more amiable then any of his brethren: The Father was content
to part with his Son, and the Son was content to stay with M. Auber; an
accident that seldom happens among the Savages. His name was Imalabouy. From
that day M. Auber treated him as his Son, and always called him so; and the
young Fellow called him Father. When he was put into clothes, he made a shift
to behave himself well enough; nor did he find it any hard matter to enure
himself to the European course of life. Captain Baron desired to have as a
counter-hostage one of Mistress Auber's Sons, who had been first wife to M. du
Plessis, and was then married to M. Auber: But M. Auber having represented to
the Captain, that young du Plessis was of too soft a nature to endure the
hardship of a Caribbian life, prevailed with him to accept by way of Hostage,
instead of him, one of his Servants, who willingly proffered to follow him.
That young man being of a strong constitution, continued some months among the
Savages, who treated him with much kindness; but whether the change of air, or
nourishment caused some alteration in him, he fell sick some time after: Which
Captain Baron hearing of, and fearing he might dye among them, he brought him
back to M. Auber, and required not any other person in his stead, saying that
he would have no other Hostage then the word of his Companion. True it is, he
would have persuaded his own Son to return along with him, but he could not
prevail with him, the Youth telling him, that he thought himself in a better
condition with M. Auber then with his Father.

Captain Baron having left at Gardeloupe so precious an engagement, took
occasion to make frequent visits to M. Auber, and by that means to see his Son:
And finding himself extremely obliged to M. Auber for the many favors he
received from him, especially for the tender affection he bore his Son, he
bethought himself to find out some occasions whereby he might express his
acknowledgments thereof: He resolved therefore to make a discovery to him, that
during the Wars between those of his Nation and the French, who were commanded
by l' Olive, he had taken a young Frenchman Prisoner, and had given him his
life only upon this score, that he had sometime been a Servant to M. du
Plessis, his old Companion: And that it was near three years that he had him,
and gave him more then ordinary liberty, though it had been in his power to put
him to death, because he was taken in Arms, and in the heat of the Engagement:
But that he had not used extremity, remembering the ancient friendship between
him and M. du Plessis, in whose attendance he had seen that Frenchman. M. Auber
compassionating the young man's condition, entreated the Captain to deliver him
up; which he promised, and not many days after was as good as his word; and he
whose good fortune it was to be thus retriv'd, staid a long time after at
Gardeloupe.

The generous Captain, not thinking it enough to have thus obliged M. Auber,
and parted with his Prisoner, told him of another Captain of Dominico who also
had a Frenchman in his house, a Prisoner at War, and proffered to solicit
that Captain to set him at liberty. He prevailed, and some days after brought
over that other Prisoner, whose name was Jean Jardin. This being a subtle young
fellow had gained the affections not only of the Captain, whose Prisoner he
was, but also of all the Caribbians, who had as much kindness for him as if he
had been of their own Nation: And he had such an excellent memory, that he had
got their Language in perfection.

M. Auber desirous to make some return of these good offices and expressions of
affection, besides the Presents he daily made the Captain, would needs oblige
his whole Nation* It was when the Captain was engaged for the War against the
Arouagues, who inhabit Trinity-Island, and to that purpose had made
extraordinary preparations. For this noblyminded Savage coming to take leave of
M. Auber before he went upon that expedition, he bestowed on him, to be put
into his party, one of his menial Servants, who was his Fowler, named Des
Serissiers, who had a long time wished himself present at the Engagements of
those Savages; and he furnished him with good firearms, and all things
requisite to make use thereof.

Captain Baron was much astonished at that favor, and having joyfully accepted
of it, made extraordinary declarations thereof among those of his own Nation.
This Volunteer very cheerfully followed the Captain, and was at the Engagement
with the Arouagues of Trinity-Island, to which there came a powerful Army of
Savages from all the Caribby-Islands. The Frenchman did as much upon that
occasion as could be expected from a gallant Soldier; and being a good
marksman, he hurt and wounded so many of the Arouagues, who were not accustomed
to feel the effect of firearms, that at last they took the rout, and retreated
into the mountains, leaving the spoil to the victorious Caribbians. From that
time Serissiers was ever looked upon by those of that Nation as a great
Captain; and they could not sufficiently admire the kindness of the French
Governor, who voluntarily deprived himself of that young man's service, and
lent him to them. All the particulars of this relation we have from very good
hands, especially M. Auber's.

During all the time of M. Auber's government of Gardeloupe, the peace made
with the Caribbians was inviolably observed on both sides, to the great
advantage of both Nations: For the Savages by that agreement had the
opportunity to treat with the French for wedges, hooks, knives, and several
other instruments and commodities which they look upon as the most necessary:
And the French received from them in exchange, Swine, Lizards, Sea-Turtles or
Tortoises, and an infinite number of other fishes, and other refreshments,
whereof they made a good advantage. So that the Caribbians were as it were the
Pourvoyers of the French, who in the mean time labored in their Plantations
without any disturbance.

CHAP. IV. Of the Trading and Employments of the Foreign Inhabitants of the
Country; and first, of the culture and ordering of Tobacco.
IN the Caribbies Money is not used in order to the carrying on of ordinary
Traffic, but this is performed by the exchanging of those Commodities which
are of the growth of the Country for such as are brought out of Europe, whether
they consist in Clothes, Linen, Ammunition, or Provisions, and other
necessaries requisite for the better conveniences and enjoyments of life. And
this was the common course of all Nations before the use of Money, and is to
this day practiced in diverse savage Countries, and particularly in Colchida,
where every one brings to the Market what he has superfluous, to supply
himself with what he wants.

The Storehouses and Magazines of these Islands are commonly well furnished
with all sorts of Commodities which are brought out of England, France,
Holland, and Zealand, nay as plentifully as in any place in the world. The
price of every Commodity is not left to the choice of the Merchants who keep
the Storehouses, but set upon it by the Governors, with the advice of their
Council. The Commodities which the Inhabitants bring in exchange for those
beforementioned, are reducible to five species; to wit, Tobacco, Sugar, Ginger,
Indico, and Cotton.

At the beginning all the foreign Inhabitants of the Caribbies applied
themselves wholly to the culture of Tobacco, whereby they made a shift to get a
competent livelihood; but afterward the abundance that was made bringing down
the price of it, they have in several places employed themselves in the
planting of Sugarcanes, Ginger, and Indico: And it has pleased God so to
prosper their designs, that it is almost a miracle to see with what improvement
all these Commodities grow in most of the Islands. And forasmuch as many who
see them in Europe know not how they are ordered, it will be a great
satisfaction to their curiosity, to give a short account of each of them;
whereto we shall add somewhat concerning Cotton.

True it is, that diverse Authors have already treated of them; but in regard
our History would be defective, if nothing should be said concerning them, we
are in the first place to assure the Reader, that the whole discourse we intend
to make thereof is not a Copy or Extract out of any other, but a true Original
naturally taken with much care and fidelity: So that if we say the same things
as others have done before us, those who shall peruse our work will not be much
troubled to find here the confirmation of a truth which comes from so remote a
part of the world, and whereof they cannot have too great an assurance: And if
they find any thing that seems to clash with some precedent relations, they are
to look on it as a discovery of the falsehood of those which are contrary
thereto: Or at least ours will make it apparent, that in all places the
Planters do not so exactly follow the same method in the ordering of these
Commodities, but that sometimes some alteration may be observed therein.
Besides, we have this further hope, that some will find in the following
descriptions a certain exactness and cleerness which they will think not
unacceptable to them; nay they may happily meet with something therein that is
new, and such as has not been observed by any other Authors: But if there be
any who shall think there is not any thing in this and the next Chapter which
they know not already, that is, nothing which may either instruct or divert
them, they are desired not to blame our diligence, and imagine them written for
others who may receive some instruction or divertisement thereby, and
acknowledge themselves obliged to us for our care.

For the getting of good and merchantable Tobacco, the first thing to be done,
is, in the proper season to prepare the beds in several places of the Gardens,
such as have good shelter from the winds; then they sow in them the seed which
had been gathered from the stalks of the precedent year, which they suffer to
grow and ripen for that purpose: They mix ashes with the seed when it is sown,
that it may not fall too thick in some places: When it begins to appear above
ground, it is carefully covered with the leaves of the prickly Palms, or with
branches of Orange, or Citron-trees, to secure it from the excessive heat of
the Sun, the coolness of the night, and the spoil which tame Fowl and Birds
might make in it.

While the Plant is growing up to a condition that it may be transplanted, the
place into which it is to be removed is prepared. If the Plantation be but
newly established, it is requisite that it should have been cleared of wood
some considerable time before, and that the branches should be burnt upon the
ground, and over the beds: And if after all that there be any thing remaining,
whatever is not burnt must be conveyed quite away, that the place may be free.
True it is, there is no need of digging the earth of turning it up, nor yet of
delving, hut only of clearing it of all weeds, so as that there remain not any
wood, nor bark, nor leaf, nor so much as the least grass. To do that, they make
use of a kind of broad and sharp Hoes, which pare and take off the surface of
the ground, and if need be, carry along with them the roots of the weeds, whose
after-growth they would prevent.

The ground being thus prepared, it is divided into several ridges or beds
distant one from the other two or three foot. To do this, they make use of long
cords, which at the distance of every two foot, or thereabouts, are marked with
a little piece of cloth, which is sewed thereto; and then they place little
sticks at all the places answerable to those marks; to the end, that when the
time of transplanting the young Tobacco is come, which is immediately after it
has pleased God to send a good shower of rain, they should have nothing else
to do but to plant, and not lose time in making those divisions of the Garden
or Plantation.

The Tobacco-plant is ready for its removal out of the bed where it had been
first sown, when it has four or five leaves strong and thick enough, and about
the breadth of a man's hand; for then, if it happen that the ground is softened by
a pleasant shower of rain, all those who are desirous of having good Tobacco
with the first season matter not much the inconvenience of being wet, so they
can but set a good quantity of it in the ground. At that time there is an
emulation among the good husbands, every one endeavoring to outvye the other
in working: Some are employed in choosing and taking off the Plants from the
beds, and disposing them into baskets; others carry them to those whose work it
is to plant them exactly at the places which had been before marked by the
cord, as we said elsewhere.

Those who are employed about the planting of them make a hole in the ground
with a sharp stick, into which they set the root of the Tobacco; then they
thrust the earth pretty hard about, yet so as that the upper part of the Plant
be not covered: And thus they do all along every rank, and as soon as they have
finished one they begin another. Having performed that exercise, at the next
meeting of the Neighbors together their common discourse is, to enquire one of
another how many thousands of Plants they have set in the ground, and thence
calculate the hopes of the future harvest.

The Plant being thus set in the ground, which is commonly done in several
intervalls, in regard it seldom happens that there is so plentiful a fall of
rain as that it might be done at once, or happily because the ground is not all
prepared at the same time, or that there are not Plants enough, is not
thereupon neglected; on the contrary, this is but the beginning of the pains
and care which the ordering of it requires; for the Planters must be very
careful to visit it often, and as soon as they have perceived that it has taken
root, there must be a special care taken that the Caterpillars and other
mischievous Insects, whereof there are abundance in those Countries, do not
gnaw it, and hinder its growth.

The next work is, at least once every month, to weed away whatever might
endanger the smothering of it, diligently to grub up and rake the earth all
about it, and to carry away the weeds to the extremities of the Plantation; for
if they be left in the place where they are laid upon their being taken out of
the ground, the least rain would make them take root afresh, and they would
require a second weeding. The most troublesome herb of any, and that which
causes most trouble to get out of the Plantations, is Purslane, which in these
parts of the world grows not without the pains and industry of Gardeners. This
exercise is continued till such time as the Tobacco-plant has covered all the
adjacent ground, and that the shade of it keeps down all other weeds.

But though all this be done, yet are not the Planters at rest, inasmuch as
answerably to the growth of the Plant in height and breadth, some must be
continually employed in cutting off the superfluous leaves, taking away those
that are dried up, rotten or decayed, clearing it of all those shoots and
suckers which might hinder its coming to perfection, by diverting the sap from
the larger leaves: In fine, when the stalk is grown to a convenient height, it
must be checked, by cutting off the top of every Plant, those only excepted
which are reserved for seed. After all this ordering, the Plant is to continue
some weeks in the ground ere it comes to maturity, during which there is a
little cessation of labor and attendance about it.

But if the laborious Planter be exempted from the great pains he had bestowed
about it, he shall not want work; for there must be a place prepared, where it
is to be disposed as soon as it is ripe. Care must be taken, that the Grange or
Storehouse, where it ought to be dried to a certain mediocrity, be well
covered and close of all sides; that it be furnished with good store of poles
fit for it to be laid upon; that provision be made of a certain thin bark taken
from a tree called Mahot, to fasten every Plant to the poles; and that the
place designed for the making of it up into rolls or pricks should have all
things requisite for that work.

While all these preparations are made, if the Tobaccoleaves lose ever so
little of their first verdure, and withal begin to bow down more then ordinary
toward the ground, and if the scent of them grows stronger, it is a sign that
the Plant is come to maturity: And then, taking a very fair day, after the dew
is fallen off, it is to be cut about an inch above ground, and left upon the
place till the evening, turning it once or twice, that the Su^ may take away
somewhat of its moisture: In the evening it is carried by armfuls into the
house. It is fastened by the lower end of the stalk to the poles, so that the
leaves hang downwards: It is also requisite that they should not be laid too
close one to the other, lest they be corrupted, or be not dry enough, for want
of air.

This first cutting down of the Tobacco being over, they often visit the Plants
which are hung up a drying, while the rest which had been left growing comes to
ripeness; and when they find the leaves fit to be made up into rolls, that is,
when they are neither too dry (for in that case they would not be able to
endure the wheel), nor yet too moist (for then they would corrupt in a short
time), they are taken off the poles, they are laid in heaps at the end of the
Grange, and every stalk is stripped of its leaves, after this manner.

In the first place, they lay aside all the longest and all the broadest
leaves, and they take away the great stalk which runs through the midst of
them; the lesser leaves are also laid by themselves, to be disposed within the
roll, and the greater serve for coverings and shrowds for them. These leaves
thus disposed are ranked on planks or tables, close by him who is to make them
up into rolls, which he makes bigger or smaller, as may be seen by those
brought over into these parts.

There is a certain art in making up the rolls, and those who can do it with
expedition and dexterity are highly esteemed, and get much more then those who
are employed about ordering the ground: They must have their hands and arms
extremely supple and nimble, to make the wheel turn with such speed, and still
to observe the same proportion, that so the roll may be equally big in all
parts.

There is a particular artifice, in the business of Tobacco, to dispose and lay
it after the winding so as that it may be the more easily put up on the sticks,
which are all to be of a certain bigness and length, to avoid deceit.

When the Tobacco is thus made up, it is conveyed to the Storehouse, and
covered with Bananas or some other leaves, that it may not be prejudiced by
taking wind, and be of a good fair color. That which cuts somewhat unctuously,
is blackish and shining, and has a pleasant and strong scent, and burns easily
in the Pipe, is accounted the best.

We told you, that the Tobacco-plant was cut almost even with the ground, and
not plucked up by the roots; and it is purposely so cut, that it may shoot
forth new stalks: And indeed it produces a second Plant, but such as is neither
so strong nor so fair as the former; nor is the Tobacco made thereof so much
esteemed, nor will keep so well: It is called by some Shoot-Tobacco, or
Sucker-Tobacco, or Tobacco of the second cutting or growth: Nay some will have
three shoots from the same stalk; and that humor has brought the Tobacco
which comes from some Islands into dis-esteem.

Now since we have expressed our selves so much at large concerning the
manufacture of Tobacco, we shall not think it improper to insert in this place
what is practiced by some curious persons, whereby it is made more excellent
then that which commonly goes under the name of Virinus-Tobacco, keeps well,
and has a scent which fortifies the brain. After they have set aside the
Plants of the first cutting, and while they are drying on the poles, they
gather together all the cast leaves, the small shoots, as also the filaments
which are taken out of the midst of the leaves which have been already cleared;
and after they have pounded them in a mortar, all is put into a bag, which is
put into a press to force out the juice, which is afterward boiled over a soft
fire till it be reduced to the consistency of a Syrup: That done, there is put
into that decoction a little Copal, which is an aromatic gum, the virtue
whereof is to fortify the brain. This gum distills from a tree of the same
name, which is common in the Continent of America, and in the Islands about the
gulf of Hondures.

After this drug is put into the composition aforesaid, it must be well
stirred, that its sweet scent and other qualities may be communicated and
diffused through the whole decoction: Then it must be taken off the fire, and
when it is cold it is set in a vessel near the person who makes up the roll of
Tobacco, and as often as he takes a handful of the leaves to feed the roll, he
must wet his hand in that liquor, and wipe it with the leaves. This secret has
an admirable effect to make the Tobacco keep well, and derives to it a virtue
which extremely heightens its price.

The Tobacco thus ordered is to be made up into a roll, at least as big as a
man's thumb, and be afterward divided into little rolls not weighing above ten
pound at the most, and then sent in little vessels or close baskets made for
that purpose, to keep it the better. Some Inhabitants of the Islands having
made trial of this secret, have put off theirs for right Virinus-Tobacco, and
sold it at the same rate.

Those who imagine that Tobacco grows without any trouble; and that rolls of it
are, as they say, found growing on Trees in America, and that there is no more
to be done but to shake them down; or happily are persuaded that it requires no
great trouble to bring them to perfection, will be undeceived when they come to
read this relation of the culture and preparation of Tobacco; whereto we have
only this to add, that if they had themselves seen the poor Servants and
Slaves, who are employed about this painful work, exposed the greatest part of
the day to the scorching heat of the Sun, and spending one half of the night in
reducing it to that posture wherein it is transported into Europe, no doubt
they would have a greater esteem for, and think much more precious that herb,
which is procured with the sweat and labors of so many miserable creatures.

We shall not need to insert here what Physicians write of the miraculous
effects of Tobacco, but leave the more curious to consult their Books, wherein
they give a strange account thereof: Only this we shall affirm, that the
virtues of it must needs be very great, since it has its course all over the
world, and that in a manner all Nations upon Earth, as well those that are
civilized as those that still continue in their Barbarism, have afforded it a
kind reception, and have advised the taking of it: And though some Princes have
prohibited the use of it in their Territories, out of a fear that the money of
their Subjects, which is rare and precious, should be turned into smoke, and
slip out of their hands for a thing which seems not to be so necessary to life;
yet is there not any but will allow it a place among the drugs and remedies of
Physic.

The more delicate and curious among those Nations who are disposed into hot
Countries, qualify it with Sage, Rosemary, and certain Perfumes, which give it
a very pleasant scent; and having reduced it to powder, they take it in at the
nostril. Those Nations who inhabit cold Countries, forbid not Persons of
Quality the use of it; nay it is a perfection and certain gallantry in the
Ladies of those Parts, gracefully to handle a Pipe, whereof the boal is of
Coral or Amber, and the head of Silver or Gold, and to puff out the smoke of
this herb without the least wrinkle or wry face, and to let it out of the mouth
after several little intervalls, which raising so many little vapors of a
brownish color, seems a kind of foil to set off the cleerness of their
complexion. The composition we have before described, which heightens the good
scent of Tobacco, will no doubt be kindly received by those persons who place
the smoking of a pipe of Tobacco among the pleasures and enjoyments of this
life.

To conclude, it is not easy to affirm what quantities of Tobacco are sent
away every year, only from the Island of S. Christophers; and it is almost a
miracle to see what numbers ^f Ships come over out of England, France, Holland,
and especially Zealand, and yet none returns empty: nay the sole trading which
the last named Province maintained with this and the neighboring Islands,
raised the greatest and wealthiest houses at Middleborough and Flushing: nay to
this day the principal commerce of those two Cities, which are the most
considerable of all Zealand, is from these Islands, which are to them what the
Mines of Peru are to the Kingdom of Spain.

CHAP. V. Of the manner how Sugar is made; and of the preparation of Ginger,
Indico, and Cotton.
WHen the great plenty of Tobacco made at S. Christophers and the other Islands
had brought down the price of it so low, that it did not turn to account, it
pleased God to put it into the heart of the French General de Poincy, to find
out some other ways to facilitate the subsistence of the Inhabitants, and carry
on some Trade: He thereupon employed his Servants and Slaves about the culture
of Sugarcanes, Ginger, and Indico; and the design met with a success beyond
what was expected.

Though it may be granted, that the Plant of the Sugar-Cane was known to the
Ancients, yet is the invention of making the Sugar but of late years: The
Ancients knew no more of it then they did of Sena, Cassia, Ambergreece, Musk,
Civet, and Benjamin: They made no other use of this precious Reed, then in
order to drink and Physic. And therefore we may well oppose all these things,
with much advantage, as also our Clocks, the Sea-Compass, the Art of
Navigation, Prospective-glasses, Printing. Artillery, and several other
excellent Inventions of the last Ages, against their right way of dying Purple,
their malleable Glass, the subtle Machines of their Archimedes, and some such
like.

Having in the precedent Book given a description of the Sugar-Cane, our
business here will only be to represent the manner how Sugar is gotten out of
it.

That work is performed by a Machine or Mill, which some call an Ingenio,
whereby the juice within the Canes is squeezed out. These Mills are built of
very solid and lasting wood, and are more convenient in these Islands then
those used to the same purpose at Madera and Brasil: Nor is it to be feared in
the former, as many times in the latter, that the fire should get to the
boiling Coppers, and set all into a flame, to the destruction of those who are
employed about the work; for the Coppers in these Islands are seen to boil, yet
the fire that causes it is made and kept in on the outside by furnaces, which
are so well cemented, that neither the flame nor the smoke does any way hinder
those who are at work, which they may follow without any fear of danger or
inconvenience.

The ordinary way of turning the Mills is by Horses or Oxen; but the French
Governor has one which is turned by water, which falling on a wheel sets the
whole Machine going.

When the Sugarcanes are ripe, they are cut somewhat near the ground, above
the first knot which is without any juice; and having cut off the tops, and
taken away certain little, long, and very thin leaves, which encompass them;
they are made up into bundles, and carried to the Mills to be there pressed and
squeezed between two rollers, turning one upon the other.

The juice which is squeezed out of them falls into a great Cistern, whence it
is conveyed through long pipes or channels into the vessels appointed for the
boiling of it. In great Sugar-works there are at least six Coppers, whereof
three very large ones are of copper, about the breadth and depth of those used
by Dyers, and are to clarify the juice, which is to be boiled with a gentle
fire, putting in ever and anon a small quantity of a certain very strong Lie,
made of water and ashes, commonly called Temper, which makes all the filth to
boil up, which as it appears is taken off with a great brass skimmer. When the
juice is well purified in these three Coppers, into which it had been conveyed
alternately one after another, it is strained through a cloth, and afterward
poured into three other Coppers of some other metal, which are very thick,
broad enough, and about a foot and a half deep. In these Coppers the Sugar
receives its last boiling; for then there is a more violent fire made, and it
is continually stirred, and when it bubbles up so as that it may be feared it
should boil over the Coppers, it is allayed by the casting in of a little
sallet-oil; and as it begins to grow thick, it is poured into the last of those
Coppers, from whence, as it inclines to a consistency, it is disposed into
vessels of wood or earth, and so carried into the Curing-house, where it is
whitened with a kind of fat earth mixed with water, which is spread upon it; then
they open the little hole in the bottom of every vessel or pot, that all the
filth or dregs that is about the Sugar may fall into another channel, which
conveys it into a vessel prepared for that purpose.

The first skimmings which had been taken off the great Coppers is laid aside
only for Cattle, but the other serves well enough to make a certain drink for
the Servants and Slaves. The juice which is drawn from the Cane will continue
good but one day, insomuch that if within that time it be not boiled, it grows
sharp and turns to vinegar. There must also be a very great care taken, that
the Reservatory into which the squeezed juice falls, and the pipes or channels
whereby it is thence conveyed into other places, be often washed; for if they
contract ever so little sharpness, the juice cannot be reduced to Sugar: The
whole work would also miscarry, if any butter or oil chance to be cast into any
of the three greater Coppers, which are to be washed with Lie; or in like
manner, if ever so little Lie fall into the three lesser ones, where the juice
is formed into a Syrup, and curdles by the violence of the fire, and the
continual agitation and stirring of it with a skimmer. But above all things
there must be a great care taken, that there fall not any juice of Citron into
the Coppers; for that would absolutely hinder the coagulation of the Sugar.

Many of the Inhabitants who are not able to get so many Coppers, nor furnish
themselves with those great Engines whereby the Canes are squeezed, have little
Mills made like Presses, which are wrought by two or three men, or driven about
by one horse; and with one or two Coppers they purify the juice gotten out of
them, reduce it to the consistence of Syrup, and make good Sugar without any
further trouble.

The greatest secret in the business of making good Sugar consists in the
whitening of it: Those who have it are very loath to communicate it. From what
has been said, it may be easily inferred what extraordinary advantages accrue
to the Inhabitants of that Island by means of this sweet and precious
Commodity, and what satisfaction it brings to their Correspondents in other
parts of the world, who have it at so easy rates.

This plenty of Sugar has put the Inhabitants upon the preserving of abundance
of excellent fruits of the growth of the Island, as Oranges, Lemons, Citrons,
and others, especially Ginger, whereof we shall give an account anon, and the
fruit called Ananas, and the flowers of Oranges and Citrons.

As concerning the preparation of Ginger, when the root is come to maturity it
is taken out of the ground; then it is dried in places well air'd, and it is
often stirred to prevent corruption. Some make no more ado then to expose it to
the Sun in order to the drying of it; but others think it requisite to cast
lime on it, the more to facilitate the drawing away of the moisture. This root,
which is one of the most considerable among Spices, is transported all over the
world; but it is most sought after in cold Countries.

The French do sometimes take it out of the ground before it is fully ripe, and
preserve it whole with such artifice, that it becomes red, and transparent as
glass. The preserved Ginger which is brought over from Brazil and the Levant is
commonly dry, full of filaments or little strings, and too biting to be eaten
with any delight; but that which is prepared at S. Christophers has no fibers
or strings at all, and it is so well ordered, that there remains nothing that
is unpleasant to the tooth when it is eaten.

It has a singular property to fortify the breast, when it is weakened by a
confluence of cold humors; as also to clear the voice, to sweeten the breath,
to cause a good color in the face, to take away the crudities of the stomach,
to promote digestion, to sharpen the appetite, and to consume that waterishness
and phlegm which puts the body into a languishing condition; nay it is affirmed
by some, that it preserves and wonderfully fortifies the memory, by dispersing
the cold humors, or the phlegm of the Brain. This root may also be reduced
into a paste, of which there may be made a Conserve, or cordial Electuary that
has the same effects.

We come now to give a short account of Indico. The Plant being cut is bound up
into little bundles or fagots, and left to rot in cisterns of stone or wood
full of fair water, on which there is cast a certain quantity of oil, which
according to its nature covers all the surface of it: They lay stones upon the
fagots, that they may the better keep under the water; and after three or four
days that the water has been boiling, which it does by the mere virtue of the
Plant, without any assistance of fire, the leaf being rotted and dissolved by
that natural heat which is in the stalk, they take great stakes and stir the
whole mass that is within the cisterns, so to get out all the substance of it;
and after it is settled again, they take out of the cistern that part of the
stalk which is not rotted: that done, they several times stir what is left in
the cistern, and after they have left it to setle, they let out the water at a
cock; and the lees or dregs which remains at the bottom of the cistern, is put
into molds, or left to dry in the Sun. These dregs is that which is so much
esteemed by Dyers, and commonly known by the name of Indico.

There are some make use of Presses, whereinto having put little bundles of the
rotted Plant, they by that means get out all the juice of it: But in regard
they are the leaves of the Plant that the foresaid Commodity is made of, those
who are desirous to have it of the highest price, think it enough to have the
dregs which remains after the corruption of those leaves, and is found, after
so many stirrings, at the bottom of the cistern.

The French Inhabitants of the Caribbies were there a long time ere they drove
any trade in that Commodity, by reason that the Plant whereof it is made, being
of it self of a very strong scent, exhales an insupportable stink when it is
rotted: But since Tobacco came to so low a rate, and that in some places the
ground would not bring forth that which was good, as it had done some time
before, they applied themselves to the culture of Indico, whereof they now make
a considerable advantage.

Lastly, as concerning Cotton, the French make it not much their business to
gather it, though they have many of the trees that bear it in the hedges of
their Plantations: But all put together amounts but to little in comparison of
what is said of a certain Quarter of the Province of China; for a certain
Author named Trigaut, in the xvii. chap. of the fifth Book of his History,
affirms, that there grows so much Cotton there as finds work enough for two
hundred thousand Weavers.

The English who are the Inhabitants of the Barbouthos drive a great trade in
this Commodity, as also those who lived formerly in the Island of Santa-cruce.
There is no great trouble in the making of Cotton fit for the market; for all
to be done, is to get out of the half-open'd button that matter which in a
manner forces its way out it self: And whereas it is full of the seed of the
tree that bears it, which are like little beans entangled within the Cotton, in
the midst whereof they had their production, there are a sort of little Engines
made with such artifice, that by the turning of a wheel, whereby they are put
into motion, the Cotton falls on the one side, and the seed on the other: That
done, the Cotton is thrust up as close as may be into bags, that so it may take
up the less room.

Thus have we given a brief account of the principal Employments which keep up
the Commerce of the Islands, and the Commodities wherein the Inhabitants do
ordinarily trade.

CHAP. VI. Of the more honorable Employments of the European Inhabitants of
the Caribbies; their Slaves; and their Government.
THe European Colonies which have planted themselves in the Caribbies, do not
consist only of a sort of Vagabonds and persons of mean condition, as some
fondly imagine, but there are also among them many of Quality, and descended
from noble Families: So that the Employments we mentioned in the precedent
Chapter, are designed only for the most inconsiderable of the Inhabitants, and
such whose necessities have forced them to earn their bread with the labor of
their hands, and the sweat of their brows: But the others, who are able to hire
people to oversee their Servants and Slaves, and to see that they do their
work, lead pleasant lives, and want not those enjoyments thereof which are to
be had in other Countries. Their employments and divertisements, besides the
frequent visits they make and receive with extraordinary expressions of
civility, are Hunting, Fishing, and other commendable exercises; nay they
endeavor to outvye one the other in their entertainments, wherein they are
magnificent, there being a sufficient plenty of Beef, Mutton, Pork, wild and
tame Fowl of all kinds, Fish, Pastry, and excellent Conserves, all in as great
abundance as at the best Tables in the European parts of the world. And these
mutual demonstrations of kindness are derived from the Officers and those of
the better rank to the meanest Inhabitants, who think it a great want of
civility to dismiss any one from their houses, before they have presented them
with somewhat to eat and drink.

Wine, Beer, Brandy, and Aqua-vitae, and such drinks, are seldom wanting in
these Islands; and if there should chance to be a scarcity of these, the
Inhabitants have the art of making a delicious drink of that sweet liquor which
is got out of the Sugarcanes, and that being kept for certain days becomes as
strong as any Sack: Of the same liquor they also make an excellent kind of
Aqua-vitae, not much unlike that which is brought thither out of France; only
this inconvenience it has, that they who drink excessively of it are apt to
fall dangerously sick. Moreover, they make several kinds of Beverage with the
juice of Oranges, Figs, Bananas, and Ananas, which are all very delicious and
pleasant to the taste, and may be ranked among Wines: They also make a sort of
Beer of the Cassava and the roots of Potatoes, which is as pleasant,
nourishing, and refreshing as that which is brought out of the Low Countries.

As concerning those Employments which are equally honorable and necessary in
order to the welfare of the Inhabitants of these Islands, it is to be observed,
that all are taught the use of Arms, and the Heads of Families seldom walk
abroad without their Swords. Every Quarter is disposed under the command of
certain Captains and other Officers, who have the oversight thereof. They are
all well-arm'd, and they often muster and are exercised even in the times of
deepest peace; so that they are always in readiness, at the first beat of D^um,
to march to the places where the Captains appoint their Rendezvous. In the
Island of S. Christophers, besides twelve Companies of Foot, there are also
some Troops of Horse, as we said elsewhere.

And whereas all persons of Quality, whereof there is a considerable number in
those Islands, have Servants and Slaves who are employed about the works
beforementioned, and that in most parts of Europe they do not make use of
Slaves, there being only the Spaniards and the Portuguez who go and buy them up
at the places of their birth, such as are Angola, Cap-vert, and Guinny, it will
be but requisite that we here give a short account of them: But we shall in the
first place speak of those who are hired Servants, and to continue such only
for a certain time.

As for the French who are carried over out of France into America, to serve
there, they commonly deliver obligatory acts to their Masters, which is done
before public Notaries; by which writings they oblige themselves to serve them
during the space of three years, conditionally to receive from them so many
pounds of Tobacco, according to the agreement they have made during that term.
These French Servants, by reason of the three years service they are engaged
to, are commonly called the Thirty-six-months-men, according to the Language of
the Islands. There are some so simple as to imagine, that if they be not
obliged to their Masters in writing before their departure out of France, they
are so much the less obliged when they are brought into the Islands; but they
are extremely mistaken; for when they are brought before a Governor to
complain that they were carried aboard against their wills, or to plead that
they are not obliged by writing, they are condemned for the space of three
years to serve either him who has paid for their passage, or such other as it
shall please the Master to appoint. If the Master has promised his Servant no
more then the ordinary recompense of the Islands, he is obliged to give him for
his three years service but three hundred weight of Tobacco, which is no great
matter to find himself in linen and clothes; for the Master is not engaged to
supply him with any thing but food: But he who before his departure out of
France promises to give three hundred weight of Tobacco to him whom he receives
into his service, is obliged exactly to pay it, nay though he had promised him
a thousand: It is therefore the Servants best course to make his bargain sure
before he comes out of his Country.

As concerning the Slaves, and such as are to be perpetual Servants, who are
commonly employed in these Islands, they are originally Africans, and they are
brought over thither from the Country about Cap-vert, the Kingdom of Angolae,
and other Seaports which are on the Coasts of that part of the world; where
they are bought and sold after the same manner as Cattle in other places.

Of these, some are reduced to a necessity of selling themselves, and entering
into a perpetual slavery, they and their children, to avoid starving; for in
the years of sterility, which happen very frequently, especially when the
Grasshoppers, which like clouds spread themselves over the whole Country, have
consumed all the fruits of the earth, they are brought to such a remediless
extremity, that they will submit to the most rigorous conditions in the world,
provided they may be kept from starving. When they are reduced to those
exigencies, the Father makes no difficulty to sell his children for bread; and
the children forsake Father and Mother without any regret.

Another sort of them are sold after they have been taken Prisoners in War by
some petty neighboring Prince; for it is the custom of the Princes of those
Parts to make frequent incursions into the Territories of their Neighbors,
purposely for the taking of Prisoners, whom they afterward sell to the
Portuguez, and other Nations with whom they drive that barbarous Trade: They
receive in exchange for them Iron (which is as precious with them as Gold),
Wine, Aqua-vitae, Brandy, or some poor Clothing: They make Slaves of the women
as well as the men, and they are sold one with another, at a higher or lower
rate, according to their youth, age, strength, or weakness, handsomness, or
deformity of body. They who bring them over to the Islands make a second sale
of them, at fifteen or sixteen hundred weight of Tobacco every head, more or
less, as the parties concerned can agree.

If these poor Slaves chance to fall into the hands of a good Master, one who
will not treat them with too much severity, they prefer their present slavery
before their former liberty, the loss whereof they never afterward regret: And
if they are permitted to marry, they multiply extremely in those hot Countries.

They are all Negroes, and those who are of the brightest black are accounted
the fairest: Most of them are flat-nos'd, and have thick lips, which goes among
them for beauty; nay there are some affirm, that in their Country the Midwives
do purposely crush down their noses, that they may be flat, as soon as they come
into the world: The hair of their heads is all frizl^d, so that they can hardly
make use of Combs; but to prevent the breeding of vermin, they rub their heads
with the oil of that shrub which is called Palma-Christi: They are very strong
and hardy, but withal so fearful and unwieldy in the handling of Arms, that
they are easily reduced under subjection.

They are naturally susceptible of all impressions, and the first that are
derived into them among the Christians, after they have renounced their
Superstitions and Idolatry, they pertinaciously adhere unto; wherein they
differ much from the Indians of America, who are as unconstant as Cameleons.
Among the French Inhabitants of the Caribbies there are some Negroes who
punctually observe abstinence all the time of Lent, and all the other
Fasting-days appointed by the Church, without any remission of their ordinary
and continual labor.

They are commonly proud and insolent; and whereas the Indians are desirous to
be gently treated, and are apt to dye out of pure grief, if they be put to more
then ordinary hardship, these on the contrary are to be kept in awe by threats
and blows; for if a man grow too familiar with them, they are presently apt to
make their advantages of it, and to abuse that familiarity; but if they be
chastised with moderation when they have done amiss, they become better, more
submissive, and more compliant, nay will commend and think the better of their
Masters: But on the other side, if they be treated with excessive severity,
they will run away, and get into the Mountains and Forests, where they live
like so many Beasts; then they are called Marons, that is to say, Savages: or
happily they will grow so desperate as to be their own Executioners. It is
therefore requisite, that in the conduct of them there should be a mean
observed between extreme severity and too much indulgence, by those who would
keep them in awe, and make the best advantage of them.

They are passionate Lovers one of another; and though they are born in
different Countries, and sometimes, when at home, Enemies one to another, yet
when occasion requires they mutually support and assist one another, as if they
were all Brethren: And when their Masters give them the liberty to recreate
themselves, they reciprocally visit one the other, and pass away whole nights
in playing, dancing, and other pastimes and divertisments; nay, sometimes they
have some little Entertainments, every one sparing what he can to contribute to
the common repast.

They are great Lovers of Music, and much pleased with such Instruments as
make a certain delightful noise, and a kind of harmony, which they accompany
with their voices. They had heretofore in the Island of S. Christophers a
certain Rendezvous in the midst of the Woods, where they met on Sundays and
Holidays after Divine Service, to give some relaxation to their wearied bodies:
There they sometimes spent the remainder of that day, and the night following,
in dancing and pleasant discourses, without any prejudice to the ordinary
labors imposed upon them by their Masters: nay, it was commonly observed, that
after they had so diverted themselves, they went through their work with
greater courage and cheerfulness, without expressing any weariness, and did all
things better than if they had rested all night long in their huts. But it
being found, that the better to enjoy themselves in these public Meetings,
they many times stole the Poultry and Fruits of their Neighbors, and sometimes
those of their Masters, the French General thought fit to forbid these
nocturnal assemblies: So that now if they are desirous to divert themselves,
they are enjoined to do it within their own Neighbourhoods, with the permission
of their Masters, who are willing enough to allow them convenient liberty.

As to the Advantages accrewing from the labors of these Slaves, he who is
Master of a dozen of them may be accounted a rich man: For besides that these
are the People who cultivate the ground in order to its production of all
necessary provisions for the subsistence of their Masters and themselves; being
well ordered and carefully looked after, they promote the making of several
other Commodities, as Tobacco, Sugar, Ginger, Indico, and others, which bring
in great profit. Add to this, that their service being perpetual, their number
increases from time to time by the Children that are born of them, which have
no other Inheritance than that of the slavery and subjection of their Parents.

All the Foreign Inhabitants who have planted themselves in those Islands are
governed according to the Laws and Customs of their own Countries.

Among the French Inhabitants of S. Christophers Justice is administered by a
Council consisting of the principal Officers who have the oversight of the
Militia of the Island, of which Council the General is President: And though
there are certain places appointed for that Administration, yet is the Council
many times assembled as the General thinks fit, and occasion requires, under a
kind of great Fig Tree, which is about the bigness of a large Elm, near the
Court of Guard of the Basseterre, not far from the Haven.

In this Council, abating all the Formalities which have been invented to make
Suits immortal, all differences that happen between the Inhabitants are
amicably composed, and decided most commonly at the first sitting, without any
charge to the Parties, save only that he which is found guilty of the wrong is
to make satisfaction according to the Custom, whereof part goes to the relief
of the Poor, and maintenance of the Church, and the rest for the satisfaction
of the party concerned. This Council does also pass sentence of death, without
appeal to any other Power.

The Governors of the other Islands do also administer Justice every one in
his Government: So that no man should be guilty of so great a weakness as to
imagine that people live in those Countries without any order or rule, as many
do: Nay, it is rather to be looked on as a kind of Miracle, that (the
Inhabitants of those Countries being a confluence of people from so many
several Countries, and consequently of different humors and constitutions)
disorders should not creep in, and that all are kept in awe and subjection to
the Laws established.

Thus much of the Foreign Inhabitants of the Caribbies; we come now to treat
of the Natural and Originary.

CHAP. VII. Of the Origin of the Caribbians, the natural Inhabitants of the
Country.
THe Method we had proposed to our selves for the profecution of this History
requires that henceforth we treat of the Indians, the natural Inhabitants of
the Caribbies. And here we conceive it not to be our business to bring upon the
Stage that great and difficult Question, to wit, How the race of Men came to
spread it self into America, and whence they came into that new World? There
are some eminent Persons have treated of this matter with so much sufficiency,
exactness, and solidity, that it were a tedious and superfluous Work at the
present to trouble the Reader with any thing concerning it. Besides, the
History of the Originals of our Savage Inhabitants of the Caribbies requires
not that we should descend so low to find them.

The ancient and natural Inhabitants of the Caribbies are those who have been
called by some Authors Cannibals, Anthropophagi, or Eaters of Men; but most
others who have written of them, commonly call them Caribbians or Caribes: But
their primitive and originary Name, and that which is pronounced with most
gravity is, as the French Writers would have it, that of Caraibes: Nay, if we
may credit these last mentioned Authors, not only the Caribbians themselves of
the Islands do so pronounce their name, but also those of their Nation who live
in the Continent of America, both the Septentrional and Meridional: So that
that being the most common appellation of them among the French Inhabitants of
the Islands, we shall also have occasion to use it sometimes in the sequel of
this History, in regard the present Work is rendered out of that Language.

Some are of opinion, that this word Caraibes (or Caribbians) is not natural to
the savage Inhabitants of the Caribbies, but that it was imposed upon them by
the Spaniards, as they had given the same denomination to many Savages of the
Meridional Continent, who are known thereby; as also that of Calibis, or
Calibites, to their allies the Inhabitants of the same Continent.

Those who maintain this opinion affirm, that the Spaniards might well give to
those People that name of Caraibes, in regard they overran all the Quarters of
the Southerly part of America; and that having made the first Maps thereof,
they set down those Nations under that Name, which has stuck to them ever
since. To prove this they allege, that they are never called Caraibes or
Caribbians among themselves, but only when they are drunk, and that having
their heads full of Wine they leap up and down and rejoice, saying in their
corrupt Language, Moy bonne Caraibe, I am an honest Caribbian: That otherwise
they only make use of that word when they are amongst Strangers, and that in
their trading and their communication with them, to make a certain discovery of
themselves, as being sensible that the said name is known to them: But that
when they are among themselves, not only they, but also those of their Nation
Inhabiting the Continent, and the Calibites, call themselves by the name of
Calinago, which is the name of the Men, and Calliponan, which is that of the
Women. And they further affirm, that they are called Oubao-bonon, that is,
Inhabitants of the Islands, or Islanders; as the call those of the Continent
Batoue-bonon, that is, Inhabitants of the Firm Land.

But all this presupposed as probable, there is but little likelihood that the
word Caribbians should have been imposed upon them by the Spaniards, and that
our Islands should not have had it before they were known by them. The first
reason we give of this assertion is, that before either the Spaniards or
Portuguez had found a passage into Brazil, there were in those Parts certain
men more subtle and ingenious then the rest, whom the Brasilians called
Caraibes, or Caribbians, as Johannes de Lery has observed in his History.
Secondly, it is a thing out of all controversy that there are certain Savages
who bear the name of Caribbians in some Quarters of the Southerly part of
America, where the Spaniards never had any Commerce: For not only those of the
same Nation with our Islanders, who inhabit along those Coasts of the
Meridional America, and are near Neighbors to the Dutch Colonies of Cayenna
and Berbica, but those also who live far within that Meridional Continent,
beyond the sources of the most remarkable Rivers, call themselves Caribbians.
Moreover, we shall find in the sequel of this Chapter, that there is in the
Septentrional Continent a powerful Nation consisting for the most part of
certain Families, who at this present take a great pride in being called
Caribbians, and stand upon it, that they had received that name long before
America was discovered. Add to this, that though it were granted that the
Spaniards would have imposed that name on all those Nations, how can it be
proved that they were as willing to accept of it from People unknown and
Enemies to them? Now it is certain, that not only all those people do call
themselves Caribbians, but also that they withal think it a glory, and derive
an advantage from that name, as Monsieur du Montel has heard it from their own
mouths: How then is it to be imagined that they should triumph in a name which
they had received from their Enemies? Nay if it be urged further, as we shall
see anon, that the Ancestors of our Savage Inhabitants of the Islands received
from the Apalachites the name of Caribbians, instead of that of Cofachites,
under which they went before; it may be replied, That they took it from such as
were their friends and confederates, and that as an Elogy of honor. In fine,
we also affirm, that it is not only in their drunkenness and debauches, that
our Indian Inhabitants of the Islands call themselves Caribbians, but they do
it also when they are sober and in cold blood; And as to their calling
themselves Calinago, it is possible they may have many different names, whence
it does not ever the more follow, that they had received any of them from the
Europaeans. For the denomination of Oubao-bonon; the signification of the word
sufficiently shows, that it is not particular to them, and that it may be
generally applied to any Inhabitants of Islands. And whereas they make use of
the name of Caribbians rather than of any other, when they speak to strangers,
it is because they are apprehensive enough that that name is best known to
them: but it is not to be concluded thence, that they received it from the
Spaniards, nay it might be more probably affirmed that the Spaniards themselves
having learnt it of them, should afterward have communicated it to other
Europaeans. But as to our design, it matters not much whether opinion be
embraced, and every one may follow which sentiment likes him best; only we
have taken the liberty to propose what we conceived most probable.

As to the originals of the insulary Caribbians, those who have hitherto given
any account of them, have had so little light to guide themselves by in that
obscure piece of Antiquity, that they may be said to have grop'd all their way:
some imagine that they are descended from the Jews, grounding their conjecture,
among other things, on this, that the Caribbians are obliged to marry those
Kinswomen of theirs that are next of kin to them, and that some among them eat
no swines flesh nor Tortoises: But this is to fetch a thing too far off, and to
ground an imagination on too weak conjectures. There are others who would have
them to come over from the Haven of Caribana, and pretend that they were
transported thence: But this opinion is grounded only on the clinching of the
words Caribana and Caribbians, without any other confirmation.

There are yet others who affirm, and that upon a simple conjecture, that these
Savages are the originary Inhabitants of the greater Islands, and that it is
not long since they came into those now called the Caribbies, where they took
refuge as the remainders of the horrid Massacres committed by the Spaniards,
when they possessed themselves of St. Domingo, Cuba, Jamaica, and Porto-Rico:
But this is confuted by the certainty of History, which assures us, that at the
first beginning of the discovery of America, the Caribbies were possessed and
inhabited by the Caribbians; that at first they were surprised and
ill-entreated by the Spaniards; but that afterward these last being beaten off
with disadvantage, and meeting with many inconveniences in the prosecution of
that war, made a kind of agreement with some among them, as we shall see more
particularly hereafter in the Chapter of their Wars. Add to this, that the
Indians of Corassao, who, without all dispute, are some of those persons who
escaped the Massacres, and who have among them some yet living, who lived in
the Port called at the present, the Port of the Kow-Island, or as the French
call Le port de l' Isle a vache, in the Island of Hispaniola, when the first
Spaniards landed there, have not a word of the Caribbian Language in theirs,
nor any thing of Carriage; whence it may be deduced, that there never was any
communication or correspondence between them and the Caribbians. Besides, those
of the greater Islands who might have fled to avoid the tyranny of the
Spaniards, would have had greater encouragement to retreat into the Territories
which were below them, and whereto the regular winds lay more fit to carry
them, than to direct their course against the wind, and so retarding their
flight, expose themselves to a thousand hazards by Sea, and engage themselves
in a voyage twenty times as long: For it is almost a miracle, that such Vessels
as theirs are can advance a league in a day against the wind; nay it many times
happens that very great vessels are in their ascent forced back more in three
hours than they had advanced in six days: For we have it from very skilful
Pilots, that they have been three months getting up from the Cul-de-Sac of St.
Domingo to St. Christophers; whereas to fall down from St. Christophers to St.
Domingo, there needs commonly not above four or five days at most.

As concerning the opinion the Caribbians themselves have of their origin, we
find, that, being as ignorant of all Monuments of Antiquity, as free from all
curiosity of enquiring after things to come, they believe for the most part,
that they are descended from the Calibites or Calibis, their Allies and great
friends, the Inhabitants of the Meridional part of America, and the
neighboring people of the Arouagues or Alouagues, in that Country or Province
which is commonly called Guyana, or the Savage-Coast. And those who adhere to
this opinion, ground their persuasion on the conformity of Language, Religion
and Manners, observable between the Caribbian Inhabitants of the Islands, and
the Calibites; though it may as well be presumed that the said resemblance
might partly proceed from the alliance and particular friendship there was
between them; partly from the Neighborhood of the Caribbians of the Meridional
Continent and those Calibites; and partly from some other causes, whereof we
shall give an account hereafter.

But these poor Savages of the Islands agree not among themselves in the
particular relation they make of their Extraction, and the occasion that
brought them into those Islands; nor can they give any account of the time of
their coming thither. We shall here set down what those of S. Vincent and some
others have related to Monsieur du Montel concerning themselves, which we have
taken out of his curious Collections.

All the Caribbians were heretofore subject to the Arouagues, and obeyed their
Prince; but some among them not able to endure that yoke, broke out into a
Rebellion: And that they might the better live undisturbed, and at a distance
from their Enemies, they retreated to the Caribby-Islands, which were not at
that time inhabited; and their first landing was in the Island of Tabago, which
is one of the nearest to the Continent: Afterward the other Calibites shook of
the Domination of the Arouagues; but finding themselves strong enough, or not
having the same inclination with the former, they continued in their Country;
and what they had at the time of their revolt they have kept ever since, and
live free in the Country, but Enemies to the Arouagues, having a
Captain General of their own Nation, by whom they are commanded. They have also
continued to this present Friends and Confederates to the Caribbians.

Upon this Relation it is that some ground the explication they make of the
word Caribbians, as if it signified Rebels; whether it was imposed upon them
by the Arouagues, or that those people assumed it of themselves by way of
triumph, as deriving a certain glory from their noble Insurrection, and the
generous Rebellion which established them in peace and liberty: But there needs
no more to show that the word Caribbian does not signify Rebel, as among
others a certain Journal of a Dutchman, than that there are many Colonies in
several parts of the Continent of America, both the Septentrional and
Meridional, which no body pretends or can pretend were ever under the power of
the Arouagues, which yet are known by the name of Caribbians. And as to the
being among them any that have rebelled against other Sovereigns, only this may
be inferred thence, That being since reconciled to them, and living to this day
in the midst of them, under the said name of Caribbians, as we shall see more
particularly anon, there is no likelihood that it should signify Rebels, since
it were a blasting of their Reputation, and a mark of Infamy to them.

But those who have conversed a long time together among the Savages of
Dominico relate, that the Caribbian Inhabitants of that Island are of opinion,
that their Ancestors came out of the Continent, from among the Calibites, to
make a War against a Nation of the Arouagues, which inhabited the Islands,
which Nation they utterly destroyed, excepting only the Women, whom they took
to themselves, and by that means repeopled the Islands: Whence it comes that
the Wives of the Caribbian Inhabitants of the Islands have a language different
from that of the Men in many things, and in some consonant to that of the
Arouagues of the Continent. He who was the Commander in chief in that
Enterprise bestowed the conquered Islands on his Confidents; and he to whose
lot the Island of Dominico fell was called Ouboutou-timani, that is to say,
King, and caused himself to be carried on the shoulders of those whom the
Islanders call Labouyou, that is, Servants.

There is so little certainty and so much variety in all these Relations, and
others of the like nature, which these poor ignorant people make upon this
occasion, that the most prudent sort of people conceive there cannot any
judgment be grounded thereon: And indeed these Savages themselves speak not
thereof but at adventure, and as people tell stories of what they had seen in
their dreams; so careless have they been in preserving the tradition of their
Origin; and they palpably contradict and confute one the other by the
difference of their Relations: However, we shall find at the end of this
Chapter what seems most probable to have given occasion to most to believe that
they are descended from the Calibites.

In all the several sentiments whereof we have given an account, either out of
the Writings or Discourses of diverse others, there is this that is commendable,
That those who advance them, proceed consequently to the discoveries they had
made, and that they do all that lies in their power to unravel and disengage
ancient and unknown Truths. But if the Relation we are about to give of the
Origin of the Caribbian Inhabitants of the Islands, be the most ample, the
most particular, the most full of Curiosities, and the best circumstanc'd of
any that has hitherto appeared, it is but just we should think it accordingly
the truest and most certain; yet with this caution, that we still leave the
judicious Reader at liberty to follow that sentiment which shall seem most
rational to him. And whereas we ought to render every one the commendation he
justly deserves, we are to acquaint the Public, that it is obliged for these
Particularities and Discoveries to the obliging Communication we have received
thereof from one Master Brigstock an English Gentleman, one of the most curious
and inquisitive Persons in the World, who, among his other great and singular
accomplishments, has attained the perfection of the Virginian and Floridian
Languages, as having in his noble Travels seen all the Islands, and a great
part of the Septentrional America: By that means it was that he came exactly to
understand, upon the very place whereof we shall make mention, and from such
intelligent Persons as could give him an account thereof with some certainty,
the ensuing History of the Origin of our Savages, the truth whereof he will
make good whenever occasion shall require.

The Caribbians were originary Inhabitants of the Septentrional part of
America, of that Country which is now called Florida: They came to Inhabit the
Islands after they had departed from amidst the Apalachites, among whom they
lived a long time; and they left there some of their people, who to this day go
under the name of Caribbians: But their first origin is from the Cofachites,
who only changed their denomination, and were called Caribbians in the Country
of the Apalachites, as we shall see anon.

The Apalachites are a powerful and generous Nation, which continues to this
present planted in the same Country of Florida: They are the Inhabitants of a
gallant and spacious Country called Apalacha, from which they have received
their name, and which begins at the altitude of thirty three degrees and twenty
five minutes, North of the Equinoctial Line, and reaches to the thirty seventh
degree. This people have a communication with the Sea of the great Gulf of
Mexico or New Spain, by the means of a River, which taking its source out of
the Apalachaean Mountains, at the foot whereof they inhabit, after it has
wandered through many rich Campagnes, disembogues it self at last into the Sea
near the Islands of Tacobago: The Spaniards have called this River Riu del
Spirito Santo; but the Apalachites call it still by its ancient name of
Hitanachi, which in their Language signifies fair and pleasant. On the
East Side they are divided from all other Nations by high and far-spreading
Mountains, whose tops are covered with snow most part of the year, and which
separate them from Virginia: on the other sides they abjoin to several
inconsiderable Nations, which are all their friends and confederates.

These Apalachites make it their boast, that they had propagated certain
Colonies a great way into Mexico: And they show to this day a great Road by
land, by which they affirm that their Forces marched into those parts. The
Inhabitants of the Country, upon their arrival gave them the name of Tlatuici,
which signifies Mountaineers or High-Landers, for they were more hardy and more
generous than they. They planted themselves in a quarter like that from which
they came, situate at the foot of the Mountains, in a fertile soil, where they
built a City, as near as they could like that which they had left behind them,
whereof they are possessed to this day. They are so united there by
inter-marriages and other bonds of peace, that they make up but one people with
them; nor indeed could they well be discerned one from the other, if they had
not retained several words of their originary language, which is the only
observable difference between them.

After the Apalachites had planted this Colony, the Cofachites, who lived more
toward the north of America, in a fenny and somewhat barren Country, and who
had continued till then in good correspondence with them, knowing that they
were then far from their best and most valiant men, took an advantageous
opportunity to fall upon their Neighbors the Apalachites, and to force them
out of their habitations, or at least to participate with them of the land
where they had settled themselves, after they should become Masters thereof.
This design having been carried on very cunningly among the chiefest of the
Cofachites, they afterward published it in all their Villages, and got it
approved by all the heads of Families, who instead of minding the business of
Husbandry and setting things in order for the sowing of Corn at the beginning
of the Spring, as they were wont to do other years, prepared their Bows,
Arrows, and Clubs; and having set their habitations on fire, and furnished
themselves with some little provisions out of what was left of the precedent
Winter, they took the field, with their wives and children, and all the little
baggage they had, with a resolution either to conquer or dye, since they had
cut off all hopes of returning to a place which they had destroyed and
despoiled of all manner of conveniences.

In this equipage they in a short time got to the frontiers of their
Neighbors: The Apalachites who thought of nothing less than having an enemy so
near them, were then very busy about the planting of their Mais, and the roots
from which they derive their ordinary sustenance: Those who lived about the
great Lake at the foot of the Mountains, which they call in their Language
Theomi, having perceived this powerful Army ready to fall on them, immediately
made their retreat into the neighboring Mountains, and left their villages and
cattle to the disposal of the enemy; thence they took their march through the
woods; to carry intelligence of this erruption to the Cities which are in the
valleys among the first mountains, where resided the Paracoussis, who is the
King of the Country, with all the considerable forces thereof. Upon this so
unexpected news, the said Prince, while he was making his preparations to go
against the Enemy, posted those who were most in a readiness for the expedition
in the Avenues of the mountains, and placed Ambuscadoes in several parts of the
great Forests, which lie between the great Lake and the Mountains, and through
which there was a necessity of passing to get into that pleasant and spacious
valley, which is above sixty leagues in length, and about ten in breadth; where
are the habitations of the chiefest Inhabitants of the Country, and the most
considerable Cities in the Kingdom.

While the Cofachites were busy about the plundering and pillaging the houses
they had found near the great Lake, the Apalachites had the opportunity to
prepare themselves for the reception of them: But the former, instead of taking
the ordinary Roads and ways which led to the flat Country, which, as we said,
lie between the Mountains, having left their Wives and Children near the great
Lake, under the guard of some Forces they had drawn off from the main Body, and
being guided by some of the Apalachites, whom they had surprised fishing in the
great Lake, crossed through the woods, and made their way over mountains and
precipices, over and through which the Camels could hardly have passed, and by
that means got into the heart and center of the Country, and found themselves
of a sudden in a Province, called that of the Amanites: They without any
resistance surpised the chiefest places of it, wherein they found to guard
them only Women, Children, and some old men, such as were not able to follow
their King, who with his people lay expecting the Enemy at the ordinary
descents which led into the Country.

The Cofachites perceiving that their design had proved so successful, and that
there was a great likelihood that in a short time they should become Masters of
the whole Country, since they had met with so good fortune immediately upon
their first appearance, prosecuted their conquests further, and having Cities
for their retreat, where they had left good strong Garrisons, they marched
toward the King of Apalacha, with a resolution either to fight him, or at
least oblige him to allow them the quiet possession of some part of the
Country. The Apalachite was extremely surpised, when he understood that the
Enemy, whom he had all this while expected on the Frontiers, and at the known
avenues of the Country, had already possessed himself of a Province that lay in
the center of his Dominions, and that he had left Garrisons in the Cities and
most considerable places thereof: However, being a magnanimous and gallant
Prince, he would try whether the chance of Arms would prove as favorable to
him, as he thought his cause good and just; he thereupon came down with his
people out of the Mountains, where he had encamped himself; and having
encouraged those that were about him to do their utmost, he confidently set
upon the vanguard of the Cofachites, which was come out to observe his motion:
having on both sides spent all their arrows, they came to a close fight, and
having taken their Clubs, there was a great slaughter in both Armies, till that
night having separated them, the Cofachites observed that they had lost a great
number of theirs in the engagement, and found that they had to do with a people
that behaved themselves more valiantly than they had imagined to themselves
they would have done; and consequently that their best course would be to enter
into a friendly treaty with them, rather than venture another hazard of their
Forces in a strange Country.

Upon this they resolved, that the next morning they would send Ambassadors to
the King of the Apalachites, with certain Overtures of Peace, and in case of a
refusal (dissembling the loss they had received in the former Engagement) to
declare open War, and to challenge him to be immediately ready to receive their
Charge, which should be much more violent then what they had met withal the day
before; and that then all their Forces were come together.

The Paracousses of the Apalachites having given audience to these
Ambassadors, desired that days time to consider of the Propositions which had
been made to him; and thereupon having required of them the Articles and
Conditions under which they would Treat with him, in case he might be inclined
to Peace, they told him, That they had left their own Country with a resolution
to plant themselves either by friendship or by force in that good and fat
Country whereof he was possessed; and that if he would condescend to the former
of those means, they desired to become one People with the Apalachites, to
dwell in their Country, and to cultivate it, and so to supply the empty places
of those who not long before had gone from among them to plant a new Colony in
some remote parts of the World.

The Apalachite assembled his Council upon these considerations, and having
acquainted them therewith, he represented, That the Army of the Cofachites
hindered the coming in of the Assistances which they might receive from the
other Provinces that had not been ready to come in to them at the beginning of
the War; That by the same means the passage of Provisions was absolutely
obstructed; That the Enemy was Master of the Field, and that without any
resistance he had got into one of the best Provinces of the whole Country,
where he had also possessed himself of places of Importance; and, That though
in the precedent Engagement he had taken particular notice of the incomparable
fidelity and gallantry of his People, in setting upon and fighting against the
Enemies, over whom they had very considerable Advantages, yet had that good
Success been bought with the loss of his most valiant Captains, and the best of
his Soldiers; and consequently it concerned them to bethink themselves of some
means to preserve the rest of the Kingdom, by sparing what was then left of the
choicest Men: And since the Enemies were the first Proposers of the Conditions
of Peace, it would be the safest way to hearken thereto, if it might be done
without any derogation from their Glory, and the great Reputation they had
acquired before; inasmuch as there was waste grounds enough in several places,
and that the Country, by reason of the transplantation of some part of their
Inhabitants, was spacious and fertile enough to sustain them all.

All the chief Commanders of the Apalachites having heard what had been
proposed by their King, and concluding it was not fear that obliged him to
hearken to an Accommodation with the Cofachites, since that the day before he
had ventured his Person among the most forward; but that it proceeded purely
from the desire he had that they might not be rashly exposed to further danger,
and his care of preserving his People, which was already at the mercy of the
Enemy, who had possessed himself of one of the richest Provinces; and having
also understood by some Spies who were come into the Kings Army by some secret
ways, and made their escape out of the Cities where the Cofachites had their
Garrisons, that they treated with great mildness and respect the women and old
men whom they had found there; having, I say, taken all these things into
consideration, they unanimously subscribed to the sentiments of their Prince,
and made answer, That there was a necessity of condescending to an
Accommodation, and making some Agreement upon the most advantageous Conditions
they could, according to the present posture of their Affairs: And after they
had confirmed this resolution by their Ha Ha, which is the sign of the applause
and ratification wherewith they are wont to conclude their Deliberations, they
signified the same to the Ambassadors of the Cofachites, who expected it with
impatience.

This news being carried over to the Camp of the Cofachites, was received with
great joy, as being consonant to the end they had proposed to themselves when
they first undertook the War and left their Country: They thereupon immediately
deputed some of the chiefest among them to agree with the Apalachites about the
absolute conclusion of that Peace, and to sign the Articles of the Treaty.
These Deputies being come to the place where the Prince of the Apalachites
expected them, attended by the most considerable Persons about his Court,
sitting on a Seat somewhat higher then any of the rest, and covered with a rich
Fur, were very kindly received; and having taken their Seats, the King drank to
them of a certain Beverage called Cassina, out of a Bowl of which he first
tasted himself: All that were present at the Council drank afterward in order;
which done, they fell upon the business of the Treaty, which was concluded upon
these Conditions;

That the Cofachites should inhabit promiscuously in the Cities and Towns of
the Apalachites; That in all respects they should be esteemed and accounted as
the natural Inhabitants of the Country; That they should absolutely enjoy the
same Privileges; That they should be subject to the King, as the others were;
That they should embrace the Religion, and observe the Customs of the Country:
Or if they would rather, the Apalachites would resign up to them the rich and
great Province of Amana, to be enjoyed only by them, according to the limits
which should be agreed upon: Provided nevertheless, That they should
acknowledge the King of the Apalachites for their Sovereign, and that from
thence forward they should render him reasonable homage.

This Agreement being thus reciprocally concluded, was attended with mutual
acclamations: Not long after, the Deputies of the Cofachites having given an
account of their negotiation to their Commander in chief and his Council, and
represented to them the choice which had been left them either of living
promiscuously among the Apalachites, or being sole possessors of the Province
into which they were entered; they unanimously accepted of the latter, and so
became absolute Masters of that Province of Amana, whereof the King of the
Apalachites put them himself into quiet possession: The Women, Children, and
Old men, who had been left behind, when all s as were able to bear arms had
followed their Prince, were transported into some of the other Provinces, where
the King appointed a settled habitation for them, and all the gallant men of
that Province who had ventured their lives against the Enemy, and for the
preservation of their Country.

All things being thus settled, both parties laid down their arms, and the
Cofachites went to fetch their Wives, Children, Cattle, Baggage, and the
Soldiers they had left near the great Lake of Theomi; and being safely
returned, they disposed themselves into the Cities appointed them,
congratulating their good fortune in the conquest of so noble a Country,
answerably to their expectation at the first undertaking of the War.

From that time the Apalachites gave the name of Caribbians, or as the French
would have it, Caraibes, to those new comers, who of a sudden, and contrary to
their expectation, forced themselves upon them, to repair the breach which had
been made by the transplantation of some of their people into another Country
of America: so that this word Caraibes signifies, in their language, a sort of
people added, or suddenly and unexpectedly coming in, strangers, or stout and
valiant men; as if they would express, that a generous people, whom they
expected not, were come upon them, and had been added to them: and this
denomination continued to these new comers instead of that of Cofachites, which
has been kept up only in some weak and wretched Families which lived more
toward the north of Florida, and after the departure of the true Cofachites,
possessed themselves of their habitations, and would also have passed under the
name of those who had preceded them in the possession of that Country: Whereas
on the other side, these true Cofachites were known by the name of Caribbians
in the Province of Amana; and therefore henceforward we shall speak of them,
and the Colonies which they have since sent abroad, only under that name.

These two Nations being thus united by the determination of their differences,
and the period they put to a cruel war which might have ruined them both, lived
afterward in good correspondence for many years. But in process of time, the
Caribbians finding themselves multiplied in the Country which they had
conquered by their arms, would not embrace the Religion of the Apalachites, who
adored the Sun, as shall be shown hereafter, nor be present at their Ceremonies
in the Temple they had in the Province of Bemarin, where the Court was; nor in
fine render the King the homages that were due to him for the Province they
were possessed of, according to their promise, and the Articles of the Treaty.

This breach of promise on the part of the Caribbians, and that unjustiafiable
act, proved the occasion of many bloody Wars which happened afterward between
the two Nations: the Caribbians were surrounded of all sides by their
adversaries, who kept them in so, that they could not any way enlarge their
quarters; and on the other side the Apalachites had in the bowels of their
Country a cruel and irreconcilable enemy, who kept them perpetually in alarms,
and obliged them to be always in arms; during which, both the one and the
other, sometimes victorious, sometimes beaten, as the uncertain chance of war
was pleased to carry it, lived a very sad life; insomuch that, many times,
either for want of cultivating the ground, or by reason of the waste committed
in the fields of one another, a little before the Harvest, they were reduced to
such an extreme Famine, as destroyed more people than the Sword.

Above an age was spent in these contests, during which the Caribbians, who had
for their Commander in chief and King of their Nation, one of their most
valiant Captains, whom they called Ragazim, added to their former acquests
another Province, which lay next to them on the South side, and is called
Matica, which reaching through the Mountains by an interval that receives a
torrent descending from the same Mountains, afterward extends toward the
West, as far as the River, which taking its source at the great Lake, after it
has made several Islands, and flown through diverse Provinces, falls at lasst
into the Ocean: This is the famous River which the French have called the River
of May; but the Apalachites name it Basainim, which signifies in their
language, the delicious River, or abounding in fish. The Caribbians having thus
dilated their territories, and forced their Enemies to retreat, made for some
years a truce with the Apalachites, who being wearied out with the Wars, and
discouraged by the loss of a considerable Province, willingly hearkened to that
cessation of arms, and all acts of hostility.

But these Apalachites being exasperated to see their Country grown less by one
of the best Provinces belonging to it, taking the advantage of the opportunity
of that Truce, secretly consulted several times among themselves how they might
carry on their designs more successfully against the Caribbians then they had
done before; and having found by sad experience, that they had not advanced
their affairs much by assaulting their Enemies openly, and by settled
Engagements, they resolved to supplant them by subtlety, and to that end to
think of all ways imaginable to make a division among them, and insensibly to
engage them in a Civil War within their own Country. This advice being received
and generally approved of all their Priests, who are in very great esteem among
them, and have Voices in their most important Assemblies, immediately furnished
them with expedients, and suggested to them the means, which were to this
effect.

They had observed that those people who came in so slily and surpised them in
their own Country, were without Religion, and made no acknowledgment of any
Divinity, whereto they conceived themselves obliged to render any public
Service, and that they stood in fear only of a certain evil Spirit which they
called Mabouya, because he sometimes tormented them; yet so as that in the mean
time they did not do him any homage: Thence it came that for some years after
their arrival, during which they had lived in good correspondence with them,
they endeavored to induce them by their example to acknowledge the Sun to be
the sovereign Governor of the World, and to adore him as God. These
Exhortations and Instructions had a great influence over the Spirits of the
chiefest among the Caribbians, and had made strong impressions in them; so that
having received the first Principles of that Religion while the time of their
mutual correspondence continued, many left the Province of Amana wherein they
had their habitations, and went into that of Bemarin, the principal Province of
the Apalachites, whence they ascended into the Mountain of Olaimi, upon which
the Apalachites made their solemn Offerings; and upon their invitation the
Caribbians had participated of those Cermonies and that Service: These Priests,
whom the Apalachites call Jaouas, which is as much as to say, Men of God, knew
that the seeds of Religion are not so easily smothered in the hearts of men;
and that, though the long Wars they had had with the Caribbians had hindered
the exercise thereof, yet would it be no hard matter for them to blow up, as we
may say, those sparks in them which lay hid under the ashes.

The Truce and Cessation of all acts of Hostility, which had been concluded
between the two Nations, presented the Apalachites with a favorable
opportunity to prosecute their design; whereupon the Priests of the Sun
advised, with the Kings Consent, that there should be a publication made among
the Caribbians, that at the beginning of the Month of March, which they call
Naarim in their language, they would render a solemn Service in honor of the
Sun, on the high Mountain; and that the said Service should be attended with
Divertisements, Feasting, and Presents, which they should liberally give to
such as were present thereat. This Ceremony was no new thing among the
Apalachites, so that the Caribbians could not suspect any circumvention, nor
fear any surprise; for it was a very ancient custom among them to make
extraordinary Prayers to the Sun at the beginning of the Month of Naarim, which
is precisely the time that they have done sowing their Mais. That which they
desire in this Service is, That the Sun would be pleased to cause that which
they had recommended to his care, to spring, grow, and come to maturity. They
have also the same solemnity in the Month of May, at which time they have got
in their first Harvest, to render him thanks for the fruits they conceive that
they have received from his hands. Besides, the Caribbians knew well enough,
that during these Festivals the Apalachites hung up their Bows and Arrows; that
it was accounted a heinous crime among them to go armed into their Temple, and
to raise the least dispute there; and that during those days of Selemnity, the
greatest Enemies were commonly reconciled, and laid aside all enmity. In fine,
they made not the least doubt but that the Public Faith, and the promise
solemnly made, would be inviolably observed.

Upon this assurance they dispose themselves to pass over into the Province of
Bemarin at the time appointed; and that they might be thought to contribute
somewhat on their part to the public Solemnity, they dress themselves with all
the bravery and magnificence they could; and though that even then they were
wont to go very lightly clad, and expose their bodies almost naked, yet the
more to accommodate themselves to the humors of their Neighbors, whom they
were going to visit, they caused* all the Furs, spotted Skins, and Stuffs that
they had, to be made into Clothes: They forgot not also to cause their faces,
their hands, and all those places of their bodies which lay exposed to be seen,
to be painted with a bright red; and they crown themselves with their richest
Garland, interwoven with the different plumage of several rare Birds of the
Country. The Women for their parts, desirous to participate of this Solemnity,
leave nothing undone that might contribute any thing to the adorning of
themselves; the Chains of Shells of several colors, the Pendants, and the high
Coifs enriched with the precious and glittering Stones which the Torrents bring
down along with them out of the high Mountains, made them appear with
extraordinary luster. In this equipage the Caribbians, partly out of curiosity,
partly out of the vanity to show themselves, and some out of certain motives of
Religon, undertake that Pilgrimage: And that they might not raise any jealousy
in those who had so kindly invited them, they leave their Bows, Arrows, and
Clubs at the last Village within their Jurisdiction, and enter into the
Province of Bemarin only with a walking stick, singing and dancing, as they are
all of a merry and divertive disposition.

On the other side, the Apalachites expected them with great devotion, and
answerably to the Orders they had to that purpose received from their King,
whose name was Teltlabin, and whose race commands at present among that people;
they kindly entertained all those who came to the Sacrifice; nay, from the
first entrance of the Caribbians into their Province, they treated them at all
places as cordially as if they had been their Brethren, and that there had
never been any difference between them: They feasted them all along the way,
and conducted them up to the Royal City, which to this day they call Melilot,
that is, the City of Council, inasmuch as it is the habitation of the King and
his Court: The chiefest of the Caribbians were magnificently entertained at the
Palace-Royal, and those of the common sort were received and treated by the
Inhabitants of the City, who spared no cost to heighten the satisfaction of
their Guests.

The day dedicated to the sacrifice of the Sun being come, the King of the
Apalachites with his Court, which was very much increased by the arrival of the
Caribbians, and a great number of the Inhabitants of the other Provinces, who
were come up to the Feast, went up very betimes in the morning to the top of
the Mountain of Olaimi, which is not a full league distant from the City: This
Prince, according to the custom of the Country, was carried in a chair, on the
shoulders of four tall men, attended by four others of the same height, who
were to relieve the former when they were weary: There marched before him
several persons playing on Flutes and other musical Instruments; with this pomp
he came to the place appointed for the Assembly; and when the Ceremony was
over, he made a great distribution of Clothes and Furs, more than he had been
accustomed to do upon such occasions before: But above all, his liberality was
remarkable toward the most considerable persons among the Caribbians; and in
imitation of the Prince, the wealthiest of his people made presents in like
manner to those of that Nation who had vouchsafed their solemn Sacrifice with
their presence; so that most of the Caribbians returned home well satisfied,
and in better Liveries than they had brought thence with them: After they were
come down from the Mountain, they were again treated and entertained with the
greatest expressions of good will, in all the houses of the Apalachites,
through whose habitations they were to return into their quarters: In fine, to
encourage them to a second visit, there were solemn protestations made to them
from the King and his Officers, that they should be at all other times received
with the like demonstrations of affection, if they were desirous to accompany
them four times in the year to the celebration of the same Ceremonies.

The Caribbians being returned into their Province could not make sufficient
acknowledgments of the kind entertainment they had received: Those who had
stayed at home being ravished to see the rich presents which their Countrymen
had brought home, immediately resolved to undertake the same pilgrimage at the
next ensuing Feast: And the day on which it was to be drawing near, there was
so great a contestation among them who should go, that if their Cacick, or
chief Captain, had not taken some course therein, the Province would have been
destitute of Inhabitants: The Apalachites on the other side continued their
entertainments and liberalities; and there was a certain emulation among them
who should be most kind to the Caribbians: Their Priests, who knew what would
be the issue of all this imposture, recommended nothing so much to them, as the
continuation of those good Offices, which they said were very acceptable to the
Sun.

Three years slipped away in these visits; at the end whereof the Apalachites,
who had exhausted themselves in liberalities toward their Neighbors,
perceiving they had gained extremely upon their affections, and that the
greatest part of them were grown so zealous for the service of the Sun, that
nothing would be able to force out of their apprehensions the deep sentiments
they had conceived of his Divinity; resolved, upon the instigation of their
Priests, for whose advice the King and all the people had great respects and
submissions, to take occasion from the expiration of the Truce to renew the war
against the Caribbians, and to forbid them access to their Ceremonies, if they
would not, as they did, make a public profession of believing the Sun to be
God, and perform the promise they had sometime made of acknowledging the King
of the Apalachites for their Sovereign, and do homage to him for the Province
of Amana, upon which account they had been admitted to be the Inhabitants
thereof.

The Caribbians were divided about these proposals: For all those who were
inclined to the adoration of the Sun, were of opinion, that satisfaction should
be given to the Apalachites, affirming, that, though they were not obliged
thereto by their promise, yet would there be an engagement to do it, though it
were only to prevent their being deprived of the free exercise of their
Religion, and debarred their presence at the sacrifices made to the Sun, which
they could not abandon without much regret: The Cacick or chief Commander, and
a great number of the most considerable among the Caribbians alleged on the
contrary, that they would not blast their reputation, and the glory of all
their precedent Victories, by so shameful a peace, which, under pretense of
Religion, would make them subject to the Apalachites; That they were freeborn,
and that, as such, they had left the place of their birth, and transplanted
themselves into a better Country than their own, by force of Arms; That their
greatest concernment was to endeavor the continuance of that precious liberty,
and to cement it with their own blood, if occasion required; That they were the
same men who had sometime forced the Apalachites to resign upto them the most
considerable of their Provinces, such a one as was the center, and as it were
the eye of their Country; That they had not remitted any thing of that
generosity, and that that valor was so far from being extinguished, that on
the contrary they had enlarged their jurisdiction by the acquest of a noble and
spacious Country, which gave them passage beyond the Mountains, whereby they
were surrounded before; That having thus removed out of the way whatever might
obstruct their designs, it would be thought an insupportable cowardice in them,
only under pretense of Religion, and out of pure curiosity of being present at
Sacrifices, to quit the possession of what they had reduced under their power
with so much trouble and bloodshed: In fine, that if any were desirous to adore
the Sun, they needed not to go out of their own Territories to do it, since he
shined as favorably in their Provinces as those of the Apalachites, and looked
on them every day as graciously as on any other part of the world; and if there
were any necessity of consecrating a Mountain to him, or a Grot, they might
find among those which separated their Country from the great Lake, some that
were as high and as fit for those mysteries as that of Olaimi.

Those who maintained the service of the Sun, and were against engaging in a
new war, which must be the sequel of refusing conditions which were as
advantageous to them as to the Apalachites, made answer; that since they had
for some years enjoyed the sweetness of peace, and experienced upon so many
occasions the kind entertainments and generosity of their Neighbors, it would
be the greatest imprudence in the world to run themselves into new troubles,
which they might avoid upon such easy terms, and that without any loss of the
reputation they had acquired; That the acknowledgments which the Apalachites
required for the Province they were possessed of, might be such, and of so
little importance, that it would not be any diminution of their Honor, or
prejudice to their Authority; That as to what concerned the Service and
Sacrifices of the Sun, they were not furnished with such Priests as were
instructed in that Science, and acquainted with the Ceremonies thereof; That it
was much to be feared that if they should undertake to imitate the Jaouas of
the Apalachites, they would, by the miscarriages likely to be committed
therein, draw upon themselves the indignation of the Divinity which they would
serve, instead of gaining its favor; That they had found upon enquiry, that
there was not any Mountain in the whole Country so kindly looked upon by the
Sun, and so pleasant as that of Olaimi: Nor was there any other that had a
Temple naturally made in the Rock, after so miraculous a manner, which was
such, that all the art and industry of man could never bring to that
perfection, and that it could be no other than the work of the beams of that
Divinity which was there adored; That though it were supposed they might find
out a Mountain and a Cave that came somewhat near the other, which yet they
thought impossible, it was questionable whether those Birds who were the Sun's
Messengers would make their habitation there; And that the Fountain consecrated
in honor of him, which wrought admirable effects, and unheard of cures, would
be found there; And consequently, that they should expose themselves to the
derision of the Apalachites, who would still have occasion to make their brags
of an infinite number of prerogatives peculiar to their ancient Temple and
Service, which the new one they pretended to build would never have. From all
which considerations the Religious party concluded, that their best course was
to make a firm peace, that so they might have the convenience of participating
of the same Ceremonies for the future, which they had frequented during the
Truce.

But those who were resolved on the contrary side were so obstinate, that all
those remonstrances prevailed nothing upon them, nor could in the least divert
them from the resolution they had taken never to acknowledge the Apalachites
for their Sovereigns, nor lose their liberty under pretense of Religion and way
of Worship, which their forefathers had been ignorant of: So that, in fine,
this contrariety of sentiments made an absolute rupture among the Caribbians,
so as to divide them into two factions, as the Priests of the Apalachites had
foreseen; whereupon being divided also in their Councels, they could not return
an unanimous answer to the propositions of peace or war which had been made to
them by the Apalachites: But either party growing stronger and stronger daily,
that which voted for an alliance with the Apalachites, and stood for the
adoration of the Sun, became so powerful as to be in a condition to oblige the
other either to embrace their opinion, or quit the Province.

It would be too tedious a Relation to set down here all the mischiefs and
miseries which that Civil War brought among the Caribbians, who mutually
destroyed one the other, till at last, after many fights, the Apalachites
joining with that party which carried on their Interest, the other was forced
to quit the Provinces of Amana and Matica, and to find out a more settled
habitation elsewhere.

The victorious Caribbians having, by the assistance of the Apalachites, rid
themselves of those who were the disturbers of their Peace, fortified their
Frontiers, and placed up and down on the avenues the most valiant and most
generous of their Forces, to deprive the Banished of all hope of ever
returning: That done, they contracted a most strict Alliance with the
Apalachites, submitting themselves to their Laws, embracing their Religion, and
so making themselves one people with them; and that incorporation continues to
this day; yet not so, but that those Caribbians do still retain their ancient
name, as we have already observed in the beginning of this Chapter; as also
many words which are common between them and the Inhabitants of the Caribbies:
Of this kind are, among an infinite number of others, the terms of Cakonnes, to
express the little curiosities which are preserved for their rarity; that of
Bouttou, to signify a Club of a weighty kind of wood; that of Taumali, to
express a certain picquancy or delightfulness of taste; that of Banare, to
signify a familiar Friend; that of Etoutou, to denote an Enemy: They also call
a Bow, Allouba; Arrows, Allouani; a great Pond, Taonaba; the evil Spirit,
Mabouya; and the Soul of a Man, Akamboue; which are the proper terms which the
Caribbian Inhabitants of the Islands make use of at the present to signify the
same things.

As concerning the Caribbians forced out of their Country by those of their own
Nation, and driven out of the limits of their ancient Habitation, and all the
places they had Conquered; having straggled up and down a while near the River
which derives its source from the great Lake, and endeavored to no purpose to
enter into some Accommodation with the Inhabitants of either side of it, they
at last resolved to make their way through their Country, either by fair means
or foul, and so to get into some place where they might perpetuate themselves,
and make a secure establishment of what was left of them: With this resolution
they made a shift to get to the Seaside, where having met with a people which
took compassion on their misery, they wintered among them, and passed over that
disconsolate Season in much want: And while they spent their time in continual
regrets, for their loss of a Country so pleasant and fertile as that which they
had lived in, and considered that they should never enjoy themselves in that
whereto their misfortune had cast them as Exiles, there arrived where they
were, at the beginning of the Spring, two little Vessels, which came from the
Islands called the Lucayos, and had been driven by the Winds into the Road near
which our Caribbians had passed over the Winter: There were in those two
Vessels, which they call Canows or Piragos, about thirteen or fourteen persons,
Inhabitants of Cigateo, one of the Lucayan Islands, who being got ashore,
related to the natural Inhabitants of the Country how they had been forced
thither by a Tempest; and among other things, they told wonders of the Islands
where they lived, adding, that there were yet diverse others beyond them,
toward the Equator, which lay desert, and were not inhabited, and those such
as were accounted better then the others whereof they had given them an
account: That for their parts, all they desired of the Inhabitants of the
Country was only some Provisions, and a little fresh Water, to enable them to
get home to their own Country, from which they conceived themselves to be
distant not above four or five days Sailing.

The Caribbians, who were studying where to find out some new habitation, and
extremely troubled that they had no settled place, where they might no longer be
exposed to the inconveniences of a wandering kind of life, having heard so much
of these Islands, and that they were not far from the Lucayas, resolved to make
their advantage of the opportunity of those Guides, whom they had met with by
so extraordinary a good fortune, to follow them, when they should depart
thence, and after their arrival at home, to plant themselves in some of those
desert Islands whereof they had given so advantageous an account.

They doubted not but that the execution of this enterprise would put a period
to all their miseries: But there was yet a great obstacle lay in their way,
which at firsst they knew not how to overcome, to wit, the want of Vessels to
cross the Sea, and bring them to the places whereof they desired to possess
themselves: The first Proposals were to fell down Trees, and to make them
hollow with fire, as other Nations did, nay that among whom they then were: But
that expedient required a long time to compass it, while in the interim, those
whom they hoped to have for their Conductors would be gone: Whereupon they
thought it the surest way to find out Vessels ready made: To that end they
resolved in the night time to seize on all those which the Nations of the
neighboring Creeks, and and such as lived near the Rivers which fall
thereabouts into the Sea, had ready in their Ports, and in condition fit for
the Sea. The day being come for the departure of the Lucayans, who were to be
their Guides, our Caribbians who had furnished themselves beforehand with all
necessary provisions, met together the most secretly they could, along the
River-sides and near the Ports, and having possessed themselves of all the
Canows or Vessels they met with, joined with the Lucayans, with whom, without
taking any leave of their Hosts, they set Sail for the Lucayas.

The Wind having proved favorable to these Fugitives, they got in a few days
to Cigateo, where they were very civilly entertained by the Inhabitants, who,
having supplied them with all necessary refreshments, conducted them to the
most remote of their Islands, and thence gave them a Convoy to bring them to
the next of the desert Islands whereof they had given them a relation, which
they called Ayay, but it is now called Santa Cruz: In their passage they sailed
by the Island of Boriquen, now called Porto-Rico, which was inhabited by a very
powerful Nation.

It was then in the said Island of Ayay that our Caribbians laid the first
foundations of their Colony, and where enjoying an undisturbed Peace, which
made them forget all precedent misfortunes, they multiplied so, that within a
few years they were forced to spread themselves into all the other Islands now
known by the name of the Caribbbies: And some Ages after, having possessed
themselves of all the inhabitable Islands, they transported themselves into the
Continent of the Meridional part of America, where they have at this day many
great and numerous Colonies, wherein they are so well settled, that though the
Yaos, the Sappayos, the Paragotis, the Arouacas or Arouagues, who are their
Neighbors in the Island of Trinity, and the Provinces of Orinoca, have often
attempted to force them out of their habitations, and engaged against them with
all their Forces, yet do they still continue in them in a flourishing
condition, and entertain so good a correspondence and so perfect a friendship
with our Caribbians, the Inhabitants of the Islands, that these latter march
out once or twice a year to their relief, joining all together with the
Calibites, their Friends and Confederates, against the Arouagues, and other
Nations, their common Enemies.

There is yet another Story concerning the origin of the Insulary Caribbians,
which is, That they are descended from their Confederates the Calibites; and we
are apt to believe somewhat of it may be true, as being the only account which
most of them can give of themselves: For these Caribbians being less powerful
then the Calibites, when they first came among them into the Continent, and
having afterward entered into Alliance with them by Marriages and common
concernments, they made up together but one people, and so there ensued a
mutual communication of Language and particular Customs: And thence it comes
that a great part of the Caribbians, having forgot their first origin, would
have it believed that they are descended from the Calibites: And it is to be
presumed, that it being out of all memory of man, when their Predecessors came
from the Northern parts into these Islands, they have not any knowledge of their
Native Country, which having cast them out of her bosom, and treated them as
Rebels, was not so far regretted by those poor Fugitives, as that they should
be over-careful to preserve the memory of it. On the contrary, it is credible,
that the sooner to forget the miseries they had suffered, they effaced the sad
ideas thereof as much as they could, and were glad of any other Origin: It may
be also, that when the Caribbians first entered the Islands, upon their coming
from the North, they were not so destitute of Inhabitants, but that there were
here and there some Families which might have passed over thither from the
Islands of Hispaniola or Porto-Rico, which they destroyed, reserving only the
Women, whom they might make use of for the propagation of their Colony: And of
this there is yet a greater probability, in that these Caribbians being
banished from among the Apalachites, and by War forced to leave the Country to
the victorious Party, many of their Wives staid behind among the Apalachites,
and the rest of their own Nation who had joined with them: And thence possibly
may proceed the difference there is between the Language of the Men and that of
the Women amongst the Caribbians.

But to give a more particular account of those Colonies of the Caribbians
which are in the Meridional Continent of America, in the first place, the
Relations of those who have entered into the famous River of Orenoca, distant
from the Line, Northward, eight degrees and fifty minutes, affirm, that at a
great distance within the Country, there live certain Caribbians who might
easily have passed over thither from the Island of Tabago, which, of all the
Caribbies, is the nearest to that Continent.

The Dutch Relations acquaint us, that, advancing yet further toward the
Equator, there lies, at seven degrees from that Line, the great and famous
River of Essequeba, near which are planted first the Arouagues, and next to
them the Caribbians, who are continually in war with them, and have their
habitations above the falls of that River, which descend with great violence
from the Mountains; and thence these Caribbians reach to the source of the same
River, and are very numerous, and possessed of a vast territory.

The same Travelers relate, that within six degrees of the Line lies the River
Sarname, or Suriname, into which falls another River named Ikouteca, all along
which there are many Villages inhabited by Caribbians.

There is besides a numerous people of the same Nation, Inhabitants of a
Country which reaches a great way into the Continent, the coasts whereof extend
to the fifth and sixth degree North of the Equator, situate along a fair and
great River named Marouyne, about eighteen Leagues distant from that of
Sarname, which from its source crosses up and down above two hundred leagues of
Country, in which there are many Villages inhabited by Caribbians; who,
observing the same custom with the Islanders, make choice of the most valiant
among them for their Cacicks, or Commanders in chief, and are somewhat of a
higher stature than those Inhabitants of the Caribbies, yet not differing much
from them, save only that some of them cover their privy parts with a piece of
cloth, but rather for ornament, than out of any consideration of shame or
modesty: Those therefore who have traveled into those Countries affirm, that,
from the mouth of the River Marouyne, which lies at five degrees and forty five
minutes of the Line to the North, to the source of it, there are twenty days
sail, and that all along it the Caribbians have their Villages like those of
our Islanders.

We observe further out of the Voyages of some Dutch, that the Inhabitants of
that Continent, through which the River of Cayenna makes its passage into the
Ocean, are naturally Caribbians.

In fine, it is not impossible but that these Caribbians might cross those
Countries as far as Brasil; for those who have made voyages thither, affirm,
that among the Provinces, which lie along the coasts of the South Sea, there
are some people, commonly known by the name of Caribbians; and that being of a
more hardy and daring constitution, as also more apprehensive and subtle than
the other Indians, Inhabitants of Brasil, they are so highly esteemed among
them, that they conceive them to be endu'd with a more excellent kind of
knowledge than the others; whence it comes that they have a great submission
for their Counsels, and desire them to preside at all their Festivals and
rejoicings, which they seldom celebrate without the presence of some one of
these Caribbians, who upon that account take their progress up and down the
Villages, where they are received with acclamations, entertainments and great
kindness, as John de Lery has observed.

Were it necessary to produce any further confirmation to prove that these
Caribbians, scattered into so many places of the Continent of the Meridional
part of America, are of the same Nation with the Islanders, we might allege
what is unanimously affirmed by the two Dutch Colonies planted in those coasts,
to wit, those of Cayenna and Berbica, both neighbors to the Caribbians of the
Continent, to show the conformity and resemblance there is in many things, as
constitution, manners, customs, etc. between them and the Indian Inhabitants of
the Caribbies, of whom we shall give an account hereafter: But it is time we
conclude this chapter, which is already grown to a great length; yet could it
not be divided, by reason of the uniformity and connection of the matter.

Yet have we a word further to add, in answer to a question, which the
curiosity of some person might happily take occasion to start, which is, How long
it may be since the Caribbians came out of Florida into these Islands? We must
acknowledge there can no certain account be given of it, inasmuch as these
Nations have commonly no other Annals than their own memories: But in regard
those people ordinarily live two hundred years, it is not to be thought strange
that the occurrences happening among them, should be transmitted to posterity
to three or four Generations. And to confirm this, we may aver that there are
many men and women among them who can give an exact account of the first
arrival of the Spaniards in America, as if it had happened but yesterday: So
that the remembrance of the departure of the Caribbians out of Florida, and the
wars they have had there, being yet fresh among the Apalachites, those who have
heard them discourse, conjecture that it may be about five hundred years since
those things came to pass. But if it be further questioned, why they did not
endeavor to make their way back again into Florida, to be revenged of the
Apalachites, and those of their own Nation, who had forced them thence,
especially after they had multiplied and recruited themselves so powerfully in
the Islands? it may be answered, That the difficulty of Navigation, which is
very easy from the Caribbies to Florida, but very dangerous from Florida to
the Caribbies, the winds being commonly contrary, chilled the earnestness they
might have to make any such attempt. In the next place it is to be noted, that
the air of the Islands being warmer, and the soil as good, and in all
appearance more suitable to their constitution than that of Florida, they
apprehended, that those who had forced them thence, had, contrary to their
intentions, procured them a greater happiness than they could have desired,
and, thinking to make them miserable, had made them fortunate in their exile.

CHAP. VIII. By way of Digression giving an account of the Apalachites, the
Nature of their Country, their Manners, and their ancient and modern Religion.
SInce we have had occasion to speak so much concerning the Apalachites, and
that above one half of the ancient Caribbians, after the expulsion of those
among them who would not adore the Sun, have to this present made up one people
and one Commonwealth with those Apalachites, it will be consonant to our
design, especially since the subject thereof is rare and little known, if we
give some account of the nature of their Country, and the most remarkable
things that are in it; as also of the manners of the Inhabitants, the Religion
they have had heretofore, and that which they profess at this day, as we have
the particulars thereof from the English, who have traded among them, and have
not long since laid the foundations of a Colony in the midst of the noblest,
and best known of their Provinces.

The Territories of the Apalachites consist of six Provinces, whereof three are
comprehended within that noble and spacious Vale which is encompassed by the
Mountains of the Apalates, at the foot whereof these people inhabit: The most
considerable of those Provinces, and which lies toward the East, wherein the
King keeps his Court; is called Bemarin: That which is in the midst, and as it
were in the center of the three, is called Amani or Amana: And the third of
those which are within that Vale, is known by the name of Matica. True it is,
that this last, which begins in the Vale, reaches a great way into the
Mountains, nay goes yet much beyond, even to the South Side of the great Lake,
which they call Theomi: The other Provinces are Schama and Meraco, which are in
the Apalatean Mountains; and Achalaques, which is partly in the Mountains, and
partly in the Plain, and comprehends all the Marshes and Fenny places,
confining on the great Lake Theomi, on the North-side.

The Country under the King of the Apalachites being thus divided into six
Provinces, there are in it some Mountains of a vast extent and prodigious
height, which are for the most part inhabited by a people living only upon what
they get by hunting, there being great store of wild beasts in those
Wildernesses: Besides which, there are also certain Vales, which are peopled by
a Nation that is less barbarous, such as addicts it self to the cultivation of
the earth, and is sustained by the fruits it produces: And lastly, there are
abundance of Marshes and Fenny places, and a great Lake, whereof the
Inhabitants are very numerous, maintaining themselves by fishing, and what the
little good ground they have furnishes them withal.

The three Provinces which are within the Vale, which, as we said in the
precedent Chapter, is sixty leagues in length, and about ten more in breadth,
lie as it were in a Champion Country, save only, that in some places there are
certain risings and eminences, on which the Towns and Villages are commonly
built; many little Rivers, which descend from the Mountains, and abound in
Fish, cross it up and down in several places: That part of it which is not
reduced to culture is well furnished with fair trees of an excessive height:
For instance, there are Cedars, Cypress, Pines, Oaks, Panamas, which the French
call Saxafras, and an infinite variety of others which have no proper names
among us.

As concerning the Fruit Trees of this Country, besides Chestnut and
Walnut-Trees, which grow naturally there, the English who have planted
themselves in those parts, as we shall relate more at large toward the end of
this Chapter, have planted Orange Trees, sweet and sharp Citrons, Lemons,
several sorts of Apples and Pears, and diverse Stones, as of Plumbs, Cherries,
and Apricocks, which have thrived and multiplied so, that in some places of
this Country there are more European fruits then in any other part of America.

There is also good store of those lesser sort of Trees which bear leaves or
flowers of sweet scent, such as Laurel, Jessemine, Roses, Rosemary, and all
those others that are so ornamental in the Garden: Nor is there any want of
Pinks, Carnations, Tulips, Violets, Lillies, and all the other Flowers which
adorn Knots and Borders.

Pot Herbs also, and all sorts of Pulse and Roots, thrive very well there:
Citruls, Cucumbers, and Melons are common all Summer long, and as well tasted
as those which grow in any part of the Caribbies.

Strawberries and Raspberries grow in the Woods without any culture: They have
also Small-nuts, Gooseberries, and an infinite variety of other small Fruits,
which in their degree contribute to the delight and refreshment of the
Inhabitants.

The Wheat, Barley, Rye, and Oats which some sowed there at several Seasons, and
in different Soils, has grown only to the blade; but in requital, there grows
every where such abundance of small Millet, Lentils, Chick-pease, Fetches, and
Mais, or Turkish Wheat, which are sown and harvested twice a year, that the
Inhabitants of the Plain Country have enough to supply those who live toward
the Mountains, who bring them in exchange several sorts of Furs. The Lands that
are sown with Turkish Wheat are enclosed with Quick-set Hedges, planted on both
sides with Fruit Trees, most whereof are covered with wild Vines, which grow at
the foot of the Trees.

As to the Volatiles of this Country, there are Turkeys, Pintadoes, Parrots,
Woodquists, Turtles, Birds of prey, Eagles, Geese, Ducks, Herons, white
Sparrows, Tonatzuli, a kind of bird that sings as sweetly as the Nightingal,
and is of an excellent plumage; and abundance of other Birds commonly seen near
Rivers and in the Forests, quite different from those that are seen in other
parts of the World.

The Apalachites have no knowledge at all of Seafish, as being at too great a
distance from the Coasts; but they take abundance in the Rivers and Lakes,
which are extremely nourishing, of an excellent taste, and much about the
bigness and in figure somewhat like our Pikes, Carps, Perches, and Barbels: They
also take Castors and Bevers near the great Rivers, Lakes, and Pools; they eat
the flesh of them, and make Furs of the Skins, for Winter-caps and other uses.

There is no venomous creature nor any wild beast in the lower part of the
Country; for the Inhabitants of the Mountains, who are expert Huntsmen, drive
them into the Forests, where they find them continual work and sport: So that
the flocks of sheep, and herds of cattle and swine graze up and down the skirts
of the Mountains without any body to look after them. But within the woods, and
in the deserts, which are not much frequented by men, there are diverse
Monstrous and dangerous Reptiles, as also Bears, Tigers, Lions, Wolves, and
some other kinds of cruel Beasts, which live by prey, and are particular to
those Countries.

The men in these Countries are for the most part of high stature, of an
Olive-colour, and well proportioned, their hair black and long: Both men and
women are very neat and curious in keeping their hair clean and handsomely
ordered: The women tie up theirs about the crown of the head after the form of
a Garland; and the men dispose theirs behind the ears: But upon days of public
rejoicing, all have their hair loose, disheveled, and dangling over their
shoulders; a fashion becomes them well. The Inhabitants of those Provinces that
lie toward and among the Mountains, cut off all the hair on the left side of
the head, that so they may the more easily draw their Bows, and they order that
which grows on the other side, so as to make a crest standing over the right
ear: Most of them wear neither Caps nor any thing instead of Shoes, but they
cover the body with the skins of Bears or Tigers, neatly sown together, and cut
after the fashion of close coats, which reach down to their knees, and the
sleeves are so short that they come not over the elbow.

The Inhabitants of the other Provinces which are seated in the Vales and
Plains, went heretofore naked from the Navel upwards, in the Summertime, and
in Winter, they wore garments of Furrs; but now both men and women are clad all
the year long: In the hottest seasons, they have light clothes, made of cotton,
wool, or a certain herb, of which they make a thread as strong as that of Flax:
The women have the art of spinning all these materials; and weaving them into
several kinds of stuffs, which are lasting; and delightful to the eye. But in
the winter, which many times is hard enough, they are all clad in several kinds
of skins, which they have the skill to dress well enough: They leave the hair
on some, and so make use of them as Furs: They have also the art of tanning
Ox-hides, and other skins, and making Shoes and Boots of them.

The men wear Caps made of Otter-skins, which are perfectly black and
glittering, pointed before, and set out behind with some rich feathers, which
hanging down over their shoulders make them look very gracefully: but the women
have no other ornament about the head, but what is derived from the several
dresses of their hair: They make holes in their ears, and wear pendants of
Crystal, or made of a certain smooth stone they have, which is of as bright a
green as that of an Emrald: Of the same materials they also make great
Necklaces, which they wear when they would appear in state: They make great
account of Corral, Crystal, and yellow Amber, which are brought to them by
Strangers; and they are only the Wives of the principal Officers that have
Bracelets and Necklaces made of them: Though there be some Spanish and English
Families among them, yet have they not altered any thing either as to their
Clothes or course of Life.

The ordinary sort of people wear only a close coat without sleeves, over a
thin garment of Goat Skins, which serves them for shirts: The Coat which comes
down to the calf of the leg, is tied about the wast with a leathern girdle,
which is set out with some little embroidery: But the Officers and Heads of
Families wear over that a kind of short Cloak, which covers only the back and
the arms, though behind it falls down to the ground: This Cloak is fastened
with strong leathern points, which make it fast under the neck, and lie close
to the shoulders: The women's garments are of the same fashion with those of the
men, save that those of the former come down to the ankles, and the Cloak has
two open places on the sides, through which they put forth their arms.

To keep themselves clear of Vermin, they often wash their bodies with the
juice of a certain root, which is of as sweet a scent as the Flower-de-luce of
Florence, and has this further virtue, that it makes the nerves more supple,
and fortifies and causes a smoothness all over the body, and communicates an
extraordinary delightful scent thereto.

The Cities of the three Provinces that are in the spacious Plain, which is at
the foot of the Mountains, are encompassed on the outside by a large and deep
Moat, which on the inside, instead of walls, is all planted with great posts
pointed at the top, thrust a good depth into the ground; or sometimes with
quick-set hedges intermixed with very sharp thorns; they are commonly about five
or six foot in breadth: The Gates are small and narrow, and are made fast with
little pieces of wood, which lie cross between small ramperts of earth that are
on both sides, and which command the avenues: There are commonly but two Gates
to every City; to enter in at them, a man must pass over a bridge so narrow,
that two men cannot well march on a front upon it: The Bridge is built upon
piles, which sustain certain planks, which they draw up in the night when they
fear the least trouble.

It is seldom seen that there is above one City in every Province; nay there
are some that have not above eight hundred houses in them: The Metropolis of
the Country, which is called Melilot, has above two thousand; they are all
built of pieces of wood planted into the ground and joined one to another: The
covering is for the most part of the leaves of reeds, grass, or rushes: Those
of the Captains are done over with a certain Mastick, which keeps off the rain,
and preserves the thatch from decaying in many years: The floors of all the
houses is of the same material, whereto they add a certain golden sand which
they get out of the neighboring Mountains, and which gives such a luster as if
they were sown with little spangles of Gold.

The Rooms of the ordinary sort of people are hung only with a kind of Mat,
made of Plantane-leaves and rushes, which they have the art of dying into
several colors; those of persons considerable among them, are hung with
precious Furs, or Deer-skins painted with diverse figures, or with a kind of
Tapistry made of Birds-feathers, which they so industriously intermingle, that
it seems to be embroidered: Their Beds are about a foot and a half from the
ground, and are covered with skins that are dressed, and as soft as can be
wished: These skins are commonly painted with Flowers, Fruits, and a hundred
such inventions, and their colors are so well set on and so lively, that at a
distance one would take them for rich Tapistry: The wealtheir sort in the
winter time have their beds covered with the skins of Martins, Beavers, or
white Foxes, which are so well dressed, and perfumed with such artifice, that
they never admit any thing of ordure: The Officers and all the most
considerable Inhabitants lie on Mattresses filled with a certain down that
grows on a little plant, and is as soft as silk; but the common people take
their rest on dried sern, which has the property of taking away the weariness
of the body, and retriving the forces exhausted by hunting, gardening, and all
the other painful exercises consequent to their course of life.

The Vessels they use in their houses are either of wood or earth, enameled
with diverse colors, and very delightfully painted: They sharpen upon stones
the teeth of several wild beasts, and therewith arm their Arrows and Lances:
Before strangers came among them and traded in their Country, they knew not
there was such a thing as Iron; but they made use of extraordinary hard and
sharp stones instead of wedges, and certain smooth and cutting bones, instead
of knives.

They all live very amicably together under the conduct of a King, who keeps
his Court at Melilot, the Metropolis of the Kingdom: In every City there is a
Governor, and other subordinate Officers, who are appointed by him, and
changed at his pleasure, as he thinks most convenient: The Villages also have
Captains and heads of Families, by whom they are governed. All immovable goods
are common among these people, and excepting only their houses, and the little
gardens belonging to them, they have no propriety in any thing: they carry on
the business of Agriculture in common, and they share the fruits of the earth
among themselves: At sowing-time the Governors and their Officers oversee the
work; and at that time all those who are of age to do any thing abroad, go out
betimes in the morning to their work, and continue there till the evening, at
which time they return to their Towns and Villages to take their rest: While
they are at work, it is the business of their Chiefs to provide them somewhat
extraordinary in meat and drink: They dispose their Harvest into the public
Granaries, which are in the midst of their Towns and Villages; and at every
full Moon, and at every new Moon, those who are entrusted with the distribution
thereof, supply every Family, according to the number of persons whereof it
consists, with as much as will suffice.

They are a temperate people, and hate all kind of voluptuousness, and whatever
tends to effeminacy: And though Vines grow naturally in their Country, yet do
they not make any wine but what is requisite for the divine service: Fair water
is their ordinary drink, but at great entertainments, they make use of a
pleasant kind of Beer, which is made of Turkey wheat: They also have the art of
making an excellent kind of Hydromel, or Mead, which they keep in great earthen
vessels: The great abundance of honey which they find among the Rocks, and in
the clefts of hollow trees, supplies them with that whereof they make that
delicious drink, which is such as may well pass for Sack, especially after it
has been kept a long time.

Those of the same Family live so lovingly together, that there are among them
some houses where an old man has his children, and his children's children, to
the third, nay sometimes to the fourth generation, all living under the same
roof, to the number of a hundred persons, and sometimes more. Most of the other
Nations of the Septentrional part of America who inhabit along the Seacoast,
are so slothful, that in the winter time they are in great want, because they
had not sown any thing when the time served, or had consumed the fruits of the
precedent harvest in extraordinary entertainments and debauches: But the
Apalachites hate nothing so much as idleness, and they are so addicted to
pains-taking, that the fruits of the earth, being answerable to their labor,
and being distributed with prudence and moderation, maintain them plentifully,
nay so that they can, in case of necessity, assist their Neighbors the
Inhabitants of the Mountains: Both men and women are perpetually employed,
after seed-time and harvest, in spinning of Cotton, Wool, and a certain Herb,
which is soft and strong, for the making of cloth, and several ordinary sorts
of stuffs, wherewith they cover themselves: Some among them employ themselves
in making of earthen ware; others in making Tapistry of the plumage of Birds;
others, in making of Baskets, Panniers, and other little pieces of
household stuff, which they do with a strange industry.

They are of a very loving and obliging disposition: And whereas their distance
from the Sea exempts them from being subject to receive any displeasure from
Strangers, they are in like manner ignorant what entertainments to make them,
when they chance to visit them, and are never weary of expressing all manner of
friendship toward them: They are docible and susceptible of all sorts of good
disciplines; but they have this discommendable in them, that they are very
obstinate in their opinions, easily angered, and much addicted to revenge, when
they are convinced that they have been injured: They are extremely apt to give
credit to their dreams, and they have some old dotards among them, who openly
make it their business to interpret them, and foretell what things shall happen
after them.

They have had a long continuance of peace; however they think it prudence to
stand always upon their guard, and they have always Sentinels at the avenues of
their Cities, to prevent the incursions of a certain savage and extremely cruel
people, which has no settled habitation, but wander up and down the Provinces
with an incredible swiftness, making havoc wherever they come, especially
where they find no resistance.

The Arms of the Apalachites are, the Bow, the Club, the Sling, and a kind of
great Javelin, which they dart out of their hands, when they have spent all
their Arrows: And whereas those that inhabit toward the woods and in the
Mountains, live only by hunting, continual exercise makes them so expert in
shooting with the Bow, that the King, who always has a Company of them about
his person, has no greater diversion than to see them shoot at a mark for some
prize, which he gives him who in fewest shots came to the place assigned, or
has shot down a Crown set up upon the top of a Tree.

They are passionate lovers of Music, and all instruments that make any kind
of harmony, insomuch that there is very few among them but can play on the
Flute, and a kind of Hawboy, which being of several bigness, make a passably
good harmony, and render a sound that is very melodious: They are mightily
given to dancing, capering, and making a thousand postures, whereby they are of
opinion they disburthen themselves of all their bad humors, and that they
acquire a great activity and suppleness of body, and a wonderful swiftness in
running. They heretofore celebrated solemn dances at the end of every harvest,
and after they had made their Offerings to the Sun upon the Mountain of Olaimi;
but now they have no set and appointed time for these divertisements.

Their voice is naturally good, mild, flexible, and pleasant; whence it comes
that many among them make it their endeavor to imitate the singing and
chirping of Birds; wherein they are for the most part so fortunate, that like
so many Orpheus's they entice out of the woods to follow them, those Birds
which think they hear only those of their own species: They do also by singing
alleviate the hard labor they are addicted unto, and yet what they do, seems
to be done rather out of divertisement, and to avoid idleness, than out of any
consideration of advantage that they make thereof.

Their Language is very smooth, and very plentiful in comparisons: That spoken
by the Captains and all persons of quality, is more elegant and fuller of
flourishes than that of the common sort of people: Their expressions are very
precise, and their periods short enough: While they are yet children, they
learn several songs, made by the Jaouas in honor and commendation of the Sun;
they are also acquainted with several other little pieces of Poetry, wherein
they have comprehended the most memorable exploits of their Kings, out of a
design to perpetuate the memory thereof among them, and the more easily
transmit it to their posterity.

All the Provinces which acknowledge the King of Apalacha for their Sovereign,
understand the language commonly spoken in his Court; yet does not this hinder
but that each of them has a particular dialect of its own, whence it comes
that the language of some, is in some things different from that of others of
the Inhabitants: The Provinces of Amana and Matica, in which there are to this
day many Caribbian Families, have retained to this present many words of the
ancient idiome of these people, which confirms what we have laid down for a
certain assertion, to wit, that being known by the same name, and having many
expressions common to them with the Inhabitants of the Caribby-Islands, those
Families have also the same origin with them, as we have represented in the
precedent chapter.

They heretofore adored the Sun, and had their Priests, whom they called
Jaouas, who were very superstitious in rendering to him the service which they
had invented in honor of him: their persuasion was, that the rays of the Sun
gave life to all things; that they dried up the earth; and that once the Sun
having continued four and twenty hours under an eclipse, the earth had been
overflown; and that the great Lake which they call Theomi, was raised as high
as the tops of the highest Mountains that encompass it; but that the Sun having
recovered the eclipse, had, by his presence, forced the waters to return into
their abysses; that only the Mountain dedicated to his honor, and wherein his
Temple was, was preserved from that deluge; and that their Predecessors, and
all the beasts which are at present in the woods and upon the earth, having
retired to the said Mountain, were preserved for the repopulation and recruit
of the whole earth: So that they conceive themselves to be the most ancient
people of the world; And they affirm, that from that time they have
acknowledged the Sun for their God.

They were of opinion, that the Sun had built himself the Temple which is in
the Mountain of Olaimi, the ascent whereof is distant from the City of Melilot
somewhat less than a league; and that the Tonatzuli (which are certain little
birds about the bigness of a Quail, and whose bellies and wings are of a bright
yellow, the back of a sky-colour, and the head of a plumage, partly red, and
partly white) are the messengers and children of the Sun, which always
celebrate his praises.

The service they rendered the Sun consisted in saluting him at his rising, and
singing hymns in honor of him: They observed the same Ceremonies also in the
evening, entreating him to return, and to bring the day along with him: And
besides this daily service which every one performed at the door of his house,
they had also another public and solemn service, which consisted in sacrifices
and offerings, and was performed by the Jaouas, four times in the year, to wit,
at the two seed-times, and after the two harvests, upon the Mountain of Olaimi,
with great pomp, and a general concourse of all the Inhabitants of the six
Provinces.

This Mountain of Olaimi is seated, as we said before, in the Province of
Bemarin, about a league distant from the Royal City of Melilot; but there is
about another league of ascent and winding from the foot of it, ere a man can
get to the top of it: It is certainly one of the most pleasant and most
miraculous Mountains in the world: Its figure is perfectly round, and the
natural descent extreme steepy; but to facilitate the access thereof to such as
are to go up, they have cut a good broad way all about it, and there are here
and there several resting places gained out of the Rock, like so many neeches:
All the circumference of it, from the foot to within two hundred paces of the
top, is naturally planted with goodly trees of Saxafras, Cedar, and Cypress,
and several others from which there issue Rosins, and Aromatic gums, of a very
delightful scent: On the top of it there is a spacious plain, smooth and eaven
all over, and somewhat better than a league in compass; it is covered with a
delightful green livery of a short and small grass, which is intermixed with
Thyme, Marjoram, and other sweet smelling herbs: And it was upon the top of
this Mountain, and upon this pleasant verdure that the people stood, while the
Priests of the Sun performed the divine service.

The place which served them for a Temple, is a large and spacious Grott, or
Cave, which is naturally cut in the Rock, on the East Side of the Mountain: It
has a vast and large mouth, as the entrance of a magnificent Temple: As soon
as the Sun is risen, he darts his rays on that entrance, which has before it a
fair and spacious square place, which a man would say were made by art in the
Rock: And there it is that the Jaouas, the Priests of the Sun, stay expecting
his rising to begin their ordinary Ceremonies on Festival days. This Cave
within is oval, two hundred foot in length, and proportionably broad: The
Vault, which is naturally cut in the Rock, rises up circularly from the ground
to about a hundred foot high: There is just in the midst of it a great hole, or
Lanthorn, which enlightens it from the top of the Mountain: This Lanthorn is
encompassed with great stones, laid close together to prevent peoples falling
in: The Vault on the inside is perfectly white, and the surface covered with a
certain Saltpeter, which a man might take for white Coral diverfy'd into
several different figures; the whole compass of it is of the same luster: The
floor of it is also extremely eaven and smooth, as if it were all of one piece
of marble. In fine, the greatest ornament of this Temple consists in its
perfect whiteness: At the bottom of it there is a great Basin or Cistern, just
over against the entrance, which is full of a very clear water, which
perpetually distilling out of the Rock, is received into that place. Just in
the middle of this Temple, directly under the Lanthorn which enlightens it,
there is a great Altar all of one stone, of a round figure, three foot in
height from the floor, and sustained by a short pillar, which Altar and the
Pedestal seem to have been cut out of the place where it stands, that being in
all probability a piece of a Rock which jutted out upon the floor of that
miraculous Cave.

The Sacrifices which the Jaouas offered to the Sun, consisted not in the
effusion of man's blood, or that of some certain beasts; for they were of a
persuasion, that the Sun, giving life to all things, would not be pleased with
a service that should deprive those creatures of the life which he had bestowed
on them; but the Sacrifice consisted only in Songs, which they had composed in
honor of him, as also in the perfumes of certain aromatical drugs, which they
appointed to be burnt on his Altar, and in the offerings of garments, which the
rich presented by the hands of the Priests, to be afterward distributed among
the poorer sort of people.

All this Ceremony, which was performed four times a year, lasted from
Sunrising till noon, at which time the Assembly was dismissed: The Priests
went up to the Mountain on the Eve of every Festival, to prepare themselves for
that solemn Action; and the people, which came thither from all the Provinces,
were there present some time before Sunrising. The way which led up to the
Mountain was enlightened by great Fires, which were kept in all that Night, for
the convenience of those who went thither to adore. All the people remained
without upon the Mountain, and none but the Priests durst come near the Grot,
which served them for a Temple. Those who brought any Garments to be
distributed to the poor, presented them to the Priests who stood at the
entrance, and they hung them on the Poles which were on both sides of the
Portal, where they remained till after the Service, and then they were
distributed among the poor, as were also the other presents which the rich
offered, and which were in like manner kept till the same time: Those also who
brought Perfumes to burn on the Altar, delivered their presents to the Priests.

As soon as the Sun began to appear, the Priests who stood before the Temple
began their Songs and Hymns, adoring him several times on their knees; then
they went one after another to cast the Incense and Perfume which they had in
their hands upon the Fire, which they had before kindled on the Altar, as also
upon a great Stone which stood before the entrance of the Grot: This Ceremony
being ended, the chiefest of the Priests powered some Honey into a hollow Stone,
made somewhat like those Stones wherein the Holy Water stands in some places,
which Stone stood also before this Temple; and into another, which was of the
same figure and the same matter, he put some corns of Turkey-wheat a little
bruised, and destitute of their outward Shell, as also some other small grains,
which the Birds consecrated to the Sun, called the Tonatzuli, do greedily feed
upon: These Birds, whereof there are great numbers in the Woods which lie round
about this Mountain, were so accustomed to find these. Treatments which were
prepared for them in that place, that they failed not to come there in great
companies as soon as the Assembly was retired.

While the Priests continued burning the perfume, and celebrating the praises
of the Sun, the People who were upon the Mountain having made several bowings
at the rising of the Sun, entertained themselves afterward in some kinds of
recreation, dances, and songs, which they sung in honor of him; and afterward
sitting down on the grass, every one fell to what he had brought along with him
for his Viaticum.

Thus they continued there till noon; but when it came near that time, the
Priests, quitting the gate of the Temple, went into the body of it, and
disposing themselves about the Altar, which stood in the midst, they began to
sing afresh: Then as soon as the Sun began to cast his golden beams on the
border of the opening or Lanthorn, under which the Altar was erected, they put
Incense and other perfumes upon the fire which they had kindled the night
before, and very carefully kept in upon that Altar: Having ended their Songs,
and consumed all their Perfumes, they all retired to the entrance of the
Temple, before the Gate, excepting only six, who remained near the Altar; and
while those who stood at the entrance lift up their Voices more then ordinary,
the others who remained at the Altar let go out of their hands, at the same
time, every one six of the Tonatzuli, which they had brought thither, and kept
in Cages for that purpose: These Birds having flown about the Temple, and
finding the entrance possessed by the Priests, who were at the Gate with Boughs
in their hands, and frighted them with their Voices, took their flight out at
the open place in the midst of the Temple; and after they had flown about a
while, the Assembly which was upon the Mountain entertained them with loud
cries of rejoicing, as accounting them to have put a period to the Ceremony,
and looking on them as the Children and Messengers of the Sun, they immediately
got into the Woods.

As soon as these Birds were gone the people marched down in order from the
Mountain, and passing near the Temple, the Priests, who were still in their
Office, caused them to enter into it; and after they had washed their hands and
their faces in the Fountain, they ordered them to go out at the same entrance,
which was divided by a small partition, purposely made there to prevent
confusion and disorder: Then at their coming out they took another way, which
led them into the Road that conducted to the Mountain, and was the same by
which they had ascended; and so every one made toward his own home.

The poor, whereof the Priests had a Catalogue, staid till all the rest were
gone, and received from their hands the Garments, and all the other Presents
which the rich had made to the Sun, to be distributed among them; which done,
all left the Mountain, and there was an end of the Ceremony.

But now, since the greatest and most considerable part of the people who are
Inhabitants of the Provinces of Bemarin and Matica, and particularly the King
and City of Melilot, have embraced the Christian Religion, this Mountain and
its Temple are not much frequented, unless it be out of curiosity: Nor does the
King permit his Subjects of the other Provinces, who have not received Baptism,
to go up thither to perform their Sacrifices and all their ancient
Superstitions.

They believed the immortality of the Soul; but they had so disguised this
Truth with Fables, that it was in a manner smothered thereby. They embalmed the
bodies of their deceased Relations with several sorts of Gums and Aromatical
Drugs, which had the virtue of preserving them from corruption; and after they
had kept them sometimes above a year in their houses, they buried them in their
Gardens, or in the neighboring Forests, with great lamentations and
ceremonies. They show to this day at the foot of the pleasant Mountain of
Olaimi, the Sepulchers of several of their Kings, which are cut in the Rock;
there is planted before every one of them a fair Cedar, for the better
observation of the place, and more exact continuance of their memories.

To make a greater expression of their mourning, and to show how much they
bewailed the death of their Friends and Kindred, they cut off some part of their
hair; But when any King died they shaved the whole head, and suffered not their
hair to grow again, till they had bewailed him for the space of fifteen months.

The Knowledge which the Apalachites have of God, they have attained to by
several degrees: For, to go to the bottom of the business, it is about an Age
since that the first Seeds of Christian Religion were sown in that part of
Florida, by a French Colony consisting of several Persons of Quality, which was
brought thither and established there by one Captain Ribauld in the time of
Charles the Ninth King of France: The first thing he did was to build a Fort,
which he named Carolina, in honor of His Christian Majesty: He imposed also on
the Capes, Ports, and Rivers of that Country, the names they are at the present
known by; so that along the Coast a man finds a place called the Port Royal,
the French Cape, the Rivers of Seine, Loyre, Charante, Garonne, Daufins, May,
Sum, and several other places, which have absolute French names, and
consequently are a manifest argument that the said Nation have heretofore had
some command there.

But what is more worthy observation, and conduces more to our purpose, is,
that at this first Expedition for Florida, there went along with the
Adventurers two Learned and Religious Persons, who immediately upon their
arrival in the Country made it their business, by all sorts of good offices, to
insinuate themselves into the affections of the Inhabitants, and to learn their
Language, that so they might give them some knowledge of God, and the sacred
mysteries of his Gospel. The Memorials which Captain Ribauld left behind him as
to that particular, show how that the King Saturiova, who governed the Quarter
where the French had established themselves, and who had for Vassals to him
several little Kings and Princes who were his Neighbors, received those
Preachers very kindly, and recommended it to all his Subjects, that they should
have a singular esteem for them; so that the affection those poor people bore
them, and the fidelity and zeal the others expressed for the advancement of
their Conversion, raised even then very great hopes that the work of the Lord
would prosper in their hands, and that that little portion of his Vineyard
being carefully dressed, would in time bring forth many good and precious
fruits, to the praise of his grace.

These happy beginnings and first fruits of the Gospel of our Savior Jesus,
were afterward augmented and advanced by the cares of Monsieur the Admiral de
Coligny, who gave a Commission to one de Laudoniere, to carry over thither a
considerable supply of Soldiers and all sorts of Tradesmen, which arrived in
the year One thousand five hundred sixty and four: But these last Adventurers
had hardly taken the air in the Country after their arrival thither, ere the
Spaniard, who imagines that all America belongs to him, and who has ever been
jealous of the French Nation, made his advantage of the disorders which were
then in that Country, to traverse the generous designs of the Directors of that
hopeful Colony, and smother it as 'twere in the Cradle: To that purpose he sent
thither Peter Melandez with six great ships full of men and ammunition, who
fell upon it on the nineteenth of September, M D LXV.

Monsieur de Laudoniere and Captain Ribauld, who had not long before brought
the Colony a small recruit of men, considering that it would be madness to
think to oppose such a powerful force, resolved, with the advice of most of the
Officers, to capitulate and deliver up the place to the stronger party, upon
such honorable conditions as people besieged are wont to demand. Peter
Melandez granted them most of the Articles they had proposed; but as soon as he
was got into the Fort, and had secured the Guards, he broke the promise he had
made them, and violating the Law of Nations, he cruelly massacred not only the
Soldiery, but also all the women and children, whom he found within the place,
and who could not make their escape by flight.

Captain Ribauld fell in the Massacre; but de Laudoniere made a shift to
escape, through the Fenns, to the ships newly come from France, which by good
fortune were still in the Road: Some others of the Inhabitants, who, upon the
first arrival of the Spaniards, had foreseen the danger likely to fall upon
them, got in time into the woods, and in the night time came to the Village of
their good friend Saturiova, who, hating the Spaniard, gave them protection,
and supplied them with provisions for a competent subsistence, till the year M
D LXVII. when Captain de Gorgues, coming to Florida with three stout ships full
of resolute men and all sorts of Ammunition, severely punished the cruelty of
the Spaniards, and being assisted by Saturiova, and all his Neighbors and
Allies, he revenged the public injuries of the French, putting to the sword
all the Spaniards he met with, not only in the Fort of Carolina, which they had
repaired and fortified after their usurpation of it, but also those he found in
two other Forts which they had built along the Coast, which he burnt and
demolished, as may be seen in the xii. Chapter of the fourth Book of the
Description of the West Indies, writ by John de Laet.

The Memorials which Captain de Gorgues caused to be printed, giving an account
of his Expedition into Florida, tell us of a certain Frenchman named Peter du
Bre, who having made his escape to King Saturiova, to avoid the cruelty of the
Spaniards, related to him, that there escaped of that Massacre but ten men, of
which number he was one; that they all met with a safe retreat in the
territories of the said Prince, who lived not far from their desolated Colony;
that three of the escaped persons died there some months after that defeat;
that of the seven remaining, there were six were so charmed with the
advantageous relation which the subjects of Saturiova made to them daily of the
Treasures of King Mayra, of the powerfulness of another whose name was Ollaca,
who commanded forty Princes, and of the generosity and prudent conduct of the
King of Apalacha, who governed many fair and large Provinces seated at the foot
of the Mountains, and reaching into several delightful Vales which they
encompassed; that they importuned Saturiova, who had entertained them so
kindly, that he would be pleased to allow them guides, to conduct them to the
Frontiers of the Kingdom of the last named, of whom they had heard so many
miracles, and had particularly this recommendation, that he was a lover of
Strangers, and that his Subjects were the most civilly governed of all the
Septentrional part of America; that Saturiova, willing to add that favor to
all those they had received from him before, gave them a good convoy,
consisting of the most valiant of his subjects, to conduct them with all safety
to all his Allies, and to the Dominions of the King of Apalacha, if they were
desirous to visit him.

The relation of the success of this Progress, which these few Frenchmen
undertook to satisfy their curiosity, and to make the best use they could of
this interval of their misfortune, assures us, that after they had visited
Athorus, the Son of Saturiova, and most of his Allies, who had their Villages
all along a delightful River which in their Language they call Seloy, to avoid
meeting any of the subjects of Timagoa, who was then engaged in a War against
Saturiova, there was a necessity they should cross Rivers upon boughs of trees
fastened together, climb up Mountains, and make their way through Fens and
thick Forests, where they met with several cruel beasts; that before they came
within the Dominions of the King of Apalacha, they were many times set upon by
Troops of Savages, who scout up and down among those vast deserts; that two of
their Guides were killed in those encounters, and most of the rest dangerously
wounded; that the subjects of King Timagoa, having observed their march, had
followed them for several days, and not being able to overtake them, they laid
ambushes for them, thinking to have met with them in their return; that after
they had run through abundance of dangers, and many times endured much hunger
and thirst, they got at last to the Province of Matica, which is under the
jurisdiction of the King of Apalacha; that the Governor of the City of Akoveka,
which is the Metroprolis of that Country, caused them to be brought to the
King, who was then gone to visit the Province of Amana; that that Prince
entertained them with so much kindness, and expressed so much friendship
toward them, that they resolved to send back their Guides into their Country,
and to setle themselves amongst the Apalachites, since they found them
answerable to the account they had received of them.

The remembrance of the dangers they had run through ere they could get into
the Province of Matica; the lively apprehension they had of the difficulties
which were unavoidable in their return; the little hope there was that the
French would ever undertake the re-establishment of their Colony; the
pleasantness and fertility of the Country into which divine Providence had
brought them; and the good natures of the Inhabitants, besides several other
considerations, prevailed with them to resolve on that setlement. But the
Guides whom Saturiova had given them, obstructed their resolution so much, and
so earnestly remonstrated to them, that they durst not present themselves
before their Lord without them, that to compose the difference, and prevent the
reproach they were afraid of at their return into their own Country, they
prevailed so far, that two of those Travelers should come back along with them
to Saturiova, to testify their care and fidelity in the execution of the
Commission he had given them.

The same Relation adds further, that those four Frenchmen who voluntarily
stayed among the Apalachites, being well instructed in the ways of God, left
them some knowledge of his Sovereign Majesty: And the English, who have some
years since found the way into those Provinces, write, that the Inhabitants of
the Province of Bemarin do still talk of those strangers, and it is from them
that they have learnt several words of the French Language, such as are among
others those that signify God, Heaven, Earth, Friend, the Sun, the Moon,
Paradise, Hell, Yea, No. Besides which there are many other words common among
those people, and are used by them to express the same thing which they
signify in French.

After the death of all these Frenchmen, who were very much lamented by all
the Apalachites, excepting only the Priests of the Sun, who bore them an
irreconcilable hatred, because they turned the People from Idolatry, and
inclined them to the knowledge of the true God who created the Sun, whom they
adored as God, the Provinces which are seated in the Vales of the Apalachaean
Mountains, and had been enlightened but by a very weak ray of celestial light,
would easily have returned to the darkness of their ancient superstition, if
God, by a remarkable disposal of his Providence, had not sent to them some
English Families, which at their arrival thither blew up that little spark,
which lay hid under the embers, into a weak flame.

These Families came out of Virginia in the year M DC XXI. with an intention to
go to New England, to avoid the frequent incursions and massacres committed
there by the Savages; but the wind proving contrary to their design, they were
cast on the Coasts of Florida, whence they passed into the Province of Matica,
and thence into those of Amana and Bemarin, and in the last they settled
themselves, and have drawn thither a considerable number of Ecclesiastics and
persons of quality, who have there laid the foundations of a small Colony. Most
of those who are retired into those places so remote from all commerce in the
world, undertook that generous design, in the midst of the great revolutions
which happened in England during the late troubles, and the main business they
proposed to themselves at that time, was only to make their advantage of so
seasonable a retreat, that they might the more seriously, and with less
distraction, mind the attainment of their own salvation, and dilate the limits
of Christianity among those poor people, if God gave them the means.

We understand also by the last papers that have been sent us from America,
that, God blessing the endeavors of the first Inhabitants of this small
Colony, they have within these twelve or thirteen years baptized most of the
Officers and the most considerable Heads of Families in the Provinces of
Bemarin and Amana; That at the present, they have a Bishop and many learned and
zealous Ecclesiastics among them, who carry on the work of the Lord; and the
more to advance it, they have built Colleges in all those places where there
are Churches, that the Children of the Apalachites may be instructed in the
mysteries of Christian Religion and true piety.

The same Papers add further, that though the King of Apalacha has received
Baptism, and seems to have much affection for these Strangers, who have
procured him that happiness; yet has he of late entertained some jealousy of
them, out of an apprehension, as it was represented to him by some of his
Council, that if he suffered them to grow more numerous, they might in time
become Masters of the Country: He thereupon in the first place dispersed them
into several Cities, that they might not be able to make any considerable body,
or foment any factions; and afterward, there was an order passed, that all
those who have at the present any setlement in the bosom of his Country, might
peaceably continue in their habitations, and participate of the same
privileges with the Natives, provided they held no correspondence with any
abroad, to the prejudice of the public tranquillity; but that henceforward no
other strangers shall be permitted to make any further establishments there.

Those who are acquainted with the Nature of the Country, affirm, that the King
of the Apalachites has no just cause to fear that either the English or any
other strangers should be guilty of any design against him, as to the mastering
of his Country: For, besides the necessity there is of having a very powerful
Army, ere any such enterprise can be undertaken, and that the English who are
established there, are no more amongst that great Nation, than a handful of
sand on the Seaside; this Country being so remote from all the rest of the
world, and destitute of Gold, Silver, precious Stones, and in a manner all rich
Commodities, whereby Commerce is kept up and continued; it is most certain,
that it will never be much sought after or envied by any Europaean Nations,
which send out Colonies only to those places, where there is hope of making
some considerable advantage by way of Trade. Whereto may be added this further
consideration, that, though these Provinces were possessed of as great
Treasures and Rarities, as they are destitute thereof; yet lying at a great
distance from Seaports, and having no navigable Rivers falling into it, by
means whereof there might in time be some correspondence between them and other
parts, there is no likelihood that there should be many persons either in
England or any where else, who would be persuaded to cross over so many Seas,
to go and end their days in a Country which is destitute of all those
conveniences, and cannot receive those refreshments which are brought out of
Europe, and contribute much to the comfortable subsistence of all the other
Colonies of America; and in a word, a Country, which can give its Inhabitants
nothing but clothing and nourishment.

Some time after the English had established themselves in this Country, as we
have represented before, the Spaniards (who as it were keep the keys of one
part of Florida, by means of the Forts they have built near the most eminent
Havens, and along the most considerable Rivers) brought in there a company of
religious men of the Order of the Minimes, whom Pope Urban the eighth had sent
into the Septentrional America, in the quality of Apostolical Missionaries, and
endowed with most ample privileges, for their better encouragement in the
carrying on of that work: They arrived in those Provinces in the year, One
thousand six hundred forty and three; and since that time they have taken their
progress through most of the Villages that lie about the great Lake, and upon
the descent of the Mountains which look toward the Country of the Cofachites:
It is reported, that they have baptized with great pomp the Paracoussis of the
Province of Achalaca, and a great number of his Subjects.

When these religious men return from their Missions, they live in a solitary,
yet delightful place, which lies upon the descent of a high Mountain, not above
a quarter of a league distant from the great Lake, and about as much from the
greatest Village of the Province of Achalaca. Before a man comes to their
habitation, he must cross through several fair Gardens, in the midst whereof
there is a pleasant walk, planted with trees on both sides, which reaches to
the skirt of the Mountain: And though they have seated themselves on an eminent
place, yet they have many springs, which, falling down from the upper part of
the Mountains, are received into great Cisterns and great Ponds, where they
have abundance of good Fish: The Lord of the Country visits them often, and
has a great respect for them; for the most part, he has some one of them
about his person, who serves him as a Chaplain.

In the year One thousand six hundred fifty and three, in which Mr. Brigstock,
that most inquisitive English Gentleman, from whom we have received all the
account we have given of the Apalachites, arrived in that Province of Achalaca,
the forementioned Religious men entertained him very kindly, and did him all
the good offices lay in their power: From them it was, that, during his abode
in the Country, he learnt all the particulars we are now going to describe, and
which he has liberally communicated to us.

They showed him an admirable Flower, which grows abundantly in the Mountains
of those parts: The figure of this Flower is much like that of a Bell, and
there are as many colors observable in it as in the Rainbow; the under
leaves, which being fully blown, are much larger than those of our greatest
Roses, are charged with a great many other leaves, which appear still less and
less to the lower part or bottom of the Bell: Out of the midst of them there
rises a little button, like a heart, which is of a very delicious taste: The
Plant has a little bushiness at the top, much like Sage: The leaves and the
flower smell like a Violet: It is also a kind of sensitive Plant, for it cannot
be touched, either in its leaves or flower, but it immediately withers.

These Religious men carried the said English Gentleman to a Village of the
Indians, who inhabit in the Mountains, where there is a miraculous Grott or
Cave, wherein the waters have fashioned all the most delightful rarities, that
a man can desire from a divertisment of that kind: They showed him particularly
one place in the said Grott, where the waters falling upon a bare stone, and
distilling drop after drop, of a different bigness, make so exact a music,
that there is no harmony can well be preferred before it.

There is found in the Mountains, on the East Side of the Province of Achalaca,
some Rock-Christal, and certain red and bright stones, which have such a luster
as that they might pass for right Rubies: It Is possible there may be some
Coppermines in those parts; but they are not yet discovered, only what confirms
this opinion is, that they find a kind of golden sand there, which is washed
down by the torrents, and has a wonderful luster: Mr. Brigstock having given
of it to some Goldsmiths to make a test thereof, it was in a manner quite
consumed by the fire, and the little that remained in the Crucible might well
pass for very fine Copper.

These same Religious men showed the said Gentleman, as they passed through the
woods, several sorts of trees which yielded Gums of excellent scent, as also
many other Rarities, a particular account whereof would require a considerable
Volume: But above all, they showed him the tree, whereof the Floridians make
that excellent drink which they call Casina, the description whereof may be
seen in the History of de Laet. It is absolutely conformable to the Relation of
Mr. Brigstock.

Before the Inhabitants of Achalacha were converted to Christianity, they took
several Wives; but now their Marriages are regulated, and they content
themselves only with one: They interred their Lords as the Apalachites do, in
the Caves that are at the foot of the Mountains: then they made up the entrance
thereof with a stone-wall: they hung before the Cave the most considerable
Vessels which those Princes had made use of at their Tables: And all the
Captains fastened all about the place, their Bows, Arrows, and Clubs, and
mourned for several days at the Sepulcher: They worshipped the Sun, and held
the immortality of the Soul as well as their Neighbors: They believed also
that such as had lived well, and served the Sun as they ought, and made many
presents to the poor, in honor of him, were hapyy, and that after death they
were changed into Stars: But on the contrary, that those who had led a wicked
life, were carried into the precipices of the high Mountains, whereby they were
surrounded, and there endured extreme want and misery, amongst the Lions,
Tigers, and other beasts of prey, which hunt after their sustenance therein.

The Inhabitants of this Country are all long-lived, insomuch that there are
many among them, both men and women, who are near two hundred years of age.

This curious digression we received from the forementioned English Gentleman,
Mr. Brigstock, and we have inserted it here, out of a presumption that it will
not be undelightful to those, who shall make it their divertisement to read
this History; at least while we are yet in expectation that that excellent
person will give us a perfect account of the state of the Apalachites, and some
others of the Neighboring Nations, as he puts us in hope that he will.

CHAP. IX. Of the Bodies of the Caribbians, and their Ornaments.
WE are now to reassume our former discourse, and return from Florida to the
Caribby-Islands, to consider there, with all the exactness imaginable, what
concerns those Inhabitants thereof on whom we intend to bestow the remaining
part of this History, and particularly what relates to their Bodies, Minds,
Dispositions, Manners, Religion, Customs, and other remarkable occurrences
concerning the savage Caribbians or Cannibals, of whose origin we have already
given so large an account.

And whereas some of the Caribbians who inhabit in the same Islands wherein the
French and other Europaean Nations have planted Colonies, or at least come
often among them, accommodate themselves in many things to their manner of
life, and that they may be the more kindly received by them, they quit many of
their old Customs; those who are desirous to be acquainted with the ancient
manners of the Caribbians, are not to learn them of the Caribbians who live in
Martinico, or those who converse most with the Europaeans; but from those of
St. Vincent, who of all others have held least correspondence with any
Foreigners: It is accordingly from them that we have received what we shall
hereafter relate concerning the Caribbians: But before we enter into the
relation, we shall make some general observations, to prevent the astonishment
which the Reader might conceive at the difference there is between the account
we give of them, and what he may receive from others, either by word of mouth
or writing.

In the first place, it is to be acknowledged a thing almost impossible, that
the Relations of Countries and Customs at so great a distance from us, should
agree in all things, especially since we find that those of neighboring
Countries are for the most part differing among themselves.

Secondly, it is to be observed, that since the Caribbians became familiar, and
have conversed with foreign Nations, they have remitted much of their ancient
Customs, and quited many things which they practiced before with an inviolable
strictness: So that there may be seen in them now a remarkable change from what
they were heretofore: That the case stands thus with them now, is to be
attributed partly to the conversation of the Europaeans, who in some things
have obliged them to abate somewhat of their originary simplicity, and in
others have made them worse than they were, as to our own shame we cannot but
acknowledge: Hence it comes that Monsieur du Montel tells us in his Relations,
that two ancient Caribbians, considering that degeneration of their
Countrymen, took occasion to entertain him with a discourse to this purpose:
Our people are become in a manner like yours, since they came to be acquainted
with you; and we find it some difficulty to know our selves, so different are
we grown from what we have been heretofore: It is to this alteration that our
people attribute the more frequent happening of Hurricanes than they were
observed to be in the days of old; and conclude thence, that Maboya (that is to
say, the evil spirit) has reduced us under the power of the French, English,
Spaniards and others, who have driven us out of the best part of our Country.

Thirdly, it is possible they may have different Customs, according to the
diversity of the Islands, though they all make up but one people; as may be
observed in the diversity of the Customs of one and the same Kingdom, according
to the several Quarters and Provinces of it: Whence it may have proceeded, for
example, that those that have conversed most at Dominico will give an account
of the Opinions, Customs, and Ceremonies of the Caribbians, much different from
what shall be related thereof by those persons who shall have frequented other
places; and yet the Relations of either side shall be true.

Fourthly, as in the Continent of America, the Caribbians, who inhabit a good
way within the Country, and consequently seldom see any foreigners, retain
much more of their ancient Customs, and their old course of life, than those
who living near the Dutch Colonies of Cayenna and Berbica, drive on an ordinary
trade with the Christians; so among our Caribbians, the Inhabitants of the
Islands, those who converse least with the Europaeans, such as are those of St.
Vincent's, are more strict observers of their ancient course of life, than are,
for example, those of Martinico or Dominico, who are oftener seen among them.

Fifthly, thence it proceeds that those persons who have seen them only in
these last mentioned places, or have heard of them only from such as have been
acquainted with them only in those places, will happily find many things in the
prosecution of our History, which may clash with the Relations they had
received of them from others; which if they do, they are not to wonder thereat,
since most of our Observations relate to the Caribbians of St. Vincents.

Lastly, we desire our Readers to take this further advertisement, that it is
our design to give a description of the ancient Manners and Customs of these
Caribbians, to the end that no body may think it strange, if their present
demeanor be not in all things answerable thereto: These advertisements being
thus premised, we proceed to give the Reader satisfaction consequently to the
title of this Chapter.

Most of those people whom we call Barbarians and Savages, have some thing
hideous and deformed or defective, either in their Countenances or some other
part of the body, as Historians affirm of the Maldiveses, the Inhabitants about
the Magellane streights, and several others which we need not name here.

But the Caribbians are a handsome well-shap'd people, well proportioned in all
parts of their bodies, graceful enough, of a smiling countenance, middle
stature, having broad shoulders, and large buttocks, and they are most of them
in good plight, and stronger than the French: Their mouths are not over large,
and their teeth are perfectly white and close: True it is their complexion is
naturally of an Olive-colour, and that color spreads even into the whites of
their Eyes, which are black, somewhat little like those of the Chinese and
Tartars, but very piercing: Their foreheads and noses are flat, not naturally,
but by artifice: For their mothers crush them down at their birth, as also
continually during the time they suckle them, imagining it a kind of beauty and
perfection; for were it not for that, their noses would be well shaped, and
they would have high foreheads as well as we: They have large and thick feet,
because they go barefoot, but they are withal so hard, that they defy Woods
and Rocks.

Among those of the Country a man cannot meet with any wanting either one or
both eyes, lame, crook-back'd, or bald, or having any other deformity
naturally; as is in like manner affirmed of the Brasilians, the Floridians, and
most Nations of De Lery c. 8.
America; whereas those who have walked through Grand Voyage de Breves.
Cairo relate, That in the Streets they have met with many oneeyed, and many
stark blind people; those infirmities being so frequent and so popular in that
Country, that of ten persons five or six are subject thereto: But if any among
the Caribbians are thus deformed, or have lost, or are maimed in any limb, it
happened in some Engagement against their Enemies; and so those scars or
deformities being so many demonstrations of their Valor, they glory in them;
so far are they from being in any danger of mischief, or being cast into a
furnace by their Countrymen, as those poor Children were among the people of
Guyana, and among the Lacedaemonians in the time of Lycurgus, who came out of
their Mothers wombs imperfect and deformed. Nay, there are some handsome Maids
and Women amongst the Savage Caribbians, witness Mademoiselle de Rosselan, wife
to the Governor of Saintalousia.

All the Caribbians are black-hair'd, as the Chinese are, who Trigaut. Hist.
Chin. l. 1. c. 8.
for that reason are sometimes called the Black-hair'd People: The hair of the
Caribbians is not curled or frizzled, as that of the Moors, but straight and
long, as those of the Maldiveses: And the Women attribute the highest
perfection of Beauty to this black color, as to what concerns the hair. It is
reported Garcilasso, l. 8. c. 13.
also, That the Indian Women of Peru are so enamored of black hair, that to
make their own of that color by artifice, when Nature does it not, they are
willing to endure incredible pains and torments: On the contrary, in Spain many
Ladies, to make their hair seem to be of a golden yellow color, perfume it
with Sulphur, steep it in Aquafortis, and expose it to the Sun in the heat of
the day, nay in the very Dog Days: And in Italy the same color is much
affected.

The Caribbians are very careful in combing themselves, and they think it
commendable so to do: They anoint their hair with Oil, and have certain
Receipts to advance the growth thereof: The Women commonly comb their Husbands
and their Children: Both Men and Women tie up their hair toward the hinder
part of the head, winding it about so as that it stands up like a horn on the
Crown; on both sides they leave locks hanging down like so many Mustachioes,
according to natural liberty. The Women part their hair so as that it falls
down on both sides of their heads; but the men part theirs the quite contrary
way, so as that one half falls down behind, the other before, which obliges
them to cut off the forepart of it, otherwise it would fall down over their
eyes: This they did heretofore with certain sharp Herbs, before they had the
use of Scissers; not to mention, that they were also accustomed to cut off
their hair when they were in mourning; whereas on the contrary, in Madagascar
the Men never cut off their hair, but the Women shave it clear off; a custom
contrary to that of those people among whom S. Paul lived.

The Caribbians seem not to have any Beards at all, but as soon as they grow
they pluck them off by the roots, as the Brasilians, Carpin in Bergeron.
the Cumaneses, and certain Nations subject to the Empire of the Tartars do,
who have always an iron instrument in their hands, wherewith they pluck out the
hair of their Beards as soon as they come out: But the Caribbians are seldom
seen to put themselves to that trouble, insomuch that it is conceived they have
a secret to prevent the growth of hair when it is once gotten off; an invention
which would have been of great convenience to the ancient Romans: For it is
affirmed, that they would not suffer their Beards to grow till after the time
of the Emperor Adrian, who first suffered his to grow; before that time it was
thought among them so honorable a thing to wear no beard, that there was a
prohibition made that Slaves should not shave theirs: The same prohibition
extended also to all persons charged with any Crime, as it were to set a mark
of infamy on them, till such time as they were cleared, as Aul^^ L. 3. c. 4.
Gellius affirms; which proceeding was contrary to what is practiced in the
Grand Seignior's Territories, who causes the Beard to be shaven, as a mark of
ignominy: In the year One thousand six hundred fifty two, that happened to the
French Consul at Alexandria, being charged with having done some unhandsom
things in his Employment; his Beard had such a natural graceful curl, and was
of so fair a flaxen color, that some Turks would have given him a considerable
sum of money for it, and kept it for a Rarity; but he chose rather to bring it
along with him into France.

The Caribbians wonder very much to see our Europeans suffer their Beards to
grow so long, and think it a great deformity to wear any, as they account it a
perfection in themselves to have none; but they are not the only Savages who
are fantastic in matter of gracefulness and beauty: All barbarous Nations, nay
some that are civilized, are wedded to their particular sentiments, as to that
point: For instance, among the This is affirmed by diverse Historians, too many
to be cited*
Maldiveses it is accounted an accomplishment of Beauty to have the body all
over hairy, which among us would be thought more becoming a Bear then a Man:
Among the Mexicans, to have a little narrow forehead, and that full of hair:
Among the Japoneses, not to have any hair at all; whence it comes, that they
are ever employed in the plucking of it off, leaving only a little tuft on the
crown of the head: Among the Tartarian Women it is thought a piece of Beauty to
be flat-nos'd, but to heighten the attractions of their noses, they rub them
with a very black unguent: Among the Inhabitants of Guinny they make the same
account of great nails and flat noses; and thence it comes that as soon as the
children are come into the world, they crush down their noses with their
thumbs, as do also the Brasilians: Among those of the Province of Cusco in
Peru, and some oriental Inhabitants of the Indies, as also among the
Calecutians, and the Malabars, it is thought very graceful to have
extraordinary large ears, hanging down over their shoulders; insomuch that some
among them use diverse artifices to make them such: Among the Aethiopians, great
lips and a skin black as Jet, are thought beautiful: The Negroes of Mosambico
are extremely pleased to have their teeth very sharp, so that some use Files to
make them such: Among the Maldiveses they are no less desirous to have them
red, and to that end, they are continually chewing of Petel: Among the
Japoneses and the Cumaneses, they are industrious to have them black, and they
purposely make them such: And among the latter, it is accounted beauty to have
a long face, lean cheeks, and excessively big legs: And hence it is that they
squeeze the heads of their children between two cushions as soon as they are
born, and that after the example of the Inhabitants about the River of
Essequebe, they bind the legs very hard a little below the knee, and a little
above the ankle, that so the calf may swell: Among some Peruvians, to have the
face cut and checkered, as it were with Lancets, and to have flat and broad
heads, huge foreheads, and the head very narrow from the forehead to the nape
of the neck, is accounted beautiful: And to reduce it to this comely shape,
they kept their childrens heads pressed between two thin boards, from the time
of their birth till they were four or five year old. To be short, among some
oriental Nations, and some Africans, it is accounted a great perfection in the
Women, to have their breasts hanging down over their shoulders; and among the
Chinese, it is the principal part of beauty to have the foot extremely little
and thin; and the better to have it so, while they are yet children they bind
their feet so hard, that they are in a manner lamed, and it is with much ado
that they are able to stand: It were a hard matter to make a description of
beauty, according to the different opinions of all these nations: But to return
to the Caribbians.

They go stark-naked, both men and women, as many other Nations do: And if any
one among them should endeavor to hide the privy parts, all the rest would
laugh at it: Though the Christians have conversed very much among them, yet
have all the persuasions that have hitherto been used to induce them to cover
themselves been to no purpose: And whereas sometimes, when they come to visit
the Christians, or to treat with them, they have complied so far with them, as
to cover themselves, by putting on a shirt, drawers, a hat, and such clothes as
had been given them, yet as soon as they were returned to their own habitations,
they strip themselves, and put up all in their Closets, till some such other
occasion should oblige them to put them on again: To requite this compliance of
the Caribbians, some among the French, having occasion to go among them, made
no difficulty to strip themselves after their example: This defiance of clothes
reigns in all places under the Torrid Zone, as every one knows.

When the Brasilians are reproached with their nakedness, Vin. Le Blanc. par.
3. c. 16.
they reply, that we came naked into the world, and that it were a mad thing
for us to hide the bodies bestowed on us by nature. The Inhabitants of the
Kingdom of Benin in Africa, Dutch Relations.
are to be commended, that they cover themselves when they are to be married,
and would do it sooner if their King would permit it: The women of the Lucayan
Islands ought also to participate of that commendation, for they were wont to
cover themselves when they came to be marriageable, and solemnized that action
with great rejoicing: But now that custom is abrogated, for that poor Nation
has been utterly destroyed by the Spaniards, or carried away and made slaves
to work in the Mines, and there are not in any of the Islands known under that
name, any of the natural Inhabitants, but only some few English who were
transported thither out of the Island of Bermudez. But come we to the Ornaments
of our Savages.

They change their natural color by dying their bodies with some composition
which makes them red all over: For living near Rivers and Springs, the first
thing they do every morning is to go and wash themselves all over: And this was
the Lib. de mor. German.
practice of the ancient Germans, as Tacitus affirms. As Soon as the Caribbians
have washed themselves, they return to their houses, and dry themselves by a
little fire; being dried, the Wife, or some one of the household takes a gourd
full of a certain red composition which they call Roucou, from the name of the
tree which produces it, and whereof we have given an account in its proper
place in the precedent Book: With this color mixed with oil, they rub the whole
body and the face; the better to apply this paint, they make use of a sponge
instead of a Pencil; and to appear more gallant, they many times make black
circles about the eyes, with the juice of Junipa Apples.

This red painting serves them both for Ornament and for a Covering; for
besides the Beauty they imagine to themselves therein, they affirm that it
makes them more supple and active; which may be the more likely to be true, for
that the ancient Wrestlers were wont to rub themselves with oil for the same
end: They affirm further, That by rubbing themselves thus with Roucou, they
secure themselves against the coldness of the night and rains, the stinging of
the Mesquitos and the Maringoins, and the heat of the Sun, which otherwise
would cause risings and ulcers in the skin. This Unction hardens their skins,
and withal gives it an extraordinary luster and smoothness, as all know who
have seen and felt them.

Most Savages do thus paint and trick up themselves after a strange manner; but
they do not all use the same colors, nor observe the same fashion: For there
are some who paint their Bodies all red, as our Inhabitants of the Caribbies
do; as for This is affirmed by diverse Historians.
instance, those of the Cape de Lopes Gonsalvez; but others make use of other
colors, as Black, White, Chestnut, Gingioline, Blew; Yellow, and the like.
Some use only one particular color; others paint themselves with several
colors, and represent diverse figures on their bodies: Some others, without
applying any color, rub themselves all over with the oil of Palmtrees: Some
anoint themselves with the oil of Balm, and then cast on it a small powder,
which seems as if it were the filings of Gold. In fine, there are some who
anoint their bodies with a glewy oil, and blow on that the down or smallest
Feathers of diverse Birds; or happily they cover themselves with a kind of gummy
paste, which is of a very sweet scent, and fasten thereon the most delightful
Flowers growing in their Country. There is sufficient choice of all these
modes; and it were a pleasant sight to see a company of these Morris-dancers
dancing together. We might add thereto, to make the divertisement the more
complete, those Turkish Pilgrims who commonly go in long Garments made of
thousands of pieces of all sorts of colors.

But this is to be noted, That the painting of the body is a very ancient kind
of Ornament; and among other Monuments of this piece of Antiquity, Pliny and
Herodian affirm, that certain Lib. 22. c. 1. In the life of Severus.
people of Great Brittany, not using any kind of clothing, painted their
bodies with diverse colors, and represented thereon the figures of certain
living Creatures, whence they were called Picti, that is, Painted people. But
among all the Savages who at this day paint themselves, the Caribbians have
this advantage, that they adorn themselves with a color which the Ancients
honored most of any; for it is reported, that the Goths made use of Vermilion
to make their faces red; and the ancient Romans, as Pliny affirms, painted
their bodies with Lib 33. c. 7.
Minium upon the day of their Triumph; and he particularly tells us that
Camillus did so: and he further adds, that upon Festival days they so painted
the face of the Statue of their Jupiter; and that heretofore the Aethiopians
made so great account of this Vermilion color, that their principal Lords
applied it all over their bodies, and that their Gods wore it in their Images.

Our Caribbians do for the most part content themselves with this ordinary
dress of red painting, which serves them instead of Shirts, Cloths, Cloaks and
Coats: But on solemn days and times of public rejoicing, they add to the red
diverse other colors, spreading them fantasticallly over the face and the whole
body.

But this kind of painting is not the only ornament in use among them; they
adorn the crown of the head with a little Hat made of birds feathers, of
different colors, or with a Plume of Herons feathers, or those of some other
Bird: They also sometimes wear a crown of feathers, which covers their heads,
so that there may be seen among them a great many crowned heads, though there
be no Kings: And yet they may be better looked upon as Kings with their feather
Crowns, than the Lord of the Gulf of Antongil be taken for a Sovereign Prince,
when he has for his Scepter and the badge of his Royal dignity, but a great
Gardiner's Pruning-hook, which he always carries about him.

The women among the Maldeveses, make about a dozen holes in each ear, at which
they fasten little gilt nails, and sometimes Pearls and Precious Stones: The
Ladies of Madagascar and Brasil make a hole as big as that a man may thrust his
thumb through it in the lower part of the ear, at which they hang pendants of
wood and bone: And the Peruvians, under the reign of their Kings the Yncas,
were accustomed to make in their ears a hole of an incredible bigness, at which
they fastened chains of a quarter of an Ell in length, with Pendants of Gold at
the bottom, of an extraordinary bigness: But our Caribbians* are content with a
small hole, according to the European mode, in the softest part of the ear,
through which they put the bones of certain Fishes very smooth, pieces of that
kind of Tortoise shells which they call Carets; and since the Christians came
among them, Buckles of Gold, Silver, Latten, at which they hang very fair
Pendants: They know how to distinguish between those that are right and the
counterfeit, but they are most taken with such as are made of Crystal, Amber,
Coral, or some other rich material, provided the buckle, and all the other
workmanship be of Gold: Some have endeavored to put upon them such as were
only Copper gilt, and would have persuaded them they were Gold; but they
refused them, saying that they intended to deceive them, and that it was but
Kettle-gold: and to make a trial thereof, they were wont to put them into their
mouths: So great is their experience in these things beyond those of
Madagascar, who when the Hollanders coming thither in the year MDC XLV. offered
them a Silver-spoon, put it between their teeth, and finding it was hard
refused it, desiring one of Tin: Whence it may easily be imagined what account
they made of Tin, since they gave a young maid in exchange for a Spoon of that
metal. Herodotus affirms that heretofore among the Aethiopians, Copper was in
better esteem than Gold, the use whereof was so vile, that they bound
Malefactors with chains of Gold.

The Caribbians do sometimes also make holes through their lips, and put
through them a kind of little Bodkin, which is made of the bone of some beast
or fish: Nay they bore through the space between the Nostrils, that they may
hang there some Ring, a grain of Crystal, or some such toy: The necks and arms
of our Caribbians have also their respective ornaments; for they have their
Neck-laces and Bracelets of Amber, Coral, or some other glittering material:
The men wear Bracelets on the brawny part of the arm, near the shoulder; but
the women wear theirs about the wrists: They adorn also their legs with Chains
of Rassada, instead of Garters: Those among them who have no acquaintance with
the Europaeans, commonly wear about their necks Whistles made of the bones of
their enemies, and great chains made of the teeth of Agoutys, Tigers, wild
Cats, or little shells bored through and fastened together with a thread of
fine Cotton of a red or violet color. And when they would make the greatest
show they can, they add to all this a kind of Caps, certain Bracelets, which
they fasten under their armpits, Scarfs, and Girdles of Feathers very
industriously disposed together by a delightful intermixture, which they suffer
to hang down over their shoulders, or from the navel to the middle of the thigh.

But the most considerable of all their Ornaments, are certain large Medals of
fine Copper extremely well polished, without any graving on them, which are
made after the figure of a crescent, and enchac'd in some kind of solid and
precious wood* these in their own language they call Caracolis: They are of
different largeness, for there are some so small that they hang them at their
ears like Pendants, and others about the bigness of the palm of a man's hand,
which they have hanging about their necks, beating on their breasts: They have
a great esteem for these Caracolis, as well by reason the material whereof they
are made, which never contracts any rust, glisters like Gold, as that it is the
rarest and most precious booty they get in the incursions they make every year
into the Country of the Arouagues their Enemies; and that it is the livery or
badge, whereby the Captains and their Children are distinguished from the
ordinary sort of people: Accordingly those who have any of these jewels make so
great account of them, that when they die, they have no other inheritance to
leave their Children and intimate Friends: Nay there are some among them who
have of these Caracolis which had been their Grandfathers, wherewith they do
not adorn themselves but on extraordinary occasions.

The women paint the whole body, and adorn themselves much after the same
manner as the men do, excepting only those differences we have mentioned
before, and that they wear no Crowns on their heads: There is this also
particularly observable in them, that they wear a kind of buskins, which fall
no lower than the ankle: This kind of ornament is very neatly wrought, and
edged above and below with a certain intertexture of rushes and cotton, which
lying straight on the calf of the leg makes it seem more full.

CHAP. X. Certain Remarks upon the Caribbian Language.
IT is our intention at the end of this History, for the satisfaction of the
more curious Reader, to add a large Vocabulary of the Caribbian Language; and
therefore, in this Chapter, we shall only make some principal remarks upon it,
such as may in some measure discover the grace, the smoothness, and the
proprieties thereof.

1. The Caribbians have an ancient and natural Language, such as is wholly
peculiar to them, as every Nation has that which is proper to it.

2. But besides that ancient Language, they have framed another bastard-speech,
which is intermixed with several words taken out of foreign Languages, by the
commerce they have had with the Europaeans: But above all they have borrowed
many words of the Spaniards, for they were the first Christians that came among
them.

3. Among themselves, they always make use of their ancient and natural
Language.

4. But when they have occasion to converse or negotiate with the Christians,
they always make use of their corrupt Language.

5. Besides that, they have also a very pleasant intermixture of words and
expressions when they would undertake to speak in some foreign Language: As
for example, when they use this expression to the French, saying, Compere
Governeur, that is, Gossip Governor, using the word Compere generally toward
all those who are their Friends or Allies: In like manner they would say,
without any more ceremony, Compere Roy, that is, Gossip, or Friend King, if
there were any occasion to do it: It is also one of their ordinary complements
to the French, when they say with smiling countenance, Ah si toy bon pour
Caraibe, moy bon pour France, If thou art good for the Caribbian, I am good for
France: And when they would commend, and express how much they are satisfied
with those of the same Nation, they say, Mouche bon France pour Caraibe, France
is very good for the Caribbian; they say also, Maboya mouche fache contre
Caraibe, Maboya does much against the Caribbian, when it thunders, or in a
Hurricane; and, Moy mouche Lunes, I have lived many Moons, to signify that
they are very ancient: They have also these words often in their mouths, when
they find that the French would abuse their simplicity, Compere, toy trompe
Caraibe, Friend thou deceivest the Caribbian: And they are often heard to say
when they are in a good humor, Moy bonne Caraibe, I am an honest Caribbian.

6. Yet is it to be observed, that though the Caribbians of all the Islands do
generally nnderstand one another, yet is there in several of them some dialect
different from that of the others.

7. There is no great use made of the letter P. in their Language; but that
only excepted, there is no want of letters, as there is in the Language of
Japan, Braseel and Canada, which want the letters F. L. R. Or in that of Peru,
wherein B. D. F. G. J. consonant and X are wanting, as Historians affirm.

8. The Language of the Caribbians is extremely smooth, and for the most part
pronounced with the lips, some few words with the teeth, and in a manner
nothing at all from the throat. For though the words we shall set down
hereafter, seem to be rough, as they are written, yet when they pronounce them,
they make elisions of certain letters, and give such an air thereto as renders
their discourse very delightful to the ear: Whence it came, that Monsieur du
Montel has given this testimony of them: I took great pleasure, said he, in
harkening unto them when I was among them, and I could not sufficiently admire
the grace, the fluency, and the sweetness of their pronunciation, which they
commonly accompany with a little smiling, such as takes very much with those
who converse with them.

9. The Caribbians who are Inhabitants of the Islands have a sweeter
pronunciation than those of the Continent: but otherwise they differ only in a
dialect.

10. By the same word, according as it is diversely pronounced they signify
several things: For example, the word Anhan signifies, 1. Yes, 2. I know not,
3. Thine, or take it, according to the pronunciation that is given it.

11. The Europaeans cannot pronounce the Caribbian Language with the grace and
fluency natural thereto, unless they have learnt it very young.

12. They hear one another very patiently, and never interrupt one the other in
their discourse: But they are wont to give a little hem at the end of every
three or four periods, to express the satisfaction they have to hear what is
spoken.

13. What advantage soever the Europaeans may imagine they have over the
Caribbians, either as to the natural faculties of the mind, or the easiness of
pronunciation of their own Languages, in order to the more easy attainment of
theirs, yet has it been found by experience, that the Caribbians do sooner
learn ours than we do theirs.

14. Some among the French have observed, that the Caribbians have a kind of
aversion for the English tongue, nay so far, that some affirm they cannot
endure to hear it spoken where they are, because they look on them as their
Enemies. And whereas there are in their corrupt Language many words taken out
of the Spanish, a people whom they also account their Enemies, it proceeds
hence, that they learned them during the time they held a fair correspondence
with that Nation, and before they began to treat them as they afterward did.

15. They are very shie in communicating their Language, out of a fear the
secrets of their Wars might be discovered; nay, those among them who have
embraced the Christian Religion, would not be persuaded to reveal the grounds
of their Language, out of a belief it might prejudice their Nation.

16. We shall here set down some of the most particular proprieties of their
Language: In the first place, the men have many expressions proper only to
themselves, which the women understand well enough, but never pronounce: And
the women have also their words and phrases, which if the men should use they
would be laughed at; whence it comes, that in this Discourse one would think
the women spoke a Language different from that of the men, as will be seen in
our Vocabulary, by the difference of expressions which the men and women make
use of to signify the same thing: The Savages of Dominico affirm, that it
proceeds hence, that when the Caribbians came to inhabit these Islands, they
were possessed by a Nation of the Arouagues, whom they absolutely destroyed,
save only the Women, whom they married for the re-peopling of the Country; so
that those Women having retained their own Language, taught it their Daughters,
and brought them to speak as they did; which being practiced to the present by
the Mothers toward their Daughters, their Language came to be different from
that of the Men in many things: But the male Children, though they understand
the speech of their Mothers and Sisters, do nevertheless imitate their Fathers
and Brethren, and accustom themselves to their Language when they are five or
six years old. To confirm what we have said concerning the cause of this
difference of Language, it is alleged, That there is some conformity between
the Language of the Arouagues who live in the Continent, and that of the
Caribbian Women: But it is to be observed, That the Caribbians of the
Continent, as well Men as Women, speak the same Language, as having not
corrupted it by inter-marriages with strange Women.

17. The old men have also some terms particular to themselves, and certain
affected expressions, not at all used by the younger sort of people.

18. The Caribbians have also a certain Language which they make use of only
among themselves, when they entertain any warlike Resolutions; it is a very
hard kind of fustian-language: The Women and Maids know nothing of that
mysterious Language, nor yet the young Men, till they have given some
assurances of their generosity, and the zeal they have for the common Quarrel
of their Nation against their Enemies: This is to prevent the discovery of
their designs before the appointed time.

19. For the variation of their Cases, Persons, Moods, and Genders, they have
no distinct particles as we have, but they lengthen their words by certain
syllables or letters at the beginning or end of the word, and sometimes by the
change of the letters: Thus they say in the Imperative, Bayoubaka, Go; but in
the Indicative, Nayoubakayem, I go: In like manner, Babinaka, dance;
Nabinakayem, I dance; much like the formation of the Hebrew Verbs.

20. Indefinite and absolute Nouns are not much in use among them, especially
the names of the parts of the body; but they are always in a manner restrained
to a first, second, or third person.

21. The first person is commonly expressed by the Letter N; at the beginning
of a word, as Nichic, my Head; the second by a B, as Bichic, thy Head; and the
third by an L, as Lichic, his Head.

22. The neuter and absolute Gender is expressed by a T, as Tichic, the Head;
but this is not much in use.

23. They have different names in speaking to persons when they are present,
and others when they speak of them; thus they say Baba, Father, speaking to
him, and Youmaan, speaking of him; Bibi, Mother, speaking to her, and Ichanum,
speaking of her; which, with the difference there is between the Language of
the Men and the Women, the young and the old, their ordinary Discourse, and
that used by them when they are engaged in Military Deliberations, must needs
cause a great multiplication of words in their Language.

24. Their proper Names are many times derived from certain Accidents, as we
shall see more particularly in the Chapter of the Birth and Education of their
Children.

25. They never name any one when the party is present; or at least, out of
respect, they do but half name him.

26. They never pronounce the whole Name of either Man or Woman; but they do
those of Children; so that they will say, the Father or Mother of such a one;
or else they say half the Name; as for instance, Mala, instead of saying
Malakaali, and Hiba for Hibalomon.

27. The Uncles and Aunts, as many as are of the collateral Line, are called
Fathers and Mothers by their Nephews; so that the Uncle is called Baba, that is
to say, Father: But when they would expressly signify the true and proper
Father, they many times add another word, saying, Baba tinnaca.

28. Consequently to the precedent appellation, all the HeCousins are also
called Brothers, and all the She-Cousins, Sisters.

29. But between He-Cousin and She-Cousin, the former calls the latter
Youeilleri, that is to say properly, My Female, or my betrothed; for naturally
among them the She-Cousins become Wiyes to the He-Cousins.

30. The Months they call Lunes, that is, Moons; and the Years ^oussinieres,
that is, the Seven Stars.

31. We shall now give a taste of the naturalness and elegance of their
Language, setting down the signification of their words, without expressing the
words themselves, so to avoid the setting of them down twice, as reserving that
for our Vocabulary.

32. To signify, that a thing is lost or broken, they commonly say it is dead.

33. They call a Capuchin Friar, Father Aioupa; and the word Aioupa signifies
in their Language a Covering or a Penthouse; as if they said, It is a man by
whom one may be covered, by reason of his great Capouche: By the same name they
also ironically call an Ape or Monkey, by reason of his long Beard.

34. A Christian, a Man of the Sea; because the Christians came to them in
Ships.

35. A Lieutenant, the track of a Captain, or that which appears after him.

36. My Son in Law, he who makes me little Children.

37. My younger Brother, my half.

38. My Wife, my heart.

39. A Boy, A little Male.

40. A Girl, A little Female.

41. The Spaniards and English, Deformed Enemies, Etoutou noubi; because they
are clothed, in opposition to their Enemies who are naked, whom they call
simply Etoutou, that is to say, Enemies.

42. A Fool, Him who sees nothing, or who has no light.

43. The Eyelid, The Covering of the Eye.

44. The Eyebrows, The Hair of the Eye.

45. The Ball of the Eye, The Kernel of the Eye.

46. The Lips, The Borders of the Mouth.

47. The Chin, The prop of the Teeth.

48. The Neck, The prop of the Head.

49. The Arm and a Wing are expressed by the same word.

50. The Pulse, The Soul of the Hand: The Germans make such another
composition, when they call the Glove the Shoe of the Hand.

51. The Fingers, The little ones, or Children of the Hand.

52. The Thumb, The Father of the Fingers, or that which is opposite to them:
Of that kind is the (...) of the Greeks.

53. A Joint, A thing added; they call also by that name a piece set on a
Garment.

54. The Bladder, The Urine Vessel.

55. The Ham, That which draws the Leg.

56. The Sole of the Foot, The inside of the Foot.

57. The Toes, The little ones, or children of the Foot.

58. The number Ten, All the Fingers of both hands.

59. Twenty, The Fingers of the Hands, and Toes of the Feet.

60. A Pocket-pistol, A little Arquebusse.

61. A Candlestick, That which holds something.

62. Thorns, The hair of the Tree, or the eyes of the Tree.

63. The Rainbow, Gods Plume of Feathers.

64. The noise of Thunder, Trerguetenni.

65. This Language has also in its abundance and its naturalness some
imperfections which are particular thereto; yet are they such as that some of
them do not so much deserve blame as commendation.

66. The Caribbians in their natural Language have very few words of injury or
abuse; and what they say that is most offensive in their Railleries is, Thou
art not good, or thou have as much wit as a Tortoise.

67. They have not so much as the names of several Vices; but the Christians
have sufficiently supplied them therewith. Some have admired that in the
Language of Canada there is no word answerable to Sin* but they might have
observed withal, that there is not any whereby to express Virtue.

68. They have no words to express Winter, Ice, Hail, Snow, for they know not
what they are.

69. They are not able to express what does not fall under the Senses, save
that they have certain names for some both good and evil Spirits; but that
excepted, they have no word to signify Spiritual things, as Understanding,
Memory, Will; as for the Soul, they express it by the word Heart.

70. Nor have they the names of Virtues, Sciences, Arts, Trades, nor those of
most of our Arms and Tools, save only what they have learned since their
Commerce with the Christians.

71. They can name but four Colors, whereto they make all the rest to relate;
to wit, White, Black, Yellow, and Red.

72. They cannot express any number above Twenty; and their expression of that
is pleasant, being obliged, as we said elsewhere, to show all the Fingers of
their Hands, and Toes of their Feet.

73. When they would signify a great Number, which goes beyond their
Arithmetic, they have no other way then to show the hair of their Heads, or
the sand of the Sea; or they repeat several times the word Mouche, which
signifies Much; as when they say in their Gibberish, Moy mouche mouche Lunes,
to show that they are very ancient.

74. In fine, They have neither Comparatives nor Superlatives; but for want
thereof, when they would compare things together, and prefer one before all the
rest, they express their sentiment by a demonstration which is natural and
pleasant enough: Thus, when they would represent what they think of the
Europaean Nations which they are acquainted withal, they say of the Spaniards
and the English, that they are not good at all; of the Dutch, that they have as
much goodness as a man's hand, or as far as the elbow; and of the French, that
they are as both the arms, which they stretch out to show the greatness
thereof: This last Nation they have a greater affection for than for any other,
especially those of it who have gone along with them to their wars; for they
give those part of their booty: And as often as they return from their wars,
though the French had not gone along with them, yet do they send them part of
the spoil.

CHAP. XI. Of the Dispositions of the Caribbians, and their Manners.
THE Caribbians are naturally of a pensive and melancholy temperament, fishing,
sloth, and the temperature of the air contributing much to the continuance of
that humor: but having found by experience, that that uncomfortable
constitution was prejudicial to their health, and that the mind ore-press'd
dries up the bones, they for the most part do so great violence to their
natural inclination, that they appear cheerful, pleasant, and divertive in
their conversation, especially when they have got a little wine in their heads:
Nay they have brought themselves to such a pass, that, as the Brasilians, De
Lery c. 12
they can hardly endure the company of such as are melancholy: and those who
have conversed much with them have always found them very facetious, and loath
to let slip any occasion of laughing, without making their advantage of it: nay
sometimes they have burst out into laughter, at what the most inclined thereto
among us would hardly have smiled.

Their discourses among themselves are commonly concerning their hunting, their
fishing, their gardening, or some other innocent subjects; and when they are in
strange company, they are never troubled if any body laugh in their presence,
so far are they from thinking it done as any affront to them: And yet, they are
so far from the simplicity of a certain Nation of New-France, who acknowledge
themselves to be Savages, not knowing what that denomination signifies, that
they think themselves highly injured when any one gives them that name: for
they understand what the word means, and say that term belongs only to the wild
beasts, the Inhabitants of the woods: Nor do they take it well to be called
Cannibals, though they eat the flesh of their Enemies, which they say they do
to satisfy their indignation and revenge, and not out of any delicacy they
find in it more than in any thing else whereby they are sustained: But they are
extremely pleased when any one calls them Caribbians, because it is a name they
pride themselves much in, as being a certain acknowledgment of their generosity
and courage: For they are not only the Apalachites, from amongst whom they
came, who by that word signify a Warlike and valiant man, endu'd with force
and a particular dexterity in military affairs; but even the Aronagnes
themselves their irreconcilable Enemies, having often experienced their
valor, understand thereby the same thing, though by the same word they would
also denote a Cruel person, by reason of the miseries the Caribbians have
occasioned them. But howere it be, this is certain, that our Savages of the
Caribbies are so much pleased with that name, that speaking to the French they
have this perpetually in their mouths, Toy Francois, moy Caraibe, Thou art a
Frenchman, I am a Caribbian.

In all other things they are of a good and tractable disposition; and they are
so great Enemies to severity, that if the Europaean or other Nations who have
any of them slaves (as among others the English have some, cunningly trapan'd
and carried away by them from the places of their birth) treat them with any
rigor, they many times die out of pure grief: But by fair means they will do
any thing, contrary to the Negroes, who must be roughly dealt with, otherwise
they grow insolent, slothful, and perfidious.

They commonly reproach the Europaeans with their avarice, and their immoderate
industry in getting of wealth together for themselves and their Children, since
the earth is able to find sufficient sustenance for all men, if so be they will
take ever so little pains to cultivate it: as for themselves, they say they are
not perplexed with caring for those things whereby their lives are preserved;
and indeed it must be acknowledged, that they are incomparably fatter, and have
their health better than those that fare deliciously: Most certain it is, that
they live without ambition, without vexation, without disquiet, having no
desire of acquiring honors or wealth, slighting Gold and Silver, as the
ancient Lacedaemonians, and the Peruvians, and contenting themselves with what
Nature had made them, and what the earth supplies them withal for their
sustenance: And when they go a hunting, or a fishing, or root up trees for
ground to make a little Garden, or to build houses, which are innocent
employments, and suitable to the nature of man, they do all without eagerness,
and as it were by way of divertisement and recreation.

But it raises a particular astonishment in them when they see how much we
esteem Gold, considering we are so well furnished with Glass and Crystal,
which in their judgment are more beautiful, and consequently ought to be more
highly prized: To this purpose, Benzoni a Milanese Historian, relates a strange
story of the New-world, how that the Indians detesting the insatiable avarice
of the Spaniards, who subdued them, took a piece of Gold in their hands, and
said, Behold the God of the Christians; for this they come from Casteel into
our Country; for this they have made us slaves, banished us out of our
habitations, and committed horrid things against us; for this they are engaged
in wars amongst themselves; for this they kill one the other; for this they are
always in disquiet, they quarrel, rob, curse and blaspheme: In fine, there is
no villainy, no mischief but they will commit for this.

In like manner, our Caribbians, when they see the Christians sad and perplexed
at any thing, are wont to give them this gentle reprehension: `` Compere (a
word they have learnt of the French, and commonly use to express their
affection, as the women do also call our Europaeans Commeres, as a mark of
their friendship; both words signifying in English Gossip, or familiar friend)
how miserable art thou, thus to expose thy person to such tedious and dangerous
Voyages, and to suffer thy self to be orepress'd with cares and fears! The
inordinate desire of acquiring wealth puts thee to all this trouble, and all
these inconveniences; and yet thou art in no less disquiet for the Goods thou
have already gotten, than for those thou art desirous to get: Thou art in
continual fear lest some body should rob thee either in thy own Country or upon
the Seas, or that thy Commodities should be lost by shipwreck, and devoured by
the waters: Thus thou growest old in a short time, thy hair turns gray, thy
forehead is wrinkled, a thousand inconveniences attend thy body, a thousand
afflictions surround thy heart, and thou make all the haste thou can to the
grave: Why art thou not content with what thy own Country produces? Why do
not thou contemn riches as we do? Part. 3. c. 16.
And to this purpose, the great Traveller Vincent le Blanc has a remarkable
discourse of some Brasilians: That wealth which you Christians pursue with so
much earnestness, do they any way promote your advancement in the grace of God?
Do they prevent your dying? Do you carry them along with you to the grave? To
the same purpose was their discourse to J. de Lery, as he relates in his
History. Chapter 13.


The Caribbians have this further reproach to make to the Europaeans, to wit,
that of their usurpation of their Country, and they stick not to do it as a
manifest injustice: Thou have driven me, says this poor people, out of St.
Christophers, Mevis, Montserrat, St. Martins, Antego, Gardeloupe, Barbouthos,
St. Eustace's, etc. neither of which places belonged to thee, and whereto thou
could not make any lawful pretense: And thou threatnest me every day to take
away that little which is left me: What shall become of the poor miserable
Caribbian? Must he go and live in the Sea with the fishes? Thy Country must
needs be a wretched one, since thou leavest it to come and take away mine: Or
thou must needs be full of malice, thus to persecute me out of a frolic. This
complaint may well exempt them from the opprobrious denomination of Savages.

Lycurgus would not permit his Citizens to travel, out of a fear they might
learn the manners of foreign Countries: But our Savages stand in need of much
travel to unbarbarize themselves, if we may use such an expression: And yet
they are not only free from that insatiable covetousness, which makes the
Christians undertake so great and so dangerous voyages, but also from the
curiosity of seeing any other Country in the world, as being enamoured of their
own more than any other. And thence it comes, that, imagining we should not be
more curious than they are, nor less lovers of our Countries, they are
astonished at our Voyages; wherein they have the honor to be like Socrates, of
whom Plato gives this testimony, that he had no more design to leave Athens,
with any intention to travel, than the lame and the blind; and that he desired
not to see other Cities, nor to live under other Laws; being, as to this
particular, as far as our Caribbians, from the opinion of the Persians, among
whom it is come into a Proverb, that he who has not traveled the world may be
compared to a Bear.

But we are to note further, that our Caribbians of the Islands have not only
an aversion from traveling into any other parts of the world, but they would
not also willingly suffer any of theirs to be carried away into a strange
Country, without an absolute promise within a short time to bring them back
again: But if it happens through some misfortune that any one of them dies by
the way, there is no thinking of any return among them, for there is no hope of
reconciliation.

But if they have no curiosity for things at a great distance from them, they
have much for those that are nearer hand, insomuch that if a man open a chest
in their presence, he must show them all that is in it, otherwise they will
think themselves dis-obliged: And if they like any thing of what they see
therein, though it be of ever so little value, they will give the most precious
thing they have for it, that so they may satisfy their inclination.

As concerning Traffic, true it is, that having treated about something, they
will fall off from what they have promised: But the secret to make them stand
to their bargain, is to tell them, that a Merchant ought to be as good as his
word: For when they are pressed upon in point of honor, and reproached with
inconstancy as if they were children, they are ashamed of their lightness.

Theft is accounted a great crime amongst them; wherein it must be acknowledged
they show themselves more rational Pluta. in his Life.
than Lycurgus, who allowed that vice in the Lacedaemonian children, as a very
commendable employment, provided they did their business cleaverly, and
Hocus-pocus-like: But the Caribbians have so natural and so great an aversion
for that sin, that there is no such thing found among them, which is very rare
among Savages: For most of them are Thieves; and Islands of Robbers.
thence it is that some of their Islands have their name thence.

But for the Caribbians, as they are are not of their own nature any way
inclined to thieving, so they live without any distrust one of another: So that
their Houses and Plantations are left without any body to look to them, though
they have neither doors nor enclosures, after the same manner as some
Historians relate of the Tartars: But if the least thing in the Carpins Travels
into Tartary.
world be taken from them, such as may be a little knife, wherewith they do
strange things in Joyner's work, they so highly prize what is useful to them,
that such a loss is enough to set them a weeping, and grieving for the space of
eight days after it, nay will engage them in combinations with their friends to
get reparations, and to be revenged on the person whom they suspect guilty of
the theft: Accordingly in those Islands where they have their habitations near
those of the Christians, they have often revenged themselves of those who had,
as they said, taken away any of their little houshould-stuff: And in those
places when they find something wanting in their houses, they presently say,
Some Christian has been here: And among the grievances and complaints which
they make to the Governors of the French Nation, this comes always in the
front, Compere Governor, thy Mariners (so they call all the foreign
Inhabitants) have taken away a knife out of my Cot, or some other piece of
household stuff of that kind. The Inhabitants of Guinny would not make any such
complaints: For if they chance to lose something, they are of a persuasion that
some of their deceased Relations, having occasion for it in the other world,
came and took it away.

The Caribbians are a people as it were associated in one common interest, and
they are of all people the most loving one to another; being in that particular
far from the humor of those Astaticks of Java, who speak not to their own
Brothers without a dagger in their hands, so distrustful are they one of
another: From this affection which our Savages mutually bear one another, does
it proceed that there are few quarrels and animosities among them.

But if they are once injured, either by a Stranger or one of their own
Countrymen, they never forgive, but contrive all the ways they can to be
revenged: Thus when any of those Imposters, whom they call Bogez, makes them
believe that one of those whom they account Sorcerers is author of the mischief
that has happened to them, they endeavor all they can to kill him, saying,
Yaraliatana, he has bewitched me; Nebanebouibatina, I will be revenged of him:
And this furious passion and desire to be revenged, is that which makes them so
brutish, as we said before, as to eat the very flesh of their Enemies, whereof
we shall give the particulars in their proper place: This implacable animosity
is the vice generally reigning among them; and it exercises the same Tyranny,
without any exception, over all the Savages of America: The revenge of the
Inhabitants of Canada is sometimes very pleasant; for they eat their own lice,
because they have bitten them: If the Brasilians hurt themselves against a
stone, to be De Lery c. 11. and 14.
revenged they bite it as hard as they can; It is observed also that they bite
the Arrows which light upon them in fighting.

Without any obligation to Lycurgus, or his Laws, the Caribbians, by a secret
law of nature, bear a great respect to ancient people, and hear them speak with
much attention, expressing by their gesture, and a little tone of the voice,
how much they are pleased with their discourses: And in all things the younger
sort comply with the sentiments of the ancient, and Linscot and Semedo.
submit to their wills: It is reported they do the same in Brasil and China.

The Young men among the Caribbians have no conversation either with the Maids
or married Women: And it has been observed, that the men are less amorous in
this Country than the women, as they are in several other places under the
Torrid Zone: Both the men and women among the Caribbians are naturally chaste, a
quality very rare among Savages: And when those of other Nations look
over-earnestly upon them, and laugh at their nakedness, they are wont to say to
them, Friends, you are to look on us only between both the eyes; a virtue
worthy admiration in a people that go naked, and are as barbarous as these.

It is related of Captain Baron, that in one of the incursions made by him and
his party into the Island of Montserrat, then possessed by the English, he made
great waste in the Plantations that lay nearest to the Sea, so that he carried
a great booty, and that among the Prisoners there being a young Gentlewoman,
Wife to one of the Officers of the Island, he caused her to be brought to one
of his houses in Dominico: this Gentlewoman being big with child when she was
carried away, was very carefully attended during the time of her lying in, by
the Savage women of the same Island: And though she lived there a good while
after among them, neither Captain Baron nor any other ever touched her; a great
example of reservedness in such people.

Yet must it be acknowledged, that some of them have since degenerated from
that chastity, and many other virtues of their Ancestors: But we must withal
make this acknowledgment, that the Europaeans by their pernicious examples, and
the unchristian-like treatment they have used toward them, basely deceiving
them, perfidiously upon all occasions breaking their promises with them,
unmercifully rifling and burning their houses and villages, and ravishing and
debauching their Wives and Daughters, have taught them (to the perpetual infamy
of the Christian name) dissimulation, lying, treachery, perfidiousness, luxury,
and several other vices, which were unknown in those parts, before they had any
Commerce with them.

But as to other concerns, these Savages are remarkable for their civility and
courtesy, beyond what can be imagined in Savages: Not but that there are some
Caribbians very brutish and unreasonable; but for the greater part of them
their judgment and docility is observable upon many occasions, and those who
have conversed long with them, have found several experiences of their fair
dealing, gratitude, friendship and generosity: But of this we shall speak more
particularly in the Chapter where we shall treat of their Reception of such
Strangers as come to visit them.

They are also great lovers of cleanliness (a thing extraordinary among
Savages) and have such an aversion for all nastiness, that if one should ease
himself in their Gardens where their Cassava and Potatoes are planted, they
will presently forsake them, and not make use of any thing growing therein: Of
this their neatness in this and other things, we shall have occasion to say
more in the Chapter Of their Habitations, and their Repasts.

CHAP. XII. Of the natural simplicity of the Caribbians.
ADmiration being the Daughter of Ignorance, we are not to think it strange
that the Caribbians, who have so little knowledge of those excellent things
which study and experience have made familiar amongst civilized Nations, should
be so much astonished when they meet with any thing whereof the cause is
unknown to them, and that they should be brought up in so great simplicity,
that it might be taken in most of these poor people for a brutish stupidity.

This simplicity is remarkable, among other things, in the extraordinary fear
they conceive at the sight of Firearms, which they look on with a strange
admiration; but their astonishment is greatest at Firelocks, much beyond what
they have for great Guns and Muskets, because they see Fire put to them; but
for Firelocks, they are not able to conceive how it is possible they should
take Fire; and so they believe it is the evil Spirit Maboya who does that
Office: But this fear and astonishment is common to them with diverse other
Savages, who have not found any thing so strange in their encounters with the
Europaeans, as those Arms which spit Fire, and at so great a distance wound and
kill those whom they meet with: This was Garcilasso's Commentary Royal, l. 3.
c. 8 Des Hayes Travels into the Levant.
it, together with the Prodigy of seeing Men fighting on Horseback, which
principally made the Peruvians think the Spaniards to be Gods, and occasioned
their submission to them with less resistance. It is reported also that the
Arabians, who make Incursions along the River Jordan, and should be more
accustomed to War, are not free from this fear and astonishment.

Among the several discoveries of the simplicity of our Caribbians, we shall
here set down two very considerable ones. When there happens an Eclipse of the
Moon, they believe that Maboya eats her, and they dance all night, making a
noise with Gourds, wherein there are many small Pebbles: And when they smell
any thing of ill scent, they are wont to say, Maboya cayeu eu, that is, The
Devil is here; Caima Loary, Let us be gone because of him, or for fear of him:
Nay they attribute the name of Maboya, or Devil, to certain Plants of ill
scent, such as may be Mushrooms, and to whatever is apt to put them into any
fright.

Some years since, the greatest part of the Caribbians were persuaded that
Gunpowder was the Seed of some Herb; nay, there were those who desired some of
it to sow in their Gardens; nay, some were so obstinate, that, though dissuaded
from it, they put it into the ground, out of a persuasion that it would bring
forth somewhat, as well as other Seeds: Yet was not this Imagination so gross as
those of certain Brutes of Guinny, who, the first time they saw Europaeans,
thought the Commodities they brought them, such as Linen, Clothes, Knives,
and Firearms, grew on the Earth so prepared, as the Fruits did on Trees, and
that there was no more to be done than to gather them: That certainly is not so
pardonable a piece of simplicity as that of the Caribbians: And we may further
alledg, to excuse that simplicity, or at least to render it the Garcilasso, l.
9. c. 16.
more supportable, the stupidity of those Inhabitants of America, who, upon the
first Discovery of the New-World, imagined that the Horse and the Rider made up
one Creature, like the imaginary Centaurs of the Poets: And that of those
others, who Montagne's Essays, l. 1. c. 8.
after they were subdued, coming to desire peace and pardon of the Men, and to
bring them Gold and Provisions, went and made the same Presents to the Horses,
with a Speech much like that which they had made to the Men, interpreting the
neighing of those Creatures for a Language of composition and truce: And to
conclude these instances, we shall add only the childish sottishness De Lery,
c. 16 Garcilasso, l. 9. c. 29.
of those same Indians of America, who roundly believed, that the Letters which
the Spaniards sent one to another were certain Messengers and Spies, speaking,
and seeing, and discovering the most secret actions; and upon this persuasion,
fearing one day the eye and tongue of one of these Letters, they hid it under a
stone, that they might freely eat some Melons of their Masters. In fine, there
will be no cause to think it so strange that the Caribbians should take
Gunpowder, a thing absolutely unknown to them, for some seed that might be
sown, when there were some people living in France, whose habitations being at
a great distance from the places where Salt was made, thought out of a like
imagination that it was gathered in Gardens. It happened also, not many years
since, that a Woman, an Inhabitant of Martinico, having sent several pounds of
Caret-shells and Tobacco to a She-Merchant of S. Malo's, Caret is a kind of
Tortoise-shell.
when this latter had put off the Commodity, she gave an account thereof to her
Correspondent at Martinico, and advised to plant Carets in her Garden rather
then Tobacco, for that the former was much dearer in France, and that there was
no danger of its rotting in the Ship, as there was of Tobacco. But let us
consider what there is yet to be said concerning the natural simplicity of our
Savages of the Caribbies.

It is a pleasant thing to consider that these poor people should be so simple,
as that though they have many places fit for the making of Salt, yet dare they
not make use of it, as accounting Salt extremely prejudicial to health, and the
preservation of life; thence it proceeds that they never either eat of it, or
season their meat therewith; and when at any time they see our people make use
of it, they say to them, out of a compassion worthy compassion, Compere, thou
hastenest thy own death: But instead of Salt, they season all their messes with
Pyman, or American Pepper.

Nor is there any Swines-flesh eaten among them, which they call Coincoin, and
Bouirokou; nor yet Tortoise, (or as some call them Turtles) which they call
Catallou, though there be abundance of those Creatures in their Country: Of
this their abstinence they give the simplest reasons imaginable: For as to the
Swine, they are afraid to taste of it, lest they should have small eyes like
those of that Beast; now in their judgment it is the greatest of all
deformities to have small eyes, and yet there are few among them but have them
such. As for the Tortoise, the reason of their abstinence from that is no less
ridiculous; they will not feed on that, say they, out of a fear lest if they
did, they should participate of the laziness and stupidity of that Creature.

Most of those people who are known by the name of Savages are also full of
strange and fantastical imaginations concerning the matter and manner of
eating: For example, the Canadians P. Junius in his Relations of New-Fra.
abstain from Muscles, only out of a pure fancy; but they are such Beasts that
they cannot give any reason for that abstinence: They will not cast the Beavers
bones to the Dogs, lest the soul of that Beast should go and tell the other
Beavers, and so oblige them to leave the Country: It is reported also, That
they do not eat the marrow of the backbone of any Creature, for fear of having
any pain in the back. The Brasilians eat no hens eggs, out of an opinion they
are poison: They De Lery, c. 11
abstain also from the flesh of Ducks, and that of every Creature that goes
slowly, as also from Fishes that do not swim swiftly, for fear of participating
of the slowness of those Creatures. The Maldiveses forbear the meat of
Tortoises, as the Pirard of the Animals of the East Indies, c. 2. Vin. le
Blanc. Garcilasso, l. 8. c. 7.
Caribbians do; but it is because of the conformity there is, in their
judgment, between them and Man. The Calecutians, and some others who live more
toward the East, never taste of the flesh of wild Oxen, Cows, and Bulls, out
of a persuasion that men's Souls, when they depart out of their Bodies, go and
animate those of the said Beasts. In fine, certain Peruvians of the Province of
Pastu abstain from all kinds of flesh whatsoever; and if they are entreated to
taste thereof, their answer is, That they are not Dogs. All these Instances are
brought upon the Stage, to show that the aversion of the Caribbians to eat
Salt, Swines-flesh, and Tortoises, should not cause them to be accounted the
most self-willed and most extravagant of all the Savages.

Besides the discoveries we have already made of their sottishness and
simplicity, there is this yet to be added, That they are so stupid, that they
cannot count a number exceeding that of the Fingers of their Hands and the Toes
of their Feet, which they show to express the said number, what exceeds it
surpassing with them all Arithmetic; so that they would be very unfit for
Bankiers; an humor contrary to that of the Chinese, Voyage to the East
Indies, 1630.
who are such excellent Accomptants, that in a moment they cast up such Sums as
it would trouble us much to do, and that with greater certainty.

But the Caribbians have the privilege not to be the only Nation in the World
which may be reproached with this ignorance; for it is as great among the
people of Madagascar and Guinny, to cite no more; nay, some ancient Historians
affirm, That there were some people who could not count above five, and others
who could not exceed four.

The Inhabitants of Guinny having counted to Ten, were wont to set a mark, and
then begin again. Certain Savages of the Septentrional part of America, to
express a great number, which it was impossible for them to name, make use of
an easy kind of demonstration, taking their hair or some sand in their hands;
a sort of comparisons which are frequent in holy Scripture. The Inhabitants of
the Caribby-Islands have also their invention to supply the defect of
Arithmetic; for when they are to go to the Wars, and are to be ready at their
general Rendezvous on a certain day, they take each of them one after another
an equal number of Pease, in their solemn Assembly; as for instance, thrice or
four times Ten, and some certain number under Ten, if need be, according as
they are resolved to advance their Enterprise; they put up these Pease in a
little Gourd, and every morning they take out one, and cast it away, till there
are none left, and then the appointed time for their departure is come, and the
next day they are to be upon their march: Another way they have is this, every
one of them makes so many knots on a little Cord, and every day they unty one,
and when they are come to the last they make ready for the Rendezvous: Sometimes
also they take little pieces of Wood, upon which they make so many notches as
they intend to spend days in their preparation; every day they cut off one of
the notches, and when they come to the last, they take their march toward the
place appointed.

The Captains, the Boyez, and the most ancient among them, have more
understanding than the common sort, and by long experience, joined to what they
had received by tradition from their Ancestors, they have acquired a gross
knowledge of diverse Stars; whence it comes that they count the Months by Moons,
and the Years by the Seven Stars, taking particular notice of that
Constellation: Thus some Peruvians regulated their Years by their Harvests:
Those Inhabitants of Canada who live in the Mountains observe the number of the
Nights and Winters; and the Soriqueses count by Suns. But though the more
judicions among the Caribbians discern the Months, and the Years, and observe
the different Seasons, yet have they not any Monuments of Antiquity, and cannot
tell how long it is since the first of their Nation left the Continent, and
settled themselves in the Islands; but all the account they are able to give of
it is, That neither themselves, nor their Fathers, nor their Grandfathers could
remember any thing of it; nor can they tell what age they are of, nor give any
precise account of the time when the Spaniards came into their Country, nor of
several other things of that nature; for they take no notice of ought of this
kind, and make no account of knowing what is done in the World.

CHAP. XIII. Of that which may be called Religion among the Caribbians.
THere is no Nation so savage, no People so barbarous, but they have some
opinion and persuasion of a Divinity, said Cicero; nay, Nature her self seems
to have been so indulgent Tusc. Quoest.
to Mankind, as to make some impression of a Divinity in the minds of Men; for
what Nation, what kind of Men are there, but have, without any previous
learning it from others, a natural sentiment of the Divinity? We may with just
reason admire these noble Illuminations proceeding out of the mouth of a man
groping in the darkness of Paganism: But things are come to that pass now, that
it will be a hard matter to make good the famous words of that incomparable
Orator and Prince of Roman Eloquence: For the poor Savages of the ancient
People of the Antes in Peru, and of the two Provinces of the Chirrhuanes or
Cheriganes, those of most of the Countries of New-France, New-Mexico,
New-Holland, Brasil, New-Netherlands, Terra del Fuego, the Arouagues, the
Inhabitants about the River Cayenna, the Islands of Robbers, and some others,
if we may credit Historians, have not any kind of Religion, and do not adore
any Sovereign Power.

Those also who have conversed among the Originary Inhabitants of the
Caribby-Islands, are forced to acknowledge, That they have, by the violence of
their brutish passions, smothered all the apprehensions Nature had bestowed on
them of a Divinity; that they have rejected all the Directions and Instructions
which might guide them to the knowledge thereof; and consequently, that by the
just judgment of God they are surrounded by so dreadful a night, that there is
not to be seen among them either Invocation, or Ceremonies, or Sacrifices, or,
in fine, any Exercise or Assembly whatsoever in order to Devotion: nay, they
are so far from having any of these things, that they have not so much as a
name to express the Divinity, so far are they from serving it; so that when any
one would speak to them concerning God, he must use these circumlocutions; He
who has created the World, who has made all things, who gives life and
sustenance to all living Creatures, or something of that kind: They are
accordingly so blinded and brutish, that they do not make any acknowledgment of
the Lord of Nature, in that admirable work of the Universe; wherein he has
been pleased to represent himself in a thousand immortal colors, and make his
adorable Omnipotency as it were visible to the eye: Thence comes it that they
are deaf to the voices of an infinite number of creatures which continually
preach unto them the presence of their Creator: And so they daily use the
benefits of their Sovereign Master, without ever reflecting that he is the
Author thereof, and making any acknowledgment of his goodness, who has so
liberally supplied them therewith.

They say that the Earth is the indulgent Mother, who furnishes them with all
things necessary to life: But their terrestrial minds are not raised to any
apprehension of that Almighty and all-merciful Father who framed the Earth, and
by the continual influence of his Divinity impregnates it with the virtue of
producing all things for the nourishment of man: If any one speak to them
concerning that Divine Essence, and discourse with them of the mysteries of
Faith, they will hearken to all that is said with much patience: But when the
discourse is at an end, they answer as it were in jest, Friend thou art very
eloquent, thou art very subtle, I would I could talk as well thou do: Nay
sometimes they say as the Brasilians do, that if they should suffer themselves
to be persuaded by such discourses, their Neighbors would laugh at them.

A certain Caribbian being at work on a Sunday, Monsieur du Montel relates how
that he said to him, Friend, he who has made Heaven and Earth will be angry
with thee for working on this day; for he has appointed this day for his
service: And I, replied very bluntly the Savage, am already very angry with
him; for thou say he is the Master of the world and of the seasons: He it is
therefore who has forborne to send rain in due time, and by reason of the great
drought has caused my Manioc and my Potatoes to rot in the ground: since he
has treated me so ill, I will work on every Sunday, though 'twere purposely to
vex him. See here a pregnant example of the brutality of this wretched people.
This discourse is much like that of those senceless people among the
Topinambous, who, when it was told them that God was the Author of the Thunder,
argued, that it followed he was not good, since he took such pleasure in
frighting them after that manner. But to return to the Caribbians.

Those of the same Nation who live in the Meridional Continent of America, have
no more Religion than the Inhabitants of the Caribbies: Some among them have a
certain respect for the Sun and the Moon, and imagine that they are animated;
yet do they not adore them, nor offer, nor sacrifice any thing to them: It is
probable they have retained that veneration for those two great Luminaries from
the remembrance of the Apalachites, among whom their Predecessors had sometimes
sojourned. Our Islanders have not preserved any thing of that Tradition; but we
shall here set down all that may be called Religion among them, and what bears
a gross representation thereof.

They have a natural sentiment of some Divinity, or some superior and obliging
power, which has its residence in the Heavens; They say, That the said power
is content quietly to enjoy the delights of its own felicity, without being
offended at the ill actions of men, and that it is endued with so great
goodness, that it does not take any revenge even of its Enemies: whence it
comes that they render it neither honor nor adoration, and that they interpret
those Treasures of clemency, whereof it is so liberal toward them, and that
longsuffering whereby it bears with them, either to weakness or the
indifference it has for the conduct of mankind.

Their persuasion therefore is, that there are two kinds of spi^its, some good,
others evil: The good spirits are their Gods; and they call them in general
Akamboue, which is the word used ^y the men; and Opoyem, which is that of the
Women: True ^t is, the word Akamboue signifies simply a Spirit, and thence ^t
comes that it is also called the spirit of man; but this appel^ation they never
attribute to the evil spirits: These good spirits, which are their Gods, are
more particularly expressed by ^he men under the word Icheiri, and by the women
under that of Chemiin, which we cannot render otherwise than by that of God,
and Chemiignum, the Gods: And every one speaking particularly of his God, says
Icheirikou, which is the word of the men, and Nechemerakou, which is that of
the women: But both men and women call the evil spirit, which is their Devil,
Mapoya, or Maboya, as all the French pronounce it; but the Caribbians in that
word pronounce the B according to the German pronunciation.

They believe that there is a great number of these good Spirits, or Gods, and
every one imagines that there is one of them particularly designed for his
conduct: They say therefore, that these Gods have their abode in Heaven, but
they know not what they do there, and of themselves they never propose to
themselves the making of any acknowledgment of them as Creators of the world,
and the things contained therein: But only when it is said to them, that the
God we adore is he who has made Heaven and Earth, and that it is he who
causes the Earth to bring forth things for our nourishment; they answer; True,
thy God has made the Heaven and the Earth of France ( or some other Country,
which they name) and causes thy Wheat to grow there: But our Gods have made our
Country, and cause our Manioc to grow.

It is affirmed by some, that they call their false Gods des Rioches; but that
word is not of their Language, but is derived from the Spanish: The French
affirm the same thing after the Spaniards; and if the Caribbians make use of
it, they do it not among themselves but only among Strangers: So that from what
has been said it is apparent, that though these Barbarians have a natural
sentiment of some Divinity, or some superior Power, yet it is intermixed with so
many extravagances, and involved in so great darkness, that it cannot be said
those poor people have any knowledge of God: For the Divinities they
acknowledge, and to whom they render a certain homage, are so many Devils, by
whom they are seduced and kept in the chains of a damnable slavery, though they
make a certain distinction between them and the evil Spirits.

They have neither Temples nor Altars particularly dedicated to these pretended
Divinities which they acknowledge, and so they do not sacrifice to them any
thing that has had life; but they only make them offerings of Cassava, and of
the first of their Fruits; and when they think they have been healed by them of
some disease, they make a kind of wine or a feast in honor of them, and by way
of acknowledgment, and as it were to express their gratitude, they offer them
some Cassava, and Ouicou; all these offerings are called by them Anacri. Their
Houses being made after on oval figure, and the roof reaching to the ground,
they set at one end of the Hut their Offerings in Vessels according to the
nature of the thing, upon one or more Matoutous, or little Tables made of
Bull-rushes and the leaves of the tree called the Latanier: Every one may make
his Offerings to his God in his own House, or Cot; but when it is done in order
to invocation, there must be one of the Boyez present: All these Offerings are
not accompanied with any adoration, or Prayers, and they consist only in the
bare presentation of those gifts.

They also invocate their false Gods when they desire their presence; but that
is to be done by the interposition of the Boyez, that is to say, their Priests,
or to say better, their Magicians; and this they do especially upon four
occasions.

1. To demand revenge on some body who has done them any mischief, and to
bring some punishment upon him. 2. To be healed of some disease wherewith they
are troubled, and to know what will be the issue thereof: And when they are
recovered, they make Wines, as they are called in the Islands, that is,
Assemblies of rejoicing and congratulation, and debauches in honor of them, as
it were by way of acknowledgment of their favor: And their Magicians do also
perform the office of Physicians among them, by an association of Magic and
Medicine, never doing any cure, or applying any remedies but what are
accompanied by some act of superstition. 3. They consult them also to know the
event of their wars. 4. Lastly, they invocate those spirits by the means of
their Boyez, to obtain of them that they would drive away Maboya, or the evil
Spirit: But they never invocate Maboya himself, as some have imagined.
Every Boy has his particular God, or rather his familiar Devil, which he
invocates by the singing of certain words, accompanied with the smoke of
Tobacco, which they cause to be burnt before that Devil, as a perfume which is
very delightful to him, and the scent whereof is able to make him appear.

When the Boyez invocate their familiar Devil, it is always done in the
nightime, and great care must be taken that there be no light near, nor any
fire in the place where they exercise their abominations; for these spirits of
darkness perfectly abhor all light: And when several Boyez invocate their Gods
at the same time, as they speak, those Gods, or rather Devils, rail one at
another, and quarrel, attributing to one another the causes of every ones evil,
and they seem to fight.

These Demons shelter themselves sometimes in the bones of dead men taken out
of their graves and wrapped in Cotton, and thereby give Oracles, saying it is the
soul of the deceased person: They make use of them to bewitch their Enemies,
and to that end the Sorcerers wrap up those bones together with something that
belongs to their Enemy. These Devils do also sometimes enter into the bodies of
Women, and speak by them: When the Boy or Magician has by his Charms obliged
his familar Spirit to appear, he bids him appear under different shapes, and
those who are about the place where he exercises his damnable superstitions,
say, that he clearly answers the questions made to him, that he foretells the
event of a war or disease, and after the Boy is retired, that the Devil stirs
the Vessels, and makes a noise with his jaws, as if he were eating and drinking
the presents prepared for him: but the next day they find he has not meddled
with any thing: These profane offerings which have been defiled by these
unhappy Spirits, are accounted so holy by the Magicians and the poor people
whom they have abused, that only the most ancient and most considerable persons
among them, have the liberty to taste of them; nay they durst not do that,
unless they have that cleanness of body which they say is requisite in all
those that are to be admited thereto.

As Soon as these poor Savages are troubled with any sickness or pain, they
believe that they are sent upon them by the Gods of some of their Enemies; and
then they make their applications to the Boy, who consulting his Demon, tells
them it is the God of such a one, or such a one, who has caused chose
mischiefs to them: And this raises in those who consult, enmity and a desire to
be revenged of those whose Gods have treated them in that manner.

Besides the Boyez or Magicians who are highly respected and honored among
them, they have also Sorcerers, at least they think them such, who, as they
say, send charms upon them, and dangerous and fatal enchantments; and those
whom they account such, they kill, if ever they light on them: It Is many times
a plausible pretense to be rid of their Enemies.

The Caribbians are subject to some other mischiefs, which they say proceed
from Maboya, and they often complain that he beats them: True it is, that some
persons of worth, who have conversed a certain time among this poor people, are
persuaded that they are neither molested, nor effectually beaten by the Devil;
and that all the complaints and dreadful relations they make as to that, are
grounded only on this, that being of a very melancholic constitution, and
having for the most part their spleens swelled and inflamed, they are many
times subject to terrible dreams, wherein they imagine the Devil appears to
them, and beats them: whereupon they start up frighted out of their wits, and
when they are fully awake, they say that Maboya has beaten them; and having
the imagination thus hurt, they are persuaded that they feel the pain.

But it is manifest by the testimonies of several other persons of quality and
exquisite knowledge, who have sojourned a long time in the Island of St.
Vincent, which is inhabited only by the Caribbians, and such as have also seen
those of the same Nation who live in the Continent of the Meridional part of
America, that the Devils do effectually beat them, and that they often show on
their bodies the visible marks of the blows they had received: We are assured
further by the Relations of diverse of the French Inhabitants of Martinico, that
going into the Quarter of these Savages, who live in the same Island, they have
many times found them making horrid complaints that Maboya had immediately
before their coming thither treated them ill, and saying that he was Mouche
fache contre Caraibes, mightily incensed against* the Caribbians; so that they
accounted the French happy, that their Maboya did not beat them.

Monsieur du Montel, who has often been present at their assemblies, and
conversed very familiarly and a long time together with those of that Nation
who inhabit in the Island of St. Vincents, as also with those of the Meridional
Continent, gives this testimony upon this sad occasion: Notwithstanding the
ignorance and irreligion wherein our Caribbians live, they know by experience,
and fear more than death the evil Spirit, whom they call Maboya; for that
dreadful Enemy does many times appear to them under most hideous shapes: And
what is particularly observable, that unmerciful and bloody executioner, who is
an insatiable murderer from the beginning of the world, cruelly wounds and
torments those miserable people, when they are not so forward as he would have
them to engage themselves in wars; so that when they are reproached with that
over-eager passion which hurries them to the shedding of man's blood, their
answer is, that they are forced thereto against their wills by the Maboya.

But these are not the only people whom that implacable Enemy of Mankind treats
as his slaves: There are several other barbarous Nations who can always show
on their bodies the bloody marks of his cruelties: For it is reported, that the
Brasilians shake and sweat with horror at the remembrance of his apparitions,
and many times out of the pure apprehension they have of the cruel treatment
they are wont to receive from him: Thence it proceeds that some of those
Nations flatter that old Dragon, and by adorations, offerings, and sacrifices,
endeavor to abate his rage and appease his fury; as among others, not to
mention the people of the Eastern part of the World, some of the Inhabitants of
Florida and Canada: For that is the only reason they can give for the service
they do him: Nay it is affirmed that the Nation of the Jews was heretofore
inclined to make offerings to that Devil, to be delivered out of his
temptations and snares: And one of their own Authors cites this Proverb as used
among them; Make a present to Elie eans son Thisby.
Samael, on the day of expiation.

But how great soever the apprehensions which the Caribbians have of their
Maboya may be, and how ill soever they may be treated by him, yet do they not
honor him with any offerings, prayers, adorations, or sacrifices: All the
remedy they use against his cruel vexations, is, the best they can, to make
little Images of wood, or some other solid matter, in imitation of the shape
under which that wicked spirit has appeared to them: These Images they hang
about their necks, and say they find ease thereby, and that Maboya does not
torment them so much when they have those about them: Sometimes also in
imitation of the Caribbians of the Continent, they make use of the mediation of
the Boyez to appease him, and they thereupon consult their Gods, as, upon the
like occasions those of the Continent have recourse to their Sorcerers, who are
highly esteemed among them.

For though the Caribbians of those parts are all generally subtle enough, yet
have they among them a sort of crafty companions, who to gain greater authority
and reputation among the rest, make them believe that they hold a secret
correspondence with the evil Spirits whom they call Maboya, as our Islanders
do, whereby they are tormented, and that they learn of them things absolutely
unknown to others: These Impostors are looked upon among this poor people that
have no knowledge of God, as Oracles, and they consult them in all things, and
superstitiously give credit to their Answers: This occasions irreconcilable
Enmities among them, and many times Murders; for when any one dies, his
Friends and Relations are wont to consult the Sorcerer how he came to his
death; if the Sorcerer answers, that such or such a one was the cause of it,
they will never rest till they have dispatched him whom the Piais (so they call
the Sorcerer in their Language) has named to them. The Caribbians of the
Islands do also in this follow the custom of their Country men of the
Continent, as we have represented before.

But this is most certain, and a thing which all the Savages daily acknowledge
themselves by experience, That the wicked one has no power to do them any hurt
in the company of any Christians; hence it comes, that in those Islands where
the Christians live jointly with the Caribbians, those wretched people being
persecuted by the Adversary, make all the haste they can to the next houses of
the Christians, where they find a certain refuge against the violent assaults
of that furious Oppressor.

It is also a manifest truth, confirmed by daily experience all over America,
That the holy Sacrament of Baptism being conferred on these Savages, the Devil
never beats nor torments them afterward as long as they live.

A man would think, that this seriously considered, these people should
earnestly desire to embrace the Christian Religion, that so they might be
delivered out of the jaws of that roaring Lion. True it is, that while they
feel the cruel pricks in the Flesh, they wish themselves Christians, and
promise to become such; but as soon as the pain is over, they laugh at
Christian Religion and its Baptism. The same brutish stupidity is found De
Lery, c. 16
among the people of Brasil.

CHAP. XIV. A Continuation of that which may be called Religion among the
Caribbians: Of some of their Traditions; and of the Sentiment they have of the
Immortality of the Soul.
WE have seen in the precedent Chapter how the Spirits of darkness take
occasion in the nightime, by hideous apparitions and dreadful
representations, to frighten the miserable Caribbians; and how to continue them
in their Errors, and a servile fear of their pretended power, they punish them
if they be not so forward as they would have them to comply with their wicked
suggestions; and how they charm their Senses by Illusions and strange
Imaginations, pretending to the Authority of revealing to them things to come,
healing them of their Diseases, revenging them of their Enemies, and delivering
them out of all the dangers whereto they shall be exposed: All this well
considered, is it to be admired that these Barbarians, who knew not, nor in the
least reflected on the honor which God had done them, in making a discovery of
himself to them in the many delightful Creatures he has set before their eyes,
to conduct them to the light of their instructions, should be delivered up to a
reprobate sense, and that at this present they should be destitute of all
understanding to perceive the true way of Life, and without hope, and without
God in the World?

We have also represented, That what endeavors soever they might use to
smother all the sentiments of Divine Justice and its Jurisdiction in their
Consciences, yet has there still remained in them some spark of that
Knowledge, which awakens them, and raises in them from time to time diverse
fears and apprehensions of that Vengeance which their Crimes might bring upon
them: But instead of lifting up their eyes to heaven, to implore the assistance
thereof, and by confidence and amendment of life to appease the Sovereign
Majesty of the true God, whom they had offended, they descend to the abysses of
Hell, to invocate the Devil by the sacrilegious Superstitions of their
Magicians, who after they have rendered them those fatal offices, involve them,
by those infamous Contracts, in the deplorable slavery of those cruel Tyrants.

These poor Barbarians are so transported and besotted by those furious
passions, that to obtain some favor from those enemies to all goodness, and to
appease those Tigers, they render them several small Services; for they not
only consecrate to them the first of their fruits, but they also devote to them
the most sumptuous Tables of their Feasts; they cover them with the most
delicate of their Meats, and the most delicious of their Drinks; they consult
them in their affairs of greatest importance, and are governed by their wicked
counsels; they expect, in their Sickness, the Sentence of their Life or Death
from those detestable Oracles, which they receive by the means of those Puppets
of Cotton, wherein they wrap up the worm-eaten Bones of some wretched Carcass
taken out of the Grave; and to free themselves from the weight of their blows,
and divert their rage, they burn in honor of them the leaves of Tobacco; and
sometimes they paint their ugly shapes in the most considerable place of their
Vessels which they call Piragas, or they wear hanging about their necks a
little Image representing some one of those cursed Spirits, in the most hideous
posture in which they had sometime appeared unto them, as we have hinted in the
precedent Chapter.

It is also conceived, That it is out of the same design of insinuating
themselves into the favor of those Monsters, that many times they macerate
their Bodies by many bloody incisions and superstitious abstinences, and that
they have so great a veneration for the Magicians, who are the infamous
Ministers of these infernal Furies, and the Executioners of their enraged
Passions: Yet have not these abused wretches any Laws determining the precise
time of all these damnable Ceremonies; but the same wicked Spirit which
inclines them thereto, finds them occasions enough to exercise them, either by
the ill treatment they receive from him, or their own curiosity to know the
event of some military Enterprise, or the success of some Disease, or lastly to
find out the means of revenging themselves of their Enemies.

But since those who have lived many years in the midst of that Nation
unanimously affirm, That in their greatest distresses they never saw them
invocate any of those Spirits, we are persuaded, that all those little
Services, which fear forces from them rather then reverence or love, ought not
to be accounted a true Worship, or acts of Religion; and that we shall give
those fooleries their right denomination, if we call them Superstitions,
Enchantments, Sorceries, and shameful productions of that Art which is as black
as are those Spirits of darkness whom their Boyez consult: And we may conclude
also, that the meat and drink which they present to those counterfeit
Divinities, cannot be properly called Sacrifices, but express Compacts between
the Devils and the Magicians, obliging them to appear when they call for them.

So that it is not to be thought strange, that in all these weak sentiments
which most of the Caribbians have of whatever has any appearance of Religion,
they should among themselves laugh at the Ceremonies of the Christians, and
think the worse of those of their Nation who express any inclination to be
Baptized: The surest way therefore for those whose hearts God should open to
believe the holy Gospel, would be to leave their Country and Friends, and to go
into some of those Islands which are inhabited only by Christians: For though
they are not so superstitious as the people of the Kingdom of Calecut, who
think it a horror only to touch a person of a contrary persuasion to theirs, as
if they were thereby defiled; nor yet so rigorous as they are in the Kingdom of
Pegu, where when a man embraces the Christian Religion, the wife celebrates his
Funeral as if he were dead, and erects a Tomb, at which having made her
Lamentations, she is at liberty to marry again, as if she were effectually a
Widow; yet he among the Caribbians who should embrace Christianity, would
expose himself to thousands of reproaches and affronts, if he continued his
abode among them.

When they see the Assemblies and Service of the Christians, they are wont to
say, is is pretty and divertive, but it is not the fashion of their Country;
not expressing in their presence either hatred or aversion to the Ceremonies,
as did the poor Savages who lived in the Island of Hispaniola, and the
neighboring Islands, who would not be present at the Service of the Spaniards,
much less embrace their Religion, because, as they said, they could not be
persuaded that persons so wicked and so cruel, whose unmerciful barbarism they
had so much experienced, could have any good belief.

Some Priests and Religious men, who had been heretofore in that Country,
having been over-forward in the baptizing of some before they had instructed
them in that Mystery, have been the cause that that Sacrament is not in such
reputation among the Caribbians as otherwise it might have been: And whereas
their Godfathers and Godmothers gave them new Clothes, and made them some
other little Presents on the day of their Baptism, and treated them very
sumptuously, within eight days after they had received that Sacrament they
desired to receive it again, that they might have other Presents and good cheer.

Not many years since, some of those Gentlemen took into their charge a young
Caribbian, their Catechumen, born in Dominico, whose name was Ya Marabouy, a
Son of that Captain whom the French call the Baron, and the Indians Orachora
Caramiana, out of a design to show him one of the greatest and most magnificent
Cities in the World, which was Paris; they brought him over-Sea, and after they
had shown him all the Rarities of that great City, he was baptized there with
great solemnity, in the presence of many Persons of Honor, and named Lewis:
Having sojourned a while in those Parts, he was sent back into his own Country,
laden indeed with Presents, but as much a Christian as when he came out of it,
because he had not been fully instructed in the Mysteries of Christian
Religion: As soon as he had set foot in his own Island he laughed at all he had
seen, as if it had been but a May Game, and saying the Christians were an
extravagant sort of people, he returned into the Company of the other Savages,
put off his Clothes, and painted his Body over with Roucou, as he had done
before.

To show the inconstancy and lightness of the Caribbians in the Christian
Religion, when they have once embraced it, there is a Story, how that while M.
Auber was Governor of Gardeloupe he was often visited by a Savage of Dominico,
who had lived a long time at Sevil in Spain, where he had been baptized; but
being returned into his Island, though he made as many Signs of the Cross as
one would desire, and wore a great pair of Beads about his Neck, yet he lived
like a Savage, went naked among his own people, and retained nothing of what he
had seen and been taught at Sevil, save that he put on an old Spanish Habit,
the more to ingratiate himself when he came to visit the Governor.

They have a very ancient Tradition among them, which shows that their
Ancestors had some knowledge of a Superior Power which took a care of their
Persons, and whose favorable assistance they were sensible of; but this Light
their brutish Children have suffered to be extinguished, and through their
ignorance never reflected on it: They say then, That their Ancestors were poor
Savages, living like Beasts in the midst of the Woods, without Houses or places
where they might retreat, living on the Herbs and Fruits which the Earth
produced of it self without manuring; whilst they were in this miserable
condition, an old man among them, extremely weary of that brutish kind of life,
wept most bitterly, and, orewhelm'd with despair, deplored his wretched
condition; whereupon a Man all in white appeared to him descending from Heaven,
and coming near, he comforted the disconsolate old man, telling him, That he
was come to assist him and his Countrymen, and to show them the way to lead a
more pleasant life for the future; That if any one of them had sooner made his
complaints to Heaven, they had been sooner relieved; That on the Seashore there
was abundance of sharp Stones, wherewith they might ^^ll down Trees to make
Houses for themselves; And, That the Palm and Plantine Trees bore Leaves fit to
cover the Roofs of them, and to secure them against the injuries of the
Weather; That to assure them of the particular care he had of them, and the
great affection he bore their species, beyond those of other Creatures, he had
brought them an excellent Root, wherewith they might make Bread, and that no
Beast should dare to touch it when it was once planted; and that he would have
them thence-forward make that their ordinary sustenance: The Caribbians add
further, That thereupon the charitable unknown person broke a stick he had in
his hand into three or four pieces, and that giving to the old man, he
commanded him to put them into the ground, assuring him that when he should
come a while after to dig there, he should find a great Root; and that any part
of what grew above-ground, should have the virtue of producing the same Plant:
he afterward taught him how it was to be used, telling him the Root was to be
scraped with a rough and spotted Stone, which was to be had at the Seaside;
that the juice issuing by means of that scraping, was to be laid aside as a
most dangerous poison; and then with the help of fire a kind of savory Bread
might be made of it, on which they might live pleasantly enough. The old man
did what had been enjoined him, and at the end of nine Moons (as they say)
being extremely desirous to know the success of the Revelation, he went to see
the pieces he had planted in the ground, and he found that each of them had
produced many fair and great roots, which he disposed of as he had been
commanded: Those of Dominico who tell this story, say further, that if the old
man had visited the pieces at the end of three days, instead of nine months, he
would have found the roots grown to the same bigness, and that they had been
produced in that time: But in regard he went not to look what became of them,
till after the expiration of so long a time, the Manioc continues to this
present all that time in the ground, before it be fit to make Cassava of.

This is all we could get from the Caribbian Tradition, and we conceived it
might well be set here at length, since it is the only one that is related
among this ignorant people, who trouble themselves not to know the Name and
Quality of that kind and heavenly Benefactor who has obliged them so much, nor
to render him any acknowledgment or honor: The Pagans were much more grateful
in honoring Ceres, from whom they said they received Corn, and the invention
of making bread: And the Peruvians, though they knew not the great Pachacamac,
that is, him whom they held to be the soul of the Universe, and the Sovereign
Author of their lives and all they had, yet did they adore him in their hearts
with much respect and veneration, and rendering him externally by their gestures
and words great expressions of their submission and humility, as to the unknown
God.

The Caribbians believe they have every one of them so many souls as they feel
beatings of Arteries in their bodies, besides that of the heart: Now of all
these souls the principal, as they say, is in the heart, and after death it
goes to Heaven with its Icheiri, or its Chemiin, that is, with its God, who
carries it thither to live there in the company of the other Gods: And they
imagine that it lives the same kind of life as man lives here below: Thence it
comes that to this day they kill slaves on the Tomb of the dead, if they can
meet with any that had been in the service of the deceased, to go and wait upon
him in the other world: For it is to be observed, that they do not think the
Soul to be so far immaterial as to be invisible; but they affirm it to be
subtle, and of thin substance as a purified body; and they have but the same
word to signify heart and soul.

As for the other souls, which are not in the heart, they believe some go after
death and live on the Seaside, and that they cause Vessels to turn: They call
them Oumekou; the others, as they conceive, go and live in the Woods and
Forests, and they call them Maboyas.

Though most of this poor people believe the immortality of the soul, as we
have represented it, yet they speak so confusedly, and with so much uncertainty
of the state of the soul separated from the body, that we should sooner have
done to say they were absolutely ignorant thereof, than set down their
extravagant Relations. Some affirm, that the most valiant of their Nation are
carried after their death into certain Fortunate Islands, where they have all
things at their wish, and that the Arouagues are there their slaves; that they
swim unwearied in great Rivers; that they live deliciously, and spend the time
in dancing, playing, and feasting, in a land which produces in abundance all
sorts of excellent fruits without any cultivation: On the contrary they hold,
that those who were cowardly and afraid to go to the wars against their*
Enemies, do after death serve the Arouagues, who inhabit barren and desert
Countries beyond the Mountains: But others who are more brutish never trouble
themselves about their condition after death, nor ever think or speak of it:
And if any question be put to them concerning it, they know not what answer to
make.

Yet they have all had heretofore a certain belief of the immortality of the
Soul, but after a very gross manner, as may be deduced from the Ceremonies of
their Interrments, and the prayers they make to the dead, that they would
return to life, as we shall represent more at large in the last Chapter of this
History; as also from this, that the most polite among them are at present of
that persuasion, that after death they shall go to Heaven, to which place they
say their Ancestors are gone before them; but they never enquire after the way
they are to take to attain that happy abode. Accordingly, when their Boyez, who
also act the part of Physicians, despair of curing their diseases, and that the
Devils have foretold by their mouths that there is no further hopes of life,
they give them this comfort, that their Gods will conduct them to Heaven, where
they shall live at ease without any fear of sickness.

The belief of the Calecutians as to this Article is worse than Pirard' s
Travels part 1. c. 27.
that of our Caribbians, and their transmigration is an extravagant kind of
immortality: For they believe that their souls at the departure out of their
bodies are lodged in those of wild Oxen, or some other beast. The Brasilians
are in this point more rational; for they conceive that the souls of the wicked
go after death to the Devil, who beats and torments them, but that the souls of
the just are entertained with dancing and good cheer in delightful plains
beyond the Mountains: And it is De Lery, c. 16
pleasant to think that most of the Savages of America place the sovereign
felicity of the other life in dancing.

The Resurrection of the body is by the Caribbians accounted a pure foolery;
their Theology is too obscure to receive so Garcilasso, l. 2. c. 7. De Laet, l.
5. c. 7.
great an illumination: We may therefore well wonder at a small glimpse of this
sacred truth in the poor Virginians, since it is a point wherein the ancient
Pagans saw as little as our Caribbians: There is also a small spark of it among
the Indians of Peru, as most Authors affirm.

But though the Caribbians have so little knowledge and fear of God, as we have
represented, yet are they extremely afraid of his voice, that is Thunder; that
dreadful voice which makes such a stir in the clouds, which is attended by such
flames of fire, which shakes the foundations of the Mountains, and makes the
Neroes and Caligulaes of this world to tremble: Our Savages therefore as soon as
they perceive the approaches of the Tempest, which commonly comes along with
that voice, make all the haste they can to their little houses, and sit down on
low stools about the fire, covering their faces and resting their heads on
their hands and knees; and in that posture they fall a weeping, and say in
their Gibberish, Maboya mouche fache contre Caraibe, that is, Maboya is very
angry with them: and they say the same when there happens a Hurricane: They
give not over that lamenting exercise, till the Hurricane is quite over; and
they are extremely astonished, that the Christians should express so so little
affliction and fear upon those occasions. Thus the Grand Tartars are mightily
afraid of Thunder, and when they Rubriques in his Travels into Tartary.
hear it, they drive all strangers out of their houses, and wrap themselves up
in Garments of coarse cloth, which they put not off till the noise be over: And
diverse other barbarous Nations are no less frighted than the Caribbians upon
the like occasions: Nay it is reported that the Peruvians, the Cumaneses, the
Chinese, and the Moluckeses imitate them in lamentations and frights, when
there happens an Eclipse.

Yet is it true, that since the Caribbians have conversed familiarly with the
Christians, some of them are grown so resolute as not to be afraid of the
Thunder: for some have been seen to laugh when it thundered most, and others
counterfeited the noise, pronouncing a word which is not easily written, and
whereof the sound comes somewhat near these letters, Trtrquetenni: But it is
very certain withal, that they do their natural inclination a great violence
when they pretend that they are not afraid of the Thunder, and it is pure
vanity which eggs them on to personate that confidence, to persuade those who
see them, that upon those emergencies their generosity is as great as that of
the Christians: For some of the French Inhabitants of Martinico who have
surpised them in their Quarters when it thundered and lightened, affirm that
they found the most resolute among them shivering with fear in their poor Huts.

Now this trouble and these disturbances which they discover at the hearing of
that celestial voice, are they not a visible effect of the sentiment they have
of an infinite and sovereign Power, imprinted by Nature on the minds of all
men, and a pregnant proof, that though these wretches endeavor all they can to
smother the stings of their Consciences, yet can they not do it so fully but
that they prick and torment them, though against their wills? And is not this
enough to make good the saying of Cicero, at the beginning of the precedent
Chapter? For though all men do not in words acknowledge that Divinity, yet are
they convinced in themselves, by a secret but irresistible hand, which writes
this first of all Truths in their hearts with the point of a Diamond: So that
to conclude, we shall say with that great man, whose words will put an
excellent period to this discourse, as they have begun it, That it is innate,
De Not. Deor. lib. 2*
and as it were graven in the minds of men, that there is a Divinity.

CHAP. XV. Of the Habitations and Housekeeping of the Caribbians.
HIstorians relate, that heretofore some of the ancient Inhabitants Garcil.
Com. Royal, l. 2. c. 12. and l. 6. c. 11.
of Peru lived scattered up and down the Mountains and Plains, like savage
beasts, having neither Villages nor Houses; That others made their retreat into
Caves, and desert and solitary places; and others took up their quarters in
ditches and hollow trees: But the Caribbians at the present are in a condition
much different from this savage and brutish kind of life: True it is we shall
find it no great task to give a description of their Habitations, for they are
at no great trouble about the architecture of them; for they require only a
tree and a hedge-bill to build themselves a lodging.

Their Habitations are somewhat near one to another, and disposed at certain
distances, after the manner of a Village; and for the most part they plant
themselves upon some little ascent, that so they may have better air, and
secure themselves against those pestilent Flies which we have elsewhere called
Mesquitos and Maringoins, which are extremely troublesome, and whereof the
stinging is dangerous in those parts where there is but little wind stirring:
The same reason it is that obliges the Floridians, beyond the Bay of Carlos and
Tortugues, to lodge themselves for the most part at the entrance of the Sea, in
Huts built on Piles or Pillars: The Inhabitants of the Caribbies are also
desirous to be somewhat near Springs, Brooks, and Rivers, because of their
washing of themselves every morning before they put the red paint on their
bodies.

Among us, and several other Nations of this part of the world, the Architects
break their brains in studying to make such strong and sumptuous Edifices, as
if they would have their duration to be equal with that of the world: The
Chinese, at the late coming of the Christians among them, expressed Trigaut' s
History of China, c. 4.
a certain astonishment thereat, and charged us with Vanity: For their parts
they measure the continuance of their Houses by that of their short lives: But
our Savages of the Caribbies are willing to abate much of that term, and order
their structures so as that they are obliged to build often in their lives:
Their little Huts are made in an oval form, of pieces of wood planted in the
ground, over which they put a Roof of Plantane-leaves or Sugarcanes, or some
herbs which they can so dispose and intermix one among another, that under that
covering which reaches to the ground, they are secured against rain and all
injuries of the weather: And this Roof, as weak as it seems to be, makes a
shift to last three or four years, without being much the worse, unless there
happens to be a Hurricane: Pliny affirms, that some Northerly people made use
of Reeds L. 16. c. 38.
for the covering of their houses; and they are used to this day in the
Low Countries, France, and other parts: The Caribians do also make use of small
Reeds fastened across for the Palisadoes, which are instead of walls to their
Habitations; under every covering they have as many partitions made as they
would have Rooms: A simple piece of Mat does among them the office of our
doors, bolts, and locks: There Is nothing above their heads but the roof it
self, and under their feet only the bare earth; but they are so careful in
keeping of it clean, that they sweep it as often as they see the least filth
upon it: This they observe in their private houses; for commonly their Carbet,
or public house, where they meet upon some rejoicing account, is not kept
over-clean, insomuch that many times the place is full of Chegoes.

Besides the little room where they take their rest, and entertain their
friends, every considerable family has two other little rooms: One serves for
a Kitchen, and the other for a kind of Storehouse, where they put up their
Bows, their Arrows, and their Boutous, which are Clubs of a heavy and smooth
wood, which they use in their wars instead of swords, when they have spent all
their Arrows: There they also put up their Baskets, their supernumerary beds,
with all the toys and ornaments they make use of at public meetings and upon
days of Triumph: All that trumpery they call by the name of Caconnes.

As to furniture, our Savages have only a kind of hanging beds, which they call
Amais, which are as it were great Coverlets made of Cotton, very nearly woven,
and folded together at both ends, that they may join the two corners of the
breadth: Then they fasten the Amais by the two folded ends, to the principal
pillars of their Edifice: Those who have no Cotton-beds, make use of another
kind of Bed, which is called Cabane; and this is made of several small sticks
laid across, on which they put a good quantity of Banana-leaves; this Cabane is
hung up and sustained by the four corners with great cords of Mahot: They have
also little Stools or Chairs made all of a piece, of a red or yellow Wood, and
as smooth as Marble: There are also some among them who have little Tables,
which have four wooden Pillars, and those covered with the leaves of that kind
of Palm which is called the Latanier.

Their Vessels, as well of the Kitchen as others, are all of Earth, as those of
the Maldiveses; or of certain Fruits like our Gourds, but which have a thicker
and harder rind, cut after diverse figures, and made smooth and painted as well
as they are able to do it: of these they make such Vessels as serve instead of
Platters, Porringers, Basins, Trenchers, Drinking-cups, and Dishes: All these
Vessels made of Fruits, they call Cois or Couis; and it is the same name which
the Brasilians give theirs made of the same materials: Their earthen Vessels
they make use of as we do of our Kettles and Cauldrons; among others they have
one kind which they call Canary; of these Canarys there are some very large,
others little; the little ones serve only for the making of sawces or
haut-gousts, which they call Taumalis; but the great ones are employed about
the making of that kind of Drink which they call Oui^ou: The Caribbians of
Martinico do often bring some of these little Canarys to the Quarter of the
French, who give them in exchange certain Caeonnes, that is, some toys or
other, wherewith they are pleased: Those little Vessels are the more esteemed,
because they are not so easily broken as our earthen Pots: These Vessels which
we have described, as wretched as they are, are preserved by them with as much
curiosity and care as can be imagined.

The Caribbians have also, at a pretty distance from their houses, a place for
the easing of their natural necessities, to which when they have need they
resort, carrying along with them a sharp stiok, wherewith they make a hole in
the ground, into which having put their Ordure, they afterward cover it with
earth; so that there is never any thing of that kind seen among them: We take
the more particular notice of this Custom of theirs, because it is consonant to
what was done by the Army of Israel as long as they were in the Field: To the
same Deuteronomy. c. 13. Busbequius in his Embassies, l. 3. Ctesias.
may also be referred the Custom of the Turks, who in that case make a pit with
a piece of Iron to cover their Excrements, which keeps their Camp very clean
when they are in the Field. An ancient Author affirms, that in the East Indies
a certain Bird named Iusta does somewhat of this kind, burying its own Ordure so
as that it may not be seen; but this smells too much of the Fable to be
credited. The Tartars, as some affirm, will Carpin' s Travels into Tartary.
not so much as make water within the enclosures of their Habitations, as
accounting it a sin.

But to return to our Savages: There are to be seen within the enclosures of
their houses a great number of Poultry and Turkeys, which they breed not so
much for their own Tables, as to make Presents to their Friends the Christians
who come to visit them, or to be exchanged for Hedg-bills, Wedges, Hoes, and
other Instruments of Iron which they stand in need of.

They have also about their habitations good store of Orange Trees,
Citron-Trees, Guavas, Fig Trees, Bananas, and other Fruit Trees; many of those
little Trees which bear the Pyman, and the Shrubs and Simples whereof they have
any acquaintance, to be used when they have any need of them; and with these
their little Gardens are bordered; but within they are full of Manioc,
Potatoes, and several sorts of Pulse, as Pease of diverse kinds, Beans, Mais,
small Millet, and some others: They have also Melons of all sorts, excellent
Citruls, and a kind of Cabbage called the Caribbian-Cabbage, which are of a
very delicious taste: But they bestow their greatest pains about the culture of
the Ananas, which they prefer before all other Fruits.

But though they have no Villages, nor movable Houses, such as may be removed
from one place to another, as is reported of the Bedovins a poor people of
Egypt, certain Moors inhabitants on the South Side of Tunis in Africa, and
certain Nations of Great- Tartary; yet do they often change their Habitations,
as the humor takes them; for as soon as they take the least disgust to their
Habitations, they immediately transplant themselves to some other place; and
this is done of a sudden, and without desiring any permission of the Cacick, as
the ancient Peruvians were obliged to do of their King upon such occasions.

Among the occasions of this change of habitation among the Caribbians of the
Islands, one is a persuasion that they shall have their health better in some
other place; the same cause occasions many times a removal of housekeeping
among the Brasilians: Sometimes it is caused by some nastiness done in their
Habitations, for which they conceive a certain horror; and sometimes the death
of one of the house, which causing in them an apprehension of going the same
way, obliges them to take up their Quarters in some other place, as if death
could not as easily meet with them there; but this foolish apprehension is much
more prevalent with the Caribbians of the Continent, who upon such occasions
will be sure to burn their habitations, and march to some other place: This
pleasant Superstition is observable also among the Indians of the Island of
Corassao, though those poor people have received Baptism; for Mons. du Montel
relates, That being in the great Village of those Indians named the Ascension,
and having observed in two or three places some houses without any Inhabitants,
though they were not deficient in ought, and others quite ruined, he asked how
those houses came to be so; whereto the Cacick, or Captain, made answer, That
it was because some persons had died in those places. The ancient Peruvians put
themselves to the trouble of such a removal, if their habitations received any
prejudice by Thunder; for then they conceived such an abomination thereat, that
they made up the doors thereof with stones and dirt, that no body might ever
enter there any more.

It is reported, That heretofore the men of the Province of Quito in Peru
thought it no shame to employ themselves in all things relating to
housekeeping, while their Wives went abroad walking at their pleasures: And
the ancient Egyptians did the like, if we may credit Herodotus: And we are to
acknowledge, Lib. 2.
that the employment of dressing Meat in the Kitchen was accounted honorable
in ancient Greece; for honest Homer in Lib. 9.
his Iliad represents Achilles making a Hash, and spitting the Meat, and all
his Courtiers busy in the Kitchen for the entertainment of the Ambassadors of
Agamemnon: And as to Fish, it has always had this privilege, that Persons of
Quality have thought it no disparagement to have a finger in the ordering of it.

But among the Caribbians the men think all these employments below and
unbefitting them; they for the most part spend the time abroad, but their Wives
keep at home, and do all that is requisite about the house: True it is, the men
fell down Timber for the building of their Houses, and when they are built it
is their business to keep them in repair; but the women take care for all
things necessary for the subsistence of the Family: The men go a hunting and a
fishing, as we shall declare more at large elsewhere; but the women fetch home
the Venison from the place where it was killed, and the Fish from the
Waterside: It is the women's work, in fine, to get in Manioc, to prepare the
Cassava, and the Ouicou, which is their ordinary Drink, to dress all the Meat,
to set the Gardens, and to keep the house clean, and all the household stuff in
good order; not not to mention the pains they take in painting their Husbands
with Roucou, and spinning Cotton for the use of the Family: so that they are
continually employed, and their work is never at an end, while their Husbands
divert themselves abroad; and so they are rather to be accounted Slaves then
Companions.

In the Islands of S. Vincent and Dominico there are some Caribbians who have
many Negroes to their Slaves, as the Spaniards and some other Nations have;
some of them they got from the English Plantations, and some from Spanish Ships
heretofore cast away on their Coasts; and they call them Tamons, that is,
Slaves: They are so well ordered, that they serve them in all things about
which they are employed with as much obedience, readiness, and respect, as if
they were the most civilized people in the World.

Now that we are treating of the Houses and Housekeeping of the Caribbians,
some might take occasion to ask, Whether, as we have the use of Lamps, Candles,
and Torches, they do not also make use of some light, and some artifice in the
nightime, to supply the want of the days light? True it is, they have learnt
of the Christians to make use of the Oil of Fishes, and to put Cotton into
Lamps, to light them in the nightime; but most of them have no other light in
the night than a kind of wood very apt to take fire, which they have ready in
the house for that purpose, whence we call it Candle-wood; it is full of an
unctuous Gum, which makes it burn like a Candle, and being once lighted, it
gives a sweet scent: In like manner the Inhabitants of Madagascar, instead of
Candles and Torches, in the night time make use of certain Gums which easily
take fire, and they put them into earthen Creusets, where they make a
delightful and sweet smelling Fire: And if the Fire chance to go out among the
Caribbians, they have the secret of supplying that want by rubbing two pieces
of Mahot one against the other, and by that collision they take fire, and in a
short time burn into a clear flame: Thus the Brasilians, instead of a Steel and
De Lery, c. 19.
Stone, the use whereof they have not, make use of two several kinds of Wood,
whereof one is almost as tender as if it were half rotten, and the other, on
the contrary, very hard; and by that friction and agitation the fire takes in
the former: The same thing is affirmed of some sorts of Canes, which may be
seen in the Cabinets of the Curious.

Those who have sailed to the mouth of the River of the Amazones relate, that
they there saw some Indians strike fire with two sticks, but after a manner
different from that of our Caribbians; for in that part of the World they have
also two pieces of Wood, one soft, which they make flat and even like a Busk,
and the other very hard, like a stick sharpened at the end, which they thrust
into the soft, which they keep close to the ground under their feet; and they
turn the other with both hands so swiftly, that at last the fire takes in that
below, and sets it of a flame: And whereas it many times happens one person may
be weary of that exercise, another immediately takes the stick in hand, and
turns it with the same swiftness, till they have got fire. Some may imagine,
that these ways of lighting fire are modern; but there are some marks thereof
in Antiquity, as may be seen in Theophrastus. History of Plants, 1. 7. c. 10.


CHAP. XVI. Of the ordinary Repasts of the Caribbians.
MOst of those people who have the denomination of Savages and Barbarians are
gluttonous and beastly in their Repasts: The Brasilians eat and drink
excessively, nastily, and De Lery, c. 9.
at all hours, nay they rise many times in the night to that employment: The
Canadians are such gluttons, that they eat till Relation of New-France.
they are ready to burst; nay they are so ravenous, that they will not lose so
much as the skimmings of the Pot: They are never seen either to wash their
hands, or the meat they eat: They have no other napkins than the hair of their
own heads, or that of their dogs, or the first thing they meet with: The
Grand-Tartars do the like: They never wash their Dishes or Kettles, Rubriques
and Carpin.
but with the pottage made in them, and are so nasty that what they do is not
be related: The other Tartars come not much Busbequius, Des Hayes, and Bergeron
short of them in nastiness and gluttony, using their hands instead of spoons
to take up their pottage, and eating the flesh of dead horses, without any
other dressing than setting of it an hour or two between their saddles and
horses-backs. In like Vin. leBlanc. and Garcilasso.
manner (to make an end of these slovenly instances) the Inhabitants of Guinny,
those of the Cape of Good Hope, and certain other Savages eat raw and stinking
flesh, together with the hair and feathers, guts and garbage, like so many
dogs: But we are to give our Caribbians this commendation, that they are
temperate and cleanly in their ordinary Repasts, as well as those of the
Continent, though some among them deserve not this elogy, as there is no rule
so general but may have some exception. Monsieur du Montel, a worthy and
faithful witness, gives this testimony of sobriety and cleanliness to those
whom he had seen at St. Vincents and elsewhere: But as we said before, they are
not all such; for those who have seen them at Dominico give them not the same
Character.

This people eat many times together in a public house, as we shall see more
particularly hereafter, either upon the account of divertisement and to be more
than ordinarily merry, or to discourse concerning their wars and common
affairs, as the Lacedaemonians were heretofore wont to do: The women, according
to the custom of some other barbarous Countries, eat not till their husbands
have done, and they have no set time for their Repasts: Their stomachs are
their Clocks and Remembrancers: They so patiently endure hunger, that after
they are returned from fishing they will have the patience to broil their fish
over a soft fire on a wooden frame made like a Gridiron, about two foot high,
under which they kindle so small a fire, that sometimes it requires a whole day
to make ready their fish as they would have it: Some of the French affirm, that
have eaten some of their dressing, they have liked it very well: It is
observable generally in all their meat, that they dress all with a very gentle
fire.

They commonly eat sitting on low stools, and every one has his little table
by himself, which they call Matoutou, as Tacitus affirms, that it was practiced
among the ancient Germans, and as it is reported at this day to be done in
Japan: Sometimes also they eat their meat on the ground, kneeling round one by
another: For Table-cloths, they have no linen, as we have, nor skins, as the
Canadians; nor Mats as the Maldiveses, nor Carpets as the Turks and some other
Nations, but fair and large Banana-leaves newly gathered, which are very fit
for Tablecloths, being so large as we have represented elsewhere: the same
serve also for Napkins, and they wipe their hands there with: They are always
very careful to wash their hands before meals: And when they are about the
dressing of any meat, they never touch any thing that is to be eaten, ere they
make their hands clean: In fine, in all their ordinary Repasts, their sobriety
and cleanliness is so observable as can hardly be imagined among Savages.

We have said elsewhere that their ordinary bread is a thin Cake which they
call Cassava, made of the Manioc-root: Other Writers have set down the manner
how it is made; yet that our History may not be thought imperfect, we shall
here give a description of the composition thereof: The root, though it be
sometimes about the bigness of a man's thigh, is easily got out of the ground:
As Soon as it is taken out it is scraped with a knife to take off a little hard
skin which covers it, and then it is scraped or filed with with a Rasp or flat
File of Iron or Copper, of a good bigness; and they press the meal which comes
from it in a linen bag, or in a long kind of pokes, which they call in the
Islands, Snakes, neatly woven of Rushes or Latanier leaves by the Caribbians,
that the juice may be squeezed out of it: The Savages before they knew the use
of those Rasps, made use instead thereof, of certain hard and sharp stones
which are to be found on the seashore: They are somewhat like our
Pumice-stones: When the moisture of the Manioc is got out, the meal is sifted
through a coarse cloth, and without mixing it with any liquor, it is put upon
an Iron Plate, or Plank, and sometimes on a broad stone, under which there is
fire; when it is baked on one side, they turn it on the other; and when it is
fully baked, it is exposed to the Sun to make it harder, that it may keep the
better: It is commonly made no thicker than a man's little finger, and sometimes
thinner, according to the fancy of the Inhabitants: It will keep many months;
but it eats best after a day or two making; there are some who would rather eat
of it than of our ordinary bread: And the greatest miracle is, that of a root
so dangerous of it self people should by artifice get so excellent nourishment:
Thus the Moors drying a kind of poisonous Apricocks which grow in their
Country, in the Sun, and afterward boiling them over a fire, make a certain
drink thereof, which is pleasant and may be drunk without any danger.

But the Cassava which the Caribbians make is very delicate; for they have so
much patience to go through with any thing they undertake, that they do better
than the French, who are so hasty, that they would make an end of any thing
as soon as they have begun it: But the Caribbians go leasurely to work, and
never consider the time spent, so the business be done to their minds.

And whereas some Europaeans who have used Cassava, complain that it is no good
nourishment, that it injures the stomach, corrupts the blood, changes the
color, weakens the nerves, and dries the body; it is to be considered, that as
custom is a second nature, so that many things, though bad in themselves, do
not prejudice health when one is accustomed thereto; so on the contrary, those
which are good and innocent, nay the best of their own nature, if a man be not
accustomed thereto, are many times prejudicial and hurtful: To confirm this
truth, it is to be attributed to want of custom, what is related by some
Historians of certain Brasilians, who being shut up with the Dutch in St.
Margarets Fort, could not brook the bread and other provisions distributed to
them as Soldiers, and on which it was necessary they should subsist, and
complained that they made them sick, and were the occasions of their death: To
this purpose there is a remarkable passage in the Travels of Monsieur des Hayes
into the Levant; to wit that the said person entertaining some Tartars at his
Table, who knew not what bread was, caused them to eat some; for within two
hours after, they thought they should have dyed when the bread they had eaten
began to swell, and to cause them great pains.

There is another kind of bread among the Caribbians made of the Spanish wheat
which they call Mais: The English Inhabitants of the Barmouthos use no other:
There are some also who instead of bread eat the root called Potatoe, whereof
we have given a description elsewhere.

As concerning the other provisions used by the Caribbians, their most ordinary
dishes, and which are used also by the Caribbians of the Continent, are
Lizards, Fish of all sorts, Tortoises only excepted; and Pulse, as Pease,
Beans, etc. but their ordinary food (contrary to the Inhabitants of Madagascar,
who have a horror for that kind of sustenance) is Crabs, got very clean out of
their shells, and fried with their own fat, juice of Citron, and Pyman, which
they are great lovers of, and which they put abundantly into all their sawces:
And yet when they entertain the French, or other Europaeans, they are not so
prodigal thereof, and then they accomodate themselves to their palates, out of
a compliance and discretion, which argues them to be somewhat better than
Savages. They call the inner part of the Crab Taumaly; and of that it is they
make their ordinary Ragoust with water, the fine flower of Manioc, and good
store of Pyman. In the last course they bring in fruits as we do; and
ordinarily they content themselves with Figs, Bananas, or Ananas: If they eat
flesh or any thing that is salted, it is only out of compliance with strangers,
to avoid being troublesome to those who entertain them, and so they accommodate
themselves to their humors who come to visit them; for then they order most of
their meat to please them: And to this must be referred what we have said
concerning their not eating of salt, Swines-flesh, Tortoises, and Lamantin.

True it is, there are among this people certain men extremely slothful and
melancholy, who lead a wretched kind of life: For they live only upon Burgaus,
Shellfish, Crabbes, Soldier^ and such like Insects: They never eat any
Pottage, nor Flesh, unless it be that of certain birds which they broil on the
coals with their Feathers about them, and their Guts within them; and all the
Sauce they use consists of the water of Manioc (which being boiled loses its
venomous quality) fine flower of the same Manioc, and good store of Pyman.

Sometimes they have a detestable kind of seasoning for their meats, and that
is the fat of the Arouagues their irreconcilable Enemies: But this has no
place in their ordinary Repasts, as being used only on solemn days of debauches
and rejoicing.

As to their drink, as they do in several parts of America, the same grains of
Mais which serve to make bread, are used for the composition of a Drink which
is accounted as good as Wine; and as among us the Wheat which makes Bread will
also make Beer; so in these Islands, of the Roots of Potatoes and Manioc, which
serve to make Bread, there are made two several sorts of Drinks, which are
ordinary in the Country: The former and most common, which is made of Potatoes
boiled with water, is called Maby: It is excellent good to refresh and quench
thirst, and it has also an appetitive virtue, which causes an evacuation of
the sandiness, and all the viscosities of the lower parts: Whence it comes,
that those who make use of that Drink, never complain of the Stone or Gravel:
The other Drink is called Ouicon (from a name coming near the Caouin of the
Brasilians) and is made of the Cassava it self, boiled in like manner with
water: It is strained through a coarse cloth, which the Savages call Hibichet:
This Drink is more excellent than the Maby and differs not much from Beer,
either as to color o^ strength: The Indians make it very pleasant, but (...)
withal* that much drunk it into^^cates, as (...) They make it of Cassava well
and thoroughly bak^^ on the plan^^ then chew^d by the Women, and put into
Vessel^ full of Water* or, after it has been infused, and boiled for (...) the
space of two days by its own virtue, with(...) fire, as new Wine does, the
infusion is strained through the coarse or (...); and the juice which is gotten
from it by that (...) being kept two days more, is ready for drinking* (...)
^a^e this composition boil the better they put into the Vessel two or three
Roots of Potatoes, scraped very small. It must indeed be acknowledged that this
custom which the Savages observe in ^^^wing the Cassava before it be put into
the Vessel, is enough to turn the stomachs of some; but it is most certain
withal, that the Drink made after that manner is incomparably better than that
which is made otherwise.

The Ouicou is also made after another manner, without the Roo^e of Potatoes*
which is this; after the Cassava is taken off the Plank, (...) laid somewhere
about the house and covered with the leaves of Manioc, and some heavy stones
laid thereon to set it into a heat; and this is done for the space of three or
four days: That done, it is broken into several pieces which are spread on
Banana-leaves, and then they are lightly sp^inkled with water, and so left:
When the Cassava has remained so for the space of one night, it becomes all
red: and then it is good to make Ouicou, and will make its water boil with out
the Roots of Potatoes.

Besides these two sorts of Drinks which are the most ordinary in the
Caribbies, there are also made in diverse places several sorts of delicious*
Wines: The Negroes, who are slaves in these Islands, make incisions in the
prickly Palms, out of which there distills a certain liquor like White Wind,
which they gather in several little Gourds fastened to the overtures of those
trees, whereof each will yield two pints every day, and sometimes more: The
most ancient Authors assure us, that among the East-Indians, the Wine of Palms
was very much in use, as indeed it is at this day: It is also used in some
parts of Africa, as at Monomotapa.

Moreover there is in the Caribbies another kind of Drink made of Bananas,
which is also in other parts, and by some called Couscou: But in regard this
sort of Wine, though very pleasant and strong, causes great ventosities, it is
not much used.

To conclude, there is made in these Islands an excellent kind of Wine of those
precious Reeds out of which the Sugar is gotten: And this is the most esteemed
Drink of any made in the Caribbies: It is called by some Cane-wine, and there
is a particular secret in the making of it: There is more made at S.
Christophers then any where else, by reason of the abundance of Canes planted
there: The juice of these Canes is got out by a Mill made purposely for that
use; afterward it is purified by fire in great Caldrons: It may be kept a long
time in its perfection, and it has a sweetness, and withal a certain
picquancy, which might make it pass for Sack. Of the same Canes there is also
made a certain Aquavitae called Cane-Aquavitae, which keeps better then the
Wine of those same Reeds.

There is not any thing in the substance of these ordinary Repasts of our
Caribbians, which seem to savor of the Savage, unless it be happily the Lizards;
But why may not they be as good Meat as the Frogs and Snails eaten in some
parts of France? And who knows not that in Spain they eat abundance of young
Asses? Nay, compare the sustenance of our Caribbians with that of the
Canadians, who, besides the skimmings of the Pot, which we said they eat, do
commonly drink filthy and nasty grease, and prefer the flesh of Bears before
any other; with that of the Inhabitants of the Island of Good-fortune, one of
the Canaries, who eat abundance of Suet; with that of the Tartars, the
Persians, the Chinese, the Huancas, a Nation of Peru, of the Negroes of
Angola, who commonly live on the flesh of Horses, Cammels, Mules, Wolves,
Foxes, Asses, Dogs, and drink the Blood of those Creatures; with that of the
East-Indians, who think the Flesh of Bats and Mice as delicious as that of
Partridges; with that of the Brasilians, who feed on Toads, Rats, and Worms;
or, lastly, with that of the Tapuyes, and some other Barbarians, who eat hair
minced very small, and mixed with wild honey, and season all their Meat with
the ashes of the burnt Bodies of their deceased Relations, and mix them with
the meal they bake, which causes horror only to represent, much more to do:
Let there be, I say, a comparison made between all these infamous Ragouts, and
those of the Caribbian Nation, and it will be found, that in their ordinary
Commons there is nothing barbarous: Yet are we not to dissemble what some of
the French relate, to wit, That they have seen the Caribbians eating the Lice
and Chegoes they had taken; as it is reported of the Mexicans and Cumaneses:
but they do not make their Ordinary out of them, and it is particular only to
some among them; besides that they do it not out of any delicacy they find in
those Vermin, but only to be revenged of them.

Moreover, the horror which the Caribbians conceived heretofore at the eating
of Swines-flesh, Tortoises, and Lamantin, for the pleasant reasons before
alleged, was so great, that if any of the Europaeans had got them to eat any
of them by surprise, and they came afterward to know it, they would be
revenged of them one time or other; witness what happened to a person of some
note among the French: This person receiving a Visit from the Cacick or Captain
of the Savages of the Island where he lived, entertained him in jest with
Lamantin, disguised in the fashion of a Hash; the Cacick mistrusting what
indeed afterward happened to him, entreated the Gentleman not to deceive him;
and upon the assurance given him thereof, he made no difficulty to eat: after
Dinner the Gentleman discovered the abuse to the Cacick and his Company, that
he might have the pleasure of their Discourses thereupon, and see what faces
they would make after such a Treatment; but they had at that time so much power
over themselves as to smother their indignation, and the Cacick only said to
him smiling, Well Friend we shall not dye of it: Some time after the Gentleman
went to return him his Visit; he received him with great civility, and made him
extraordinary cheer; but he had given his people order to put into all the
Sauces some fat of the Arouagues, whereof the principal Indians are always well
provided: After this infamous Repaste was ended, the Cacick, glad in his heart,
asked the Gentleman and his Company how they liked his Treatment; whereupon
they commending it very much, and giving him thanks for it, he acquainted them
with the trick he had put upon them; most of them were so troubled at the
thought of it, and had such an inclination to cast up all they had eaten, that
they grew very sick; but the Indian laughing at the spectacle, told them that
he was then revenged.

Those who have lately been among the Caribbians of Dominico and Martinico
affirm, That now most of them make no difficulty to eat Lamantin, Tortoises,
and Swines-flesh, nay, all other Meats in use among the Europaeans; and that
they laugh at the simplicity which obliged them to abstain from them, for fear
of participating of the nature and qualities of those Animals.

They have also remitted much of that severity which they used toward their
Wives; for now they are seldom seen to fetch home the Fish their Husbands had
taken: And when they have been a fishing, the Husband and Wife eat together:
The Women go also oftener to the Carbet, to participate of the Feast and the
public rejoicing there made, then they did before their Husbands became so
familiarly acquainted with Strangers.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Employments and Divertisements of the Caribbians.
ALexander the Great accouuted Labor to be a thing truly Plut. in his Life.
Des Hayes Travels to the Levant. Garc. Com. Royal, li. 5. c. 11. and l. 6. c.
35.
Royal; and there are to be seen at this day in the Seraglio at Adrianople, the
Tools which Amurath made use of to make the Arrows he sent to some of his
principal Officers: The Peruvians are much to be commended as to this
particular; for the Kings of Peru had made Laws, and appointed particular
Judges for the regulation of Idle persons and Vagabonds, insomuch that it was
ordered, That Children of five years of age should be employed in some Work
suitable to their age; nay, they spared not the blind, the lame, and the dumb,
but employed them in diverse things, wherein they might do something with their
hands: But there are some people so lazy, that they Herod. l. 5.
think Idleness a thing very commendable; and the Historians De Laets Hist of
America.
who have written of the West Indies tell us of certain stupid and brutish
Indians of New-Spain and Brasil, who pass away the whole day snoring in their
Cots, while their Wives go abroad to get in certain Roots for their sustenance.

But our Caribbians are not like these last; for they are found taking pains
and their pleasure in several sorts of exercises: The chiefest, and those which
are most ordinary among them are Hunting and Fishing, wherein they bestow the
greatest part of their time, but especially in Fishing: They are seldom seen to
go out of their Houses without their Bows and Arrows; and they are wonderfully
expert in the use of them, being accustomed to that exercise from their
Infancy, as the Turks also are; whence it comes, that in time they come to be
so excellent at the Bow, that within a hundred paces they will hardly ever fail
striking a half-Crown piece; nay, as they are making their Retreat they can do
execution on their Enemies, as the Parthians were sometimes wont to do: How much
therefore are we the more to wonder at those left handed Benjamites, who could
Judge. 20. 16.
sling stones at an hairs-breadth, and not miss?

When the Caribbians go abroad a hunting or a fishing, they do not take their
Wives along with them, as some Brasilians do, who cause theirs to walk before
them, so great is their jealousy; but when they have taken any thing, they
leave it upon the place, and the Women were heretofore obliged to go and bring
it home, as we have already hinted: It is reported that the Canadians do the
same.

Among the Caribbians of the Islands there is no distinction of quality as to
Hunting; but the exercise of it is as free to the meanest as to the greatest
among them: The case is the same among all the other Indians of the West Indies.

As in their private Repasts they never use no kind of Flesh, if they have not
Strangers to entertain, so ordinarily their hunting is only for Lizards; and if
they engage themselves in any other kind of hunting, it is upon some
extraordinary occasions, when they would treat some of their Friends among the
Europaeans, or when they intend to visit them, and would get something of them
in exchange for what they had taken.

They are extremely expert in fishing with the Hook, and in taking of Fish with
the Dart; and a man cannot sufficiently admire their patience in that Exercise;
for they would be content to continue half a day in the same place, without
betraying any weariness: And when, after they have waited a long time for the
Fish, they come at length to perceive some great one to their mind, and within
their reach, they cast the Dart at it, as the Brasilians do; which having
fastened, they immediately leap into the water after the Dart, to seize their
prey: But besides the Hook and Dart wherewith they take Fish, they are also
very excellent in diving near the Rocks, and forcing them out of the holes
where they shelter themselves; as being in that particular equally expert with
the Floridians, who, not De Lery, c. 12. Acosta, l. 3. c. 15. Fr. Pirard, part
1. c. 2.
expecting that the Fish should come and show themselves, go and find them out
in the bottom of the water, and there kill them with their Clubs; so that they
are seen coming up again with the Fish in one hand, and the Club in the other.
It Is a common thing among the Savages to be excellent Swimmers and Diverse; and
it is particularly affirmed of the Brasilians, the Maldiveses, some Peruvians,
and the Inhabitants of the Islands of Robbers, that they may pass for a kind of
amphibious Creatures.

But if the other inventions for fishing should fail our Caribbians, they have
their recourse to a certain wood, which they bruise after they have cut it into
little pieces; which done, they cast it into Ponds, or those places where the
Sea is quiet and calm; and this is as it were a Sovereign Mummy, wherewith they
take as much Fish as they please; but they are so prudent as not to make use of
this last expedient but only in case of necessity, for fear of making too great
a waste among the Fish.

After Hunting and Fishing, they apply themselves to several kinds of Works, as
to make Beds of Cotton, very neatly woven, which they call Amaes: The Women
spin the Cotton on the knee, and commonly they make use of neither Distaff nor
Spindle; but some of them in the Island of Martinico have learned the use
thereof of the French: They have also the perfect Art of twisting it; but in
some Islands the Men weave the Beds: Besides this, they make Baskets of
Bull-rushes, and Grass, of diverse colors; wooden chairs all of one piece;
little Tables, which they call Matoutou, weaved of the leaves of the
Latanier-tree; the straining-cloths called Hibichets; the Catolis, which are a
kind of great baskets to carry things on the back; several sorts of Vessels fit
for eating and drinking, which are polished, painted, and adorned with
abundance of pretty figures delightful to the eye: They make also some other
little ornaments, as Girdles, Hats, and Crowns of feathers, wherewith they set
out themselves on solemn days: And the women make for themselves a kind of
Buskins, or half-stockings of Cotton. But above all they take abundance of
pains in ordering and polishing their Arms, that is, their Bows, their Arrows,
and their Boutous or Clubs, which are of a hard and smooth wood, and neatly
wrought about the handles with wood and bones of diverse colors.

They take no less pains about their Piragas, or Vessels wherein they go to
Sea, and whatever belongs to Peace or War. These Vessels are made of one great
Tree, which they make hollow, smooth, and polish with an unimaginable
dexterity: The greater sort of Piragas are many times raised higher all about,
especially toward the poop, with some planks: Sometimes they paint in them
their Maboya; sometimes they represent Savages, or some other fantastic
figures. These Shallops are so large as many times to carry fifty men with all
their Arms. Before they had any acquaintance with the Christians, who furnished
them with all sorts of Wedges, and other Carpenters and Joyners tools, they
were put to a great deal of trouble to make their Vessels; for they were
obliged, as the Virginians, and some other Savages were, to set fire at the
foot De Lery, c. 13.
of the Trees, and to compass them about a little above the foot with wet moss,
to keep the fire from ascending; and so they undermined the Tree by little and
little: Afterward to pierce the wood they used certain hard stones sharpened
at one end, wherewith they cut and made their Piragas hollow, but with so great
trouble and expense of time, that they acknowledge how much they are obliged to
the Europeans, who have taught them easier ways to do it, by the
iron-instruments wherewith they have supplied them. Thence it came that the
Peruvians thought it so great a happiness to have the tools Comment. Royal, l.
1. c. 11.
which were brought them by the Europeans, that the use of Scissers being
introduced into Peru by the means of the Spaniards, an Indian of Quality
admiring the invention, said to one of them, That though the Spaniards did not
furnish them with any thing but Rasors, Scissers, Combs and Looking-glasses, it
sufficiently obliged them liberally to bestow on them all the gold and silver
they had.

The Caribbians employ themselves also in making earthen Pots of all sorts,
which they bake in furnaces, as our Potters do: And of the same material they
also make those Plates or Planks on which they bake the Cassava.

The dexterity they express in these little Exercises, is a sufficient
discovery that they would easily learn other Trades, if they were taught them.
They delight very much in handling the tools of Carpenters and Joyners; and
though they have not been taught how they are to be used, yet are they able to
do many things since the Europeans have supplied them therewith: So that it is
to be presumed, that if they had good Masters, they would do well at those
Trades.

They are great Lovers of divertisements and recreation; and thence it comes
they seek after whatever may keep them in a good humor, and divert melancholy:
To that purpose they take a pleasure in keeping and teaching a great number of
Parrots and Paraquitos.

To divert themselves they also make several Musical Instruments, if they may
be so called, on which they make a kind of harmony: Among others they have
certain Tabours or Drums made of hollow Trees, over which they put a skin only
at one end: To this may be added a kind of Organ which they make of Gourds,
upon which they place a cord made of the string of a reed which they call Pite;
and this cord being touched makes a sound which they think delightful. The
concerts of diverse other Savages are no better then theirs, and no less
immusical to their ears who understand Music. In the morning, as soon as they
are up, they commonly play on the Flute or Pipe; of which Instrument they have
several sorts, as well polished and as handsome as ours, and some of those made
of the bones of their Enemies: And many among them can play with as much grace
as can well be imagined for Savages. While they are playing on the Flute, the
Wives are busy in making ready their breakfast.

Sometimes also they pass away the time in singing certain Airs, the burdens
whereof are pleasant enough; and in that Exercise they sometimes spend half a
day together, sitting on their low stools, and looking on their fish while it
is broiling. They also put pease or small pebble-stones, as the Virginians do,
into gourds, through the midst whereof they put a stick which serves for a
handle, and then shaking them they make a noise: This is the invention the
women have to quiet their children. Most of the Caribbian Songs consist of
bitter railleries against their Enemies; some they have also on Birds, and
Fishes, and Women, commonly intermixed with some bawdery; and many of them have
neither rhyme nor reason.

Many times also the Caribbians of the Islands join Dancing to their Music,
but that Dancing is regulated according to their Music. There are some
Barbarians excessively addicted to that Exercise, as for instance the
Brasilians, who, as de Lery affirms, spend day and night in dancing: And we
have said elsewhere, that there are many Savages who make their imaginary
felicity of the other life to consist in dancing.

But the Caribbians use Dancing particularly at their solemn Entertainments in
their Carbet, or public house. These Entertainments are ordered after this
manner: Some days before the meeting the Captain gives notice to every house,
that all may appear at the Carbet at the day appointed: In the mean time the
Women make a kind of strong drink of baked Cassava, and better prepared then
that which they ordinarily drink; and as they add to the dose of the
Ingredients, so is the drink the stronger, and more apt to intoxicate: The men
go a fishing, or catching of Lizards; for as to other meat they seldom prepare
any for their own Tables, unless they have Strangers to entertain: On the day
appointed both men and women paint their bodies with diverse colors and
figures, and adorn themselves with their Crowns of Feathers, their richest
Chains, Pendants, Bracelets, and other Ornaments: Those among them who would
appear most gallant rub their bodies with a certain Gum, and blow the Down of
diverse Birds upon it. In fine, they all put on their best faces, and endeavor
to make the greatest show they can at this solemnity, priding it in their
Plumes, and all their other gallantry: The women bring thither the Drink and
Messes they have prepared, and are extremely careful that nothing be wanting,
which may contribute to the solemn entertainment: Our Caribbians spend all that
day and the best part of the night in eating and drinking, dancing, discoursing
and laughing: And in this Debauch they drink much more than ordinary, that is,
they make a shift to get drunk; and the women will not be much behind them,
especially when they can get any Wine, or Aqua-vitae to promote the work: So
that what we have said of their ordinary sobriety holds not at these Meetings;
no more than it does at their going to their Wars, and at their return thence:
and yet take them at the worst, their excesses come much short of those of the
Brasilians, who in their Debauches drink three or four days without ceasing,
and in their drunkenness engage themselves in all kind of Vices.

Their drunkennness and their debauches are frequent, as happening upon these
several occasions: 1. When there is any Council held concerning their Wars: 2.
When they return from their Expeditions, whether they have proved successful or
not: 3. Upon the birth of their first Male Children: 4. When they cut their
Childrens hair: 5. When they are at age to go to the Wars: 6. When they cut
down trees, in order to the making of a Garden and building of a House: 7. When
they launch a new Vessel: And lastly when they are recovered of some disease:
They call these assemblies Ouicou, and since they have conversed with the
French, Vin, that is, Wine.

But on the contrary they have also their Fasts, wherein they betray the
ridiculousness of their humor: For, 1. they fast when they enter into
adolescency: 2. When they are made Captains: 3. At the death of their Fathers
or Mothers: 4. At the death of the Husband or Wife: 5. When they have killed
one of their Enemies the Arouagues; this last occasion of fasting they glory
very much in.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Entertainment which the Caribbians make those who come to
visit them.
HEre it is that our Caribbians triumph over all other Savages in point of
civility: For they receive strangers, who come to their Islands to visit them,
with all manner of kindness and testimonies of affection.

They have sentinels all along the Seaside in most of those Islands whereof
they are solely possessed: These sentinels are placed on the Mountains, or such
eminent places whence they may see a good way into the Sea; and they are so
disposed, that they overlook those places where there is good anchorage for
Ships, and an easy descent for men to land: As Soon as ever these perceive a
Ship or Shallop coming toward them, they give notice thereof to such of their
people as are next to them: Whereupon of a sudden there come out together
several Canows or Vessels, in each whereof there are not above three men at
most, who are sent out to discover what they are, and call to them at a
distance to declare themselves; for they trust not the Flagg, as having been
often deceived thereby: and they know by their voices whether they be French,
Spaniards, English or Dutch. Some affirm, that the Brasilians and the Peruvians
are so exact in their smelling, that they will discern a Frenchman from a
Spaniard by the scent.

When the Caribbians are not well-assured who they are who come toward them,
and perceive that they intend them some mischief, they put themselves into a
posture of defense, possess themselves of the narrowest avenues of their
Country, place ambushes in the Woods, and without being perceived keep an eye
on their Enemies, retreating through obscure ways till they have found their
advantage, and joined all their Forces together; and then they let fly a
shower of Arrows on their Enemies: That done, they surround them, close with
them, and cut them all off with their Clubs: In some Islands they make up a
body of fifteen hundred men and more, as may be guessed by their appearance;
for their number cannot be certainly known, inasmuch as they themselves not
knowing how to reckon, cannot tell what numbers they are: But if they are
pressed by their Enemies, they get into the Woods, or climb up Rocks that are
inaccessible to all others; or if they are near the Sea, they leap in and dive,
and rise up again at a hundred, nay sometimes two hundred paces from the place
where they had been seen: And afterward they rally together, at certain
Rendezvouses known to themselves, and charge afresh when it is least expected,
and when they were thought to be absolutely routed.

But when they find those coming to them to be friends who come only to visit
them, after they have cried to them that they are welcome, some cast themselves
into the water and swim to them, enter into their Vessel, and when they come
near land proffer to carry them ashore on their backs, as an assurance of their
affection: In the mean time the Captain himself, or his Lieutenant, expects
them on the shore, and receives them in the name of the whole Island: Thence
they are conducted by a considerable number of them to the Carbet, which is as
it were the Townhouse, where the Inhabitants of the Island, every one
according to the age and sex of the New-comers, bid them welcome: The old Man
complements and makes much of the old Man; the young Man and Maid do the like
toward those of their age; and a man may read in their countenances how much
they are satisfied with the visit.

But the first discourse they make to the Stranger is to ask him his name, and
then to tell him theirs: And for an expression of great affection and
inviolable friendship, they call themselves by the names of those whom they
entertain: But to crown the Ceremony, they will have the person whom they
receive in like manner to assume their name: Thus they make an exchange of
names; and they have such excellent memories, that ten years after such a
meeting they will remember the names of their friends, and relate some
circumstance of what had passed at the former interview: And if they were
presented with any thing, they will be sure to call it to mind; and if the
thing be still in being, they will show it to him who had bestowed it on them.

After all these complements which are passed at the first meeting, the next is
to present their Guests with those pensile Beds which they call Amais, very
clean and white, whereof they have store against such occasions: They desire
them to rest themselves thereon, and then they bring in Fruits; and while some
are busy preparing some treatment, others entertain them with discourse,
observing still the conformity of age and sex.

This kind of entertainment may well be accounted more rational than that of
the Caribbians of the Southerly part of Continent, who receive their Guests
after a very odd fashion, not much unlike what is practiced by the Canadians:
For the Cacick of those Caribbians conducts him who comes to see them to the
Publick-house, without speaking at all to him: then he is presented with a
stool and some Tobacco, and so they leave him for a time, without speaking a
word to him, till he has rested himself and taken his Tobacco: Then the Cacick
comes and asks him, whether he be come? The other answering yes, he sits down
by him and falls into discourse: Afterward those of the common sort come
asking him after the same manner, whether he be come? And having thereupon
brought him something to eat, they also fall into discourse with him: True it
is indeed, that our Insulary Caribbians, in the reception of their Guests,
toward those of their own Nation, who are strangers in their Islands, practice
the same thing as the Caribbians of the Continent: But when they entertain
French and other Europ^ans who would be loath to keep silence so long, they
speak to them, and fall immediately into discourse, as we said before,
accommodating themselves to their humor, and, to comply with them, crossing
the rules of their own Ceremonies.

But the Banquet they intend them was prepared before hand, let us now see how
it is ordered, and how they demean themselves therein: They give every one his
little Table, and his Trigaut, l. 1. c. 7.
Messes apart, as the Chinese do: Somebring in broiled Lizards; others, fried
Crabs; some, Pulse; and others, Fruits, and so of the rest: During the Repast,
they discourse with them, and wait on them with the greatest care imaginable:
They think it the greatest kindness can be done them to eat and drink heartily;
and all their business is to fill the Cups, and see that every Table be
furnished: When a man drinks he must take all off, otherwise they are
disobliged; and if one cannot eat all the Cassava that is given him, he must
put up the rest and carry it Rusbequius, lib. 4.
along with him, otherwise they will take it unkindly: Thus the Turks when they
are at a friends Table, are wont to fill their Handkerchers, and sometimes the
sleeves of their Garments with fragments of meat and bread, which they carry
away with them. And among the Grand-Tartars, when a Guest cannot eat all
Rubriques in his Travels into Tartary.
that is presented to him, he must give the remainders to his Servant to lay up
for him, or carry it away himself in his bag or pouch, wherein he puts up also
the bones, if he has not picked them clean enough, that he may afterward do
it at his leisure: But among the Chinese, when the Guest goes home, the
Servants of the person who invited him, carries along with him the dishes that
were left.

After the Repast, the Caribbians conduct you to their private Houses, and into
their Gardens, show you their Arms, their curiosities and their trinkets, and
present you with Fruits, or some little pieces of their own workmanship.

If any one be desirous to continue a while among them, they take it for a
great favor, and are extremely glad of it, and find the same treatment as at
first: But if they are willing to be gone from them, they are troubled, and ask
whether you dislike your entertainment, that you should be gone so soon. With
that sad countenance they all re-conduct you to the Seaside, nay will carry you
into your Shallops, if you will suffer it: And at that final parting they again
present you with fruits, which they force you to accept, saying to those who
would refuse them, Friend, if thou have no need of it thy self, thou may give
it to thy Mariners; so they call all the Servants and Domestics of those to
whom they speak. The Brasilians and the Canadians, as some affirm, do also make
presents upon the like occasions: And Tacitus relates, that the ancient Germans
made presents to the Strangers who came to visit them; but they reciprocally
demanded something of them: In this point the Caribbians show themselves more
generous, for they give, and require nothing back in lieu of it.

But it would be an incivility to go and visit these good people and to receive
their kindnesses, and not to present them with something: Whence it comes that
the Strangers, who go to see them, never go without some grains of Crystal,
Fishing-hooks, Needles, Pins, or little Knives, or some such toies: And as soon
as they have done eating, they set on the little Table, on which they have
eaten, some of those things: Those who have prepared the Banquet think
themselves requited a hundredfold, and make extraordinary acknowledgments
thereof.

We have hitherto represented what treatment the Caribbians have heretofore
made to some of their friends, French and Dutch, who took occasion to visit
them: But they use other Ceremonies at the reception of Strangers of their own
Nation, or their Confederates, who chance to come into their Islands: There is
in every Carbet a Savage, who has a Commission to receive Passengers, and is
called Niouakaiti: If they are of the common sort, he presents them with Seats,
and what is fit for them to eat, especially a Cassava-cake folded double, which
signifies that they may eat as much as they can, and leave the rest behind them.

If those who come to see them, or pass by occasionally are considerable to
them upon any other account, as being some way related to them, or Captains,
they comb their hair both at their coming and their going away, they hang up
Beds, and invite them to rest themselves, saying, En Bouekra, behold thy Bed:
They also present them with Matoutous, which are little Tables made of Rushes,
or the leaves of Palms or Lataniers, as we said elsewhere, on which they set
the meat and the Cassava not folded, but as they come off the Plank: The women
set them at their feet, and the men standing about, show that which was
brought, saying, En Yerebaili, behold thy meat: Afterward the women bring in
Gourds full of Ouicou, and make them drink: Then having set them on the ground
before them, the Husband who stands behind the women, says, En batoni, behold
thy drink: And the other makes answer to these two complements, Yao, that is to
say, very well, or I thank you. The Cassava unfolded signifies, eat thy fill
and carry away the rest; which they fail not to do: When they have dined well
without being interrupted by any one, they all come to salute them one after
another, saying to him, Halea-tibou, that is, be welcome: But the women are not
much concerned in this Ceremony. As for the Visitants when they would depart,
they go and take leave of every one in particular; which they express by the
word Huichan in their language.

CHAP. XIX. Of what may be accounted Polity amongst the Caribbians.
THere are in every Island of the Caribbies, inhabited by the Caribbians,
several sorts of Captains: 1. The Captain of the Carbet, or of a Village, whom
they name Tiouboutouli hauthe: This is when a man has a numerous Family and
retires with it at a certain distance from others, and builds Houses or Huts
for to lodge it in, and a Carbet, where all of the Family meet to be merry, or
to treat of the affairs which concern it in common; thence it is that he is
named a Captain of a Family, or of Houses.

2. A Captain of a Piraga, that is, either he to whom the Vessel belongs, or he
who has the command of it when they go to the Wars; and these are named
Tiouboutouli Canaoa.

3. Amongst those who have every one the command of a Vessel in particular,
they have also an Admiral or General at Sea, who commands the whole Fleet: Him
they call Nhalene. In fine, they have the grand Captain, or Commander in chief,
whom they call Ouboutou, and in the plural number, Ouboutounum: This is the
same whom the Spaniards call Cacique (and we in this History call Cacick) as
some other Indians, and sometimes also our Savages do in imitation of them: He
is during his life, from his first election to that charge, the General of
their Armies, and he is always highly respected among them: He appoints the
meetings of the Carbet, either for merry-making or deliberations in order to a
War: And he always goes abroad attended by all of his own house, and some
others who do him the honor to wait on him: Those who have the greatest
retinue are the most highly honored: If any one gives him not the respect due
to him upon the account of his charge, it is in his power to strike him: Of
these there are but two at the most in an Island, as at Dominico: They are also
commonly the Admirals when a Fleet goes out: Or happily that charge is bestowed
on some young man, who is desirous to signalize himself upon that occasion.

This charge is obtained by election: and commonly he who is advanced thereto
must have killed diverse of the Arouagues, or at least one of the most
considerable persons among them. The Sons do not succeed their Fathers in that
charge, if they be not worthy thereof. When the chief Captain speaks all others
are silent: and when he enters into the Carbet, every one makes him way; he
has also the first and best part of the entertainment: The Lieutenant to this
Captain is called in their Language Ouboutou maliarici, that is to say
properly, the Track of the Captain, or that which appears after him.

None of these Chiefs has any command over the whole Nation nor any
superiority over the other Captains: But when the Caribbians go to the Wars,
among all the Captains they make choice of one to be General of the Army, who
makes the first assault: and when the expedition is over, he has no authority
but only in his own Island: True it is, that if he has behaved himself
gallantly in his enterprises, he is ever after highly respected in all the
Islands: But heretofore, before the commerce between the Caribbians and
foreign Nations had altered the greatest part of their ancient Polity, there
were many conditions requisite to obtain that degree of honor.

It was in the first place requisite that he whom they advanced to that
dignity, had been several times in the Wars, and that to the knowledge of the
whole Island whereof he was to be chosen Captain, he had behaved himself
courageously and gallantly: Next to this it was necessary, that he should be so
active and swift in running, as to surpass all competitors in that exercise:
Thirdly, he who stood for the Generalship of an Island, should excel all
others in swimming and diving: A fourth condition was, that he should carry a
burden of such weight as his fellow-pretenders should not be able to stand
under: Lastly, he was obliged to give great demonstrations of his constancy:
for they cruelly cut and mangled his shoulders and breasts with the tooth of an
Agouty; nay his best friends made deep incisions in diverse parts of his body:
And the wretched person who expected that charge was to endure all this,
without betraying the least sign of resentment and pain; nay, on the contrary,
it was requisite that he received all with a smiling countenance, as if he were
the most satisfied man in the World: We shall not wonder so much that these
Barbarians should endure such Torments, in order to the acquisition of some
Dignity, when it shall be considered, that the Turks do not show themselves
sometimes less cruel toward themselves, upon the account of pure gallantry, and
as it were by way of divertisements witness what is related by Busbequius in
the fourth Book of his Embassies, which were too tedious to set down in this
place.

To return to the Caribbians of the Islands: This ancient ceremony, which they
observed in the election of their chief Governors, will no doubt be thought
strange and savage; but there is something of the same kind observable in other
Nations: For in the Kingdom of Chili they choose for the Sovereign Captain him
who is able longest to bear a great Tree upon his shoulders: In the Country of
Wiapoco, toward the great River of the Amazons, to be advanced to the dignity
of Captain, he must endure, without the least stirring of the Body, nine
extraordinary strokes with a Holly-wand from every Captain, and that three
several times; but that is not all; he must also be put into a Bed of Cotton,
over a Fire of green Leaves, the thick Smoke whereof ascending upwards, must
needs be very troublesome to the wretch who is so mad as to expose himself
thereto; and he is obliged to continue there till he be in a manner half dead;
this speaks a strange desire to be Captain: Nay, heretofore among the Persians,
those who were desirous to be admitted into the Fraternity of the Sun, were
required to give proofs of their Constancy in fourscore several sorts of
Torments: The Brasilians, without any other ceremony, make choice of him for
their General who has taken and killed most Enemies: And now also in some of
the Caribbies the Caribbians themselves laugh at their ancient Ceremonies at
the election of their Captain; for having observed that their Neighbors think
that kind of proceeding ridiculous, they now make choice of him for their
Chief, who having behaved himself valiantly in the Wars against their Enemies,
has acquired the reputation of a brave and gallant person.

As soon as the Cacick is received into his Charge, he is highly respected by
all, insomuch that no man speaks if he do not ask or command him to do it; and
if any one cannot forbear speaking as he ought, all the rest immediately cry
out, Cala la bocca, which they have learned from the Spaniard; But it suffices
not to be silent in the presence of their Chief, but they are also very
attentive to his Discourse, look upon him when he speaks; and to show that they
approve of what he says, they are wont to smile, and that smile is accompanied
by a certain Hun-Hun.

These expressions of respect are such as are not to be accounted savage, as
being used generally all over the World; but the Maldiveses have a particular
way of honoring a person; Pirard, Linscot, Garcilasso, Des Hayes, and others.
for as they think it a kind of disrespect to pass behind any one, so to
express a great submission they take their passage just before him, and making
a low obeisance, say as they go by, May it not displease you: The Yncas, a
people of the Kingdom of Peru, to express the respect they bear their God,
enter into his Temple backwards, and go out of it after the same manner; quite
contrary to what we do in our ordinary Visits and Civilities: The Turks account
the left hand the more honorable among Military persons: The Inhabitants of
Java think the covering of the Head is the greatest act of submission: The
Japonneses think it a great incivility to receive those who would honor them
standing; they take off their Shoes when they would express how much they
honor any person: In the Kingdom of Gago in Africa all the Subjects speak to
the King kneeling, having in their hands a Vessel full of Sand, which they cast
on their Heads: The Negroes of the Country of Angola cover themselves with
Earth when they meet with their Prince, as it were to signify, that in his
presence they are but dust and ashes: The Maronites of Mount Libanus meeting
their Patriarch, cast themselves at his feet and kiss them; but he immediately
raising them up, presents them with his hand, which they taking in both theirs,
and having kissed it, lay on their heads: But they who live about the Straight
of Sunda have a very strange Custom, which is, that to honor their Superiors
they take them by the left foot, and gently rub the Leg from the Anckle-bone to
the Knee; and that done, they in like manner rub the Face, and the forepart of
the Head; an action which I doubt would be far from being thought respectful in
these Parts.

From what has been said it may be deduced, That this Worlds Honor, whatever
it may be, Virtue excepted, consists only in Opinion and Custom, which differ,
and sometimes clash, according to the diversity of Men's humors.

But to return to the Captain of our Caribbians; It is his business to take the
Resolutions of War, to make all Preparations in order thereto, and to go upon
any Expedition in the head of his Forces: He also appoints the Assemblies of
his Island, and takes care for the reparations of the Carbet, which is the
House where all Resolutions that concern the Public are taken: In fine, he it
is who in the name of the whole Island, as occasion serves, gives Answers, and
appoints the days of divertisement, as we mentioned before.

The administration of Justice among the Caribbians is not exercised by the
Captain, nor by any Magistrate; but, as it is among the Tapinambous, he who
thinks himself injured gets such satisfaction of his adversary as he thinks
fit, according as his passion dictates to him, or his strength permits him: The
Public does not concern it self at all in the punishment of Criminals; and if
any one among them suffers an injury or affront, without endeavoring to
revenge himself, he is slighted by all the rest, and accounted a Coward, and a
Person of no esteem; But, as we said before, there happen few quarrels or
fallings out among them.

A Brother revenges his Brother and Sister, a Husband his Wife, a Father his
Children; so that when any one is killed, they think it justly done, because it
is done upon the account of revenge and retaliation: To prevent that, if a
Savage of one Island has killed another Savage, out of a fear of being killed
by way of revenge by the Relations of the deceased, he gets into another Island
and setles himself there. Those whom they think Sorcerers do not exercise that
profession long among them, though for the most part they are rather imagined
to be such, than that they are really so.

If the Caribbians suspect any one to have stolen something from them, they
endeavor to lay hold on him, and to cut him over the Shoulders with a Knife or
the Tooth of an Agouty, as a mark of his crime and their revenge: These Agoutys
Teeth among the Caribbians supply the want of our Rasors, and indeed they are
in a manner as sh^rp: Thus the ancient Peruvians and the Canarians, before they
had the use of our Iron Instruments, made use of a certain kind of Flint
instead of Scissers, Lancets, and Rasors.

The Husband suffers not his Wife to break her conjugal Faith toward him
without punishment; but he himself acts the part of both Judge and Executioner,
as we shall declare more particularly in the Chapter of their Marriages. They
know not what it is to punish publicly, or to observe any form in the
execution of Justice; nay, they have no word in their Language to signify
Justice or Judgment.

CHAP. XX. Of the Wars of the Caribbians.
IT is commonly at their public Feasts and Entertainments that the Caribbians
take their Resolutions of engaging upon any War; which humor is not particular
to their Nation; for the Brasilians and the Canadians do the like: And that it
may not be thought this is found only among Savages, Herodotus Lib. ^.
and Strabo affirm, That heretofore the Persians consulted Lib. 15.
concerning their most important affairs at their great Feasts, and when they
had their heads well stored with Wine. And not only the Persians, but also
several Grecian Nations held their Councels of War at Table, if we may believe
Plutarch. Symp. 1. 3. qu. 2. Trigaut, l. 1. c. 7.
The same thing is at this day practiced among the Chinese, as some Historians
affirm.

But to return to the Councels of War of our Caribbians: When they begin to
have their brains warmed with their drink, an old Woman comes into the Assembly
with a sad countenance and deportment, and with tears in her eyes demands
audience; which being easily granted her, by reason of the respect and
reverence they bear to her age, with a doleful voice, interrupted by sighs, she
represents the injuries which the whole Nation has received from the
Arouagues, their ancient and inveterate Enemies: And having reckoned up the
greatest cruelties which they have heretofore exercised against the Caribbians,
and the gallant men they have killed or taken in the Battles that were fought
between them, she comes to particularize in those who were lately made
Prisoners, massacred, and eaten, in some later Engagements: And at last she
concludes, that it were a shameful and an insupportable disparagement to their
Nation, if they should not revenge themselves, and generously imitate their
Predecessors, those brave Caribbians, who minded nothing so much as to gain
satisfaction for the injuries they had received; and who after they had shaken
off the yoke, which the Tyrants would have imposed on them for the taking away
of their ancient Liberty, have carried their victorious Arms into the
Territories of their Enemies, whom they have pursued with darts and fire, and
forced to make their retreats into their highest Mountains, the clefts of
Rocks, and the dreadful recesses of their thickest Forests; and this with so
great success, that at present they dare not appear at their own Seacoasts,
and can find no habitation so remote where they think themselves secure from
the assaults of the Caribbians; fear and astonishment having been their
constant attendants after such signal Victories: That they are therefore
courageously to prosecute their advantages, and not to rest till that pestilent
Enemy be utterly destroyed.

As soon as the old Woman has made an end of her discourse, the Captain makes
a Speech to the same purpose, to make a greater impression in the minds of the
Audience; which ended, the whole Assembly unanimously applauds the Proposition,
and make all demonstrations imaginable of the justice of their Cause. From that
time, being encouraged by the words they had heard, they breathe nothing but
blood and wounds. The Captain, concluding by the applause of the whole
Assembly, and by their gestures and countenances, that they are resolved for
the War, though they do not say so much, immediately orders it, and appoints
the time for the Enterprise by some of their ways of numbering, as we have
hinted in the Chapter of their Natural Simplicity. In this place we are to make
this particular Remark, That they take these bloody resolutions when they are
well laden with drink, and after the Devil has tormented them to egg them on
thereto, as we have said elsewhere.

The next day after the Assembly, nothing is seen or heard in all parts of the
Island but preparations for the War: Some polish their Bows; others order their
Clubs; others prepare, sharpen, and poison their Arrows; and others are
employed to make ready the Piragas: The Women, for their parts, are busy about
disposing and getting together the necessary provisions for the Army: So that
on the day appointed they all meet at the Seaside with all things in a
readiness to embarque.

They all furnish themselves with good Bows, and every one with a good sheaf of
Arrows, which are made of a small smooth Reed, with a little piece of iron or
some sharp bone at the point: The Arrows used by the Brasilians are made after
the same manner; but the Caribbians add to theirs, to make them more dreadful,
a mortal poison made of the juice of the Manchenillo-trees, and other poisons;
so that the least scratch made by them becomes a mortal wound. It has hitherto
been a thing impossible to get out of them the Receipt of that composition.
They have also every one of them that wooden sword which they call Boutous, or
to say better, that massy Club which they use instead of a sword, and wherewith
they do miracles in point of fencing. These are all their Arms; for they have
no Targets or Bucklers, as the Tapinambous, but De Lery, c. 14.
their bodies are naked.

Next the care they take about their Arms, they also provide themselves
sufficiently with belly-timber, and take along with them in their little
vessels good quantities of Cassava, broiled Fish, Fruits, and particularly
Bananas, which keep a long time, and the meal of Manioc. The Icaqueses in their
Wars never trouble themselves about any such thing; and what they do in this
particular is so peculiar to them, that it deserves to be mentioned: for they
are content with so little sontheir sustenance, and delight so much in living
upon certain Plumbs which grow abundantly in their Parts, and from which they
have their name, that when they go to the Wars they are never seen to carry any
provisions for the belly along with them.

Our Savages of the Caribbies, as well as those of Brasil, take De Lery, c. 14.
along with them to the Wars a certain number of Women, to dress their meat,
and look to the Piragas when they are got ashore. Their Arms and Provisions are
well fastened to these Piragas; so that if the Vessel comes to overturn, which
happens often, they set it right again without losing any thing of what was in
it: And upon those occasions, being so good De Lery, c. 13.
Swimmers as we have represented them, they are not troubled for their own
persons, so far that they have sometimes laughed at the Christians, who, being
near them upon those occasions, endeavored to relieve them. Thus the
Tapinambous laughed at some French men upon the like accident, as De Lery
relates. Chap. 12.
The sails of the Caribbians are made of Cotton, or a kind of Mat of
Palm-leaves: They have an excellent faculty of rowing with certain little Oars,
which they move very fast. They take along with them also some Canows, which
are their least kind of Vessels, to attend their Piragas.

Their custom is to go from Island to Island to refresh themselves, and to that
end they have Gardens even in those which are desert, and not inhabited: They
also touch at the Islands of their own Nation, to join their Forces, and take
in as they go along all those that are in a condition to accompany them; and so
their Army increases, and with that equipage they get with little noise to the
Frontiers.

When they sail along the Coasts, and night comes upon them, they bring their
Vessels ashore, and in half an hours time they make up their lodging-place
under some Tree with Balisier and Latanier-leaves, which they fasten together
on poles or reeds, sustained by forks planted in the ground, which serve for a
foundation to this little structure, and to hang their beds on: These lodgings
thus made in haste they call Aioupa.

The Lacedaemonian Lawgiver had forbidden, among other Plut. in the Life of
Lycurgus.
things, that War should be always waged against the same Enemies, for fear
they might thereby grow more experienced in Military Affairs: But the
Caribbians follow not those Maxims, nor fear any such inconvenience; for they
always make War against the same Nation: Their ancient and irreconcilable
Enemies are the Arouacas, Arouaques or Arouagues, which is the name commonly
given them in the Islands, though the Caribbians call them Alouagues, who live
in that part of the Meridional America which is known in the Maps under the
name of the Province of Guyana or Guayana, not far from the Rivers which fall
down out of that Province into the Sea. The cause of this immortal enmity
between our Insulary Caribbians and those people has been already hinted in
the Chapter of the Origin of the Caribbians, to wit, that those Arouagues have
cruelly persecuted the Caribbians of the Continent, their Neighbors, the
Relations of our Islanders, and of the same Nation with them; and that they
have continually warred against them to exterminate them, or at least, to drive
them out of their habitations. These Arouagnes then are the people whom our
Islanders go and find out in their own Country, commonly once or twice a year,
to be revenged of them as much as they can: And it is to be observed on the
other side, that the Arouagues never make any attempts on the Caribbians of the
Islands, in the Islands where they live, but only stand on the defensive;
whereas they are sure to have our Savages among them oftener then they wish,
coasting along, as they are wont to do, all the other Islands wherein they have
Gardens or Colonies, though the furthermost of the Caribby-Islands, which is
Santa-Cruce, is distant from the Country of the Arouagues about three hundred
Leagues.

It was Alexanders generosity made him use this expression, Q. Curt. Justin. l.
9.
that a Victory was not to be stolen: but Philip of an humor different from
his Son, thought there was no shame in a Conquest, howere it were obtained: Our
Caribbians, with most of the old Inhabitants of America, are of the same
opinion: For they carry on all their wars by surprise, and think it no
dishonor to make their advantage of the night: Contrary to the Icaqueses, who
would think their reputation blasted, if coming to the Territories of their
Enemies, they did not send them notice of their arrival, and challenge them to
come and receive them armed. The Arraucanes, next neighbor to the Chili, a
warlike people, and whom the Spaniard has not been yet able to overcome, nay
was sometimes worsted by them, do much more: For when they are to engage
against an Enemy, they have the War proclaimed by Heralds, and send this
message to them; We shall meet thee within so many Moons, be ready. And so the
Yncas, the Kings of Peru, never undertook any Garcilas. l. 5. c. 12.
war, till they had first advertised their Enemies thereof, and declared it two
or three times: Whence it may be inferred by the way, that L' Escarbot is
mistaken in his History of New-France, Lib. 3. c. 25.
where he affirms, that all the West-Indians generally wage their wars by
surprise.

The Caribbians have this imagination, that the War they should begin openly
would not prosper: So that having landed in the Country of the Arouagues, if
they are discovered before they give the first shock, or that a dog, as one
would say, did bark at them, thinking it ominous, they immediately return to
their Vessels, and so to their Islands, leaving the design to be prosecuted
some other time.

But if they are not discovered, they fall upon their Enemies even in their
Houses: If they cannot easily come at them, or find them well fortified in some
Houses that have good Palisadoes, whence they play upon them with their Arrows
with some advantage, they are wont to force them out by shooting fire to the
Houses with their Arrows, at the points whereof they fasten lighted Cotton: And
these arrows being shot on the roofs, which consist of Grass or Palm-leaves,
they presently set them on fire: Thus the Arouagues are forced out of their
holes, and to fight in the open field, or run away: When our Savages have thus
gotten them into the field, they presently shoot away all their arrows, which
being spent they take their Boutous, and do strange things therewith; they are
in perpetual motion all the time they are fighting, that the Enemy may have the
less time to observe them: Firearms, especially great Guns, which make so
great noise, and do such execution, especially when they are laden with Nails,
Chains, and other pieces of old Iron, have abated much of their courage when
they have had to do with Europaeans, and makes them afraid to come near their
Ships and Forts: But though they do not take Opium, to make them less sensible
of danger, before they go to Travels of Villamont lib. 2. Paludanus in Linscot.
c. 76. and Vin. le Blanc.
fight, as the Turks and the East-Indians of Cananor do; nor yet feed on Tigers
and Lions to make themselves more courageous, as the people of the Kingdom of
Narsinga toward Malabar; yet when they fight equally armed with the Arouagues,
and have begun the Battle, especially if they are animated with some good
success, they are as bold as Lions, and will either overcome or die. Thus did
the warlike Savages of the Country of Carthagena, when they were assaulted by
the Spaniards; for Linscot and de Laet.
they fell in among them with such fury, both men and women, that a young maid
laid several Spaniards upon the place ere she was killed her self. They say
also that the Mexicans and Accosta and le Jeune
Canadians will rather be cut to pieces than taken in fight.

If the Caribbians can take any one of their Enemies alive, they bind him and
bring him away captive into their Islands; but if any one of theirs fall dead
or wounded in the field, it would be an eternal and insupportable reproach to
them to leave him in the power of the Enemy: That consideration makes them
break furiously into the midst of the greatest dangers, and resolutely make
their way through whatever opposes them, to retrive the bodies of their
Comrades; and having gotten them by force from amongst the Enemies, they carry
them to their Vessels.

When the fight is over, our Savages make their retreat to the Seaside, or
into some neighboring Island; and if they have received some considerable loss
by the death of some of their Chief Commanders, or their most valiant Soldiers,
they fill the air with dreadful howling and crying before they get into their
Vessels; and intermixing their tears with the blood of the deceased, they
mournfully dispose them into their Piragas, and accompany them with their
regrets and sighs to some of their own Territories.

But when they have had the Victory, they spend not the time in cutting off the
heads of their slain Enemies, in carrying them in triumph, and in taking the
skins of those poor bodies, to make Standards in their Triumphs, as the
Canadians do, and as heretofore was the custom of the Scythians, as Herodotus
affirms; Lib. 4.
nay, as was that of the ancient Gauls, if we believe Livy. Lib. 10.
The Caribbians think it enough to express their joy by outcries over the
bodies of the Arouagues, and afterward all along their Coasts, as it were to
insult over that hateful Country before they leave it: But after they have sung
in that strange Country some of their triumphal songs, they make what haste
they can to their Vessels, to carry away the rest into the bosom of their
native soil; and the poor Arouagues they have taken, they carry away chained,
to be dealt with as shall be seen in the next Chapter.

The end they propose to themselves in these Expeditions, is not to become
Masters of a new Country, or to load themselves with the spoils of their
Enemies; but only the glory of subduing and triumphing over them, and the
pleasure of satiating their Revenge for the injuries they have received from
them.

Next the Arouagues, the greatest Enemies the Caribbians have are the English:
this enmity took its rise hence, that the English, having under the Flags of
other Nations got diverse of the Caribbians aboard their Ships, where they had
at first charmed them with kindness, and little presents, especially
Aqua-vitae, which they extremely love; when they saw their Vessel full of these
poor people, who never dreamed of any such treachery, weighed anchor, and
carried the Caribbians, men, women, and children into their Plantations, where
they are still kept as slaves: It is reported that they did the like in several
of the Islands, wherein they followed the example of the Spaniards: Whence it
comes that they still bear a grudge to the English, and can hardly endure to
hear their Language spoken: Nay, their dissatisfaction is so great, that if a
Frenchman, as some of that Nation affirm, chance to make use of some English
expressions in his discourse, he runs the hazard of their enmity: Accordingly,
in their turns, by the law of retaliation, they have often made incursions into
the Islands of Montserrat, Antego, and others which are in the hands of the
English; and after they had set some houses on fire, and taken some Goods, they
carried away men, women, and children, whom they brought to Dominico and St.
Vincents; but it was never heard that they did eat any of them, it seems they
reserve that cruelty for the Arouagues: Nay before the Caribbians had any war
with the Inhabitants or Martinico, when the Parents or Friends of the English
who had been carried away Prisoners of War by those Caribbians, employed the
mediation of the French, they were easily enlarged and put into the hands of
the French, who gave the Caribbians in exchange for them, some of those trifles
which they highly value, or happily an Iron wedge, or some such necessary tool:
Nay, upon the presenting them with some of those things they have delivered up
some of the Arouagues appointed to be eaten. They have at this present in the
Island of St. Vineents some young Boys and Girls of the English Nation, who
being carried away very young, have clearly forgot their Parents, and would
hardly return with them, so well are they pleased with the humor of the
Caribbians, who for their part treat them as mildly as if they were of their
own Nation; they are now known only by the fairness and flaxenness of their
Hair, whereas the Caribbians are generally black-hair'd.

As for the Spaniards, at the first discovery of America, the Caribbians who
were then possessed of all the Caribby-Islands, were cruelly treated by them;
they persecuted them with fire and sword, and pursued them even into the woods,
as wild beasts, that they might carry them away Captives to work in the Mines:
Which kind of procedure forced this people, which is valiant and generous, to
oppose the violence, and to lay ambushes for their Enemies, nay to assault them
in their Ships which lay in their Roads, which they borded without any fear of
Firearms, making their way through Swords and Pikes: In which attempts they
were many times so fortunate, that they became Masters of diverse Ships richly
laden, dispatching all that opposed them, carrying away all the booty, and
then seting the Ships on fire: True it is, they pardoned the Negro-slaves they
met with, and having brought them ashore put them to work in their Habitations;
thence came the Negroes which which they have at present in St. Vincents and
some other Islands.

The Spaniards being sensible of these losses, and perceiving they had a
stubborn Enemy to deal with, and that when they had ruined that Nation, they
should not advantage themselves; and considering further, that the Islands they
were possessed of lay convenient for their Ships in their long Voyages, to take
in refreshments of water, wood, and provisions if need were, and to leave such
as were sick in their Fleet, they resolved to treat the Caribbians more kindly;
and thereupon having set some of them at liberty whom they had Captives, and
sent them back into their Country with presents, they made use of them to treat
concerning a peace with that People, the conditions whereof being accepted by
some of the Islands, they set ashore therein some swine which they had brought
out of Europe; and afterward they left there behind them the sick they had in
their Ships, and took them in again recovered at their return. But the
Caribbians of St. Vincents, and those who lived at Dominico would not consent
to that agreement, but still persist in the aversion they had for the
Spaniards, and the desire they have to be revenged of them.

As to what concerns their defensive wars, they have learnt by their
acquaintance with the Christians, and the differences they have had with them
upon several occasions, to keep their ranks, and to encamp in advantageous
places, and to make some kinds of fortifications in imitation of the others:
The French found i^ so by experience, some years since, at the taking of
Granada: They imagined that the Caribbians would not have made any resistance;
but they found them in a defensive posture, to prevent their landing, and
contest their possession of that place; for besides the mischief they did them
by an extraordinary shower of Arrows, and the Barricadoes they placed in the
avenues, they courageously opposed their landing, and laid several ambushes for
them; and when they saw that the French, notwithstanding their resistance, were
resolved to come, and forced them to make their retreat into the woods, they
rallied on an eminent place which they had fortified: and whereas it was
somewhat steepy on all sides save only one, which had a spacious avenue, they
had cut down certain trees, of the boals whereof they had made long Rollers,
which being lightly fastened at the top of the Mountain, might be rolled down
the descent, with a more than ordinary force and violence against the French,
if they had attempted any assault: Out of this Fort they also made several
sallies upon the Enemy, who was building one where they might safely expect the
supply which was to be sent them from Martinico; there they kept them in as it
were besieged for certain days, during which they had made hollow places in the
earth to secure themselves from the Muskets; and thence showing only their
heads, they shot their Arrows at those who had the confidence to come without
the Trenches; nay, in the night time they made a shift to get a pot full of
burning coals, on which they had cast a handful of Pyman-seed, into the Hut
which the French had set up at their first arrival in the Island, purposely to
stifle them, if they could, by the dangerous fume, and the stupifying vapor of
the Pyman: But their stratagem was discovered; and some time after the expected
supply being come to the French, the Caribbians treated with them, and left
them the absolute possession of the Island; but the differences they have since
had with the French Inhabitants of Martinico have occasioned another War which
lasts still.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Treatment which the Caribbians make their Prisoners of War.
WE are now going to dip our Pen in Blood, and to draw a Picture which must
raise horror in the beholder; in this there must appear nothing but
Inhumanity, Barbarism, and Rage; We shall find rational Creatures cruelly
devouring those of the same species with them, and filling themselves with
their Flesh and Blood, after they had cast off Humane Nature, and put on that
of the most bloody and furious Beasts: A thing which the Pagans themselves, in
the midst of their darkness, heretofore thought so full of execration, that
they imagined the Sun withdrew himself, because he would not show his light at
such Repasts.

When the Cannibals, or Anthropophagi, that is, Eaters of Men (for here it is
that we are properly to call them by that Name, which is common to them with
that of the Caribbians); when I say they bring home Prisoner of War from among
the Arouagues, he belongs of right to him who either seized on him in the
Fight, or took him running away; so that being come into his Island, he keeps
him in his house; and that he may not get away in the night, he ties him in an
Amac, which he hangs up almost at the roof of his dwelling; and after he has
kept him fasting four or five days, he produces him upon some day of solemn
debauch, to serve for a public Victim to the immortal hatred of his
Countrymen toward that Nation.

If there be any of their Enemies dead upon the place, they there eat them ere
they leave it: They design for slavery only the young Maids and Women taken in
the War: They do not eat the Children of their She-prisoners, much less the
Children they have by them themselves: They have heretofore tasted of all the
Nations that frequented them, and affirm, That the French are the most
delicate, and the Spaniards of hardest digestion; but now they do not feed on
any Christians at all.

They abstain also from several cruelties which they were wont to use before
they killed their Enemies; for whereas at present they think it enough to
dispatch them at a blow or two with the Club, and afterward cut them into
pieces, and having broyl'd them, to devour them; they heretofore put them to
several torments, before they gave them the mortal blow: We shall not think it
besides our purpose to set down in this place some of the inhumanities which
they exercised upon these sad occasions, as they themselves have given an
account thereof to those have had the curiosity to inform themselves from their
own mouths.

The Prisoner of War who had been so unfortunate as to fall into their hands,
and was not ignorant that he was designed to receive the most cruel treatment
which rage could suggest, armed himself with constancy, and, to express how
generous a people the Arouagues were, marched very cheerfully to the place of
execution, not being either bound or dragged thereto, and presented himself with
a smiling and steady countenance in the midst of the Assembly, which he knew
desired nothing so much as his death.

As soon as he perceived those people who expressed so great joy at the
approach of him, who was to be the mess of their abominable Entertainment, not
expecting their discourses and their bitter abuses, he prevented them in these
terms; I know well enough upon what account you have brought me to this place;
I doubt not but you are desirous to fill your selves with my blood, and that
you are impatient to exercise your teeth upon my body; but you have not so much
reason to triumph to see me in this condition, nor I much to be troubled
thereat: My Countrymen have put your Predecessors to greater miseries than you
are now able to invent against me; and I have done my part with them in
mangling, massacring, and devouring your people, your friends, and your
fathers; besides that I have Relations who will not fail to revenge my quarrel
with advantage upon you and upon your Children, for the most inhumane treatment
you intend against me: What torments soever the most ingenious cruelty can
dictate to you for the taking away of my life, is nothing in comparison of
those which my generous Nation prepares for you in exchange: therefore delay
not the utmost of your cruelty any longer, and assure your selves I both slight
and laugh at it. Somewhat of this nature is that brave and bloody Bravado which
may be read of a Brasilian Prisoner, ready to be Montagn' s Essays, l. 1. c. 30.
devoured by his Enemies; Come on boldly, said be to them, and feast your
selves upon me; for at the same time you will feed on your Fathers and
Grandfathers, who served for nourishment to my Body: These Muscles, this Flesh,
and these Veins are yours, blind Fools as you are; you do not observe, that the
substance of the Members of your Ancestors are yet to be seen in them; taste
them well, and you will find the taste of your own Flesh. But let us return to
our Arouagues.

His soul was not only in his lips, but showed it self also in the effects
which followed that Bravado; for after the Company had a while endured his
menaces and arrogant defiances without touching him, one among them came and
burnt his sides with a flaming brand; another cut good deep pieces out of him,
and would have made them bigger, had it not been for the bones, in several
parts of the body: Then they cast into his smarting wounds that sharp kind of
Spice which the Caribbians call Pyman: Others diverted themselves in shooting
Arrows at the poor Patient; and every one took a pleasure in tormenting him;
but he suffered with the same countenance, and expressed not the least
sentiment of pain: After they had made sport thus a long time with the poor
wretch, at last growing weary of insulting, and out-brav'd by his constancy,
which seemed still the same, one of them came and at one blow dispatched him
with his Club. This is the Treatment which the Caribbians made heretofore to
their Prisoners of War; but now they think it enough to put them to a speedy
death, as we have already represented.

As soon as this unfortunate person is thus laid dead upon the place, the young
men take the body, and having washed it cut it in pieces, and then boil some
part, and broil some upon wooden Frames, made for that purpose, like Gridirons:
When this detestable Dish is ready, and seasoned according to their palates,
they divide it into so many parts as there are persons present, and joyfully
devour it, thinking that the World cannot afford any other repast equally
delicious: The Women lick the very sticks on which the fat of the Arouague
dropped; which proceeds not so much from the deliciousness they find in that
kind of sustenance, and that fat, as from the excessive pleasure they conceive
in being revenged in that manner of their chiefest Enemies.

But as they would be extremely troubled that the enraged hatred they bear the
Arouagues should ever end, so do they make it their main endeavor to foment
and heighten it: thence it comes, that while this poor Carcass is a dressing,
they carefully gather and save all the fat that comes from it; not to put into
Medicines, as Surgeons sometimes do; or to make wildfire of it, to set their
Enemies houses on fire, as the Tartars do; but they gather together that fat to
be afterward distributed among the chiefest of them, who carefully keep it in
little Gourds, to pour some few drops thereof into their Sauces at their solemn
Entertainments, so to perpetuate, as much as lies in their power, the motive of
their Revenge.

I must needs acknowledge, the Sun would have more reason to withdraw himself
from these Barbarians, than to be present at such detestable Solemnities; but
it would be requisite that he withdrew himself at the same time from most of
the Countries of America, nay from some parts of Africa and Asia, where the
like and worse cruelties are daily exercised: For instance, the Tapinambous
make in a manner the same treatment to their prisoners, as the Caribbians do to
theirs; but they add thereto diverse expressions of barbarism, which are not to
be seen in the Caribbies: They rub the bodies of their Children with the De
Lery, c. 15. Chapter 8.
blood of those miserable Victims, to animate them to future Cruelties: He who
had been the Executioner of the Captive caused himself to be mangled and
flashed, and cut in several parts of the body, as a Trophey of Valor, and a
mark of Glory: And what is yet superlatively strange, is, That those Barbarians
bestowing their Daughters for Wives on those Enemies, as soon as they fall into
their hands, when they come to cut them in pieces, the Wife her self eats
first, if it be possible, of the flesh of her Husband; and if it happen that
she has any Children by him, they are served in the like manner, killed,
roasted, and eaten; sometimes as soon as they come into the World. The like
Barbarism has sometimes been observed in Garcilas. l. 1. c. 12.
several Provinces of Peru.

Diverse other barbarous Nations do also exceed the Caribbians in their
inhumanity; but above all, the Inhabitants of the Country of Antis are more
cruel then Tigers: If it happens Ibid.
that by right of War or otherwise, they make a Prisoner, and that they know
him to be a person of small account, they immediately quarter him, and bestow
the Members on their Friends or Servants, that they may eat them if they
please, or sell them in the Shambles; but if he be a person of quality, the
chiefest among them meet together, with their Wives and Children, to be present
at his death: Then these unmerciful people having stripped him, fasten him stark
naked to a post, and cut and slash him all over the body with a sort of Knives
and Rasours made of a certain Stone, such as may be Flint: In this cruel
Execution they do not presently dismember him, but they only take the flesh
from the parts which have most, as the calf of the Leg, the Thighs, the
Buttoeks, and the Arms; that done, they all pell-mell, Men, Women, and
Children, dye themselves with the blood of that wretched person; and not
staying for the rosting or boiling of the Flesh they had taken away, they
devour it like so many Cormorants, or rather swallow it down without any
chewing: Thus the wretch sees himself eaten alive, and buried in the bellies of
his Enemies: The Women adding yet somewhat to the cruelty of the Men, though
excessively barbarous and inhumane, rub the ends of their Breasts with the
blood of the Patient, that so their Children may suck it in with their Milk.
And if these inhumane Executioners have observed, that amidst all the torments
they put the miserable deceased person to, he expressed the least sense of
pain, either in his countenance or other parts of his body; or that he so much
as groaned or sighed, then they break his bones, after they have eaten the
flesh about them, and cast them into some nasty place, or into a River, with an
extreme contempt.

Thus also do several other Nations cruelly insult over the wretched remainders
of their murdered Enemies, and exercise their inhumane revenge and barbarous
animosity on that which has no feeling thereof: Thus some Inhabitants of
Florida, to satiate their brutality, hang up in their houses, and carry about
De Laet. hist. of America.
them, the skins and hair of their Enemies; the Uirginians wear about their
necks a dried hand; some Savages of New-Spain hang about some part of their
bodies, after the manner of a Medal, a piece of their flesh whom they had
massacred: The Somedo hist. of China, p. 1. c. 2.
Lords of the Island by the French called Belle-Iste near China, wear a Crown
made up of Deaths-heads, hideously disposed, and interlac'd with silk strings:
The Chinese make drinkingcups of the Spaniards skuls whom they have killed, as
heretofore the Scythians were wont to do with their Enemies, as Herodotus Lib.
4.
affirms: The Canadians and the Mexicans dance on their Festival days, wearing
about them the skins of those whom they had fley'd and eaten: The Huancas, an
ancient Nation of Peru, Garcil. l. 6. c. 10.
made Drums of such skins, affirming, that when they were beaten they had a
secret virtue to make those who fought against them to run away.

From all this Discourse it may be deduced, to what degree of rage and fury
Hatred and the desire of Revenge may ascend: And in these Examples there are
are many circumstances more bloody, and some more detestable discoveries of
cruelty and barbarism, then there are in the treatment which our Cannibals make
to their Prisoners of War, the Arouagues.

But to make this treatment appear the less horrid, it were easy to bring on
the Stage diverse Nations, who besides that furious animosity, and that
unquenchable thirst of Revenge, do further discover a barbarous and insatiable
gluttony, and an absolutely brutish passion of feeding on Man's flesh.

And in the first place, whereas our Cannibals ordinarily feed only upon the
Arouagues, their irreconcilable Enemies, sparing the Prisoners they take of
any other Nation, some Floridians, who live near the Straight of Bahama,
cruelly devour all the Strangers they can get into their hands, what Nation
soever they be of; so that if any people land in their Country, and that they
chance to be the stronger party, they must infallibly expect to be their next
days Commons: They think Man's flesh extremely delicate, from what part soever
of the Body it be taken; but they affirm, that the sole of the foot is the most
delicious bit of any; thence it comes, that the said part is ordinarily served
up to their Carlin, who is their Lord, whereas anciently the Tartars cut off
the breasts of young Maids, and reserved Bergeron's Treatise of the Tartars.
them for their chief Commanders, whose ordinary food they were. To these
Barbarians we may add those of the Province of Hascala, and of the Region of
the City of Darien in Garcil* de Laet, and Linscot.
New-Spain, who did eat not only the flesh of their Enemies, but also that of
their own Countrymen: And Historians affirm, that the Yncas, Kings of Peru,
subdued diverse Provinces, Garcilas. Com. Royal.
the Inhabitants whereof thought no Law so rigorous and insupportable, among
all those which the said victorious Princes imposed on them, as those which
prohibited the eating of man's flesh, so much were they addicted to that
execrable diet; for not staying till he whom they had mortally wounded, had
given up the ghost, they drunk off the blood which issued out of his wound; and
they did the like when they cut him up into quarters, greedily sucking it, lest
a drop should be lost: They Garcil. l. 7. c. 17. Roulox, Baro, and Rubriques in
their Travels. Vin. le Blanc. p. 1. c. 15. and 25.
had public Shambles for the selling of man's flesh, whereof they took pieces
and mine'd them very small, and of the entrails they made puddings and
saucages: And particularly the Cheriganes, or Chirrhuanes, a people inhabiting
the Mountains, had so strange and so insatiable an appetite to man's flesh, that
they gluttonously eat it raw, not sparing their nearest Relations when they
dyed: The same thing is at this day affirmed of the Tapuyes, a certain other
oriental Nation; and Herodotus assures Lib. 3.
us of such a thing in his time; nay it is averred, that the people Vin. le
Blanc. p. 1. c. 24.
of Java are so barbarous and so great lovers of that abominable nourishment,
that, to satisfy their damnable appetite, they deprive their Parents of their
lives, and toss the pieces of their flesh one to another like balls, to see who
shall have most of them: The Amures, a people of Brasil, are yet more inhumane
and detestable; so that we need not feign Saturnes devouring De Laets History
of America.
their own children; for if we may credit Historians, these Barbarians eat in
effect their own Children, member after member, and sometimes opening the wombs
of great bellied women, they take out the fruit thereof, which they immediately
devour, longing so strangely after the flesh of their own species, that they go
a hunting of men, as they do beasts, and having taken them they tear them in
pieces, and devour them after a cruel and unmerciful manner.

By these examples it is sufficiently apparent, that our Cannibals are not so
much Cannibals, that is, Eaters of men, though they have the name particularly
attributed to them, as many other savage Nations; and it were an easy matter
to find yet elsewhere certain discoveries of Barbarism answerable to that of
our Caribbian Cannibals, nay such as far exceeds theirs: But we have done
enough, let us draw the Curtains on these horrors, and leaving the Cannibals
of all other Nations, return to those of the Caribbies, to divert our eyes,
wearied with beholding so many inhumanities and bloody Tragedies, by a prospect
of their Marriages.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Marriages of the Caribbians.
THere are in America some Savages so savage and so brutish, that they know not
what Marriage is, but go indifferently together like beasts. This, among
others, is affirmed of the ancient Peruvians, and the Inhabitants of the
Garcil. l. 1. c. 14. and 15. and l. 7. c. 17.
Islands of Robbers: But the Caribbians, with all their barbarism, subject
themselves to the Laws of this strict Alliance.

They have no set time of the Year appointed for their Marriages, as the
Persians, who ordinarily marry in the Spring; Strab. l. 11.
nor yet are they obliged to do it at any certain age, as several other
Savages, whereof some marry commonly at In the East Indies.
nine years; others at At Madagascar.
twelve; some at The Peruvians.
four and twenty; and others only at The Floridians.
forty: Nor is it the custom among the Caribbians, as in a manner among all
other Nations, that the young Men should ordinarily make choice of the Maids
according to their own minds and inclinations; nor on the other side, do the
young Maids make choice of their Husbands, as those of the Province of
Nicaragua do, at their public Feasts and Assemblies; and as it was done
heretofore in Candia, as Historians affirm.

But when our Savages are desirous to marry, they have a privilege to take all
their Cousin-germans, and have no more to say, then that they take them to
their Wives; for they are naturally reserved for them, and they may carry them
to their houses without any other ceremony, and then they are accounted their
lawful Wives. They may all take as many Wives as they please; especially, the
Captains pride it much in having a great number of them: They build a
particular Hut for every Wife: They continue what time they please with her
whom they fancy most, yet so as that the others conceive no jealousy thereat.
She whom they most honor with their company, waits on them with the greatest
care and submission imaginable; she prepares Cassava for them, paints them; and
goes along with them in all their Expeditions.

Their Husbands love them all very well; but this love is like a fire of straw,
since that many times they forsake them with as much ease as they take them;
yet are they seldom seen to leave their first Wives, especially if they have
had children by them.

If there chance to be among the She-prisoners of War any that they like, they
make them their Wives; but though the children born of them are free, yet are
the Mothers, for their parts, still accounted Slaves. All the Wives speak with
whom they please; but the Husband dares not discourse with the Relations of his
Wife, but upon extraordinary occasions.

When it happens that any one among them has no Cousingermans, or that having
staid too long ere they took them to Wives, their friends have disposed of them
to others, they may now marry such as are not of any kin to them: but it is
requisite that they demand them of their Fathers and Mothers, and as soon as
the Father or Mother has granted their request, they are their Wives, and they
carry them to their own habitations.

Before they had altered some part of their ancient Customs, by reason of the
converse they have had with the Christians, they took none for their lawful
Wives but their Cousins, who were theirs by natural right, as we said before,
or such young Maids as their Fathers and Mothers willingly proffered them at
their return from the Wars. This ancient Custom of theirs has many particular
circumstances worthy our remark; and therefore we shall give an account of it
at large, as we have it from the most ancient of that Nation who have related
it, to show the great changes which have crept into their Manners and Customs,
since they became acquainted with foreign Nations.

When the Caribbians returned with success from their Wars, and that there was
a solemn reception made for them in their Islands, and a great entertainment at
their Carbet, after that Solemnity, which is still in use among them, the
Captain gave an account of the success of their Expedition, and commended the
generosity and gallantry of those who had behaved themselves valiantly: But his
main design was to recommend the valor of the young men, the better to animate
them to make future expressions of the same courage upon the like occasions. It
was ordinarily at the end of that discourse that Fathers of families, who had
Daughters marriageable, took occasion to present them for Wives to those among
the young men whose performances they had heard so much celebrated, and whose
courage and undauntedness in fighting had been so highly commended: There was
an emulation among them who should get such for their Sons-in-law: And he who
had killed most Enemies, had much ado that day to escape with one Wife, so many
would there be proffered to him: But Cowards and persons of no worth met with
no courtship to that purpose; so that, to be married among them, there was a
necessity of being courageous; for a Wife in that Nation then was the reward of
generosity. Thus among the Brasilians, the young men were not admitted to marry
till they had killed some Enemy: And in a Vin. le Blan. p. 1. c. 30.
City of Grand-Tartary, called Palimbrota, those of highest quality could have
no Wives till they had brought proof that they had killed three Enemies of
their Prince. It is reported also, Alex. ab Alexandro, l. 1. c. 24.
that heretofore in Carmania, if any one were desirous to marry, it was
requisite that he brought the King the head of an Enemy. The same Custom in a
manner was observed among a certain people near the Caspian Sea. And who knows
not that King Saul demanded of David the lives of an hundred Philistines, for
the dower of his Daughter, before he gave her him in Marriage?

But happy did that Father think himself among our Caribbians, who could first
approach and seize about the body of some one of those valorous Sons-in-Law
whom the Captain had commended; for there was nothing to be expected for that
time by him that came next; and the marriage was concluded as soon as the other
had said to the Young Man, I bestow my Daughter on thee for thy Wife; the like
expression from a Mother was as effectual: And the Young Man durst not refuse
the Daughter when she was thus presented to him; but it was requisite, that
whether she were handsome or unhandsome, he took her to Wife. Thus the
Caribbians married not after previous courtships and Love-suits.

And if the young Caribbians, after they were married, continued the same
gallantry in ensuing Wars, they had accordingly other Wives bestowed on them at
their return: this Poligamy is still in use among them, and it is indeed common
among other Barbarians. The Chileses, Inhabitants of the Island De Laets
History.
of Mocha, make no more ado, but as often as they are desirous to have a new
Wife, they buy one for an Ox, a Sheep, or some other Commodity: And there are
some places where the number of Wives belonging to the same Husband is
prodigious, as in the Kingdom of Bennin, the King whereof has sometimes The
Dutch Relations.
seven hundred Wives and Concubines; and where the ordinary subjects, as well
as those of Mexico, have each of them about a hundred, or a hundred and fifty
Wives. On the other side there are some places where every Wife in like manner
is permitted to have many husbands, as among the Pelhuares, a Nation of Brasil,
in the Kingdom of Calecut; and heretofore in some of the Canaries.

The Young Men among the Caribbians do not to this day converse with either
Maids or Women till they are married; wherein certainly they are at a great
distance from the humor De Laet, Pirard, p. 1. c. 27. Conquest of the Canarys
by Berencourt. Vin. le Blanc. p. 1. c. 3.
of the Peguans, who are so passionately amorous, that to make it appear, that
the violence of the secret fire which consumes them, extinguishes in them the
sentiment of all other ardors, they sear their own arms in the presence of
their Mistresses with a flaming Torch, or suffer to die and be spent upon their
flesh, a piece of linen cloth all of a flame, and dipped in Oil: And to show
that being wounded to death by Love, all other wounds must needs be slight,
they cut and slash their bodies with Ponyards. The Turks do somewhat of the
same kind, as Villamont affirms; for upon the like occasions Lib 3.
they give themselves several cuts and great wounds with their knives, in
diverse parts of their bodies.

The number of Wives among the Caribbians is not limited, Pirard. p. 1. c. 12.
as it is among the Maldiveses, where a man may have but three at the same
time: But as that number was heretofore proportioned to their courage and
valor, (for as often as they returned from the wars with the commendation of
gallant men, they might pretend to and hope for a new Wife) so at the present,
they have as many as they desire and can obtain; so that among them, as well as
among the Topinambous, he who has most Wives De Lery, c. 17.
is accounted most valiant, and the most considerable person in the whole
Island. And whereas in the Island of Hispaniola all History of Lopez.
the wives lay in the same Room with their Husbands, the Caribbians as we said
before, to prevent all differences and jealousies, keep their wives, as the
Turks and Tartars do theirs, in distinct Habitations; nay, sometimes they
dispose them into several Islands: Or happily another reason of their ordering
such a distance between the several aboads of their wives, is that they may the
more conveniently apply themselves to the culture of their Gardens, which lie
scattered up and down in diverse places: and it is upon the same account that
some affirm the Caribbians of the Continent do the like, their wives having
this commendation, that they are not troubled with jealousy. Our Savages of
the Islands, if they have no more wives than one, are very careful not to be
far from them; and if they have many, they visit them by turns one after
another: But in this they observe the same Custom with the Floridians, that
they meddle not with those who are with child.

It is somewhat to be wondered at, that Lycurgus and Solon Plut. in their Lives.
those Lights of Greece, should show themselves so blind and withal so
dishonest, as to open a gap for Adultry to get in among their Citizens; for
there is hardly any Nation so Barbarous and Savage, but has of it self light
enough to read this Law drawn by the hand of nature; that Adultery is a crime,
and that a certain horror ought to be had for it; nay there is not any but
expresses a certain detestation of it, and severely punishes it. The punishment
of Adultery is pleasant enough among the Inhabitants of Guinny; for the Wife,
if she has a Dutch Relations.
mind to continue still with her Husband, pays him by way of satisfaction, some
ounces of Gold. But there is no jesting with those of Bengala, and the
Mexicans, who cut off their wives noses Linscot, c. 16.
and ears in that case: Diverse other barbarous Nations punish V. le Blanc. p.
1. c. 32.
this crime with death; nay, the Peguans are so severe upon these occasions,
and have so great a horror for this breach of conjugal love, that both men and
women who are found guilty thereof are buried alive.

Nor are the Caribbians the most indulgent, and the least jealous of their
honor in this case; heretofore they knew not how to punish this Crime, because
it reigned not among them before their commerce with the Christians: but now if
the Husband surprises his Wife prostituting her self to some other, or have
otherwise any certain knowledge of it, he does himself justice, and seldom
pardons her, but dispatches her, sometimes with his Club, sometimes by ripping
up the upper part downwards with a Rasor or the tooth of an Agouty, which is
near as sharp.

This execution being done, the Husband goes to his Fatherin-law, and tells him
in cold blood, I have killed thy Daughter because she proved unfaithful to me:
The Father thinks the action so just, that he is so far from being angry with
him, that he commends him, and conceives himself obliged: Thou have done well,
replies he, she deserved no less: And if he has any more Daughters to dispose
of, he immediately proffers him one of them, and promises to bestow her on him
at the first opportunity.

The Father marries not his own Daughter, as some have affirmed; they abhor
that crime, and if there have been any incestuous Fathers among them, they were
forced to absent themselves; for had they been taken by the rest, they would
have burnt them alive, or torn them into a thousand pieces.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the birth and education of Children among the Caribbians.
THere is hardly any Custom among these poor Indians so brutish, as that which
they use at the birth of their children; their wives are delivered with little
pain, and if they feel any difficulty, their recourse is to the root of a
certain Rush, out of which they get the juice, and having drunk it, they are
immediately delivered: Sometimes the very day of their delivery, they go and
wash themselves and the child at the next River or Spring, and fall about their
ordinary business: The Peruvian, the Japonneses, and the Brasilian women
Garcil. Lincot. and De Laet.
do the like; and it was ordinary among the Indians of Hispaniola, and the
ancient Lacedaemonians to wash their children in cold water, immediately after
their birth, to harden their skins. The Maldiveses wash theirs so for several
days together; and Pirard.
it is affirmed by some, that the Cimbri were heretofore wont to put those
little newly-born creatures into snow, to accustom them to cold and hardship,
and to strengthen their members.

They make no feast at the birth of their Children, save only at that of the
firstborn, and they observe no set time for that, but every man according to
his humor: But when they assemble their friends to rejoice with them upon the
birth of their firstborn, they spare nothing that may contribute to the
entertainment and merry-making of the invited; whereas heretofore the Thracians
accompanied with their tears the cries Herod. l. 5.
of those who came into the world, reflecting on the miseries they were to
suffer in this life.

But behold the brutality of our Savages in their enjoyments, for the
augmentation of their Family! As Soon as the Wife is delivered the Husband goes
to bed, to bemoan himself there, and act the part of the woman in that
condition; a custom, which, though savage and ridiculous, is yet used, as some
affirm among the Peasants of a certain Province of France, where they have this
particular phrase for it, fair la couvade: But what is most troublesome to the
poor Caribbian, who has put himself into bed instead of his newly-delivered
Wife, is, that they oblige him to a certain diet for ten or twelve days
together, allowing him every day only a little piece of Cassava, and a little
water, wherein there had been boiled a little of that root-bread; afterward
his allowance is a little increased, yet still continued in that same diet; but
he breaks the Cassava which is presented to him only in the middle, for the
space of about forty days, leaving the extremities entire, which he hangs up in
his Hut, to serve at the entertainment he afterward intends to make for all
his friends; nay after all this, he abstains, sometimes for the space of ten
months, or a whole year, from several kinds of meat, as Lamantin, Tortoises,
Swines-flesh, hens, Fish, and delicious things, being so pitifully simple as to
fear that those things might prejudice the child: but this great abstinence
they observe only at the birth of their firstborn; for at those of the rest,
their fasts are much less rigorous, and shorter, not lasting ordinarily above
four or five days.

Among the Japonneses and the Brasilians, the Husbands are De Laet, and
Maffaeus.
also subject to the same extravagance of personating the women delivered; but
they are not such fools as to fast in their beds; on the contrary, they are
deliciously and plentifully treated with all things: Some affirm, that
heretofore the same thing was observable among the Tibarians, a people not far
Alex. ab Alexandro. Fran. Cauche.
from Cappadoeia, and some others: But the natural Inhabitants of Madagasear
imitate this fast of the Caribbians, when they would have their children
circumcised.

Some of our Caribbians are yet guilty of another extravagance, worst of all
for the poor Father who has a child born; for at the expiration of his fast,
his shoulders are scarified and opened with the Tooth of an Agouty; and it is
requisite that the besotted wretch should not only suffer himself to be so
ordered, but he must also endure it without expressing the least sentiment of
pain: Their persuasion is that the more apparent the Fathers patience shall be
in these trials, the more recommendable shall be the valor of his Son; but
this noble blood must not be suffered to fall to the ground, since the effusion
thereof contributes so much to future courage; it is therefore carefully saved
to rub the child's face withal, out of an imagination he will be the more
generous: This is also done in some parts toward the Daughters; for though
they are not to be in their military engagements, as the Amazons heretofore
were, yet do they go to the Wars with their Husbands, to provide Victuals for
them, and look to their Vessels while they are engaged with the Enemy.

As^oon as the Children are born, the Mothers make their foreheads flat, and
press them so that there is a descent backwards, for besides that that form of
the forehead is accounted one of the principal pieces of beauty among them,
they affirm, that it facilitates their shooting up to the top of a tree
standing at the foot of it, wherein they are extremely expert as being brought
up to it from their childhood.

They do not swathe their children at all, but leave them at liberty to turn
themselves which way they will in their little Amacs, or Beds of Cotton, or
upon little Couches of Bananaleaves laid on the ground in some corner of their
Huts; and yet their limbs are not any way distorted, but the whole body is
perfectly well-shap'd. Those who have lived among the Pirard, ^a^. 1 De Lery,
c. 17.
Maldiveses and the Topinambous, affirm the same thing of the children of those
people, though they never bind them up in any thing, no more then the
Caribbians are. The Lacedaemonians Pl^t. in the Life of Lycurgus.
heretofore did the like.

They do not impose Names on their children as soon as they are born, but after
twelve or fifteen days, and then they call a Man and a Woman, who stand as it
were for Godfather and Godmother, and make holes in the child's ears, the
under-lip, and the space between the nostrils, and put a thread through, that
there may be places to hang Pendants: But if they conceive the children too
weak to endure the boring of those parts, they defer that ceremony till they
are grown stronger.

Most of the Names the Caribbians give their children, are derived from their
Ancestors, or from diverse Trees which grow in their Islands, or else from some
accident that happened to the Father while his Wife was with child, or during
the time of his own lying in: Thus ones Daughter, in the Island of Dominico,
was called Ouliem-banna, that is to say, The leaf of the wild ^ine, which is a
Tree whereof we have given a description in its proper place. Another of the
same Island, having been at S. Christophers whilst his Wife was with child, and
having there seen the ^r^n^h General, named the child he had at his return,
General, upon remembrance of the kind entertainment he had received at the
General's.

Something of this kind is also observed among other Nations: For instance, the
Canadians borrow Names from Fishes Lescarbot.
and Rivers: The Virginians and Brasilians take theirs from the first thing
they think of, as from Bows, Arrows, living Creatures, Trees, Plants: The Grand
Seignors of Turkey are wont to give to the Eunuchs who keep their Wives, the
Names of the fairest Flowers; to the end that those Women calling them by the
same Names, there should proceed nothing out of their mouths but what were
decent and delightful: The Romans, as may be seen in Plutarch, sometimes took
their Names from Fishes, sometimes from their Country-divertisements, sometimes
from the marks and imperfections of their bodies, and sometimes from their most
Heroic Actions, in imitation of the Greeks: Nay the Holy Scriptures furnish us
with abundance of examples of Names taken from diverse accidents, as among
others those of Benoni, Pharez, Icabod, and the like.

The Names which the Caribbians impose on their male children some time after
their birth, are not to be continued while they live; for they change their
Names when they come to the age requisite to be received into the number of
Soldiers: and when they have behaved themselves valiantly in the Wars, and
have killed one of the chief Commanders of the Arouagues, they assume his Name,
as a mark of Honor: Which Custom relates somewhat to what was practiced among
the Romans after their Victories, when they assumed to themselves the Names of
the Nations whom they had subdued; as may be instanced in Scipio Africanus, and
diverse others whom we need not cite. These victorious Caribbians have also, in
their Wines or public rejoicing days, some particular person chosen to give
them a new Name, to whom they say, after they have taken a sufficient dose of
drink, Yeticlee y atec* that is, I would be named, name me; whose desire the
other presently satisfies: and in requital he receives some Present, such as
may be a knife, or a grain of Crystal, or some other trifle much esteemed
among them.

The Caribbian Women suckle their own children, and are very good Nurses and
indulgent Mothers, having all the care imaginable to bring them up; nay when
their neighbors are gone to the wars they look to their Children. All the
Peruvian Garcil. and Lescarbot.
and the Canadian women, and most of the West-Indians are also their own
Nurses: And in the East Indies, in the Kingdom of Transiana and the Maldivos,
the women, of what quality Le Blanc and Pirard.
soever they be of, are obliged to suckle their own Children: And Tacitus
affirms, that all Mothers nursed their own Children De Mor* German.
among the ancient Germans: Nay it is reported that heretofore the Queens of
Peru took the pains to bring up their own children: And we have the examples of
some Queens of Bergeron ia his Treatife of Navigations.
Era^ce, who have not thought those maternal endeavors below them; a Custom
much contrary to that of those Canarian Women, who commonly caused their
Children to be suckled by Goats: The same thing was also done by some
Country-women of ^^^^^ne, in Montaigne's time. Essays, l. 2. c. 3.


The Mothers of our little Garibbians do not only give the b^east to their
Children, but as soon as they are grown a little strong, they chew the Potatoes,
Bananas and other fruits, to feed them withal: And though they suffer the
little ones to tumble up and down stark naked upon the ground, and that many
they eat and lick the dust, and other filth which they are apt to put into
their mouths, yet do they thrive extremely, and for the most part become so
strong, that at six months they are able to go alone.

At two years of age their hair is cut, and then there is a Feast made for the
whole Family; some Parents defer till that time the piercing or boring of their
ears, lips, and the space between the nostrils; yet is not this much in use,
but only when the weakness of the child will not permit it to be done sooner.
When they are a little more advanced in years, the Boys eat with their Fathers,
and the Girls with their Mothers: Fathersin-Law, and all Relations which are in
the collateral line with their true Fathers, they call by the general name of
Fathers.

Though the Children of the Caribbians are not instructed to do any reverence
to their Parents, nor to express the respect and honor they owe them, by any
gestures of the body; yet have they a natural affection for them, and if any
injury be done them, they immediately espouse their quarrel, and endeavor all
the ways they can to be revenged: For instance, a Frenchman of Gardeloupe
having cut the cords of the Amac wherein an old Caribbian lay, by which means
falling down he bruised himself and put his shoulder out of joint, the old
man's Son-in-Law immedately got together some young men, who making an
incursion into the Island of Marigalanta, maslacred the French who were then
beginning to plant themselves there.

But the main business which the Caribbians mind in the education of their
Children, is to teach them the use of the Bow: And to bring them the better on,
as soon as they are able to go the Parents put their Breakfast on the branch of
a tree, whence they must strike it down with their Arrows before they eat; if
they cannot there is no compassion: As the Children grow up, their portion of
meat is hung up higher: Sometimes also they cut off a Banana-tree, and plant it
in the ground as a But, to teach their Children to shoot at the Fruit: by this
means in process of time they come to be expert in that exercise. Ancient
Histories tell us of other people, who not differing much from this Custom of
the Caribbians, obliged their Children to sling down their meat from the place
where they set it.

They commonly design all their Sons to bear Arms, and to revenge them of their
Enemies, in imitation of their Predecessors: But before they are ranked among
those who may go to the wars, they are to be declared Soldiers in the presence
of all their kindred and friends, who are invited to be present at so solemn a
Ceremony: The manner of it is thus; The Father, who had before got all his
Friends together, causes his Son to sit on a low stool, which is placed in the
midst of the Hut, or in the Carbet; and after he has represented to him the
whole duty of a generous Caribbian Soldier, and made him promise that he will
never do any thing which may derogate from the glory of his Predecessors, and
that he will to the utmost of his power revenge the ancient quarrel of his
Nation, he takes by the feet a certain Bird of prey, which they call Mansfennis
in their language, and which had been prepared long before for that purpose,
and with that he discharges several blows on his Son, till such time as the
bird is killed, and the head of it crushed to pieces: After this rough
treatment, which puts the young man as it were into a maze, he scarifies his
whole body with the tooth of an Agouty, and to cure the wounds he has made, he
puts the dead bird into an infusion of Pyman-seeds, and he rubs all the wounded
parts therewith, which causes an extraordinary pain to the poor Patient; but it
is requisite he should suffer all this with a cheerful countenance, without the
least discovery of pain: Then they make him eat the heart of the bird; and to
close the Ceremony, he is laid into a kind of Amac, where he is to continue
stretched out to his full length, till his strength be in a manner spent, by
reason of much fasting: That done, he is acknowledged by all to be a Soldier;
he is admitted into the Assemblies of the Carbet, and may go along with the
rest in all their military Expeditions which they undertake against their
Enemies.

Besides the exercises of war, which are common to all the young Caribbians who
would live in any esteem among the Bravos of their Nation, their Fathers do
many times design them to be Boyez, that is Magicians, and Physicians: To that
end they send them to some one of the best skilled in that damnable profession,
that is, one who has the reputation of invocating the evil Spirits,
instructing people how to be revenged of their enemies by sorceries, and in
curing diverse diseases whereto those of that Nation are subject: But it is
requisite that the young man who is presented to the Boyez to be instructed in
his Art, should be consecrated thereto from his childhood by abstinence from
several kinds of meat, by rigorous Fasts, and that to begin his apprenticeship,
there is blood drawn from all parts of his body with the tooth of an Agouty,
after the fame manner as those are to be treated who are received Soldiers.

The Caribbians do also teach their Children to fish, swim, make Baskets,
Clubs, Bows, Arrows, Girdles, Beds of Cotton and Pyragas: But to have any care
of cultivating their minds, and instructing them in any thing of civility, or
virtue, is more than could be expected from those poor Savages, who have no
other light than their own blinded understanding, nor follow any other rule in
all the actions of their lives, than the sad disorder of vicious and corrupt
nature.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the ordinary Age of the Caribbians; their Diseases; the
Remedies used by them in order to the Recovery of their Health; their Death,
and Funeral Solemnities.
THe Caribbians being naturally of a very good temperament, and endeavoring
all they can to avoid trouble and disquiet, and consequently to spend their
lives with the greatest enjoyment of mind; it is no wonder, considering withal
their ordinary temperance and sobriety, that they should be free from an
infinite number of inconveniences and indispositions whereto other Nations are
subject, and that they should come to their graves later than most other
people: The good air they live in does also in some measure contribute to their
health and long life.

If therefore they do not die of violent deaths, they all of them live to a
very great age; nay they are so vigorous in the extremities of age, that at
fourscore and ten they commonly get children: There are many among them who
being above a hundred years of age, have not so much as a gray hair: De Lery an
Author worthy credit, affirms, that he seldom saw any gray hairs in the heads
of the Tapinambous of the same age: Chapter 8.
Other Historians affirm; that the wives of those Savages bear Children till
they are fourscore years of age: And De Laets Hist. of America.
some French took notice of a Savage in the Country of Canada, who had a better
sight than any of them, and the hair of the head absolutely black, though he
were above a hundred Lescarbot.
years of age.

The Caribbians live ordinarily a hundred and fifty years, and sometimes
longer: For though they cannot number their years, yet is the number thereof
deduced from the account they give of certain accidents: And among others,
there were not long since living among them some persons who remembered the
first arrival of the Spaniards in America: Whence it is to be concluded, that
they must be a hundred and sixty years of age at the least: And indeed these
are such a people as may pass for the shadow of a body, and have nothing but
the heart living, being continually bedridden, immovable, and reduced to pure
skeletons; yet are they still observed to be in health: And it is sufficiently
apparent, that their tongues are living as well as their hearts, and that their
Reason is not expired; for they do not only speak with much ease, but also
their memory and judgment are not chargeable with any defect.

Nor is it much to be admired that the Caribbians should live so long, since
both ancient and modern Histories furnish us with Dutch Relations. p. 1. c. 24.
Lescarbot.
examples enough to confirm this truth; and among others the Dutch who have
traded to the Moluccoes, affirm, that in that Country the Inhabitants live
ordinarily a hundred and thirty years: Vincent le Blanc affirms, that in
Sumatra Java, and the Part 1. c. 34. and p. 1. c. 26.
neighboring Islands, they live to a hundred and forty, as they do also among
the Canadians; and that in the Kingdom of Bergeron, Lescarbot, De Laet.
they hold out to a hundred and fifty: Pirard and some oath Casubyrs assure us,
that the Brasilians live no less, nay that sometimes they exceed a hundred and
sixty: And in Florida, and Jucatan, some have gone beyond that age: Nay it is
reported that the French, at the time of Laudoniere's voyage into Florida, in
the year MDLXIV. saw there an old man, who said he was three hundred years of
age, and Father of five Generations: And if we may credit Maffaeus, an
Inhabitant of Bengala, in the year 1557. made it his boast, that he was three
hundred thirty five years of age. So that all this considered, it is no
incredible thing that our Caribbians should live so long.

Aselepiades, as Plutarch relates, was of opinion, that generally Plac. Phil.
l. 5. c. 30.
the Inhabitants of cold Countries lived longer than those of hot, giving this
reason, that the cold keeps in the natural heat, and closes the pores to that
end, whereas that heat is easily dispersed in those Climates where the pores
are kept open by the heat of the Sun: But experience, in the Caribbians and so
many other Nations of the Torrid Zone who ordinarily live so long, while our
Europaeans commonly dye young, destroies that argument.

When it happens that our Caribbians, as sometimes it must, are troubled with
any indisposition, they have the knowledge of abundance of Herbs, Fruits,
Roots, Oils, and Gums, by the assistance whereof they recover their health in a
short time, if the disease be not incurable: They have also an infallible
secret to cure the stinging of Snakes, provided they have not touched a vein;
for then there is no remedy: This is the juice of a certain Herb which they
apply to the wound, and in four and twenty hours they are infallibly cured.

The bad nourishment of Crabs, and other insects on which they commonly feed,
is the cause that they are most of them subject to a troublesome disease, which
in their language they call Pyans, as the French call it a kind of small Pox:
When those who are fallen into this disease, eat of the Fram-Tortoise, or of
Lamantin, or of Caret, which is another kind of Tortoise, they are immediately
full of little risings, inasmuch as these meats force the disease out; they
have also many times great Impostumes, Corns, and Carbuncles, in diverse parts
of the body: To cure those, which proceed for the most part from the bad
nourishment they use, they have the bark of a tree called Chipiou, bitter as
soot, which they steep in water, and having scraped into that infusion the
inner part of a great shell called Lambys, they drink up that potion: They also
sometimes pound the bark newly taken from certain trees of Miby, or other
Withyes which creep along the ground, or fasten on trees, and drink the juice
gotten from it: but they do not willingly make use of this remedy but when the
trees are most full of sap.

Besides these Medicines wherewith they purge the ill humors within, they also
apply outwardly certain unguents, and liniments, which have a particular virtue
of taking away the blisters and marks which commonly remain on their bodies who
have been troubled with the Pyans: They make up these Remedies with the ashes
of burnt Reeds, mixed with the water which they get out of the leaves at the top
of the Balisier-tree: They also use to the same end the juice of the Junipae
fruit, and they apply on the botches the husks of the same fruit, which has
the virtue of drawing away the matter of the wounds, and to close up the
Ulcers: They have not the use of Phlebotomy, but they use scarifications upon
the place affected, by scratching or opening it with the Tooth of an Agouty,
and causing it to bleed a little. And to take off somewhat of the astonishment,
which might be conceived at what we have represented elsewhere concerning the
incisions which these Barbarians make on themselves upon diverse occasions,
whereby it might be imagined their bodies should be as it were mangled and
covered with scars, it is to be noted, that they have also certain secrets, and
infallible remedies to cure themselves presently, and to close the wounds so
that a man cannot easily observe the least scar about their bodies.

They also make use of artificial Baths, and provoke sweat by a kind of stove,
wherein they enclose the Patient, who receives his absolute cure by that
remedy: The Sorriqueses do also sweat their sick, but sometimes they moisten
them with their breath: And for the cure of wounds, they and the Floridians
Lescarbot and De Laet.
suek out the blood, as was practiced by the ancient Physicians, when any one
had been bitten by a venomous beast, causing him who was to do that office to
be prepared for that purpose: It is reported also that our Caribbians, when
they have been stung by some dangerous Serpent, cause the wound to be sucked by
their Wives, after they have taken a drink which has the virtue of abating the
force of the venom: The Topinambous do also suck the affected parts, though
there De Lery, c. 20. Linscot, c. 1. Villamont' s Travels, l. 3.
be no wound; which is also sometimes done in Florida: And the Turks when they
are troubled with any defluxion and pain; either in the head, or any other part
of the body, burn the part affected.

Some Barbarian Nations have much stranger remedies in their Diseases, as may
be seen in Histories* It is reported that the Indians of Mechoacam and Tabasco
in New-Spain, to cure themselves of Fevers, cast themselves stark-naked into
the River, thinking thereby to drown the disease: Some thing of the same kind
has also been seen among the Caribbians; for Monsieur du Montel met there one
day an old man washing his head in a very cold spring, and having asked him the
^eason of it, the man replied, that it was to cure himself for he was much
troubled with cold; and yet contrary to all rules of our Medicine, this strange
remedy proved fortunate to the old man; for the same Gentleman met him the next
day very well and lusty, and quite cured of his indisposition; and the Savage
failed not to brag of it, and laugh at the Frenchman for pitying him the day
before.

The Caribbians are very shye in communicating their secrets in Medicine,
especially the women, who are very skilful in all those cures; nay they are so
careful in keeping to themselves the sovereign Remedies they have against the
wounds made by poisoned Arrows, that no rewards could yet prevail with them to
discover them to the Christians: But they are very willing to come and visit
them, and to dress them when they stand i^ need of their assistance: For a
person of quality among the French having been dangerously bitten by a Serpent,
was happily recovered by their means: Which kindness of theirs makes them
differ much from those brutish people of Guinny and Dutch Relations, and V. le
Blanc. p. 1. c. 24.
Sumatra, who have no compassion on their own sick, but leave them to shift for
themselves like so many poor beasts* But the ancient people of the Province of
Babylon concerned themselves so particularly in all Diseases, that the sick
were there disposed into a public place, and every one was to teach them that
remedy which he had tried upon himself: Those who have made Voyages to Cambaya
affirm, that there is an Hospital there for the entertainment of birds that are
troubled with any indisposition.

When the ordinary Remedies which our Caribbians are wont to make use of when
occasion requires, have not the success they had promised to themselves, their
recourse is to their Boyez, that is their Magicians, who also pretend to the
profession of Physic, and having sent for them, they ask their advice
concerning the event of their sickness: These unhappy instruments of Satan have
by their enchantments gained so great reputation among these poor besotted
people, that they are looked upon as the Judges of life and death, and so
dreaded by reason of their sorceries, and the revenge they take on those who
slight them, that all think themselves obliged to express a compliance with
their advice.

As concerning the Ceremonies observed by them upon these occasions, we have
already given some account thereof in the Chapter of their Religion: It is
requisite above all things, that the House or Hut into which the Boy is to
enter, should be very neatly prepared for his reception; that the little Table,
which they call Matoutou, should be furnished with Anakri for Maboya, that is,
an offering of Cassava and Ouicou, for the evil Spirit, as also with the
first fruits of their Gardens, if it be the season of fruits: It is further
requisite, that at one end of the Hut, there should be as many low stools or
seats as there are to be persons present at that detestable action.

After these preparations, the Boy, who never does this work but in the night
time, having carefully put out all the fire in and about the House, enters into
it, and having found out his place by the weak light of a piece of Tobacco set
on fire, which he has in his hand, he first pronounces some barbarous words,
then he strikes the ground several times with his left foot, and having put the
end of Tobacco which he had in his hand into his mouth, he blows upwards five
or six times the smoke which comes out of it, then rubbing the end of Tobacco
between his hands he scatters it in the air: Thereupon the Devil, whom he has
invocated by these apish Ceremonies, shaking very violently the roof of the
house, or making some other dreadful noise presently appears, and answers
distinctly to all the questions put to him by the Boy.

If the Devil assures him, that his disease for whom he is consulted, is not
mortal, the Boy, and the Apparition which accompanies him, come near the sick
person to assure him that he shall soon recover his former health; and to
confirm him in that hope, they gently touch those parts of his body, where he
feels most pain, and having pressed them a little, they pretend that there come
out of them Thorns, pieces of Bones, splinters of Wood and Stone, which were,
as these damnable Physicians affirm, the cause of his sickness: Sometimes also
they moisten the part affected with their breath, and having sucked it several
times, they persuade the Patient that by that means they have got out all the
venom which lay in his body, and caused him to languish: In fine, to put a
period to this abominable Mystery, they rub the sick person all over with the
juice of the Junipa-fruit, which dies his body of a very dark brown, which is
as it were the mark and seal of his cure.

He who is persuaded that he has recovered his health by this damnable means,
is wont by way of acknowledgment to make a great feast, at which the Boy has
the chiefest place among those who are invited: He is by no means to forget the
Anakri for the Devil, who fails not to be there: But if the Boy finds by the
communication he has had with his familiar, that the sickness is to death, he
comes and comforts the sick person, telling him that his God, or to say better
his familiar Devil, having compassion upon him, will take him into his company,
and carry him along with him to be delivered out of all his infirmities.

Certain people of old finding themselves unable to endure Aelian, l. 3. c. 38
the trouble and inconveniences of decrepit age, were wont to dispatch their
wearied souls out of their infirm bodies with a glass of Hemlock: And some
others, as Pliny affirms, being Lib. 4. c. 12.
weary of their lives, cast themselves into the Sea: But in other Ael. l. 4. c.
1.
Countries the Children thought it too long to stay till their Parents were
come to so great age, and so became their Executioners, and this they were
authorized to do by a public Law. And even at this day the Sunshines upon some
Provinces of Florida, where there are people so cursed, as upon a certain
motive of Religion and Piety, to put their Parents to death when they are old,
as persons useless in this world, and chargeable to them.

But how old soever they may be among the Caribbians, the Children are never
troubled to see their Fathers and Mothers in that condition: True it is, that
some Caribbians heretofore have hastened the death of their Parents, and have
killed their Fathers and Mothers out of a persuasion that they did a good work,
and rendered them a charitable office, by delivering them out of many
inconveniences and troubles which attend old age. An old Captain among them,
whom the French called Le Pilote, made it his boast that he had done that
detestable service to many of his Ancestors: But it is to be observed that the
Caribbians did not practice that inhumanity, but only toward those who desired
to be delivered in that manner out of the miseries of this life; and so it was
a certain compliance with their earnest entreaties who were weary of their
lives: Moreover that piece of barbarism was never universally received among
them, and the more prudent sort do at the present detest it, and maintain their
Fathers and Mothers to the last gasp, with all the care, and all the
expressions of love, honor, and respect that can be expected from a Nation
which has no other light for its direction, than that of a corrupt Nature:
They patiently bear with their imperfections, and the frowardness of their old
age, are never weary of ministering unto them, and as much as they can, keep
near them, to divert them, as the French have observed in some of their
Islands; which demeanor of theirs is the more commendable, in that it is done
amongst Barbarians: So that if any among them do not honor their Fathers and
Mothers, they have degenerated from the virtue of their Ancestors.

But when after all their care and pains they chance to lose any one of their
Friends or Relations, they make great cries and lamentations upon his death:
Wherein they differ much from the ancient Thracians, and the Inhabitants of the
Fortunate Herod. l. 5. and Philost in the Life of Apollonius, l. 5. c. 1.
Islands, who buried their dead with rejoicing, dancing, and singing, as
persons delivered out of the miseries of humane life. After the Caribbians have
wept over their dead, they wash them, paint the bodies with a red color, rub
their heads with Oil, comb their hair, thrust up the legs to the thighs, and
the elbows between the legs, and bend down the face upon the hands, so that the
whole body somewhat resembles the posture of the child in the mothers womb; and
then they wrap it up in a new bed, till all things be ready to dispose it into
the ground.

There have been some Nations who cast the bodies of the dead into Rivers, as
some Aethiopians did: Others cast them Drake's Voyages, part 2.
to Birds and Dogs, as the Parthians, the Hircanians, and such others, who were
somewhat of the same humor with Diogenes the Cynick: Some others covered them
with heaps of stones. It is reported of some Inhabitants of Africa, that they
disposed their dead in earthen Vessels; and that others put them into glass:
Heraclitus, who maintained that fire was the principle of all things, would
have the bodies of the dead burnt, that they might return to their first
origin: And this Custom, observed for several ages among the Romans, is at
this day practiced among diverse oriental Nations: But Cyrus Xenoph. Cyropaed.
l. 8.
at his death affirmed, that there was nothing happier than to be disposed into
the bosom of the earth, the common Mother of all mankind: The first Romans were
of the same opinion, for Plin. l. 7. c. 54.
they interred their dead: And of the several ways of disposing of the dead,
interring is that which is in use among the Caribbians: They do not make their
Graves according to our fashion, but like those of the Turks, Brasilians, and
Canadians, that is about four or five foot deep, and round like a Tun: and at
the bottom of it, they set a little stool, on which the Relations and Friends
of the deceased place the body sitting, leaving it in the same posture as they
put it in immediately after the death of the party.

They commonly make the grave within the house of the deceased; or if they bury
him elsewhere, they always make a covering over the place where the body is to
be laid, and after they have let it down into the grave, and wrapped it in an
Amac, they make a great fire about it, and all the more ancient both men and
women kneel down: The men place themselves behind the women, and ever and anon
they stroke them with their hands over their arms, to incite them to lament and
weep: Then singing and weeping they all say with a pitiful and lamenting voice:
Alas, why did thou dye? Thou had so much good Manioc, good Potatoes, good
Bananas, good Ananas: Thou were beloved in thy Family, and they had so great
care of thy person: Why therefore would thou dye? Why would thou dye? If
the party were a man, they add, Thou were so valiant and so generous; thou have
overthrown so many Enemies; thou have behaved thy self gallantly in so many
fights; thou have made us eat so many Arouagues; Alas! who shall now defend us
against the Arouagues? Why therefore would thou dye? And they repeat these
expostulations several times over.

The Topinambous make in a manner the same lamentations over the graves of
their dead: He is dead, say they, that brave De Lery, c. 5.
Huntsman; that excellent Fisher man; that valiant Warrior; that gallant eater
of Prisoners; that great Destroyer of Portuguez and Margajats; that generous
Defender of our Country, he is departed this world: And they often repeat the
Dutch Relations, l. 1.
same expressions: The Inhabitants of Guinny do also ask their deceased what
obliged them to dye, and they rub their Faces with a wisp of straw, to try if
that will awake them: And Busbequius, in the Relation of his Embassies into
Turkey relates, that passing through a Town of Servia, named Yagodena, he heard
the women and young maids lamenting over a deceased person, and saying to him
in their Funeral songs, as if he had been able to hear them: What have we
deserved, and wherein have we been deficient in doing thee service, and
comforting thee? What cause of discontent have we ever given thee that should
oblige thee to leave us? Which somewhat relates to the complaints of our
Caribbians.

The howlings and expostulations of the Topinambous and the Virginians upon the
like occasions last ordinarily a month: The people of Egypt continued their
lamentations seventy days: And some Floridians employ old women to bewail the
deceased for the space of six months: But Lycurgus limited mourning Plot. in
his Life.
for the dead to eleven days; and that is much about the time that our
Caribbians took to do the same office, before they put the dead body into the
ground: For during the space of ten days or thereabouts, twice every day the
Relations, and the most intimate friends came to visit the deceased party at
his grave; and they always brought him somewhat to eat and drink, saying to him
every time: Alas! why would thou dye? why will thou not return to life again?
say not at least that we refused thee wherewithal to live upon; for we have
brought thee somewhat to eat and drink: And after they have made this pleasant
exhortation to him, as if he should have heard them, they left the meat and
drink they had brought with them at the brink of the grave till the next visit,
at which time they put it on his head, since he thought it much to stretch
forth his hand to take it.

The Peruvians, the Brasilians, the Canadians, the Inhabitants Acosta, De Lery,
P. Junius, Fran. Cauche, Th. Nicholas in Bergeron, Carpin, and Trigaut.
of Madagascar, the Canarians, the Tartars, the Chinese, do also bring certain
dishes of meat to the graves of their nearest Relations. And not to go to
Countries at so great a distance, is there not something of this kind done
among us? for during certain days they serve the Effigies of our Kings and
Princes newly dead, and they are presented with meat and drink, as if they were
living, nay so far as to taste the meats and drinks before them.

The Caribbians of some Islands do still set meat at the graves of the
deceased, but they leave them not so long as they did heretofore, ere they
covered them with earth: For after the Funeral lamentation is ended, and that
the women have wept as much as they can, some friend of the deceased lays a
plank over his head, and the rest put the earth together with their hands till
they have filled the grave; that done, they burn all that belonged to the
deceased.

They also sometimes kill Slaves to attend the Ghosts of the deceased, and to
wait on them in the other world: But these poor wretches get out of the way
when their Masters dye, into some other Island. We may justly conceive a
horror at the relation of these inhumane and barbarous Funerals, which are
Acosta' s Hist. of China, De Laet, Garcil. Pirard, Linscot, etc.
drenched with the blood of Slaves, and diverse other persons, and among others
women, who have their throats cut, are burnt and buried alive, to go and
accompany their Husbands into the other world, whereof frequent examples may be
found in diverse Nations: But our Caribbians think it enough upon these
occasions to put to death only the Slaves of the deceased, if they can catch
them.

It was forbidden the Lacedaemonians to bury any thing with the deceased
person; but the contrary has been and is still practiced in diverse Nations:
For not to mention the many precious Virgil, Arian, Tacitus.
things which were consumed with the Bodies that were burnt among the ancient
Romans, Macedonians, Germans and other people, we read in the History of
Josephus, that King Lib. 7. c. 12. Carpin. De Lery, Dutch Relations, De Lact,
and Junius.
Solomon put up great wealth with the body of David his Father: Thus the
Tartars put into the grave with the dead person all his Gold and Silver: And
the Brasilians, Virginians, Canadians and several other Savages inter with the
bodies, the cloths and whatever else belonged to the deceased.

The same thing was also practiced among the Caribbians in their Funerals,
before they conversed with the Christians: For at the last visit they made to
the deceased, they brought along with them all the things he had used or worn
about him in his life time, to wit, his Bow and arrows, the Boutou, or Club,
the Crowns of Feathers, Pendants, Chains, Rings, Bracelets, Baskets, Vessels,
and other things, and buried all with him, or burnt them over the grave: But
now they are grown better Husbands; for the Relations of the deceased reserve
all those things for their own use, or else they bestow them as presents on
those who come to the Interment, who keep them in remembrance of the deceased.

After the body is covered with earth, the nearest Relations cut off their
hair, and fast very rigorously, out of a persuasion that by that means they
shall live longer and more happily: Others forsake the houses and the place
where they have buried any of their kindred, and go and live elsewhere: When the
body is near rotted, they make another assembly, and after they have visited,
and sighing trampled on the Sepulcher, they have a merry meeting, at which they
drown all their grief in Ouicou. Thus the Ceremony is concluded, and the poor
Carcass is no further tormented.

FINIS.
A CARIBBIAN VOCABULARY.
ADVERTISEMENT.
We said elsewhere, that the Men and Women among the Caribbians use several
words to express the same thing, so that the Men have a term peculiar to
themselves, and the Women another to them. Those words therefore of this
Vocabulary, after which the letter M. is set, are such as are properly used by
the Men: And those which have a W after them, are the proper terms of the
Women. The accent denotes the syllable to be pronounced long. Note also that ch
is every where to be pronounced like sh in the Caribbian words.

I. The PARTS of MAN'S Body.
MY Body, Nokobou. Fat, Takelle. My skin, Nora. This signifies generally
whatsoever serves for a covering. My bones, Nabo. This signifies also a
gristle, and the tender sprig of a Plant. The Caribbians make no distinction
between the Veins and the Nerves, and they express both by the word Nillagra,
which signifies my Nerves or my Veins; as Lillagra, his Nerves or his Veins. By
the same name they also call the roots of trees. My blood, Nitta. M.
Nimoinalou. W. The hair of my head or Body, Nilibouri. My head, Nicheucke. My
Eyes, Nakou. The ball of my eye, Nakoueuke, that is properly, the kernel of my
Eye. My eyelid, Nakou-ora, that is, the skin of my eye. My Eye-brow,
Nichicouchi, properly a piece of my Eye. The hair of the Eyelids, Nakouiou,
properly the hair of the Eye. My forehead, Nerebe. My face, Nichibou. My Nose,
Nichiri. My mouth, Niouma. My lip, Nioumarou. My tooth, Nari. My cheek-teeth,
Nackeuke. My jaws, Nari-aregrick, properly, that which is next to my teeth. My
ear, Narikae. My Temples, Nouboyoubou. My cheeks, Nitigne. My chin, Nariona. My
breast, Nouri. My bosom, Narokou. My shoulder, Neche. My arm, Narreuna; it
signifies also a wing. My elbow, N^ugt^e^meuke. My hands, Noucabo. My fingers,
Noucabo-raun; as if you said the little ones or Children of my hand. My thumb,
Noucabo-iteignum, that is properly, what is opposite to the fingers. The pulse,
Noucabo-anichi, that is properly, the soul of the hand. My nail, Noubara. My
stomach, Nanichirokou. My heart, Niouanni, M. Nanichi, W. this word signifies
also my soul. My lungs, Noara. My Liver, Noubana. My Entrails, Noulakae, that
signifies also the belly. My Reins, Nanagane. My side, Nauba. The Spleen,
Couemata. The Bladder, Ichicolou-akae. My Navil, Narioma. The natural parts of
the Man, Yaloukouli, M. Neheuera, W. The natural parts of the Woman, Touloukou.
My back-parts, Narioma-rokou. My buttock, Niatta. My Thigh, Nebouik. My knee,
Nagagirik. My Ham, Nichaoua-chaoua. My Leg, Nourna. My shin, Nourna-aboulougou.
My joint, Napataragoune, that is a thing added; which word they apply also to a
piece set on a garment. My ankle, Noumourgouti. My foot, Nougouti. My heel,
Nogouti-ona. My toes, Nougouti-raim, that is properly, the little ones of the
foot. The sole of my foot, Nougoutirokou, that is properly, the inside of the
foot.
Whereas they very seldom express themselves by the indefinite names,
especially when they speak of the parts of the body, but restrain them to one
of the three persons, we have here set them down under the first: Whoever
therefore would put them under any of the other two, needs only change the
first letter of every word, as may be seen in the chapter of their Language.

II. KINDRED and ALLIANCE.
MY Kinsman, Nioumoulikou, M. Nitoucke, W. My marriage, Youelleteli. My
Husband, Niraiti. My Father, speaking to him, Baba, M. and W. My Father,
speaking of him, Youmaan, M. Noukouchili, W. My Grandfather, Itamoulou, M.
Nargouti, W. My Uncle by the Fathers side, they call him Father, Baba. And to
signify the true and proper Father, when they would expressly distinguish him,
they sometimes make this addition, Baba tinnaka. The Uncle by the Mother side,
Yao, M. Akatobou, W. My Son, Imakou, Imoulou, Yamoinri, M. Niraheu, W. My
Grandchild, Hibali, when there is but one: But when there are more, Nibagnem.
My Elder-Brother, Hanhin, M. Niboukayem, W. My younger-Brother, Ouanone and
Ibiri, M. that is properly, my half: Namouleem, W. My Brother-in-law, and my
Cousin-german by the Motherside, Ibamouy, M. Nikeliri, W. The Cousin not
married to the Cousin-German, Yapataganum. My Nephew, Yanantigane. My
Son-in-law, Hibali moukou, that is properly, he who makes little ones. My Wife,
Yenenery, M. the women say, Liani, his Wife. My Mother, speaking to her, both
men and women say, Bibi, which word is also an exclamation. A mother, speaking
of her, Ichanum, M. Noukouchourou, W. My mother-in-law by a second marriage,
Noukouchorouteni. My mother-in-law, whose daughter I have married, Imenouti. My
Grandmother, Innouti, M. Naguette, W. My Aunt by the mothers-side is called
mother, Bibi. The Aunt by the Fathers-side, Naheupouli. My Daughter, Niananti,
M. Niraheu, W. My Sister, Nitou. The elder sister, Bibi-Ouanouan. The younger
sister, Tamoulelouan. Step-daughter, Daughter-in-law and Niece, Nibache.
My^she-Cousin-german, Youelleri, M. that is to say, my female, or she who is
promised me; because naturally, they are to be wives to their Cousins. The
women say, Youellou. The Children of two Brothers are called brothers and
sisters; the children of Sisters the like.
III. CONDITIONS and QUALITIES.
A man, or a male, Ouekelli, M. in the plural number, Ouekliem. Eyeri, W. in
the plural, Eyerium. A Woman, or a Female, Ouelle, M. in the plural number,
Ouliem: Inarou, W. in the plural, Innouyum. A Child, Niankeili. A Boy, Mouleke.
A Girl, Niankeirou. A little boy, Ouekelli-raeu, properly a little male. A
little girl, Ouelle-raeu, properly, a little female. An old man, Ouaiali. A
Father of a Family, Tiouboutouli authe. A Widow and Widdower, Moincha. A
Comrade, Banare. A Friend, Ibaouanale, M. Nitignon, W. An Enemy, Etoutou, M.
Akani, W. An Enemy who goes clad, in opposition to those who go naked, Etoutou
noubi. Savage, Maron: The Caribbians attribute that name only to animals and
wild fruits. An Inhabitant, Bonon. An Islander, or Inhabitant of the Islands,
Oubao-bonon. An Inhabitant of the Continent, Baloue-bonon. A man come thither
by Sea, Balanagle: Thus they call the Christians, because they come to their
Country by Sea. An Admiral, or General of a naval Army, Nhalene. A Captain of a
Vessel, Tiouboutouli Canaoua. A Commander in chief, or General, Ouboutou; in
the plural numb. Ouboutounum. A Lieutenant, Tiouboutoumali arici, that is
properly, the track of the Captain, or that which appears after him. A Soldier
or Warrior, Netoukouiti. A Sentinel, or Spy, Arikouti, Nabara. My Prisoner of
war, Niouitouli, Niouemakali. He who has the charge of entertaining Guests,
Niouakaiti. My hired servant, such as the Christians have, Nabouyou. A servant
who is an absolute Slave, Tamon. A Huntsman, Ekerouti. Fat, Tibouleli. Lean,
Touleeli. Great, Mouchipeeli. Big, Ouboutonti. Little, Nianti, racu. Pretty
little one, Pikenine, in the bastard Language. High, Inouti. Low, Onabouti.
Deep, Ouliliti, Anianliti. Broad, Taboubereti. Long, Mouchinagouti. Round,
Chiririti. Square, Patagouti. Fair, Bouitouti. Deformed, Nianti ichibou. Soft,
Nioulouti. Hard, Teleti. Dry, Ouarrou, Ouarrouti. Moist, Kouchakouali. Heat and
cold are expressed in the ix. Section. White, Alouti. Black, Ouliti. Yellow,
Houereti. Red, Ponati. They have no names but only for those four colors, and
they refer all the rest to them. A Thief, Youalouti. An incestuous person,
Kakouyoukouatiti. An Adulterer, Oulimateti. A Fornicator, Huereti. Quarrelsome,
Oulibimekoali, Koauaiti. A treacherous person, Nirobouteiti. Evil, Oulibati,
Nianouanti. Good, Iroponti. Wise, Kanichicoti. Cunning, Manigat. A fool,
Leuleuti ao, or Talouali ao; that is properly, he who has no light. Valiant,
Ballinumpti. Cowardly, Abaouati. Joyful, Aouerekoua, Liouani. Sad, Imouemeti.
Drunk, Nitimainti. Rich, Katakobaiti. Poor, Matakobaiti. Picquant, Chouchouti.
Dead, Neketali.
IV. ACTIONS and PASSIONS.
HE puts his trust in him, Moingatteti lone. Stay for me, Jacaba, Noubara.
Hope, expect, Allire. Hope in him, Emenichiraba. Hope, Ementchira. My hope,
Nemenichiraeu. My fear, Ninonnoubouli. My joy, Naoueregon, M. Niouanni, W. My
sadness, Nitikaboue. He is born, Emeignouali. You are welcome, Halea tibou. I
am hungry, Lamanatina. I am thirsty, Nacrabatina. Give me to eat, or give me
some bread, Yerebalium boman, M. Nouboute um boman, W. Give me some drink,
Natoni boman Eat, in the Imperative, Baika. To eat, in the Infinitive, which is
seldom used, Aika. I eat, Naikiem. Drink thou, Kouraba. I drink, Natiem,
Natakayem. I am warm with drinking, or have drunk plentifully, Nacharouatina.
Come hither, Hac-yete. Go thy ways, Bayouboukaa. Speak, Ariangaba. I speak,
Nanangayem. Hold thy peace, Maniba. Sit down, Niourouba. Lie down on the
ground, Raoignaba. Rise up, Aganekaba. Stand up, Raramaba. Look, Arikaba. Hear,
Akambabae. Blow, Irimichaba. Taste it, Aochabae. Touch it, Kourouabae. Go,
Bayoubaka. I go, Nayoubakayem. Walk, Babachiaka. Run, Hehemba. Dance, Babenaka.
I dance, Nabinakayem. Leap, Choubakouaba. I am going, or about to leap,
Choubakoua niabou. Laugh, Beerraka. I laugh or am glad, Naouerekoyem. Weep,
Ayakouaba. Sleep, Baronka. Awake, Akakotouaba. Watch, Aromankaba. Labor or
pains-taking, Youategmali, M. Noumanikle, W. Rest, Nemervoni. A Fight,
Tibouikenoumali. War, Nainchoa, M. Nihuctoukouli, W. Peace, Niuemboulouli. He
is defeated, Niouellemainti. He is overcome, Enepali. Breathe, Aouraba banichi,
that is properly, refresh thy heart. Blow, Phoubae. Spit, Choueba. Cough,
Hymba. Wipe thy nose, Nainraba. To ease ones self, Homoura. Wash thy self,
Chibaba. Moisten, Touba boubara. Go to wash thy self, Akao bouka I swim,
Napouloukayem. I swim well, Capouloukatiti. He was drowned, Chalalaali. He was
choked, Niarakouali. Open, Talaba. Shut it, Taba. Seek, Aloukaba. Find,
Ibikouabae. Fly, Hamamba. Thou fallest, Batikeroyen. Loose it, Aboulekouabae.
Sell it, Kebeciketabae. Buy, A mouliakaba. He trades, Haouanemeti. Go a
hunting, Ekrekabouca. That which I have taken in hunting, Nekeren. He shoots
well with the Bow, Kachienratiti, Boukatiti. He shoots well with a gun,
Katouratiti. Go a fishing, Tikabouka authe. I fish, Natiakayem. What I have got
a fishing, Natiakani. He is come into the Port, Abourricaali. I sing in the
Church, Nallalakayem. I sing a song, Naromankayem. He is in love with her, or
makes much of her, Ichoatoati tao. Kiss me, Chouba nioumolougou. I would be
named, name me, Yetiklee yatek. He loves him, Kinchinti lone, Tibouinati. He
hates him, Yerekati lone. A quarrel, Liouelebouli. Drunkenness, Liuetimali.
Strike, beat, Baikoaba. A whip or wand, Abaichagle. Beat him, Apparabae.
Scratch, Kiomba. Kill him, Chiouibae. He is well, Atouattienly. He is sick,
Nanegaeti, Nanneteiti. Sickness, Aneck. He has bewitched me, Naraliatina. I
will be revenged, Nibane bouibatina. Revenge, Nayouibanabouli. He has bitten
him, Kerrelialo. He is wounded, Niboukabouali. He is yet living, Nouloukeili,
M. Kakekeili, W. Life, Lakakechoni. He is dead, Aoueeli, Nikotamainali, M.
Hilaali, W. Bury him, or it; which is not said only of a man, but generally of
whatsoever is put into the ground, as of a Plant, Bonambae. Burial, Tonamouli.
V. Things relating to HOUSEKEEPING and TRADE.
A Village, Authe. A Publick-House, Karbet. An ordinary house, Toubana, M.
Touhonoko, W. A Penthouse, Covering, or Hut suddenly erected, Aioupa. A Garden,
Maina. My Garden, Imainali, M. Nichali, W. A Trench for the planting of Manioc,
Tomonack. The Roof, Toubana ora, properly, the covering of the House or Hut. A
Wall or Pallisado, Kourara. Floor of boards they have not any. A Plank,
Iboutou. A door, Bena. A Window, Toullepen, properly a Hole. A Bed, Amac and
Akat, M. Nekera, W. A Table, Matoutou. A Seat, Halaheu. A Cage, Tonoulou-banna.
A Vessel, Takae, which is generally applied to all Vessels. A Vessel made of a
Gourd, Coui. Half the Coui, which serves for a dish, Tauba; this word signifies
properly, a side- A Drinking-cup, Ritta- A Glass, Flagon, bottle, Boutella,
from the Spanish. The wooden frame which serves for a Gridiron, and is by other
Savages called Boucan, Youla. An Iron Pot or Kettle, Tourae. An Earthen Pot,
Taumali akae, and Canary. A Candlestick, or any thing that holds a thing,
Taketakle. A Candle, Lamp, Torch, Touli, which is a Sandal-wood which yields a
Gum. A pair of snuffers, Tachackoutagle. A Hook, Keoue. A needle, Akoucha. A
pin, Alopholer. A Coffer, Arka. A basket, Alaouata, Catoli. The hair-cloth to
sift the meal of the Manioc, and to strain the Ouicou, Mouchache. Flesh that
may be eaten, Tekeric. Roast-meat, Aribelet, Acherouti. Sauce, Taomali, or
Taumali. A dish of hash'd meat, Natara. A Feast, Natoni, Laupali, Eletoak.
Poison, Tiboukoulou, M. Tibaukoura, W. Merchandise, Eberitina. A Merchant,
Baouanemoukou. A Piraga, or great vessel of the Savages, Canaoua. A little
vessel of the Savages, which we call Canow, Couliala. A Ship, Kanabire; this
probably is derived from the French word Navire. A Cord, Ibitarrou. A Cable,
Kaboya; it is a word no doubt framed by them since their acquaintance with
strangers; as are also some of the ensuing. An Anchor, Tichibani, and
Ankouroute. A Knife, Couchique. Scissers, Chirachi. Much, Mouche, a word of the
corrupt Language. Ten, Chonnoucabo raim, that is, all the fingers of both
hands. Twenty, Chonnougouci raim, that is, all the fingers of both hands, and
all the toes of both feet; they cannot number any farther. Behold thy bed,
Bouekra. Behold thy meat, En yerebaili. Behold thy drink, En batoni. Gramercy,
or well, Tao. Yes, Anhan. Nay, Oua. To morrow, Alouka. Good morrow, Maboue.
Farewell, Huican.
VI. ORNAMENTS and ARMS.
Toys and trifles in general, Cacones. A Crown, Tiamataboni. A Ring,
Toukabouri. A Chain or Necklace, Eneka. My Chain, Yenekali. A Bracelet,
Nournari. Pendants for the ears, Narikaela. A Girdle, Jeconti, Niranvary.
Spanish Leather, Tichepoulou. A Comb brought out of Europe, Baina. A Comb of
Reeds, Boulera. A Handkercher, Nainragle. A Looking-glass, Chibouchi. A Sword,
Echoubara. An Arquebuss or Musket, Rakabouchou. A Pistol, Rakabouchou raeu,
properly, a little Musket. Great Guns, Kaloon. A Pike, Halberd, Ranicha. The
point of it, Lichibau, M. Laboulougou, W. The middle, Lirana. The end, Tiona. A
bow, Oullaba, M. Chimala, W. these two words signify also a tree. The string
of the bow, Ibitarrou. Arrows, Alouani, Bouleoua, Hippe. The Club which the
Savages use instead of a sword, Bouttou.
VII. LIVING CREATURES.
A Dog, Anly. A Bitch, Ouelle anly, properly the female of the dog. A swine,
Bouirokou, sometimes they also call that creature, Concoin. An Ape or Monkey,
Alouata. A Tortoise, or Turtle, Catallou, and in the corrupt Language,
Tortille. The great Lizard, Ouayamaka; the same which other Indians call
Iganas. The little Lizard, or Catch-flye, Oulleouma. A mouse, Karattoni. A Cat,
Mechou. The Soldier, a kind of Snail so called, Makere. A Pismire, Hague. A
Spider, Koulaele. A Serpent, Hehue. A Snake, Couloubera, from the Spanish. A
Scorpion, Akourou. A Fish, Authe; and in the corrupt Language, Pisket. The
shell of a Fish; they name the fish, and then add ora, as much as to say, the
shell or covering of the fish: Thus Ouataboui-ora, is that which we have
elsewhere called a Lambis. A Mesquito, a kind of fly, Aetera. Another kind of
small flies commonly called Maringoins, and known under that name, Malu
Kalabala: It seems their feet are white. A Fly, Huere-huere. The glittering
fly, Cogouyou, not differing much from the Cocuyos of the other Indians. A
bird, Tonoulou. A Turkey-cock, Ouekelli-pikaka. A Turkey-hen, Ouelle-pikaka. An
ordinary hen, Kayou. A Duck, Kanarou. A Goose, Iriria. A Parrat, Koulehuec. A
Pigeon, Ouakoukoua. A Turtle, Oulleou. A Partridge, Ouallami. A Feather,
Toubanna, this signifies also a leaf. A wing or arm, Tarreuna. A beak, or
mouth, Tiouma. A foot or claw, Tougouti.
VIII. TREES and PLANTS.
A Tree, Huehue. A Plant, Ninanteli. A Flower, Illehue. Fruit, or seed, Tun. A
leaf, Toubanna, this signifies also a feather. A Branch, Touribouri. A Thorn, a
Cyon, Huehueyou, properly, the hair of the tree; or Huehueakou, as if one would
say the eyes of the tree. A Forest, Arabou. Figs, Bakoukou. Orenges, and
Lemons, or Citrons they call as we do, because these fruits were brought
thither out of Europe. The Cassia-tree, Malimali. Cotton, Manoulou. The
Cotton-tree, Manoulouakecha. The wild-Vine, Ouliem. Raquette, a fruit so named
by the French, Batta. A great kind of Thistle, Akoulerou. Tobacco, Youli. A
Melon, Battia. Pease or Beans, Manconti. A Cane, or Reed in general, Maboulou,
Tikasket. The Sugar-cane, Kaniche. The juice of the Canes, or the wine thereof,
Kanichira. Sugar, Choucre, a corrupt word. An herb, Kalao. A root that may be
eaten, Torole.
IX. THINGS ELEMENTARY and IN ANIMATE.
THe Heavens, Oubekou. A white cloud, Allirou. A black cloud, Ouallion. Misty
weather, Kemerei. A Star, Oualoukouma. The Sun, Huyeyou, M. Kachi, W. The Moon,
Nonum, M. which word signifies also the earth, Kati, W. A day, Lihuycouli.
Light, Lalloukone. Lightsome, Laguenani. Night, Ariabou. Darkness, Bourreli. It
is day, Haloukaali. It is night, Boureokaali. The air, Naouaragle. The wind,
Bebeite, it sometimes also signifies the air. Fire, Ouattou. Ashes, Ballissi.
Rain, Konoboui. Hail, Ice, Snow, are things they are not acquainted withal:
Winter is also unknown to them. Summer, Liromouli. Cold, Lamoyenli. Heat,
Loubacha. Fair weather, Ieromonmeeli. They call it also by the name of Summer.
It is fair weather, Hueoumeti. It is foul weather, Yehumeti. Thunder, Oualou
ouyoulou. The noise of Thunder, Trtrguetenni. A tempest, Youallou, Bointara,
Ourogan, which is the most common name. The Rainbow, Alamoulou, or Youlouca,
as if they would say God's plume of feathers. A Mountain, Ouebo. A Valley,
Taralironne. An ascent, Tagreguin. A plain, Liromonobou. Water, a River, Tona.
A Pond, Taonaba. A Spring or Fountain, Taboulikani. A Well, Chiekati. A Brook,
Tipouliri. The Sea, Balanna, M. Balaoua, W. The earth, Nonum, M. that signifies
also the Moon, Mona, W. Excrement, Itika. Sand, Saccao. A way, Ema. A Stone,
Tebou. A Rock, Emerali. A Island, Oubao. The Continent, Baloue. Wood, Huehue,
it signifies also a tree. Iron, Crabou. Gold and silver, Boulata. Brass,
Tialapirou. Latten, Kaouanam. A hole, Toullepen, it signifies also a window. A
Haven, Beya, not much differing from the word Bay.
X. Things relating to RELIGION.
THe Soul is expressed by the same word which signifies the heart: See before
in the Section of the Parts of Man's Body. A Spirit, Akamboue, M. Opoyem, W.
These names are general: thence it comes that they are sometimes applied to the
Spirit of Man. But they are particularly attributed to good Spirits, at least
those whom the Caribbians account such, and allow the place of Gods. A Good
Spirit, which they hold to be a Divinity, and whereof every one of them has
one peculiar to himself for his God, is also called Icheiri, which is the term
of the men, and Chemun, which is that of the women, and whereof the plural is
Chemignum: So that those words are answerable to God and Gods. My good Spirit,
or my God, Icheirikou, M. Nechemerakou, W. The evil Spirit, or Devil, both men
and women call him Maboya, as all the French pronounce the word: but the
Caribbians pronounce it as if it were written with a p, Mapoya. They also
attribute the name of Maboya to certain Mushrooms, and some other Plants of ill
scent. The Devil, or evil Spirit is here, let us get away from him, Maboya
kayeu eu, kaima Loari: They are wont to say so when they smell any ill scent.
The Offerings they make to the false Gods or Devils, Anakri. Invocations,
Prayers, Ceremonies, Adorations, are things they have no knowledge at all of.
FINIS.
A TABLE Of the CHAPTERS Of the first Book of this History.
CHAP. I. OF the Situation of the Caribbies in general; the Temperature of the
Air; the Nature of the Country, and its Inhabitants. page 1. CHAP. II. Of each
of the Caribby-Islands in particular. p. 6. CHAP. III. Of the Islands which lie
toward the North. p. 14. CHAP. IV. Of the Island of St. Christopher. p. 21.
CHAP. V. Of the Lee-ward Islands. p. 24. CHAP. VI. Of Trees growing in these
Islands, whose Fruit may be eaten. p. 28. CHAP. VII. Of Trees fit for Building,
Joyners-Work, and Dying. p. 39. CHAP. VIII. Of Trees useful in Medicine, and
some others, whereof the Inhabitants of the Caribbies may make great
advantages. p. 44. CHAP. IX. Of other Trees growing in these Islands, whose
Fruits or Roots contribute to the subsistence of the Inhabitants, or serve for
some other uses. p. 50. CHAP. X. Of the Plants, Herbs and Roots growing in the
Caribbies. p. 54. CHAP. XI. Of some other rare Productions of the Caribbies,
and several sorts of Pulse and Flowers growing in those Islands. p. 61. CHAP.
XII. Of five kinds of four-footed Beasts found in these Islands. p. 69. CHAP.
XIII. Of the Reptiles found in these Islands. p. 72. CHAP. XIV. Of the Insects
commonly seen in the Caribbies. p. 78. CHAP. XV. Of the more considerable kinds
of Birds which may be seen in the Caribbies. p. 85. CHAP. XVI. Of the Sea and
River-Fish of the Caribbies. p. 97. CHAP. XVII. Of the Sea Monsters found in
these Islands. p. 100. CHAP. XVIII. A particular Description of the Sea-Unicorn
which was cast ashore at the Haven of the Tortoise-Island, in the Year 1644.
and a pleasant Relation, by way of Digression, of several beautiful and rare
Horns brought lately from Davis-streight; with an account of the Country, and
the Dispositions of the Inhabitants. p. 107. CHAP. XIX. Of certain Shellfish,
rare Shells, and other remarkable productions of the Sea, found on the Coasts
of the Caribbies. p. 119. CHAP. XX. Of Ambergris; its Origin; and the marks
of that which is good, and without mixture. p. 127. CHAP. XXI. Of certain
Creatures living partly on Land, partly in the Waters, commonly called
Amphibia, which may be found in the Caribby-Islands. p. 131. CHAP. XXII.
Containing the particular Descriptions of several sorts of Crabs or Crab-fish,
commonly found in the Caribbies. p. 139. CHAP. XXIII. Of Thunder, Earthquakes,
and the Tempests sometimes happening in the Caribbies. p. 143. CHAP. XXIV. Of
some other inconveniences of the Country, and the remedies thereof. p. 146.
A Table of the Chapters of the second Book of this History.
CHAP. I. OF the Establishment of those Inhabitants who are Strangers in the
Islands of S. Christopher, Mevis, Gardeloupe, Martinico, and some other Islands
of the Caribbies. p. 157 CHAP. II. Of the Establishments of the French in the
Islands of S. Bartholomew, S. Martin, and Sante-Cruce. p. 173. CHAP. III. Of
the Establishment of the French Colony in the Island of Gardeloupe,
consequently to the Peace concluded with the Caribbians of Dominico, in the
Year M. DC. XL. p. 178. CHAP. IV. Of the Trading and Employments of the
Foreign Inhabitants of the Country; and first, of the Culture and ordering of
Tobacco. p. 187. CHAP. V. Of the manner how Sugar is made; and of the
preparation of Ginger, Indico, and Cotton. p. 194. CHAP. VI. Of the more
honorable Employments of the Europaean Inhabitants of the Caribbies; their
Slaves; and their Government. p. 198 CHAP. VII. Of the Origin of the
Caribbians, the natural Inhabitants of the Country. p. 204. CHAP. VIII. By way
of Digression giving an account of the Apalachites, the Nature of their
Country, their Manners, and their ancient and modern Religion. p. 228 CHAP. IX.
Of the Bodies of the Caribbians, and their Ornaments. p. 249. CHAP. X. Certain
Remarks upon the Caribbian Language. p. 259. CHAP. XI. Of the Dispositions of
the Caribbians, and their Manners. p. 265. CHAP. XII. Of the natural simplicity
of the Caribbians. p. 271. CHAP. XIII. Of that which may be called Religion
among the Caribbians. p. 276. CHAP. XIV. A continuation of that which may be
called Religion among the Caribbians: Of some of their Traditions; and of the
Sentiment they have of the Immortality of the Soul. p. 283. CHAP. XV. Of the
Habitations and Housekeeping of the Caribbians. p. 291. CHAP. XVI. Of the
ordinary Repasts of the Caribbians. p. 297. CHAP. XVII. Of the Employments and
Divertisements of the Caribbians. p. 304 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Entertainment
which the Caribbians make those who come to visit them. p. 309. CHAP. XIX. Of
what may be accounted Polity amongst the Caribbians. p. 313. CHAP. XX. Of the
Wars of the Caribbians. p. 317. CHAP. XXI. Of the Treatment which the
Caribbians make their Prisoners of War. p. 326 CHAP. XXII. Of the Marriages of
the Caribbians. p. 332. CHAP. XXIII. Of the birth and education of Children
amongst the Caribbians p. 336. CHAP. XXIV. Of the ordinary Age of the
Caribbians; their Diseases; the Remedies used by them in order to the Recovery
of their Health; their Death, and Funeral Solemnities. p. 342
FINIS.

