Man's Chief Guide to SALVATION: Wherein is laid down many good Instructions and
motives to stir up every poor soul, that he may be able in these sinful days
to withstand Satan's assaults. By Tho. Robins B. of D.

T R
portrait, presumably of Thomas Robins, with an open book in hand

Cor. 16. 13, 14. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit your selves like men,
and be strong.

^rinted for T. Passenger on London Bridge, 1666.

MAN'S Chief Guide to SALVATION.
Matthew. 11, 28, 29. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I
will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
MY Beloved, here you may see the great love that our blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ bears to poor sinners. First of calling us so lovingly, Come; and
to us as I may say, Come ^^to me. Secondly, we may plainly see who (...) is
that should come: all ye that be heavy ^den. And thirdly, the chiefest reason
of this why he calls us, because he will give us rest: I but what rest? the
everlasting rest for our souls.

Indeed my brethren I desire you all to take notice that our Savior Jesus
Christ has a great love to us, in calling us so lovingly as he does here in
this place of Scripture, I, and in many more: but alas how many is there yt
regard it? no, no, we are the more ready for to turn the farthest from him,
little knowing the danger that may follow: for sin is so pleasant unto us, that
we never regard what any says to us, when we be a going to any sin. A^ for
example these three sins which I here sha^ name unto you, that is to say,
Pride, Whoredom, and Drunkenness, which are the thre^ terrible crying sins of
the Nation; yet let u^ but busy our selves about one of these, thoug^ the Lord
himself calls we will not hear.

In the first place, Drunkenness is a mo^ notorious sin, and a delightful sin:
For when three or four, more or less, are got on the Al^^ house bench there to
make merry, never thinking on the danger that may follow, but the^ they sit
quaffing and making themselves mer^^ till they be so much inflamed with it,
that the^ forget themselves and so become drunk, an^ then any sin is common
with them: then the wicked sin of swearing must be maintain^ by swearing of one
great oath or another which is a most base and notorious sin: and I pray God yt
every one of us may have a care how we follow any such terrible sin: for
certainly ye Lord is sorely offended at this Land and Nation for the maintaing
this sin of drunkenness so much as we do: therefore in ye name of God I desire
every one of you to have a care of this terrible sin of drunkenness: for
certainly this is a great cause to stay men for coming to our Savior; although
he calls us so loving as he does in this Text, as to come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. But certainly my brethren
the Lord will punish us for this sin: for we may assure our selves that he does
take notice how we do lead our lives. I pray you look into the 28 Chapter of
Isaiah, at the 7 verse, and there you may see that the Lord took notice of the
Drunkenness that was among the people: But they also have erred through Wine
and strong Drink, and are out of the way: the Priest and the Prophet have erred
through strong Drink, they are swallowed up with Wine, they are out of the way
through strong Drink, Isa. 28. ver. 7. By this my brethren, you may see that
the Lord takes notice of this wicked sin of Drunkenness, and pray God give
every one of you grace to have a care that we fall not into this wicked sin;
for certainly it is one of the greatest sins of the Nation, which cries out for
judgment against us.

2. I desire to exhort you to have a care of that most abominable sin of
Whoredom, for that is a sin that the Lord joins to pride, as you may find in
Isaiah 18. verse. 1. for there he cries, Woe to the Crown of Pride, to the
drunkenness of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is a fading flower. But for all
this, who is he that does seek to fly from this sin of Pride? No, no, it has
too much pleasure in the eye: nay, rather then we would step one foot back from
it, we had rather set two forward to maintain it. But truly good people I must
needs tell you, this is not y^ way to bring you into the way of salvation; no,
it will build a strong wall of separation between ye Lord and you; therefore in
the name of God have a care of it; for certainly the Lord will have account
given him at the latter day: Then it is not your Silks and Satin, nor your
fine apparel that can do you any good. No my Brethren, then your gay attire
will be odious in the sight of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and the
rottenness of your hearts will stink in your own nostrils: therefore I desire
you once more to have a care, and to strive by all possible means to refrain
from all sin whatsoever, and strive to be ready to make answer to the Lord when
he calls us to an account, as he did the servants in ye gospel, which he had
formerly given the Talents to, to see what good use they had made of them: and
some had put them to good use, and the Lord did commend them that had put them
to good use: His Lord said unto him, well done thou good and faithful servant,
thou have been faithful over few things, I will make thee ruler over many
things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Matthew. 25. 23. And thus you may
see what a gallant thing it is for every christian to make good use of their
time while they live here on earth, that they may be able to give a good
account at ye latter day, when they are called to the judgementseat, as this
faithful servant did: then may they come to receive ye same reward, and so
enter into the joy of the Lord: but have a care yt you be not found like the
wicked and slothful servant, for fear the Lord say the same words to you, as he
did to him in the 28 verse of this Chapter, in these words, Take therefore the
talents from him, and give it unto him that has ten talents: Indeed this was a
great discouragement to that servant: but this did not serve his turn, now the
worst came after; for it was not the loss of his substance which the Lord lent
him, that could make recompense, as you may see in the 29 and 30 verses of this
Chapter, For unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have
abundance; but for him that has not shall be taken away, even that which he
has, and cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter darkness; there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 25. 29, 30. verses. Even so will it be
one day with us; for the Lord must and will have account given him: then happy
is that poor soul that has any spark of grace in him, to bring him into the
way of repentance: for certainly if you will but labor while you live here on
earth for to serve the Lord with a true heart, then no doubt but the Lord will
give you rest in that blessed kingdom, and speak unto us with those comfortable
words, as he spoke to the people in Isa. 45. 9, 10 ver. Thou whom I have chosen
from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men of the throne,
and said unto thee, thou art my servant, I have chosen thee, and not cast thee
away; fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God, I
will strengthen thee, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my righteousness. O what a comfortable speech was here to be spoke from
a sinner from so good and gracious a God? O what man or woman yt has any fear
of God before their eyes, but they would strive to please so loving a God as we
have that is always careful over as, and caring of us, to put us in mind of
him; nay good people this calling is not all, but he makes us any a great
promise, and all is to win our ^ve to him, as you may see in that 4 verse (...)
the 51 of Isaiah, Hearken to me my people, and give ear unto me, O my Nation;
for a Law ^all proceed from me, and I will make my judg^ents to rest for a
light of the people. Break ^rth in joy, sing together ye waste places of
^erusalem; for the Lord has comforted his people, he has redeemed Jerusalem,
Isaiah 52.

I will declare thy righteousness and thy ^orks; for they shall not profit thee
when thou ^riest: Let thy companions deliver thee, but the ^ind shall carry
them all away, vanity shall take ^em, but he that puts his trust in me,
shall ^ossess the Land, and shall inherit my holy ^ountain, Isaiah 57. 12. and
13. verses. Here ^e may see what a love the Lord has to us, ^f we would but
love him: But alas, how should we love him which we did never see, and cannot
love our poor Brethren which is ^aily with us? We have many days of Fast^ng,
many days of Humiliation, which is ^ery good; I but how do we Fast? to breed
Dissension with our Neighbors, and for an ^utward show, and inwardly inventing
strife and be bate, as the Prophet Isaiah says in ^h. 58. of Isaiah and about
the 14. verse. Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and fight with the fist
of wickedness. And I pr^ God that there be not a great many of us the do use to
fast after this manner: for I am (...) fraid there are too many now a days that
man a great show of going to Church to fast a^ pray, and yet bring but an evil
heart back ^gain; for either they have some grudge some neighbor, or one evil
thought or other for if nothing else canker their hearts, the will have a
grudge toward the poor, and t^ poor should be the chief of their fast, as y^
may find in Isaiah 56. and 7. verse of the Chapter; for the Prophet cballengeth
ye peop^ about their fast, because he saw it was wic^ed, for says he, It is
such a fast which I ha^^ chosen, a bowing down his head like a bul-rus^ and to
spread sackcloth and ashes under him will thou call this a Fast, and an
acceptabl^ day unto the Lord? is not this the Fast that have chosen to loose
the hands of wickedness to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go
free, and that you break every yoke Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry,
an^ that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thin^ house? when thou see
the naked, that tho^ cover them; and that thou hidest not thy se^ from thine
own self: Indeed good people yo^ may see here this is the Fast that we should
make if we should fast to please God, then w^ must feed the hungry, clothe the
naked, and seek comfort the afflicted: but indeed I am afraid ^t here is but a
few here that can say with a ^e conscience, that they do make such a fast (...)
this: But indeed my brethren all that I (...) say unto it, is this, I pray God
give every (...) of us grace to fear him, and to love the (...) and needy, and
seek to relieve them as (...) Lord has enabled us: For as Solomon ^h, Prove.
14. 20, 21. verses, The poor is hated ^^ of his own neighbor, but the rich
has ^y friends: He that despises his neighbor ^eth, but he that has mercy
on the poor ^py is he: And happy is he that can keep ^se Commandments; for he
that will strive ^eep these Commandments, the Lord will ^p him; for just as we
keep Gods Com^ndments, so will the Lord keep us: there^e as Moses said to the
people in Deuteronomy. 11. 27, 28. verses, so say I unto you that be ^e present,
Beho^d I have set before you this a blessing and a curse: a blessing if you
obey Commandment of the Lord your God which ^ommand you this day. Here you may
see danger that belongs to us if we keep not Commandments, I and the blessing
that ^ongs to all such as does keep them: And I ^y God give us all grace to
choose the good, (...) forsake the evil. These Commandments Lord give every
true Christian grace to keep them, and seek to refrain those wic^ sins which I
here have named, concerni^^ Drunkenness and Pride.

And Thirdly, I desire you to have a c^^ of that wicked sin of Pride; for
certai^ it is a sin that the Lord is sorely displeased as you may peruse by
that place of Scr^^ture, in the 28 of Isaiah and the 1 verse; these words, Woe
to the Crown of Pri^^^ Nay, there is many more places in Scr^^ture that gives
us warning enough of th^^^ sins; and as the Apostle Paul said to Philippians,
so I say to you, Finally Brethr^^ whatsoever things are true, whatsoever thi^
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoe^^^ things are pure, whatsoever
things are love whatsoever things are of good report, if th^^^ be any virtue,
and if there be any praise, th^^^ on these things, Philip. 4. 8. That you mi^^^
walk worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleas^^ being fruitful unto every good
work, incr^^sing in the knowledge of God, strenst the^ with all might according
to his glorious Po^^ unto all patience and long-suffering with (...) fullness,
Colos. 1. 10, 11. verses. Set your ^^^fections on things above, and not upon
the th^^ of the earth; for ye are dead, and your li^ hid with Christ, Colos. 3.
2, 3. verses.

Beloved, here you may see the perfest way (...) find Christ; for if you would
go to him, you ^ust set your affections on things above, and ^ot on things
below; for things on the earth ^e but dead, and of no value: no, no, it is the
^ings above that we must set our affections (...): if we mean to have life
eternal, it is Christ ^r Lord and Savior that sits upon the Throne ^at we must
set our affections on, if ever we ^ean to have peace with him in glory; then
(...) Paul said to the Colossians, Put on therefore ^s the elect of God, holy,
and beloved, bowels ^f me^cy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meek^ess,
long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man
has a ^uarrel against any, even as Christ for gave you, (...) also do ye, and
above a^l things put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness, as you may
and in the 12. 13. and 14. verses of this Cha^ter: and as the Apostle says
here, we ought ^o forbear one another; and if any man wrong ^s, as Christ
forgave sinners, so we ought ^o forgive one another. But alas my Bre^hren, it
is not so with us now adays; now if any wrong one another, there is no
forgiveness with a great many, but straight to law, or else seek to do three
ill turns for one, by one means or other: for if a poor man do anywrong to a
rich man, then straight he goes to Law; and if a rich man do any wrong to a
poor m^^ then he will strive to do him one ill turn or ^ther; I but this is
against Gods Comma^^ment, as you may see by this place of Scr^^ture; for God
commands us to love one a^^ther, and forgive one another, and so we m^^ do, if
we look that Christ should forgive us, (...) you may find in that 14. ver.
Above all thi^ we should put on charity: and that is a wo^ which is but little
used now adays, and a^ this is for want of love; for if we did love o^ another,
then Charity would be used a gre^^ deal more then it is, and certainly we m^^
strive to put on both these garments, if (...) do desire to be one of Gods
perfect servant^ For charity is the bond of perfections, Col. (...) 14. For it
is sanctified by the Word of G^ and Prayer: if thou put thy brethren in ^^
inembrance of these things, thou shall be (...) good Minister of Jesus Christ,
nourished (...) in the works of good Doctrine, whereun^^ thou have attained, 1 Timothy 4. 5, 6 verses. (...) any man teach other ways, and consent not to the
wholesome words, even the words of our Lo^^ Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine
which is a^cording to godliness, he is proud and knowin^ nothing, doting about
questions and strifes (...) words, whereof comes envy, strife, railing^ evil
surmisings, perverse disputings of men o^ corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth, supposing that gain is godliness, from such with^^ thy self, 1 Timothy
5. 3, 4, 5. verses. that every one of us would but strive to ^hdraw from such
people, and strive to set (...) hearts and minds upon the true know^^^ge of
God: meditate upon these things, ^e thy self wholly to them, that the profit ^y
appear to all, 1 Timothy 4. 15. O that every (...) of you would but have a strong
confidence ^he Lord, and carry a patient mind, so may (...) come to receive our
reward, Hebrews 10. 36. Cast not away therefore your confi^^^ce, which has
great recompense of reward; (...) ye have need of patience, that after ye have
^^^e the will of God, ye may receive the pro^^^e. Let your conversation be
without cove^^^sness, and be content with such things as you ^e; for he has
said, I will never leave thee forsake thee: so that we may boldly say, ^^^e
Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man (...) do unto me, Hebr. 13. 5, 6.
verses. O ^^t every poor soul had but so much confi^^nce in the Lord, as to say
that he is con^ted without covetousness, and that he is ^ll content with such
as the Lord has sent (...); then I say, happy is he, for the Lord ^^^h
promised he will never forsake them, nor ^^^e them. If it be so, that the Lord
has ^omised that he will never forsake us, O let (...) strive to do our best
endeavors never to forsake him; for he is a gracious God a^^ merciful Savior
to all such as love him, (...) keep his Commandments: for look into ye (...) of
James at the last verse, and there you (...) find the pure Religion before the
Lord is ^^ving the widows and the fatherless, but tr^ I cannot see but they be
the least looked a^ now adays, and then how can we say (...) our Religion is
pure? Pure Religion and (...) defiled before God, is this, to visit the wid^^^
and fatherless in their affliction: I pray (...) consider this, if there be no
pure Religion us, but what does visit the Fatherless and (...) Widows in their
affliction; truly it is to (...) feared we have but little pure Religion the
Land: for let them be what they will* they be poor there is little looking on
them, (...) if they be rich they shall be feasted, and the (...) must stand
back: I but you may see your se^ that y^ Lord is not pleased at such doings,
(...) look into the second of St. James, and there (...) tells us yt it is not
a Christians profession^ regard the rich, and d^spise the poor. Bu^ there come
into your Assembly a man wit^ gold Ring in good Garment, and there co^^^ in
also a poor man in vile raiment, and y^ have respect to him that has the gay
cloathi^^ and say unto him, sit thou here in a good pla^^^ and say to the poor,
stand thou here, or sit un^ my footstool, are you not then partial in yo^
selves, and becomes Judges of evil thoughts? Hearken my Brethren, Has not God
chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which
he has promised to give them that love him, but ye have despised the poor,
James 2. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. verses. And as Paul said to Timothy, in 2 Timothy 17. 18.
so I say to you all, charge them that are rich in this world that they be not
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in y^ living God who gives us
richly all things to enjoy, that th^^ do good, that they be rich in good works:
which the Lord give us all grace so to do.

And now I desire to give you a word of Exhortation concerning these perilous
times we live in; our Savior has given us fair warning in many places of
Scripture concerning this, as in Mark 13. beginning at the 5 verse. Jesus
answering them, began to say, Take heed lest any man deceive you; for many
shall come in my Name and deceive you. Nay he had told his Disciples, he told
them when the people should come, as you may see in the 4 verse of this
Chapter: And when you hear of wars, and rumors of wars, be not troubled; for
such things must needs be, but the end shall not be yet, Mark 13. 5, 6. verses.
Nay, if you but please to read the whole Chapter, you shall find it altogether
to that purpose: Therefore in the Name of God I desire you to have a care of
those people; for you may see here tha^ the Lord gives us fair warning, as you
man see in the 22 verse of this Chapter: For say^ he, If any man shall say unto
you, lo, here is Christ or lo, there is Christ, believe him not: and i^ the 22
verse of this Chapter, you may more plainly understand the reason why he give^
us so much warning of them; for false Christ^ and false Prophets shall arise,
and shall she^ signs and wonders to seduce, if it were possibl^ even the very
Elect. And indeed good people you may assure your selves yt there are suc^
people abroad; now therefore have a care o^ them: truly I do not say this or
that is he^ for you may know them by their works. An^ as James says, in the
second of James and the 14 verse, What does it profit my Brethren* though a man
say he has Faith, and have no^ works; can Faith save him? Now in the following
verses you may understand the differenc^ between him that has Faith and no
works* For if a brother and a sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and
one of you say unto them depart in peace, be you clothed and filled;
notwithstanding ye give them not these things that are needful: So is Faith, if
it have no^ works, it is dead being alone: yea a man man say, he has faith,
and I have works, show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show the^ thy
faith by thy works. Thou believe there i^ one God, thou do well, the Devils
believe and ^^emble; but will thou know vain man that faith without works is
dead, James 2 beginning at ^he 14 verse, and so to the twentieth: so may ^^e
say unto such people as do call themselves Christ, and a man cannot perceive
any such ^^orks in them; for if a man knows himself to ^ave so much worth in
him as to call himself Christ, I say I would gladly see them do such ^iraculous
deeds as he did, that is to cure the ^ame, the blind, and the sick, and to
raise the ^ead as he did: Nay, his Apostles, which call ^im Lord and Master,
yet they had the same ^ower in themselves, to do such things, as you ^ay see in
the 28 of the Acts and the 8 verse. There you may see yt Paul had power by the
^ealing of a Publican which lay sick of a fever and a bloody flux, and he but
touched him after ^e had prayed: And it came to pass that the ^ather of the
Publican lay sick of a Fever and (...) Bloody flux, to whom Paul entered in and
pray^d, and laid his hands on him, and healed him: (...) when this was done,
others also which had ^seases in the Island came and were healed; (...) you may
see by this, that the Apostle had ^me more power then ordinary men, yet ^rst
not call themselves Christ: Nay I desire ^^u to look into the 3 of the Acts,
and begin^^ng of the 1 verse, and so to the 13 verse: I ^ay you take notice,
for it is worth your observation. Now Peter and John went up together into the
Temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour, and a certain man lame from
his Mothers womb, was carried, whom they laid daily at the Temple which is
called beautiful, to ask alms of them which entered into the Temple: he seeing
Peter and John about to go into the Temple, asking alms of them, Peter
fastening his eyes upon him with John, said, Look on us; and he gave heed unto
them, expecting to have received something of them. Then Peter said, Silver nor
Gold have I none, but such a^ I have I give to thee: in the Name of Jesus o^
Nazareth rise up and walk; and he took him by the right hand and lift him up,
and immediately his feet and his ancle-bones received strength and he leaped
up, stood, and walked with them into the Temple, leaping and praising God: An^
they knew it was he which sat for alms at the gate of the Temple, and they
were filled with wonder and amazement at that which had happened unto him: And
as the lame man which was healed beheld Peter and John, and a^l the people ran
together unto them in the Porch^ which was called Solomon's; and when Peter sa^
it, he said unto the people, Ye men of Israe^ why marvel ye a^ ^his? or why
look ye so earnestly on us, as if by our own power and godlines^ we had made
this man to walk? Acts the third, and beginning at the first, and so to the
twelfth verse: So here you may see that the ^postles had great power from God,
yet they (...) not call themselves Christ, as some will (...): now for all that
you may see here they but ^^k hold of the man's hand and bid him arise, ^^d he
arose up from the ground and was ^^aled; yet I say for all this, they denied
the ^^wer of themselves, as you may see in this ^st verse: Then I say how dare
any one of (...) say they be Christ, when they are not able (...) do as his
Apostles did? for certainly if our ^ith be weak, and our works so small that
^^e fall short of his Apostles, then certainly ^e are not fit to equal our
selves so much ^ith the Lord our God as to call us Christ. ^ndeed I would
desire at the hands of Al^ighty God to guide all such into the way of
^ghteousness, and to pardon and forgive both ^^em and us for all our sins and
wickedness; (...) as for all those that does hear any that calls himself
Christ, despise him not as an enemy, ^ut rather exhort him as a brother; yet
this I ^^y unto you, as you may find it written in ^ark 13. and the 23. But
take ye heed: behold, (...) have foretold you all these things: This is a ^air
warning for us to have a care of such people, and not to be one of them: for if
I ^ould hear or see this man do such acts as our ^aviour Jesus Christ did, or
as his Apostles ^id, then there would be some ground for their professing
themselves Christ: but truly it (...) to be feared that they be as great
sinners (...) ever, if not greater, therefore ought more (...) be pitied. I
exbort you therefore in the na^ of God to pray for them. For as James says
(...) the fifth of James and at the thirteenth vers^ and so the latter end of
the Chapter; and (...) I say to you all, Is any man among you afflic^ed, let
him pray; is any man merry, let him si^ Psalms; is any man sick among you, let
him ca^^ for the Elders of the Church, and let them pra^ over him, anointing
him with the Oil of the^ Lord, and the prayer of the faithful shall save the
sick, and the Lord will raise him up, and if he have committed sins they shall
be forgiven him: b^ also in the last verse, let him know that h^ that
converteth a sinner from the error of hi^ way, shall save a soul from death,
and hides (...) multitude of sins, and the Lord give us every one grace to pray
one for another, an^ strive to forsake our wicked sins and fly t^ the Lord our
God, and forsake all other gods* And I beseech you brethren suffer this wor^ of
Exhortation to take impression in you^ hearts. Let brotherly love continue
amon^^ you, let your conversation be without covetousness, that we may all
boldly say, the Lord is my help, I will not fear what man can d^ unto me: If
any of us lack wisdom, let u^ ask it of the Lord; but let us have a care tha^
we ask it with a true and faithful heart, look^^g after Jesus Christ the Author
and Fi^^her of our faith: Love thy Neighbor as (...) self, and do to all men
as you would they ^ould do unto you; and in so doing, thou may ^^me to be one
of that blessed company which ^r Lord and our Savior Jesus Christ ^^th call so
loving, As come unto me all ye ^^at are weary and heavy laden, and I will give
^^u rest. And the Lord of his mercy send ^^ery poor soul to that blessed rest
which ne^^r will have end; and that for thy dear Son ^^r only Lord and Saviors
sake, to whom given all honor, praise, power, and domi^^on, now and for
evermore, Amen.

I am yours in Christ Jesus, ^HOMAS ROBINS.

FINIS.
^^ese Books following being of a small Price, are (...) Printed for Thomas
Passenger at the three Bibles (...) on the middle of London Bridge.
THe Christians Combat, or his true spiritual warfare: by C. Love late
Preacher of (...) Word in the City of London.

The wise Merchant, or the pearl of price: (...) T. Calvert, Minister in York.

The Book of Graces, with Prayers for Mo^^ing and Evening. These are all but 3
d a piece.

The Sinners Warning piece, or Heavens M^^senger: by T. Robins B* of D.

The Scholars Winter Garment, or the G^^ment of Righteousness: by T. R. B. of D.

Englands Colden Legacy, or a brief Des^^^ption of the manifold mercies the
Lord h^^ bestowed upon this sinful Nation.

A Wonder of wonders, or Gods people (...) worlds wonder: by R. H. a Lover of
the Tru^^

Gods Message from Heaven to Sinners (...) Earth: by T. R. B. of L.

Christ upon the Cross suffering for Sinne^ by S. S.

A Call to unconverted Sinners to turn to (...) Lord; a Book seasonable for
these Times: (...) T. P. B. of L.

The School of Learning, being Prayers (...) Morning and Evening for every day
in the we^ with Graces before and after Meat, and a she Catechism for Children.

Now or never work out your salvation w^^^ fear and trembling: by R. B.

The Virtuous Wife, or a good woman in (...) proper colors, being a new Book
setting fo^^^ the rare qualities of the truly Virtuous Wi^^ by L. P. These ten
last are sold for 2 d a pie^^

FINIS.

