AN ACCOUNT OF SUEDEN.

ADVERTISEMENT.

AN ACCOUNT OF Denmark, AS It was in the Year 1692.

The Third Edition Corrected.

Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Queen's Head, against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street, 1694.

AN ACCOUNT OF Sueden: Together with an EXTRACT OF THE History of that KINGDOM.

LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Queen's Head, against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street, 1694.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THE kind Reception which the Public has given to a late Book, called, An
Account of Denmark, (whereof Three Large Editions have come abroad in less than
Three Months) encouraged me to seek after an Account of Sueden, I found all
sorts of People desirous to be informed in the state of this other Northern
Crown.

After diligent Enquiry, I was at last so Fortunate as to light on this Account
in Manuscript, written some few years ago by a very Able and Learned Gentleman;
and hearing that several Copies of it were got abroad, I considered it might at
last chance to come forth in Print less Correct than at present I undertake to
give it the World, whom I pretend to oblige by a very Accurate Edition;
insomuch that I hope the Author himself will not be offended at this
Undertaking, since it is likely 'twould have been published by others, not so
well to his Advantage.

You will find here a Relation of Matter of Fact only, though I will venture to
say, a very Exact one; and such as I doubt not but will be very Entertaining to
the Reader.

What shares the Clergy, the Army, or the Court, had in the Management of
Affairs from time to time in Sueden, we have reason to believe are faithfully
delivered here; the Ingenious Author of this Account being a Person of so known
and established a Reputation.

For so much as relates to my Publishing this Book, I confess ingeneously, it is
as unknown to the Author, as his Person is to me; but his Candor, Parts, and
Learning appear plainly enough by this Work, that he took great Care and Pains
to compile it. If it prove to the Satisfaction of the Public, as I doubt not
but it will, I shall not lose my Labor, nor you the Pleasure and Benefit of it.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. OF Sueden in general, Page 1. Chap. II. Of the Provinces and Cities
of Sueden, 22. Chap. III. Of the Laws of Sueden, 32. Chap. IV. Of the Natural
Inclinations and Dispositions of the Suedes, 45. Chap. V. Of their Religion,
53. Chap. VI. Of the Universities of Sueden, 63. Chap. VII. Of their Marriages
and Funerals, 69. Chap. VIII. Of the Royal Family, and Court of Sueden, 73.
Chap. IX. Of the Government of Sueden, Page 86. Chap. X. Of the Privy Council,
113. Chap. XI. Of the States of Sueden, 116. Chap. XII. Of the Revenue of the
Kingdom, 121. Chap. XIII. Of the Forces of Sueden, 126. Chap. XIV. Of the Trade
of Sueden, 142. Chap. XV. Of the Suedish Conquests, 156. Chap. XVI. Of the
Interest of Sueden, 159. Chap. XVII. An Extract of the History of Sueden, 166.
AN ACCOUNT OF SUEDEN.
CHAP. I.
Of Sueden in general.
THE Dominions subject to the Crown of Sueden have in this and the last Age
been so enlarged, by the Acquisitions, or (as some call them) Encroachments
made upon all their Neighbors, that they do not properly fall under one
General Description; the Qualities and Characters of some of its Provinces
being as different as their Situation: So that the Short View here offered,
will not reach the more distant parts, but chiefly respects the Kingdom of
Sueden, and Dukedom of Finland, which have the Baltic Sea on the South, the
unpassable Mountains of Norway on the West, Lapland on the North, and Moscovy
on the East; being extended from 56 to 69 Degrees of Northern Latitude, and
from 32 to 55 in Longitude; and consequently are more than twice as big as the
Kingdom of France: But the Abatements that must be made for several Seas, and
many great Lakes, some whereof above 80 English Miles long, and 20 broad, as
also for Rocks, Woods, Heaths, and Morasses, that cover very much of these
Countries, will reduce the habitable part to a very small portion,
comparatively to the Extent of the whole.

The Soil in places capable of Cultivating, is tolerably Fruitful, though
seldom above half a foot deep; and therefore more easily Plowed, as it
frequently is by one Maid and an Ox, and is generally best where there is
least of it, that is, in the little spaces between the Rocks; and frequently
the Barren Land enriched with the Ashes of Trees growing on the places that are
burnt, and the Seed raked among the Ashes, produces a plentiful Crop without
farther Cultivation.

This practice is so ancient, that their Writers derive the Name of Sueden from
a word in their Language that expresses it; but the danger of destroying the
Woods has of late occasioned some Laws to limit that Custom.

If the Inhabitants were industrious, above what necessity forces them to, they
might at least have Corn sufficient of their own; but as things are managed,
they have not, nor can subsist without great Importations of all sorts of Grain
from the Country of Leif-land, and other parts of Germany, adjacent to the
Baltic Sea: And notwithstanding these Supplies, the poorest sort in many
places remote from Traffic, are fain to grind the Bark of Birch-Trees to mix
with their Corn and make Bread, of which they have not always plenty.

The Cattle, as in other Northern Countries, are generally of a very small
size; neither can the Breed be bettered by bringing in larger from abroad,
which soon degenerate; because in Summer the Grass is much less nourishing than
in the places from whence they came; and in the Winter they are usually
half-starved, for want of Fodder of all kinds, which often falls so very short,
that they are forced to unthatch their Houses to keep a part of their Cattle
alive. Their Sheep bear a very course Wool, only fit to make Clothing for the
Peasants. The Horses, especially the Finnish, tho small, are hardy, vigorous,
strong, sure-footed and nimble Trotters, which is of great use to them, because
of the length of their Winters, and their fitness for Sleds, which is their
only Carriage in that Season; and the Soldiers do pretend, that in War they are
not only able to resist, but to break a Body of the best German Horse.

Of Wild Beasts, which are very plentiful in these parts, Bears, Elkes, Deer,
and Hares, are hunted for their Flesh, as also, together which Wolves, Foxes,
Wild-Cats, etc. for their Furs and Hides. They hunt with less Ceremony than
elsewhere is used, taking all advantages to shoot their Game, at which they are
generally very dextrous. Parks there are but few, and meanly stocked, the
Charge of feeding Deer all Winter exceeding the Profit, and abating the
Pleasure of them. There are no Rabbets in these Countries, but what are brought
in for Curiosity, and kept Tame. In Winter Foxes and Squirrels somewhat change
Color, and become Grayish, but Hares turn white as Snow.

Fowl both Wild and Tame are very plentiful and good in their kind, except
Sea-Fowl, which feed and taste of Fish: The most common are Orras and Keders,
the former of the bigness of a Hen, the other of a Turkey; as also Partridges,
and a Bird somewhat resembling them, called Yerpers. There are taken in Winter
great numbers of small Birds, as Thrushes, Blackbirds, and Sydenscwans; the
last of the bigness of Veldefares, but better meat, supposed to come from
Lapland, or yet farther North; and have their Name from the beautifulness of
their Feathers, some of which are tipped at the point with Scarlet. Pigeons there
are, those of the Woods very rare, because of the Hawks; and of the
House-Pigeons none but what are kept tame, because their Food is scarce, and
the danger of the Hawks great if they go abroad. Eagles, Hawks, and other
rapacious Fowl abound most in the Northern and Desert parts, whither Nature
seems to call them; as may be gathered from a Story credibly related, of a
large Hawk shot some years ago in the Northern Parts of Finland, which had on
one Leg a small Plate of Gold with this Inscription, Ie Suis au Roy; on the
other, one of Silver with these words, Duc de Chevereuse me guard.

The chiefest Lakes in Sueden are the Vetter, the Wenner, and Maeler; the first
in Ostrogothia, remarkable for its foretelling of Storms, by a continual
Thundering Noise the day before in that Quarter whence they arise; as also for
the sudden breaking of the Ice upon it, which sometimes surprises Travelers,
and in half an hour becomes Navigable: For its great depth, in some places
above 300 Fathom, tho no part of the Baltic Sea exceed 50; it supplies the
River Motala, which runs through Norcopingh, where it has a Fall of about 30
Foot, and some Winters is so choked up with Ice, that for many hours no Water
passes. The second is in Westrogothia, from which issues the River Elve, that,
falling down a Rock near Sixty Foot, passes by Gottenburgh. The third empties
its self at Stockholm, furnishing one side of the Town with Fresh Water, as the
Sea does the other with Salt: These and abundance of other Lakes, whereof many
like Ponds have no Vents, and are called Inn-Seas, are not ill stored with
variety of Fish, Salmon, Pikes, Perch, Tench, Trouts, Eels, and many other
sorts unknown elsewhere, of which the most plentiful is the Streamling, a Fish
less than a Pilcher, taken in great quantities, and salted in Barrels, and
distributed over all the Country. Besides, the North-Bottom or Bay that
separates Sueden and Finland, abounds with Seals, of which a considerable
Quantity of Train Oil is made and exported; and in the Lakes in Finland are
vast quantities of Pikes, which being taken, are salted, dried, and sold at
very cheap Rates.

These Lakes are of great use for the convenience of Carriages both in Summer
by Boats, and by Sleds in Winter; and among them and on the Seacoasts are
almost innumerable Islands of different Sizes, whereof there are in Sueden
above 6000 that are Inhabited, the rest are either bare Rocks, or covered with
Wood: Gotland, Oland, and Aland, are Isles of large Extent, one being Sixty
miles long, and the others little less.

Their Woods and vast Forests overspread much of the Country, and are for the
most part of Pines, Fir, Beech, Birch, Alder, Juniper, and some Oak; especially
in the Province of Bleaking, the Trees growing in most places so close
together, and lying to rot where they fall, that the Woods are scarce passable.

These afford a plentiful and cheap firing, and being generally very straight
and tall, are easily convertible into Timber, fit for all uses. In the parts
near the Mines, the Woods are much destroyed, but that want is so well supplied
from distant places by the convenience of Rivers and Winter-Carriages, that
they have Charcoal above six times as cheap as it is in England, tho indeed it
is not half so good.

Of Mines in Sueden, there is one of Silver, into which Workmen are let down in
Baskets to the first Floor, which is 105 Fathom under ground; the Roof there,
is as high as a Church, supported by vast Arches of Oar; thence the Descent is
by Ladders or Baskets to the lowest Mine, above forty Fathom, where they now
Work. They have no Records so ancient as the first Discovery either of this or
the Copper Mine, which must needs have been the work of many Ages; the Oar
seldom yields above 4 per Cent. and requires great pains to Refine it; they are
also at the charge of a Water-Mill to drain the Mine, and have the benefit of
another that draws up the Oar. It yearly produces about Twenty thousand Crowns
of Fine Silver, of which the King has the Pre-emption, paying one fourth less
than the real Value. The Copper-Mine is about eighty Fathom deep, of great
extent, but subject to damage by the falling in of the Roof; yet that is
sometimes recompensed by the abundance of Oar that the ruined Pillars yield,
tho most commonly the loss in that Case is very great; the occasion of which
falls is attributed to the throwing the Earth and Stones, brought out, upon the
Ground over the Mine, by which the Pillars become overcharged, and give way;
and the reason of this is said to be, that the profit arising to those that are
concerned, is so little, that they are not able to work it off as they ought;
and unless the King abates considerable part of the Profit arising to the Crown
from this Mine, it is believed it will in few years be at a stand, especially if
the designs of making Copper, that are on foot elsewhere, do take any tolerable
effect. The Copper yearly made out of this Mine, amounts to the value of about
Two hundred thousand pounds, of which the King has a fourth part, not by way of
Preemption, but in kind; besides, that upon the remainder, he has a Custom of
25 per Cent. when it is exported unwrought.

Lately a Gentleman of Italy came to Sueden with Proposals to make Copper a
shorter and cheaper way than has hitherto been practiced, as to make that in
five Days, which before required three Weeks, and with one fifth part of the
Charcoal, and with fewer hands. The Bargain was made, and his Reward agreed to
be a Hundred thousand Crowns; the first Proof he made succeeded to admiration;
but when he came to work in earnest, and had got his new-invented Ovens built
to his mind, the Miners, as he complained, picked out the very worst Oar, and
were otherwise so envious and untractable, that he failed of success, and lost
his Reward, and not without difficulty obtained leave to buy Oar, and practice
his Invention at his own Charge, as he now does.

Iron-Mines and Forges are in great numbers, especially toward the Mountainous
parts, where they have the convenience of Water-falls to turn their Mills. From
these, besides supplying the Country, there is yearly exported Iron to the
value of near Three hundred thousand pounds. But of late years, the number of
these Forges has been so much increased, that each endeavoring to undersell
(...) and scarce can be stopped till it come at some Lake, or very large Plain.

In the Summer season the Fields are clothed with variety of Flowers, and the
whole Country overspread with Strawberries, Rasberries, Currants, and the like,
which grow upon every Rock. In their Gardens, Mellons are brought to good
perfection in dry years; but Apricocks, Peaches, and other Wall-fruits, are
almost as rare as Oranges; they have Cherries of several sorts, and some
tolerably good, which cannot be said of their Apples, Pears, and Plumbs, that
are neither common, nor well-tasted; all kinds of Roots are in plenty, and
contribute much to the Nourishment of the poor People.

The Sun at highest is above the Horizon of Stockholm Eighteen hours and an
half, and for some Weeks makes a continual Day. In Winter, the Days are
proportionably shorter, the Sun being up but five hours and a half, which
defect is so well supplied as to Lights, by the Moon, and the whiteness of the
Snow, and clearness of the Sky, that Traveling by Night is as usual as by Day;
and Journeys begun in the Evening as frequently as in the Morning. The want of
the Sun's heat is repaired by Stoves within doors, and warm Furs abroad;
instead of which, the meaner sort use Sheepskins, and other the like Defenses;
and are generally better provided with Clothing, befitting their Condition,
and the Climate they live in, than the Common People of any part of Europe, tho
where any neglect or failure happens, it usually proves fatal, and occasions
the loss of Noses, or other Members, and sometimes of Life; unless the usual
Remedy to expel the Frost when it has seized any part, be early applied, which
is to remain in the Cold, and rub the part affected with Snow, till the Blood
return to it again.

What has been said in relation to Sueden, is in the main applicable to
Finland, except only that hitherto no Mines have been discovered there. Its
chiefest Commodities are Pitch, and Tar, all sorts of Wooden-ware, Dried Fish,
Cattle, Train Oil, etc.

The Remainder also of this Discourse, in what relates to the Laws, Government,
Customs, and Natural Dispositions of the People, equally belongs to them, with
this difference, that the Finlanders are rather more hardy and laborious, more
Clownish, Ignorant, and Superstitious, than the Suedes.

CHAP. II
Of the Provinces and Cities of Sueden.
THE Country is divided into Twenty five Provinces, each of which is governed
by an Officer, called Landshofdingh, whose Authority comprehends that of Lord
Leiutenant, and Sheriff together, except where there is a General Governor, as
in Finland, and upon the Borders of Denmark and Norway, to whom the Governor of
each Province is subordinate, and has thereby a more restrained Authority;
these Officers are placed by the King, and take an Oath, to keep the Province
for his Majesty, and his Heirs, to govern according to the Laws of Sueden, and
such Instructions as they shall receive from his Majesty, and to quit the
Province whenever he shall call them thence.

To them and their Subordinate Officers (who are all of the King's choosing) the
Execution of Judicial Sentences, the Collection of the King's Revenues, the
care of Forests, Parks, and other Crown Lands, etc. is committed.

Of Cities, those of Stockholm, Gottenburgh, Calmar, and Two or Three more, may
deserve that Name: The other Corporations, which in all make not an Hundred,
scarce exceed some Villages in England; they are all Governed by Burgomasters,
and Counselors Chosen by the King out of their own Body, or at least, such as
are of the quality of Burghers, no Gentleman accepting of those Employments.
Their Offices and Salaries are for Life, or rather during their good Behavior.
The Privileges of Cities are derived from the King, and for the most part are
owing to the Wisdom of Gustavus Adolphus, the Author of their best and most
regular Constitutions at Home, as well as of their Glory Abroad.

The City of Stockholm lies in 59 Degrees, 20 Min. North Latitude, and about 41
Longitude. About 300 years ago, it was only a bare Island with Two or Three
Cottages for Fishers; but upon the Building of a Castle there, to stop the
inroads of the Russians, and the Translation of the Court thither, it grew by
degrees to surpass the other more Ancient Cities, and it is at present the
Metropolis of this Kingdom, and supposed to be as Populous as Bristol.

The Castle here, which is covered with Copper, is a Place of no Strength or
Beauty, but of great use, being a spacious Building, that, besides Entertaining
the Court, furnishes Room for most of the great Offices, the National Court of
Justice, Colleges of War, Chancery, Treasury, Reduction, Liquidation,
Commerce, Execution; as also, an Armory, Chapel, Library, Archives, etc. It
Lodges very few of the Inferior Officers and Servants of the Court; they,
together with the Foot Guards, being Quartered upon the Burghers at their
Landlords Charge for Lodging, Fire and Candle.

In this City there are Seven large Churches built of Brick, and covered with
Copper, besides Two more now Building, and Three or Four Wooden Chapels.

The Palace of the Nobility, which is the place of their Assembly at the
Convention of Estates, and the Depository of their Privileges, Titles, and
such other Records as concern their Body, is a very stately Pile; as is also
the Bank, built at the City's Charge; which, together with several Magnificent
Houses of the Nobility, are covered with Copper, and make a handsome Prospect;
most of the Burghers Houses are built of Brick, except in the Suburbs, where
they are of Wood, and thereby exposed to the danger of Fire; which commonly,
when it gets to a head, destroys all before it, in the Quarter where it
happens; to repair which Misfortune, they sometimes send the Dimensions of the
House they intend to build into Finland, where the Walls and several
Separations are built of Pieces of Timber laid one upon another, and joined at
the Corners, and afterward marked, taken down, and sent by Water to Stockholm,
there to be set up and finished, and when they are kept in good Repair, will
last Thirty or Forty Years, and are warmer, cleanlier, and more healthful than
those of either Brick or Stone. To prevent the Danger of Fire, the City is
divided into Twelve Wards, and in each of these is a Master and Four
Assistants, who upon notice of any Fire are immediately to repair to it, as
also all Porters and Laborers, and to range themselves under the Master of
their respective Wards: There is also a Fire-Watch by Night, who walks about
only to that purpose; and in each Church-Steeple Watch is kept, and a Bell
Tolled upon the first appearance of any Fire.

The Government of this City is in the hands of the Great Stadtholder, who is
also a Privy Counselor; he sits once a Week in the Town House, and presides
also in the College of Execution, assisted by an Under Stadtholder, and the
Bailiff of the Castle; next to him are the Four Burghmasters, one for Justice,
another for Trade, the Third for the Polity of the City, and the Fourth has the
Inspection over all Public and Private Buildings, and determines such Cases as
arise on that account; with them the Counselors of the City always sit and
give their Votes, the Majority of which concludes: Their Number is uncertain,
but usually about Twenty, most Merchants and Shopkeepers, or such as have
served the King in some Inferior Employments; and besides their Salary they
have an Immunity from such Impositions as are laid on the Inhabitants, to
support the Government of the City, which pays all its Officers and Servants,
and maintains a Guard of 300 men, and defrays the Charge of all Public
Buildings and Repairs. To support this Expense, besides a Duty belonging to the
City, upon Goods Imported and Exported, (which is about 4 per Cent. of the
Customs paid the King, and amounts to about 4000 l. per An.) the Magistrates
impose a Yearly Tax on the Burghers, in which they are assisted by a
Common Council of Forty eight (which chooses its own Members), and meets every
Spring to proportion the Payments for the ensuing Year. On the Richer Traders
they usually impose 40, 50, or 60 l. sterling; and upon others of a meaner
Condition, as Shoe-makers, Tailors, etc. 5 or 6 l. and no Housekeeper less than
15 s. besides Quartering the Guards, Inferior Officers, and Servants of the
Court, with other lesser Charges; which all together, would be thought a great
burden even in Richer Countries; neither is it otherwise esteemed by the
Inhabitants of this City, who can scarce be kept in heart by the Privileges
they enjoy, as well in Customs, as in the Trade of the Place, which must needs
pass through their hands; the Natives of other parts of the Kingdom, as well as
Foreigners, being obliged to deal only with the Burghers, except those of the
Gentry that make Iron, who have a Privilege to sell it immediately to Strangers.

This City is in a manner the Staple of Sueden, to which most of the Goods of
their own Growth, viz. Iron, Copper, Wire, Pitch, Tarr, Masts, Deals, etc. are
brought to be Exported. The greatest part of the Commodities Imported from
abroad come to this Port, where there is a Haven capable of receiving 1000 Sail
of Ships, and has a Bridge or Key near an English Mile long, to which the
greatest Vessels may lie with their Broadsides: The only Inconvenience is, That
it is Ten Miles from the Sea, and the River very crooked, and no Tides.

CHAP. III.
Of the Laws of Sueden.
THE Laws of Sueden were anciently as various as the Provinces were numerous,
each of which had Statutes and Customs peculiar to its self, enacted as
occasion required by the Lagh-man or Governor of the Province, who was chosen
by the People, and Invested with great Authority, especially while the Kingdom
was Elective, his Suffrage concluding the Province he governed. This variety
was necessarily attended with great Confusion; for remedy whereof, about
Four-score Years ago, one Body of Laws was compiled for the direction of the
whole Kingdom; yet this Collection is but an imperfect piece, and the Laws so
few, and concieved in such general terms, that in most cases they need the
assistance of the Civil Law; and after all, the Final Determination depends
much upon the Inclinations of the Bench; which in a poor Country, where
Salaries are small, is often filled with such as are of Weak Parts, and subject
to Corruption upon very small Temptations. The Effects of this would be more
visible, if each Superior Court did not keep a Cheque upon the Lower, and the
King's Court of Revision overawe them all, to which all Civil Causes importing
the Sum of 70 l. are appealable; and very few end before they have been brought
thither. In this Supreme Court his Majesty very frequently sits with great
Patience and Application; and in Seven Years time has determined more Causes
than the Senators did in Twenty before.

His Majesty is observed always to make a short Mental Prayer at first sitting
down there.

In this Court the President of the Chancery, and Two or Three other privy
Counselors, do also sit, so does the Chancellor of the Court (an Officer next
in degree to a Privy Counselor) who is President of the Under Revision, where
he and Two Secretaries do put Business into a Method fit to be brought before
the King.

The Courts of Justice inferior to this are of three Degrees; of the lowest
Degree of first Instance, there is one in each Corporation, (besides Stockholm,
in which there are Three), as also in each District or Territory, whereof every
Province contains several, some above Twenty; in the former (Cities) an
Alderman or Counselor presides, and has some of his Brethren for Assistants;
in the latter, the Governor of the Territory, with a standing Jury; his Court
is Ambulatory, and usually kept near or upon the place where the Fact or
Trespass was committed.

In these Courts Examinations are taken, and matters not exceeding Forty
Shillings are determined, the rest transmitted to the next Superior Court, of
which in every Corporation there is one, where the Burghmaster is President,
and the Aldermen Assistants; and so in every Province there is one or more of
these Courts, the President whereof retains the name of Lagh-man, without other
Authority than that of a Judge; from these all Causes of Blood must be
transmitted to the respective National Courts, where they are determined
without further Appeal; and thither also all Civil Actions, not exceeding 20 l.
may be appealed; of these National Courts there are Three, one for the Kingdom
of Sueden, held at Stockholm; another for the Kingdom of Gothia, kept at
Iencopingh; and a Third for the Dukedom of Finland, at Abo: In each of these a
Privy Counselor is President, and above half the Assessors are to be
Gentlemen: All these Courts sit continually, or at most have but short
Vacations; and not being pestered with too much Formality give Causes a speedy
dispatch, unless they be retarded by some underhand Engagements.

Actions relating to the Sea are Triable in the ordinary Courts, according to
their Sea-Laws, founded upon those Ancient ones of Wisby in Gothland, which
have formerly been as famous in the Baltic Sea, as the Laws of the Rhodes and
Oleron in other places. The Court of Admiralty has not any peculiar
Jurisdiction in the Administration of these Laws, but only in such matters as
directly concern the King's Fleet, and in some places that belong immediately
to the Admiralty.

For Causes Ecclesiastical there is a Consistory in each Diocese, of which the
respective Bishop is President, where Causes of Bastardy, Contracts of
Marriage, and other matters of that nature, are tried; and Church Censures of
Penance, Divorce, etc. inflicted: These Courts have not Power to administer an
Oath, nor to inflict any Corporal Punishment. From them there lies an Appeal to
the respective National Court, and in some Cases to the King, as in all other
matters.

For matters relating to the Mines, besides Inferior Courts, and Officers
settled in the respective parts of the Country, a General Court, called the
College of the Mines, sits at Stockholm, of which most commonly the President
of the Treasury is chief, with a Vice President, and other Assessors; the Laws
in this regard are more exact and particular than in other matters, and for the
most part Justice very carefully administered.

The Power of executing all Judicial Sentences is lodged in the Governors of
the Provinces, the Stadtholders of Stockholm, and other places, and from them
derived to Inferior Officers, who are accountable to the National Courts;
whither they may be Convened and punished, upon plain Proof of Default. But the
Proof being difficult, and Ministers of Justice apt to favor each other, they
take great liberty to delay Execution, or to arbitrate, and put their own sense
upon Sentences; so that this part of Justice is administered the worst of all
others, and has an Influence not only at home, but lessens the Credit of the
Suedish Subjects abroad, against whom Justice cannot be obtained without great
difficulty.

The ordinary Charges of Lawsuits are no where more moderate than in Sueden;
the greatest burden arising from a late Constitution, That all Declarations,
Acts, and Sentences, must be written upon Sealed Paper of different Prizes,
from Two pence to Seven Shillings a Sheet, according to the Quality of the
Cause, the Benefit of which accrues to the King, and is computed to bring in
about 3000 l. a year; other Charges are very few, every man being permitted (in
Criminal Actions compelled) to plead his own Cause: Accordingly the Practice of
the Law is below a Gentleman, and rather the Refuge than the Choice of meaner
persons, who are very few in Number, and for the most part very poor.

The Custom of a Jury of Twelve men is so ancient in Sueden, that their Writers
pretend it had its Original among them, and was thence derived to other
Nations; but at present it is disused every where, except only in the Lower
Courts in the Country, and there the Jurymen are for Life, and have Salaries;
they have this peculiar to themselves, that among them there must be an
unanimous Concurrence to determine a Cause, which in other Courts is done by a
Majority of Voices.

Titles to Estates are rendered more secure, and less subject to Contests, by
the Registers that are kept of all Sales and Alienations, as well as of other
Engagements of them: The Purchaser running the hazard of having an
After-Bargain take place of his, if he omit the Recording of his Transaction in
the proper Court.

In Criminal Matters, where the Fact is not very evident, or where the Judges
are very favorable, the Defendant is admitted to purge himself by Oath, to
which is oftentimes added the Oath of Six or Twelve other men* who are all
Vouchers of his Integrity.

Treason, Murder, Double Adultrey, Burning of Houses, Witchcraft, and the like
Heinous Crimes, are punished with Death, which is executed by hanging of Men,
and beheading of Women; to which burning alive or dead, quartering and hanging
in Chains, is sometimes added, according to the Nature of the Crime. Criminals
of the Gentry and Nobility, are usually shot to Death.

The Punishment of Stealing, is of late instead of Death, changed into a kind
of perpetual Slavery, the Guilty party being condemned to work all his Life for
the King, in making Fortifications, or other Drudgery, and always has a Collar
of Iron about his Neck, with a Bow coming over his Head, to which is a Bell
fastened, that rings as he goes along.

Duels between Gentlemen, if the one Party be killed, are punished with the
Survivor's Death, and a Note of Infamy upon the Memory of both; if neither be
killed, they are both condemned to a Prison, with Bread and Water for two
years, to which is added a Fine of 1000 Crowns; or one years Imprisonment, and
2000 Crowns. Reparation of Honor in case of Affront, is referred to the
respective National Court, where Recantation and Public Begging of Pardon is
usually inflicted.

Estates as well acquired, as inherited, descend to the Children in equal
Portions, of which a Son has two, and a Daughter one; nor is it in the power of
the Parents to alter this Proportion without the Intervention of a Judicial
Sentence in case of their Children's disobedience, only they may bequeath a
Tenth of their acquired Possessions to such Child, or other, as they will
favor. Where an Estate descends encumbered with Debts, the Heir usually takes
two or three Months time, as the Law allows, to search into the Condition of
the Deceased's Estate, and then either accepts the Inheritance, or leaves it to
the Law, which in that case Administers; as lately, besides other Instances,
was practiced upon the decease of the late Rix Drost Count Magnus De la
Gardier, the King's Uncle.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Natural Inclinations and Dispositions of the Suedes.
THE Nature of the Climate, which affords a very healthful and dry, as well as
sharp Air, disposes the Natives to a vigorous Constitution; and that confirmed
by a hardy Education, course Fare, hard Lodgings, etc. qualifies them to endure
whatever uneasy Circumstances befall them, better than those that are born in a
more moderate Country, and more indulgently bred.

But on the other side, it seems as if the severity of the Clime should in a
manner cramp the Faculties of their Bodies, and indispose them for any great
degree of Dexterity and Nimbleness; and the same may be said in a great
measure, of their Minds too, which seldom are found endued with any eminent
share of Vivacity or Pregnancy of Wit; yet by Industry, Experience, and
Traveling, not a few of them arrive at a mature and solid Judgment, being led
by their Genius to serious things, in which they that have Patience to go
through with the Studies they apply themselves to, become Excellent, and merit
the Title of great and able Men; but this seems not to be the Talent of this
Nation, they being generally more apt to sit down with superficial
Acquisitions, than to pursue their Studies to a fundamental degree.

This Disposition of Body and Mind qualifies them more for a Life of Labor and
Fatigue, than of Art and Curiosity, and the effect of it is visible in all
Orders of Men among them.

The Nobility mostly apply themselves to a Military Life, in which they are
more famous for Courage, and enduring Hardships, than for Stratagems and
Intrigues. They that are employed in the Administration of Civil Affairs, tho
they are indeed Laborious and Indefatigable in their business, yet they seldom
raise their Speculations above what the necessity of their Employments require,
their Abilities proceeding not so much from Study, as Experience in the Tract
of business.

In point of Learning, they, like their Neighbors the Germans, are more given
to Transcribe, and make Collections, than Digest their own Thoughts; and
commonly proportion their Studies to their occasions.

In matters of Trade, they more easily do the Drudgery, than dive into the
Mystery, either of Commerce or Manufactures, in which they usually set up for
Masters before they be half taught; so that in all such things as require
Ingenuity, Neatness, or Dexterity, they are forced to be served by Strangers.
Their Common Soldiers endure Cold and Hunger, and long Marches, and hard Labor
to admiration; but they learn their Duty very slowly, and are serviceable more
by their Obedience to command, and standing their Ground, than by any great
forwardness to attack their Enemy, or in nimbleness and address in executing
their Orders; and so their Peasants are tolerably Laborious when need compels
them, but have little regard to Neatness in their Work, and are hardly brought
to quit their old, slow, and toilsome Methods, for such new Inventions as are
more dextrous and easy.

The Dispositions more peculiar to the several degrees of these People, are,
That the Nobility and Gentry are naturally Men of Courage, and of a Warlike
Temper, have a graceful Deportment, inclined to value themselves at a High
rate, and make the best Appearance they possibly can, that they may gain the
respect of others; and are therefore more excessive in the number of their
Attendants, Sumptuous Buildings, and Rich Apparel, than in the plentifulness of
their Tables, or other less observed Occasions. They never descend to any
Employments in the Church, the Practice of Law or Physic, or the Exercise of
any Trade; and tho to gain experience in Maritine Affairs, they submit to the
lowest Offices abroad, yet at home there is but one Example known of a
Gentleman, that accepted the Command of a Merchant's Ship.

The Clergy are but moderately Learned, and little acquainted with the Disputes
about Religion, as having no Adversaries to oppose; they affect Gravity, and
long Beards; are esteemed for their Hospitality, and have great Authority among
the Common People. The Burghers are not very Intelligent in Trade, nor able to
do their business without Credit from abroad; rather inclined to impose upon
those they can overreach, than follow their Calling in a fair way. The
Peasants, when Sober, are very obsequious and respectful, but Drink makes them
mad and ungovernable; most of them live in a very poor Condition, and are
taught by necessity to practice several Arts in a rude manner, as the making
their Shoes, Clothes, etc. the several Instruments of Husbandry, and other
necessaries, that they cannot spare Money to buy: And to keep them to this, as
also to favor the Cities, it is not permitted to more than one Tailor, or
other such Artisan, to dwell in the same Parish, tho it be never so large, as
many of them are above twenty Miles in compass.

In general, it may be said of the whole Nation, that they are a People very
Religious in their way, and constant frequenters of the Church, eminently Loyal
and Affected to Monarchy, Grave even to Formality; Sober, more out of
necessity, than Principles of temperance; apt to entertain Suspicions, and to
envy each other, as well as Strangers; more inclined to pilfering, and such
secret Frauds, than to such open Violences, as breaking of Houses, or Robbing
on the Highways: Crimes as rarely committed in this, as in any Country whatever.

CHAP. V.
Of the Religion of Sueden.
CHRISTIANITY was not received into Sueden, till about the beginning of the
Ninth Century; and not into Finland till near three hundred Years after; and if
not first Preached, was at least first Established by English Divines, of whom
the chiefest was St. Sigfrid, who, as their Histories relate, quitted the
Archbishopric of York, to become the Apostle of the Goths, as they style him;
with him three of his Nephews that he brought thither, were Martyred by the
Heathen Goths. So also was St. Eskill, and other English, by the Suedes; and
about the Year 1150. St. Henry, an English Bishop, accompanied St. Erick, King
of Sueden, in his Expedition to Finland, which the King conquered, and the
Bishop converted into Christianity; he also was Martyred by the Infidels, and
lies buried at Abo, the Metropolis of that Country.

The Reformation, as well there, as in Denmark and Norway, began soon after the
Neighboring parts of Germany had embraced Luther's Tenets, and was established
according to his Platform. The Tyranny of King Christian the Second, who then
wore these three Northern Crowns, gave an opportunity to Gustavus, the Founder
of the present Royal Family, both to alter Religion, and advance himself to the
Regal Dignity, which till that time was Elective, but was then made Hereditary
to his Family; in which it has since continued, as the Lutheran Religion has
also done in the Country, never but once disturbed from abroad, and since that
disturbance never distracted at home with Nonconformity; all the Orders of Men
agreeing in a constant Attendance on Divine Service, and a Zeal for their own
Way, without any nice Enquiries into disputable Points, either in their own
Tenets, or those of other Churches; whereby it becomes the business of their
Preachers, rather to persuade the Practice of Piety, than to oppose the
Doctrine of others, or defend their own.

The Church is governed by an Archbishop and Ten Bishops, whose Studies are
confined to their own Employments, being never called to Council, but only at
the Assembly of the States, nor troubled with the Administration of any Secular
Affair: their Revenues are very moderate, the Archbishop of Upsall not
Importing 400 l. a year, and the Bishoprics after that Proportion. Under them
are Seven or Eight Superintendents, who have all the Power of Bishops, and only
want the Name; and over each Ten Churches is a Provost or Rural Dean, with some
Authority over the Inferior Clergy, of whom the Sum total may best be computed
by the Number of Churches, which in Sueden and Finland is short of Two
thousand; to which the Addition of Chaplains and Curates will increase the Body
of the Clergy to near Four thousand persons; they are all the Sons of Peasants
or mean Burghers, and can therefore content themselves with the small Income of
their Places, which besides more inconsiderable Dues, arises from Glebe-Lands,
and one Third of the Tithes, of which the other two Thirds are annexed to the
Crown, to be employed in Pious Uses: However, the Clergy have generally
wherewithal to exercise Hospitality, and are the constant Refuge of Poor
Travelers, especially Strangers, who use to go from Priest to Priest, as
elsewhere from Constable to Constable.

The Clergy of each Diocese, upon the Death of their Bishop, propose Three
persons to the King, who either chooses one of them, or some other, to succeed
in that Office; which is also practiced in the Choice of Superintendents. In
the Choice of an Archbishop all the Chapters in the Kingdom vote, but the
Determination is altogether in the King's breast. His Majesty has also the
Patronage of most Churches, some few only being in the Disposal of the
Nobility. Many of their Churches are adorned with variety of Sculptures,
Painting, Gilding, etc. All of them are kept neat and clean, and in good
Repair, furnished as well in Country as City with Rich Altar-Clothes, Copes,
and other Vestments.

For the more regular Government of the Church it has been found necessary to
cause the Ancient Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons to be revised by a Committee
chosen out of the several Bodies of the Estates, who have spent some years in
that matter, and at last presented the King with a New System of Church-Laws;
wherein his Majesty, having caused such Alterations to be made as he thought
fit, has lately approved and published them.

Of these* some that concern their Religion in general, shall here be taken
notice of. By these New Canons it is ordained, That

If any Suedish Subject change his Religion, he shall be banished the Kingdom,
and lose all Right of Inheritance both for himself and his Descendants.

If any continue Excommunicated above a Year, he shall be Imprisoned a Month
with Bread and Water, and then banished.

If any bring into the Country Teachers of another Religion, he shall be Fined
and Banished.

Foreign Ministers shall enjoy the Free Exercise of their Religion, only for
themselves and Families.

Strangers of a different Religion shall have no Public Exercise of it; and
their Children shall be baptized by Lutheran Ministers, and educated in that
Religion* otherwise they shall not have the Privileges of Suedish Subjects.

These Laws, as they oblige the Clergy to a more constant Attendance on all the
parts of their Duty, than has formerly been practiced, so they require the
Laity to frequent the Church on all occasions; and the Civil Magistrates,
especially on Days of great Solemnity, make very strict search, and punish such
as are found absent from Church without a just Excuse, with Imprisonment and
other Severities: But the Clergy are not entrusted with the sole Administration
of these Laws, nor empowered by them to transact matters of any great moment,
without the concurrence of the Civil Power; for besides that many Causes,
formerly Triable in Ecclesiastical Courts, are now transferred to the Secular
Magistrates; the King reserves to his own cognizance several cases of that
kind, especially the Point of Excommunication, which the Clergy are not
permitted to pronounce against any one, till the King has been acquainted with
the Case, and gives leave; which Caution is used because of the consequence,
which is, the Loss of a Subject.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Universities of Sueden.
LEARNING, whatever their Modern Writers pretend, can plead no great Antiquity
in this Country; the Institution of an University at Upsall being not above
Three hundred years ago; and few Monuments extant of a more Ancient Date, but
only Funeral Inscriptions, rudely cut upon Rocks and unhew'n Stones, which are
every where found; but as they have no Date, so they seldom express more than
the Names of Persons, of whom no other Memory remains; that which makes them
most remarkable is, That they are writ in the Ancient Gothic Language, and the
Runick Character.

The most Curious Piece of Learning among them, is a Translation of the
Evangelists into the Gothic Tongue, done about Twelve or Thirteen hundred Years
ago, by Ulphila, a Bishop of the Goths in Thracia, of which they have the sole
Ancient Manuscript Copy that is known to be in the world. Since the
Reformation, Gustavus Adolphus was the first great Patron Learning had in this
Country, by whom the Universities that had been much impaired, were endowed
with tolerable Salaries for Professors in most Sciences. These his Daughter
Queen Christina somewhat augmented, and by the Fame of her own Learning, and
the favorable Reception she gave to Scholars, drew several Learned men from
abroad, that have left good Proofs of their Abilities, and raised an Emulation
in the Natives, whose best Performance is in the History, Antiquities, and
Ancient Laws of the Country.

The University of Upsall consists of a Chancellor, who is always a great
Minister of State; a Vice Chancellor, always the Archbishop; a Rector, chosen
out of the Professors, of whom there are about Twenty that have each 150 l. a
Year Salary. The ordinary Number of Students is above Seven or Eight hundred;
Fifty of which are maintained by the King, and some few others were formerly by
Persons of Quality; the rest, that cannot subsist of themselves, spend the
Vacation in gathering the Charity of the Diocese they belong to, which is
commonly given them in Corn, Butter, dried Fish or Flesh, etc. upon which they
subsist at the University the rest of the Year. They live not Collegiately, but
in Private Houses; nor wear Gowns, nor observe other Discipline, than what
their own Necessity or Disposition leads them to.

The other University of Abo, in Finland, is constituted in the same manner,
but less numerous in Professors and Students.

There was a Third at Lunden in Schonen, which, having been interrupted by the
late Wars, is thought fit to be discontinued, because its Neighborhood to
Denmark nourished in the Students an Affection for that Crown, to which that
Province formerly appertained; yet it is again restored.

In each Diocese there is one Free School, where Boys are fitted for the
University; and other trivial Schools, to which Children are sent to learn to
Read, Write, and Sing their Prayers; a Custom so universal, that very few of
them want this degree of Education; and further than that, such as are not
designed for Studies, do very seldom go, nor waste their time in other needless
Improvements.

Public Provisions for the Poor, are very few; there is not above Five or Six
Hospitals in the Kingdom, and a little Almshouse in each Parish, maintained by
the Charity of the Inhabitants; to which for the most part they are very well
disposed, according to their Abilities.

CHAP. VII.
Of their Marriages and Funerals.
MArriages in Sueden are totally governed by the Will of the Parents, and
founded so much upon Interest, that the Inclination of the Parties is little
regarded, nor the Nation much troubled with the Extravagancies of Lovers:
Stealing of Matches is scarce heard of in an Age; nor can the Church give
License to Marry, without Publication of the Banns: Persons of Quality of both
Sexes commonly remain unmarried till Thirty or above, because their Fortunes on
both sides being in their Parents hands while they live, they are not in a
condition to maintain a Family, till the Death of Relations, or Advancement to
Office, furnish them with the Means of subsisting. The Women, while young, have
generally Fair Complexions, tolerable Features, and good Shapes; and some of
them are accounted more eminent for Chastity before Marriage, than Fidelity
after; they are very fruitful, and seldom fail of a Numerous Issue: They are no
where made greater Drudges than here, the meaner sort being, besides the
ordinary offices of their Sex, put to Plow and Thrash, to Row in Boats, and
bear Burdens at the Building of Houses, and on other occasions.

Domestic Quarrels rarely happen, and more seldom become Public; the Husbands
being as apt to keep the Authority in their own hands, as the Wives by Nature,
Custom, or Necessity, are inclined to be Obedient: Divorces, and other
Separations between Man and Wife, scarce ever happen, but among the Inferior
sort, when the Innocent Party is allowed to marry again: Cousin-Germans may not
Marry without the King's Dispensation, which is more frequently granted, than
refused.

In Wedding Entertainments they have ever affected Pomp and Superfluity beyond
the proportion of their Abilities; for by the Excess of one Day, ofttimes many
of them involve themselves in such inconveniences as they feel many Years. The
same is observable in their Funeral Solemnities, which are usually accompanied
with more Jollity and Feasting than befits the Occasion; and to gain time to
make their Preparations, they commonly Transport their Dead to Vaults within,
or adjoining to their Churches, where they remain unburied some Months, and
sometimes several Years; but of late these, and other unnecessary Expenses
begin by degrees to be laid aside, as well in conformity to the Frugality of
the Court, as in compliance with their present Fortunes, which are narrower now
than they have formerly been.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Royal Family, and Court of Sueden.
CHARLES XI. the present King of Sueden, was born November the 25th, 1655. Two
years after his Father, Charles Gustave X. of the House of Deux Ponts, was
advanced to the Crown, up on the Abdication of Queen Christina, whose
Cousin-German he was, being the Son of John Casimir, Prince Palatine of the
Rhine, and Catherine of Sueden, Daughter to Charles IX. and Sister to Gustavus
Adolphus, Queen Christina's Father. This Kings Mother, Princess Hediwing
Eleonora, of the House of Holstein, and Sister to the present Duke, had no
other Child, and upon the Decease of the King, her Husband, in the year 1660.
was made Regent of the Kingdom, together with the five Great Officers of the
Crown, and held that Post till the Year 1672. when the King, her Son, was
declared Major, and took the Government.

His Majesty's Education in his Minority, by his own Genius, and the Indulgence
of his Mother, (if not by the contrivance of the Principal Ministers) was
mostly in order to a Military Life; in which Exercises, such as Fencing, and
Riding the Great Horse, he took more pleasure, and made better proficiency,
than in such Studies as required more intention of the mind. Besides the
Suedish and High Dutch Languages, which his Majesty learned in his Infancy, and
speaks both equally well; he was not perfected in any other, having only a
smattering of French, to which he has so great an Aversion, that he will
neither own, nor be brought to speak so much of it as he understands; which
want concurring with (if not causing in him) a reserved Temper, and
backwardness to Conversation with Strangers, makes it more difficult for
Foreign Ministers to entertain his Majesty, and himself uneasy upon their
Addresses.

None ever better conquered this Difficulty, than Mr. Warwick, who, having
learned a little High Dutch, with which he entertained his Majesty in ordinary
Discourse, without much mixture of business, he thereby became the Favorite
Foreign Minister, and had the Honor to be singled out by his Majesty on all
occasions.

In the year 1674. his Majesty was Crowned, and presently after engaged in a
War that gained him an eminent degree both of Experience and Honor, having
never lost a Battle in which he was Personally present.

At the Conclusion of the War, Anno 1680. he married the Princess Ulrica
Eleonora, Sister to the King of Denmark, a Lady as Eminent for Piety, Virtue,
Wisdom, and all other Qualities, truly Great and Noble, as for her Birth and
Extraction. These, with her great Charity to the Poor, and Liberality to all,
have gained her the Hearts of the whole Nation, and surmounted the Aversion
they naturally have to those of her Country. By her his Majesty has already
had Seven Children; five Princes, four of which are Dead; and two Princesses,
and has fair hopes of a more numerous Issue.

The King is of a Middle Stature, and well-set, his Hair brown, of a healthful
and vigorous Constitution, and Sanguine Complexion, never attacqued with any
Violent Sickness, but what has been occasioned by some outward Accidents; of
which two especially have endangered his Life: one was in the War, when his
Majesty riding on the Ice, it brake, and he fell into the Water, which brought
him into a Fever, that he narrowly escaped. The other happened by the fall off
his Horse, when he broke his Leg, and was so ill treated by his Surgeons, that
besides the danger of his Life then, the effects of their miscarriage, are
still seen in his Majesty's halting. There have happened to him two Accidents
more, which have impaired his Strength, and it is feared may shorten his Days.
One was, That at Hunting, Monsieur Wachmaster being in danger to be killed by a
Bear, the King was so eager to rescue him, that he broke a Vein, and was then
like to have bled to Death, and since has been subject to bleeding upon any
motion. The other was, That his Majesty has formerly accustomed himself to
ride Post such long Stages, and with so great speed, that he has often been
near suffocated by the heat; the expense of his Spirits, and the Agitation of
his Blood, whereof the effects are still observed, and feared by those about
him.

He possesses many Excellent and Princely Qualities, an Exemplary Piety, and
Religious Disposition, that shows its self in all his Actions; and invincible
Courage, that has often exposed his Person to great dangers, not only in his
Wars, but in his Divertisements.

His Chastity and Temperance are very regular at least; if there be any
Instances of his failing in the latter upon any extraordinary Occasion or
Entertainment, he has never been known, or scarce suspected to violate the
former.

Frugality is practiced by his Majesty in a high degree, and his Parsimonious
Temper appears on all Occasions; that if his Subjects think him too pressing
for Money, they have the Satisfaction to see and believe that it is laid either
out, or up for their Good, not expended in profuse Liberalities, or vain
Divertisements, to which his Majesty is a perfect Stranger; neither delighted
with Plays, Gaming, or any other Recreations, besides Riding, Fencing, and
Hunting.

His peaceable Demeanor may perhaps more justly be ascribed to the State of
his Affairs, than his own Nature, which more powerfully inclines him to the
Fatigue of a Camp, than the Ease of a Court; and suits better with a Martial
Familiarity, than the shows of Grandeur, and the Solemnities of State. The
Choleric Temper that has been incident to all his Ancestors, has sometimes
carried him to low Expressions of his Anger, as well toward the greater as
meaner sort of his Subjects; but the fit is usually soon over, and is
recompensed by his placability and readiness to forgive those that have
offended him.

His Respect to his Mother seems to equal, if not exceed, his Kindness to his
Consort, who has the Satisfaction of his Constancy, but little share in his
Secrets, and not very much of his Conversation, which he frequently bestows on
the Queen Mother, and usually eats in her Apartment.

His Majesty's most diligent Inspection into all the Affairs of his Kingdom,
besides that it makes all his Ministers more circumspect, has gained him a
great stock of Experience. The smallest matters are not below his notice, and
nothing of any moment is concluded, before he has been consulted; this is the
Employment of all his time, scarce any hour of the Day passing from five in the
Morning, when he constantly rises, in which business of one nature or other, is
not before him.

The Frugality of his Majesty's Temper, is every where visible in his Court, in
which there is little regard had to Splendour and Magnificence, either in
Furniture, Tables, or Attendants, or other things of that Nature. The Principal
Officer of the Court, is the Upper Marshal, formerly called the Marshal of the
Kingdom, which Office is now held by Count John Steenbeck; next to him, are the
Marshal and Intendant of the Court, with about eight or ten that are styled
Gentlemen of the Court, who wait at the King's Table. That which makes the best
Appearance, is the Foot-Guards, which consist of 2200 Men, of which one Company
is always in the Castle, and the other in the other parts of the City. The
Colonel of the Guards is next the King's Person in all Public Solemnities;
and the Captain that has the Watch, lies in the Room next to his Majesty's
Bedchamber. There is another Guard of 250 Men, of which about ten at a time
wait on Foot with Halberts, and on Horseback, when the King travels in Ceremony.

Next to the King, the Queen Mother is ranked both in the Addresses of Foreign
Ministers, and on all other occasions.

She is a Princess of great Virtue and Goodness, and would be more esteemed, if
she were not diverted from the Exercise of Liberality, by the Inclination she
has to Building, which she has gratified in the Structure of a very Magnificent
House, about six Miles from Stockholm; it has one Front toward a great Lake,
and the other looks upon a Garden of a Thousand Yards long, adorned with very
fine and choice Statues, the Spoils of Germany and Denmark, and a great number
of Cascades, that are supplied with very good Water from an Eminence about a
Mile distant.

Her Court and Revenue is governed by Count Charles Gyldenstern, and next to
him is the Marshal of her Court, and other Officers; as also a Governess of the
Maids of Honor, who are six, with other inferior Servants.

The Queen Consort, besides what has already been said of her, is a great lover
of Reading, and together with the Northern Languages, speaks French perfectly
well; she is of a Melancholy Disposition, and lives very retired, seldom
stirring out of her own Apartment, and that of the Prince and Princesses.

The Elder Princess was born in the Year 1681. And the Prince in the Year
following; both of a delicate Constitution, of great hopes, and Educated with
much care. The Younger Princess was born Anno 1688.

CHAP. IX.
Of his MAJESTY'S Government.
HIS Majesty was no sooner Crowned, but he found himself engaged in the War
then on foot; and espoused the French Interest, in Consideration of a Subsidy
of 200000 l. a Year, in which the first Blow was the Defeat of Feldt Marshal
Wrangel, and his Army in Germany; a Disaster so little foreseen, or provided
for, that it made a more easy way for all the Miseries that ensued upon it, and
gave the King more eminent Occasions of showing his Courage in defense of his
Kingdoms and People; for as the Success of that Action turned the Bias of the
Danish Councels, and presented the favorable opportunity they expected, to
engage in the War, which they began with the surprizal of Holstein, and the
Taking of Wismar, and thence translated it into Schonen; so that when the King
was called into those Parts to make Head against the Danes, he found the
effects of his Ministers Deficiency in making due Preparations; Four of the Six
Fortified Places of that Province being already in the Enemies hands, and the
Inhabitants at liberty to express their Affections for Denmark.

To encounter these Difficulties, and a more Potent Enemy, assisted by more
Powerful Confederates, the King at first had but a Handful of Men, and empty
Magazines; the Forces of the Kingdom being scattered into Germany and Leifland,
the Borders of Norway, and the Sea-Service; from all which places his Majesty
received nothing but accounts of Losses and Misfortunes; so that the Fortune of
Sueden, and all its Ancient Glory, seemed to be confined to his Majesty's
Person and his little Army, with which in the compass of One Year, he won Three
Pitched Battles; and in one of them he is said to have Charged Thirteen times
at the Head of a Brigade; and yet, which is very remarkable, does value himself
for not having drawn the Blood of any one man.

In the course of this War the King gained a great Stock of Military
Experience, without any Tincture of those Vices that commonly prevail in a
Camp; and was so indefatigable, and perpetually employed, that he scarce had
his Boots off in Three Years time: The Streights he was often reduced to,
taught him many excellent Lessons, especially the Necessity of putting the
Kingdom into a better Posture of Defense than he found it: Besides, his
Officers, with the chief Ministers about him, Baron John Guldenstiern, made it
their business to possess his Majesty with an ill opinion of the Senate, and
discovered the Malversations that the Ruling Lords had been guilty of in his
Minority; which sunk so deep with him, that as his displeasure fell upon some
of those Lords during the War, and a Slight upon them all, neither
communicating his Counsels, nor acquainting them with the Success of his
Actions, which they were left to learn from Passengers and Masters of Ships; so
after the Conclusion of the Peace, and his return to Stockholm in the year
1680, his Majesty called together the States of the Kingdom, and gave them a
Summary Account of the State of Affairs during the War, and the Issue of it,
and proposed to them to inspect the Occasions of the great Losses the Kingdom
had sustained, to find out means to deliver the Government from the Streights
(or rather States) it labored under, and to consult for its further Security.

The Odium of all the Losses and Misfortunes of the War, was easily fixed upon
the Ministers that had managed Affairs in the King's Minority; and therefore a
Committee was chosen out of the several Bodies of the States, to enquire into
the Miscarriages and Evil Counsels of those Ministers, and pass Sentence upon
the Delinquents: And to this end the Registers of the Council were examined,
the damage arising from each Resolution computed, and every Senator that had
Voted therein was charged with his Proportion of it; and that with so much
Rigor, that their whole Estates have not sufficed to make Satisfaction: To
this the States also found, that the Power the Senators attributed to
themselves, had helped to produce these bad effects, and therefore declared,
That as they the States needed no such Mediators between the King and them; so
neither did they find, that the Article of his Majesty's Coronation Oath, (in
which he had promised to rule the Kingdom with the Advice of the Senators) did
oblige him to think it necessary any longer to have their Concurrence to any
Counsels he thought fit to take; or continue their Salaries to more of them
than he was pleased to employ: Upon which several of them were laid aside; and
the rest, instead of their former Title of Counselors, or Senators of the
Kingdom, were styled the King's Counselors; a Method which perhaps in time may
cost the Crown dear, there being left none to bear the Burden between the King
and the Complainants. And to give greater strength to this, the States declared
also, That tho the Regents, during a Minority, might be called to account for
their Administration; yet his Majesty, who received his Crown from God, was
only accountable to God for his Actions, and tied by no other Engagements than
what his Coronation Oath imported; namely, To rule the Kingdom according to
Law: Which Article was further explained in the following Convention.

To remedy the great Necessities the Government was reduced to, and discharge
the vast Debts contracted in the War, several very Important Conclusions were
made; for both a very large Benevolence was granted, toward which every person
in the Kingdom that received Wages paid the Tenth Penny; every whole Farm Five
Crowns, which is near as much as the usual Rent of those Farms; and the Cities
a proportionable Contribution; and that for Two Years, or if a War happened, for
Four: And a Resolution was taken to establish a New College of Reduction, with
Power to reunite to the Crown all such Lands, as by former Kings had been
alienated by way of Donation, or sold at an undervalue.

The Choice of the Members of this College, and the Particulars of their
Instructions, were left to his Majesty; the States only prescribing some
general Bounds, and especially providing, That of such Lands as were to be
reunited, the value of 70 l. a year should be left to the Possessor.

The care of the future Security of the Kingdom the States recommended to his
Majesty, praying him to make such an Establishment of the Militia, and
Preparation of the Fleet and Fortresses, as should appear needful: So
favorable was this Conjuncture for the Advancement of the King's Authority,
that he scarce needed to ask whatever he desired; each Body of the States
striving which should outbid the other in their Concessions. The Nobility and
Gentry, who universally depend on the King, as not being able to subsist upon
their own private Fortunes, without some additional Office, were under a
Necessity to comply with every thing, rather than hazard their present
Employments, or future Hopes of Advancement; their Interest therefore obliged
them to keep pace with the Officers of the Army that sat in their House, and
some others of their Brethren, who vigorously promoted the King's Affairs.

The Clergy, Burghers, and Peasants, were easily persuaded, That the Miseries
they had suffered, proceeded from the too great Power of the Nobility; that the
King could never be too much trusted, his Majesty having so often exposed his
Life to the greatest Dangers in Defense of his Subjects, it was their Duty to
make all the grateful Returns they were able; besides, they were glad of an
occasion of humbling the Nobility, who in Prosperity were always imperious, and
concluded, that the burden falling upon them, would redound to their own ease.

These Dispositions of the People, added to the excessive Affection they had
for the King's Person, from an Opinion of his Piety, and Admiration of his
Courage, gave him an opportunity to lay the Foundations of as Absolute a
Sovereignty, as any Prince in Europe possesses. The Project of which great
Alteration, his Majesty (as was supposed) received from Baron John
Gyldenstiern, a Minister of Great Abilities, and as great an Enemy to the
Senate: He had waited on the King in the War, and drawn to himself the
Management of all weighty Affairs, and perhaps expected to hold the same Post
upon this Great Revolution, which in the former Constitution he could not hope*
but before this Assembly, and soon after his return from an Embassy in Denmark,
he died, not without suspicion of Foul play.

Upon these Foundations his Majesty, after the Separation of the States, set
his Ministers earnestly to work, and with an Unwearied Application took
Cognizance of their Proceedings.

Foreign Affairs were committed to Count Benedict Oxenstiern, Monsieur
Ehrenstien, and Monsieur Oernstedt, persons of great Experience and Abilities:
The Count began to be employed in Public Affairs at the Treaty of Munster, at
which he was for some time, and has since been for the most part in Embassies;
especially in Germany, and was then returned from the Treaty of Nimeguen, where
he had ('it is said upon his Lady's account) entertained a violent Aversion to
France; and being made President of the Chancery in the room of Count Magnus de
la Gardie, who was laid aside, he took care to give his Majesty the same
Impressions, laying before him how that Court, by corrupting his Ministers, had
engaged Sueden in the War, of which his Majesty had felt the miseries; and was
forced to sit down with the Loss of some Territories in Germany, besides Forty
Sail of good Ships, and above 100000 men; all which might either have been
prevented or repaired, if France had not sacrificed Sueden to its own Interest:
That the Subsidy was rather distributed by French Commissaries, and employed in
their own Service, than paid to his Majesty, who often times in his greatest need
could not be supplied out of that Fund: That his Majesty could neither be
Master of his own Counsels, nor make any tolerable Figure in Europe, so long as
he was esteemed a Pensioner and a Mercenary.

These and the like Reasons moved the King to command each Member of the Privy
Council to put in Writing what Measures they thought advisable for him to take,
in relation to Foreign Affairs; in which some of them argued very warmly for
France; but the Reasons on the other side were more prevalent with his Majesty,
who thereupon took such Resolutions as produced the Guaranty League with
Holland, and other Counsels, that Sueden has since pursued.

For the management of Affairs at Home, his Majesty employed Baron Claudius
Flemingh, whose Father having been ill used by the Regents in the King's
Minority, had left him several Projects, that fell in with the Designs on foot,
and enabled him to go through with the Reduction of Crown Lands, being made
President of that College, and assisted with a competent number of Assessors:
He began to examine the Titles of those that held any Lands that had formerly
belonged to the Crown; and where any such were found to have been alienated by
way of Donation for pretended Services, or were situated in forbidden places,
(that is, within Six miles of any of the King's Castles) they were reunited to
the Crown without further dispute; the Value of 70 l. per An. being reserved to
the Possessor: As to Crown Lands that had been sold, enquiry was made into the
nature of the Price, and the Real Value of the Estate. Where Ready Money had
been paid, the Interest of 5 per Cent. was allowed for it; and if the Yearly
Value of the Estate exceeded that Interest, the said Overplus, and the Interest
of it at 8 per Cent. from the first Alienation, was computed, and frequently
made to amount to as much as the Capital it self; which being by that means
satisfied, the Estate returned to the King. Where Lands had been given in
Payment of Arrears, there no Interest was allowed, the Capital being accounted
unfruitful; so that the Yearly Value of such Lands, together with the Interest,
was deducted from the Principal; which being soon eaten out, not only the Lands
returned to the King, but the Possessor also became indebted to him; and he was
to accept it as an Act of Grace, if his Majesty took the Lands, and forgave the
Debt.

By these Methods the King recovered a very great Revenue, tho with the
Impoverishing of most Families in Sueden, and many of them, such whose
Ancestors, and themselves also had spent their Lives and Fortunes in the
Crown's Service, which Considerations could not be regarded, nor Exceptions
made in favor of any in particular, without adding to the Discontents of all
the rest, who more patiently suffered, while the Case was general.

The same Baron Flemingh was also made president of the Treasury, and of the
College of Liquidation, a Court erected not only to be a Barrier to the
Treasury, and keep all Creditors off, till their Accounts were first stated and
approved in that College; but his business was also to find out such as were
any ways indebted to the King, to form the Charge against them, and demand
Payment, which was not to be refused upon pretense (as it sometimes was the
Case) that the Party had greater Sums due from the Crown, but the King's Debt
was to be paid first, and without any delay, and the Party left to State his
Accounts afterward in the College of Liquidation. And wherein such Acts were
used toward many, by making (as they call them) Observations upon the Price,
the time of delivering the Species of Money, and the like, that several of the
King's Debts have been paid without a farthing of Money, and not a few
Pretenders have thereby been made Debtors to the King, and payment extorted
with great Rigor.

The payment of the Fleet, his Majesty committed to Baron Hans Wachtmeister,
(in the place of the Great Admiral, Count S^eenbeck) who prevailed to have it
removed from Stockholm, its ordinary Station, to a Harbor fortified for that
purpose in the Province of Bleaking, and named Carlscrone, as being both nearer
to Denmark, and Germany, earlier free from Ice in the Spring, and the Parts
adjacent abounding with Timber. In that, and other places, great diligence was
used, both to repair the Old Ships, which amounted not to Twenty Sail, and to
build New Ones, of which since that time, about Twenty from Eighty to Forty
Guns; and Eight or Ten of less force, have been built by Two English, and other
Master builders.

The Establishment of the Militia, his Majesty made his own peculiar Care, as
having more immediately felt the Effects of the Disorder it had been in, and
learnt by Experience the necessity of such a Standing Force, as might answer
the ends of its Institution.

In what manner his Majesty proceeded herein, shall be shown in another place.

In this interval, his Majesty published several new Laws; one against Duels,
the substance of which is already mentioned; another to fix the Right of
Precedence among the Nobility and Officers; wherein next after the
Privy-Counsellors, the Soldiers are principally considered; each considerable
Office, being ranked according to its Dignity and Precedence, determined
according to that Rank, without any respect to Birth or Quality.

At the next Assembly of the States in the Year 1683. besides a benevolence
equal to that granted the last Sessions, his Majesty obtained such farther
Advantages, as the ends he designed did require; for not only the Reunion of
the 70 l. a year reserved by the former Session, was consented to, and that
without the least difficulty, because those of the Nobility that had lost most,
did thereby revenge themselves of the Officers of the Army: And others, who had
been the great Sticklers in the Reduction, by which themselves had lost little
or nothing, if the Reservation of 70 l. per Annum had stood; but the Article of
ruling the Kingdom according to Law, was also further explained, and the States
declared, That his Majesty was not thereby tied to the Laws then in being, but
might alter the same, and add thereto such Constitutions, as he thought most
useful for the present State of the Kingdom; and that whatever Instructions he
pleased to give any College or Officer, the same were a Law to them, and all
others that they concerned, added only this, That they hoped his Majesty would
communicate to the States such Laws as were of a general Nature, and intended
to be binding to the whole Kingdom. And whereas his Majesty had laid before the
States, the undue Proceedings of the Ministers at his Father's Death, whose
Testament they rescinded, and altered the Frame of the Government, he had
prescribed to be observed in the King's Minority; the States declared, That the
Authors of those Alterations, were no honest Patriots, and left them to the
King's Justice, promising that in case of his Majesty's Decease, during his
Successor's Minority, they would see his Testament punctually fulfilled, and
the Form of Government thereby prescribed, inviolably observed.

The next Assembly of the States in 1686. renewed the usual Benevolence which
was asked to enable the King to pay his Debts, and made some further
Concessions in the matter of the Reunion, rather to take off the Odium from
the King and his Ministers, than to add any Authority to his Majesty's
Proceedings.

These and the like Concessions, have rendered his Majesty an Absolute Monarch,
to which his Subjects submit without any contest; and had not those other
pressures that accompanied it made it uneasy, there would scarce have been
found in that Loyal Kingdom any one Person disaffected to the Government; but
the loss of Estates, they supposed to have right to, has created Discontents in
many of the Nobility and Gentry, and the frequent and heavy Taxes imposed by
the States are no less sensible to those of inferior Degrees; that perhaps the
King of Sueden has lost as much in the Affection of his Subjects, as he has
gained in his Revenue; yet this is not like to produce any bad Effects, since
the King knows so well how to make himself obeyed, and has such effectual means
in his hands, not only to restrain any disorders, but to engage the greatest
part of the Nation to his Interest.

For the Distribution of all Employments of any Value in the Kingdom, belongs
to his Majesty; and the Nobility and Gentry, as well as others, are under a
greater necessity than ever, of rendering themselves acceptable to him, that
they may get Employments. Besides, his Majesty has lately thought fit to cause
all that are in Office to renew their Oath of Fidelity; the Tenor of which has
been accommodated to the present Government. The Instructions also of all
Governors of Provinces, and other, both Civil and Military Officers, have been
revised and renewed: And as a new Body of Laws Ecclesiastical is already
published; so the Common Laws of the Kingdom are under Consideration, to be
rendered more plain, full, and suitable to the present State of things,
according to the mind of the King, and those that are his Advisers in this
Change; yet all this Power and Provision is not by the Court it self thought
sufficient to keep an Oppressed People from Disorders; nor would it likely long
do so, if the King did not by great Applications and Deferences court the
Clergy, and by no small degrees of Compliance with them, not only in
Ecclesiastical, but even in Civil Affairs, cultivate their Fidelity and
Affection; and this, because the Priests have very great and uncontrollable
Interest and Authority among the Common People (who only can make Disturbances)
and can at their pleasure inflame, or appease them.

CHAP. X.
Of the Privy Council.
THE Ancient Constitution, which gave them the Title of Senators of the
Kingdom, gave them also Authority, not only to advise in all business of
Importance, but in some Cases to admonish and overruled the King, who was not
at Liberty to transact any weighty Affairs without the Concurrence of a
majority of the Senate; and tho the King chose them, yet the States received
their Oath, which rather expressed their Fidelity to the Kingdom in general, than
to the King; their Office was for Life, and not only attempts upon their
Person, but Defamation of them, was accounted Treason.

But the Late Revolution has effectually delivered the King from this (as they
call it) Encroachment upon Royalty and Prerogative, and reduced those Officers
to the Title, and proper Duties of Privy-Counsellors, putting it into the
King's Power to employ them as he thinks fit, to ask their Counsel as he sees
occasion, and to lay such of them aside, as he finds convenient, which his
Majesty accordingly practices; some of them being laid aside, and the
remainder, together with those the King has added to them, are dispersed into
various Employments, and very rarely meet in a Body; his Majesty transacting
all Affairs, both Domestic and Foreign, with the proper Officers, to whom they
are immediately entrusted, without the Participation of the whole Council. The
number of Privy-Counsellors is at present about Eighteen, each of them has a
Salary of 300 l. a year, and most have other beneficial Employments.

CHAP. XI.
Of the States of Sueden.
THE Boundless Liberality of the three last Sessions of the States has left
that Body little more than its Ancient Name, and a Power of Consent to such
Impositions as the King's Occasions require, which he chooses rather to receive
through their hands, than employ his Authority in a matter so apt to Administer
occasion of Discontent: Their usual time of Assembly, is once in three Years,
or oftener, if the Affairs of the Kingdom require it. The Letters for calling
them together, are sent to the Governors of Provinces, who thereupon write to
each Nobleman and Gentleman in their Province, and to the Bishops, who cause
the same to be published in all Churches.

The Body of the Nobility and Gentry are represented by one of each Family, of
which there are about a Thousand in Sueden, and with them the Colonel,
Lieutenant-Collonel, Major, and one Captain of each Regiment sit and vote.

For the Clergy, besides the Bishops and Superintendents in each Rural Deanery,
or Ten Parishes, one is chosen, and maintained at the Charge of his Electors;
these make a Body of about Two hundred.

The Representatives of the Burghers are chosen by the Magistrates and
Common Council of each Corporation, of which Stockholm sends Four, others Two,
and some One, who make about One hundred and fifty.

The Peasants of each District, choose one of their own Quality to appear for
them, whose Charges they bear, and give him Instructions in such matters as
they think need Redress; they are about Two hundred and fifty.

Their first meeting (when at Stockholm) is in a large Room in the Castle,
called the Hall of the Kingdom, where his Majesty being seated on a Throne, and
the Privy-Counsellors sitting at some distance, the President of the Chancery
makes them a Complement in the King's Name, and then a Secretary reads his
Majesty's Proposals to them, in which they are acquainted with the State of
Affairs since their Recess, and the present occasion of their Advice and
Assistance. To which, first, the Marshal of the Nobility, who is chosen by the
King, returns an answer, and kisses the King's hand; and after him, the
Archbishop in the Name of the Clergy; the first Burgher master of Stockholm,
for the Burghers, and one of the Peasans for his Brethren. They then separate
into four several Houses, and choose a Secret Committee, composed of an equal
Number of each Body, who receive from the King's Ministers such further
Informations of his Majesty's Pleasure, as are not thought fit to be
communicated in public, and thereupon prepare such matters as are to be
proposed to the several Bodies. In each House matters are concluded by majority
of Voices; and if one or more of these Bodies differ in Opinion from the rest,
they are either brought over by persuasions, or the point remains unconcluded.

When the Affairs proposed by the King are finished, they then insinuate their
Grievances, each Body severally, to which the King returns such Answers as he
thinks sit; and to each Member of the three Inferior Bodies an Authentic Copy
is delivered, as well of the general Conclusion made by the whole States, as of
the King's Answer to the Grievances of his respective Body, which he carries
home to his Electors.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Revenue of the Kingdom.
THE standing Revenues of the Kingdom of Sueden, arise from Crown Lands,
Customs, Poll-Money, Tithes, Copper and Silver-Mines, Proceedings at Law, and
other less considerable Particulars; which are calculated in all to near a
Million of Pounds a Year; of which the Lands make above one Third, and the
Customs almost a Fourth. The Poll-money is paid only by the Peasants, each of
which above Sixteen, and under Sixty, pays about Twelvepence a year.

In the Treasury-Chamber, a President (now Baron Fabian Wrede) with Four
Counselors, and other Officers sit, and act as a Court of Justice, in such
matters as relate to the King's Revenue; but they make no Assignments, that
being the business of the Contoir of State, in which the Commissary, in
conjunction with the President, dispose of all Payments, but yet not without
Orders immediately from the King: At the beginning of every Year they make a
Calculation of what is likely to come in, and what will remain above the
ordinary Charge; which they lay before his Majesty, and receive his Orders what
Debts shall first be paid. The greatest part of the King's Money passes through
the Bank, and thereby saves the Charge of Officers, to recieve and pay it,
there being between the Contoir of State, and the Bank, only one Rent-master
(as they style him) who keeps account with them both, and gives Assignments
according to the Orders he recieves.

The Revenue is supposed at present to exceed the ordinary Charge of the Crown;
and the King having lately had three several extraordinary Contributions, and
vast Forfeitures from the Faulty Ministers of State, as also great Advantages
in recovering the Debts due to the Crown, would have his Coffers well filled,
if the Building of Ships, and paying of Debts contracted in the last War, had
not drained them in some measure. In 1686 it was told the States in the King's
Name, That in Six Years time his Majesty had paid Debts to above Two Millions
of Pounds (tho many of them were paid with little Money), besides the Building
of about Thirty Ships: And yet it is generally believed, the King is not ill
provided with Ready Cash; and there is great necessity for such Provision, to
supply any pressing occasion, since the Credit of Sueden is very low Abroad;
and at Home the ordinary Taxes are so high, that the people cannot long furnish
any Additional and Extraordinary Assistances; that as the Crown has resumed all
former Liberalities, and with Rigor exacted its utmost Right, so it must
chiefly depend upon those Funds, little being to be expected from the People,
and no Credit from Abroad in case of Extremity, since those that have formerly
trusted the Crown, have been so very ill used; and neither the States of the
Kingdom, if they should interpose their Engagements, are in a condition to make
them good; nor can any Dependence be made upon the Security either of the
Crown Lands, or any other Branch of the Revenue, since the late Resumption of
those Lands, and Revocation of such Securities, have destroyed all future Faith.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Forces of Sueden.
THE Reputation gained, and the Conquests made by Sueden in this and the last
Age, has not so much been owing to its Native Strength, as to Foreign
Assistance of Germans, French, English, and especially Scots, of whom they have
used great Numbers in all their Wars with Moscovy, Poland, Germany, and
Denmark; and by them the Art of War and Military Discipline has been by degrees
introduced into this Nation, that in former times had only the advantage of
Courage and Numbers; for tho the Original Constitution of the Country, and its
Division into Hundreds and other larger Portions, that still retain Military
Names, seems to have been the work of Armies, and the frequent Expeditions of
the Goths, and other Inhabitants of these parts, show, That in all Ages they
were addicted to War and Violence; yet it was in a disorderly and tumultuous
manner; their Infantry always consisting of unexperienced Peasants, raised for
the occasion, and disbanded as soon as it was over. The Feudal Laws indeed
(which are supposed to have had their Birth amongst these people) provided for
a competent Number of Cavalry, all Estates of the Nobility and Gentry being
held by Knights Service; and while the Kingdom was Elective, the Kings were
bound to maintain some Forces of Horse out of the Revenues of the Crown; but
this Establishment had been in a great measure corrupted, and the Kingdom so
shattered with Domestic Broils, that it made a very inconsiderable Figure; and
was little known in Europe, till the Crown became Hereditary, and the Interest
of the Royal Family concerned in the Strength and Prosperity of the Nation:
Since that time the Standing Forces of the Kingdom have been augmented, yet not
so effectually established as its necessities required; for it generally
happened, that the Nobility and Gentry were so backward in fitting out their
Horse, and the Levies of Foot not being to be made without the consent of the
Peasants in the Assembly of the States, it was so hardly obtained, that the
Regiments were very thin, and Recruits extreme difficult; nor were the Officers
Salaries so punctually paid, as to enable them to be in readiness on all
occasions.

To remedy these Inconveniences, the present King, on whom the States had
conferred an Absolute Power, to put the Militia into such a Method as he should
think fit, has made such Regulations in all the Particulars relating to this
Matter; as were requisite to bring it to Perfection.

The new Injunctions he has made about the Cavalry, that the Nobility and
Gentry furnish, are so exact, that it is not in their power to put either the
Man or the Horse that are once Listed, to other Employments than what are there
specified, but must have them in a continual Readiness, whenever they are
called upon, with such Arms and Equipage, as his Majesty has directed. In
default of which, severe Penalties are inflicted, and the Estates they hold by
that Service subject to Confiscation.

For the Infantry, the King has taken the like Care; and whereas, formerly no
Levies could be made but by Consent of the States, and that but by small
parcels at a time, and with such disturbance, that on those occasions 'twas
usual for half the Peasants to run into the Woods, and other hiding places to
escape being made Soldiers This has been remedied by the King's Commissioners,
who have distributed the Infantry of each Province proportionably to the Number
of Farms, each of which of the Value of about 60 or 70 l. a Year (not being
appropriated to the Officers or other peculiar Services) is charged with one
Foot Soldier, who receives from the Farmer, Diet, Lodgings, ordinary Clothes,
and about Twenty Shillings a Year in Money; or else, a little Wooden House is
built for him at the Farmer's Charge, who must also furnish him with as much
Hay, as will keep a Cow in Winter, and Pasturage in Summer, and Plow and Sow
for him such a parcel of Ground as will afford him Bread; they that are
married, (as many of them are,) generally accept this latter Condition; the
unmarried Soldiers usually abide with the Farmer, but are not bound to do him
any Service without Wages; when they have once taken the Peasants Money, and
are Listed in the King's Service, they can never quit so long as they are able
to serve, and if they desert, are punished with Death: The first Institution of
this Method was very burdensome to the Peasants, who were at great Charge to
hire their Men, which cost them 10 and sometimes 20 l. apiece, and the same
they must do whenever their Soldier dies. This in peaceable times will not be
so chargeable, as it is in times of War; when Men will be unwilling to serve,
and Recruits more frequently needed; and as this is part of the Project
hitherto unexperienced, so most believe it will be found very difficult, if not
impracticable.

As all the common Soldiers are thus provided for at the Country's Charge, so
all Officers both of Horse and Foot are maintained by the King, who has
appropriated so much of the Lands lately reunited, or formerly belonging to the
Crown, to that purpose. So that every Officer has a convenient House, and
competent Portion of Land to live upon, situate in that part of the Country,
where the Regiment he belongs to is quartered; as also the Rent of so many
other Farms as make up his pay, (which though it be somewhat less than formerly,)
yet being punctually paid either in Money, Corn or other Commodities, they find
it more profitable, than when they were to solicit for it at the Treasury.

A Colonel of Foot has, of these Lands the yearly Rent of about 300 l. and the
rest proportionably, which amounts to about 2500 l. a Year, for all the
Officers both upper and under, of one Foot Regiment. And there being in Sweden,
Finland and Liefland 28 Regiments of Foot, under this Establishment the
Maintenance of all the Officers belonging to them, costs the King about 70000
l. a Year; what Charge the Clothing of the common Soldiers once in two or
three Years, their Arms and such other Necessaries may put the King to, cannot
be so easily computed.

The Officers of Horse are provided for after the same manner with such large
Allowance as is requisite. There are Fifteen Regiments of Horse thus
established, and the Maintenance of their Officers is computed to be about
80000 l. a Year, all which arises from the Rents of Crown Lands, as do also the
Wages of Civil Officers in the Country, who have Farms annexed to their
Employments, in the same manner as the Militia.

The Laws the King has made for maintaining this Constitution are every exact
and particular, and provide with great Caution, that neither the Peasants shall
be oppressed, nor the Lands and Houses ruined; to which end all such Lands are
yearly visited, and the Possessor compelled to make such Repairs as are found
needful; and as every Officer upon his first coming to such an Estate,
subscribes an Inventory of it, so upon Advancement he cannot take Possession of
another Charge, till he has put that Estate into as good a Condition as he
found it, and in case of Death his Heirs cannot inherit, till that be done.

In times of Peace, all Trespasses and Crimes committed by the Soldiery fall
ordinarily under the Cognizance of a Civil Magistrate, who has the same
Authority over them, as over the rest of the King's Subjects, except when they
are encamped, or in Garrison, or any way under flying Colors; in all which
Cases, as also in all Matters that relate solely to their Profession, their
Officers have Jurisdiction over them, without whose leave a private Soldier is
not permitted to lodge out of his Quarters, nor be absent a day from the Parish
he belongs to; the inferior Officers cannot be absent from their Charge, but by
the Colonel's Permission, nor Captains and those above them without the King's
leave; and the good Effect of the Officers constant Residence, upon their
respective Charges, appears in the quiet and peaceable Behavior of the
Soldiers, who have not hitherto broke out into any Enormities, nor given the
common People any great occasion of complaint.

To keep them in Discipline, each Company meets, and is exercised, once a
Month, and every Regiment once or twice a Year, at which times only they wear
the the Kings's Clothes, which at their return, are carefully laid up in the
Churches.

For their Government in time of War the King has lately caused the Articles
of War to be reviewed and printed, together with a new Establishment of Courts
Marshal, and Instructions for the Auditors General, and other Officers
concerned in the Ministration of Justice.

And for his Majesty's Information on all occasions, a Book has been lately
made, specifying the Names of every Military Officer in the King's Army, the
time when they first came into the Service, and by what Steps they have risen,
by which means at one view, his Majesty knows the Merit and Services of any
Officer.

The Forces in Pomerania and Bremen, as also the Regiment of Foot Guards are
not under this Establishment, but are paid in Money.

The whole Body of the King of Sweden's Forces, according to the best and most
exact Account, is as follows:

The established Militia in Sweden, Finland and Liefland are, Men Cavalry 15
Regiments, is 17000 Infantry 28 Regiments, is 35000 Foot Guards Regiment, 2000
Forces in Pomeren and Bremen 6 Regiments, is 6000 In all, 50 Regiments, 6000


Each Regiment ordinarily consists of 1200 Men (but some of more) of which 96
are Officers; and such care is taken to keep them complete, that it very seldom
happens, that 20 Men at a time are wanting in a Regiment; and as they are
always in a readiness, so a great Body of them may quickly be brought together,
especially toward the Borders of Denmark and Norway, where in twenty Days time
the King of Sueden can have an Army of 20000 Men.

Above the ordinary Establishment the King has annexed to each Regiment about
twenty supernumerary Farms, to answer any extraordinary Accidents of Fire, etc.
and to furnish a Subsistence for such Officers, as are past Service.

For common Soldiers that Age or Wounds have rendered unfit for War, there is
one general Hospital, which has a good Revenue, and besides that, every Officer
that is advanced, pays to it a Sum of Money proportionable to the Charge he
arises to. A Colonel pays 100 Crowns, and others in proportion.

Besides the Arms in the Hands of the Militia, there is a considerable Magazine
at Stockholm, and another at the Castle of Iencopingh toward the Borders of
Denmark, and these, as occasion serves, are furnished from a considerable
Iron-work at Oerbro in Nervia which is continually employed in making Arms of
all sorts. In the Castle of Iencopingh a Train of Artillery stand always in
readiness. This is the sole Inland Fortress in Sueden, which less needs such
Artificial Strengths, as well for other Reasons, as because Nature in very many
places has provided it with such Passes, as that a handful of Men may defend
against a great Army.

On the Borders of Norway, beside some small Forts, that keep the Passages over
the Mountains, there is the Castle of Bahunz situate upon a Rock in the midst
of a deep River, but overlookt by the Rocks near it.

The City of Gottenburgh is a well fortified place, but wholly Commanded by the
Neighboring Hills.

The Town of Marstrand, and the Castle of Elfsburgh lie toward the Sea: on
that side toward Denmark are Waerburgh, Halmstad, Landscrone and Malmo, places
of good defense. Upon the Baltic Shore are Carlescrone and Calmar, with two
small Forts at the entrance of the River leading to Stockholm. The Northern
parts are covered with Lapland, the Borders of Finland toward Russia with vast
Woods and Morasses, and in some parts with Castles and Forts. In Liefland,
besides Riga, Revell and Narva, which are very strong places, there are several
considerable Fortresses.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Trade of Sueden.
THOUGH Sueden has in all Times furnished Europe with those necessary Commodities
it abounds with, yet either the Warlike Temper, the Idleness or Ignorance of
the Inhabitants, has formerly kept them from being much concerned in Trade, and
given Strangers the Management and Advantage of it, which for a long time, the
Hans Towns situate on the Baltic Sea, monopolized, till the Seven Provinces
of the Netherlands were Erected into a Republic, and became Sharers with them:
Before that time very little Iron was made in Sueden, but the Oar, being run
into Pigs, was carried to Dantzick, and other Parts of Prussia, and there
forged into Bars; for which reason the Country Smiths in England call Foreign
Iron Dansk or Spruce Iron. The Nation owes the greatest Improvements it has
made in Trade to the Art and Industry of some ingenious Mechanics, that the
Cruelty of the Duke de Alva drove into these parts: their Success invited great
Numbers of Reformed Waloons to transplant thither, whose Language and Religion
remains in the places they settled in, where they erected Forges and other
Conveniences for making of Iron Guns, Wire, and all other Manufactures of
Copper, Brass, and Iron which for the most part are still carried on by their
Posterity.

The Suedish Navigation was very inconsiderable, till Queen Christina at the
Conclusion of the War in 1644. obtained from Denmark a Freedom from Customs for
all Ships, and Goods belonging to Suedish Subjects, in their Passage through the
Sound, and established in her own Dominions that difference in Customs that
still subsists between Suedish and Foreign Ships, and is in proportion of 4, 5,
6, the first called Wholefree, the second Half, and the last Vnfree, so that
where a whole free Suedish Ship pays 400 Crowns, half free pays 500, and a
Foreign Vessel 600.

But as great as this Advantage was, it had but little effect, till the English
Art of Navigation bridled the Hollanders, and opened the Intercourse between
England and Sueden. Since that time their Commerce has been much augmented, as
well as ours that way, and Goods transported by both, or either Party according
to the various junctures of Affairs. When Sueden has been engaged in a War, the
English Ships have had the whole Employ; but in times of Peace, the Advantage
is so great on the Suedish side, and Merchants so much encouraged by Freedom in
Customs to employ their Ships, that English Bottoms cannot be used in that
Trade, but only while Sueden is unprovided with a number of Ships sufficient
for the Transportation of their own Commodities; whether it be feasible to lay
a Duty upon Suedish Ships, importing Goods into England, proportionable to what
is laid upon Foreign Vessels there, or whether the Matter be of so great
Importance as to merit such a Resolution, does not belong to this Discourse to
determine.

The chief Commodities Sueden vends, are Copper, Iron, Pitch, Tar, Masts,
Deals, and Wooden Ware, (besides the Commodities exported from Liefland) to the
value of about 700000 l. a Year, in return of which they receive from abroad
Salt, Wines, and Brandy, Cloth, Stuffs, Tobacco, Sugar, Spices, Paper, Linen,
and several other sorts of Goods which are supposed commonly to balance their
Exportations, and sometimes exceed them.

Their Trade to Portugal for Salt is accounted most necessary, as without great
quantities of which they cannot subsist. That with England is more beneficial,
because it takes off almost half their own Commodities, and brings in near two
thirds of Money for one of Goods. The worst is their French Trade, in regard it
rather supplies their Vanities, than Necessities, and gives little or no vent
to the Commodities of the Country.

The general Direction of their Trade belongs to the College of Commerce,
which consists of the President of the Treasury, and Four Counselors, who hear
Causes of that nature, and redress any Disorders that happen. The Bank at
Stockholm is of great benefit to Trade, as well in regard that the King's
Customs for that City are paid in there, as also that the Merchants ordinarily
make Payments to each other by Bills drawn upon it, which eases them of a great
Trouble in Transporting their Money from place to place, that would otherwise
be very difficult and chargeable. This Bank is well constituted, and was in
very good Credit, whilst it had the States of the Kingdom for its Guarrantees,
of which it has now but the Shadow; those States being (and are now styled) the
Kings (not Kingdoms) States so that all its Foundation derives now from the
Will and Pleasure of the King, which may on several occasions diminish not only
its own Sufficiency, but also the Confidence of those that make use of it. The
Management of the Trade of Sueden has always in the main been in the Hands of
Strangers, most of the Natives wanting either Capacity or Application, and all
of them Stocks to drive it; for without Credit from abroad, they are not able
to keep their Iron-works going: and therefore at the beginning of Winter, they
usually make Contracts with the English, and other Foreigners, who then advance
considerable Sums, and receive Iron in Summer; Were it not for this necessity,
Foreign Merchants would have but little Encouragement, or scarcely Permission
to Live and Trade amongst them, and even as the Case stands, their Treatment of
them is as rigorous, as in any Country, occasioned chiefly by the Envy of the
Burghers, who cannot with any Patience see a Stranger thrive among them. This
is less sensible to Hollanders and others, many of whom become Burghers, and
the rest by their near way of Living are less subject to Envy, but is more
especially the Case of the English Merchants, who find it not their Interest to
become Burghers, and usually live somewhat too high.

The Interest of England in the Trade of Sueden may be computed, by the
Necessity of their Commodities to us, and the vent of ours there; their Copper,
Iron, Tar, Pitch, Masts, etc. cannot be had elsewhere, except from America,
whence it has been supposed such Supplies may be furnished; and if so, this
Consideration ought in reason to have an Influence on the Suedish Councels, and
engage them to make the English Trade with them as easy as possible, that the
Merchants be not driven upon new Designs.

As to our Importations thither, it has already been said, that they scarce
amount to one third of what we export from thence, and consist chiefly of
Cloth, Stuffs, and other Woollen Manufactures, of which has been formerly
vended yearly there to the value of about 50000 l. besides these, Tobacco,
New Castle Coals, Pewter, Lead, Tin, Fruits and Sugar, with several other of
our Commodities are sold at this Market; as also good quantities of Herrings
from Scotland, with other of their Wares, that in all we are supposed to vend
Goods to about 100000 l. a Year, whereof if any more than half be paid for, it
is extraordinary. But the making of Cloth in Sueden to supply the Army, etc.
which has been formerly endeavored without Success, being now encouraged and
assisted by the Public, and undertaken by some Scots and others, has of late,
and does now prove a great hindrance to the Vent of our Cloth there. And to
favor this Undertaking, English Cloth is now, (unless it be such finer Cloths
as cannot be made here) clogged with such excessive Duties, as render the
Importation of it impracticable. These Undertakers have got Workmen from
Germany, and some from England, and besides the German Wool they use, they
receive great quantities from Scotland (supposed to be practiced out of
England) without which they cannot work. Yet as at present, the English Trade
in Sueden, is of the Importance above mentioned, notwithstanding the Abatements
aforesaid, it is however considerable, and will be so, while their Commodities
continue to be necessary, and those that are concerned in it, will deserve as
they need, Protection and Encouragement.

The last Treaty of Commerce between the Two Nations expired several Years ago;
and that of an older Date neither suits the present State of Things, nor has
been thought by the Suedes to subsist; though now for their own Interest they
insist upon the contrary, accordingly their Treatment of the English is only in
reference to their own convenience. And as the Subject of former Complaints
still remains, so new Burdens are frequently imposed upon them: Sometimes they
have demanded of Merchants that were leaving the Country, a sixth part of the
Estate they had got in it, and arrested their Effects on that account. And
besides others, that more directly concern their Trade, the quartering of
Soldiers, and paying of Contributions has been exacted for some Years, and
sometimes the English forced to submit to it.

In the Year 1687. upon their Petition to the King, for redress of these
Impositions which were than laid very high, upon some above 50 l. upon others
40, 30, etc. besides that such of them as kept House had Soldiers quartered
upon them, some 3, 6, or 8. In answer to their Petition, a Placaet was
published, declaring that they should be exempt from those Payments; but
withal, that no Foreign Merchant should continue to Trade in Sueden above Two
Months in a Year, unless he would become a Burgher. In pursuance of which
Resolution their Warehouses were shut up for some time, and the Suedes seem
resolved to proceed to extremity; but have not put that Resolution generally in
Execution, though they seem to wait for an Opportunity, and now and then they try
it upon particular Persons, to see how Foreign Princes will take it.

The Law that exacts the third part of such Foreign Merchants Estate, as die in
Sueden, has not in effect been so beneficial to the Suedes, as frightful to the
Merchants, who (especially the English) for that and other reasons, never think
of marrying, and settling there, so long as their Affairs are in good order,
and they in a Condition to return home with a competent Estate and Credit; upon
which account England seems to be less concerned to endeavor the repeal of
that Law, it being more useful to have Sueden a Nursery for young Merchants,
than a place of Settlement for those that have got Estates.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Suedish Conquests.
THE ancient Expeditions of the Goths, and the Kingdoms they erected in France,
Spain, Italy and elsewhere, upon the Ruins of the Roman Empire, have little
Connection with the present State of the Country, and only shows, that their
Nation was then much more populous and powerful, than it has been in latter
times, which is generally ascribed to the use of Polygamy among them, while
they were Heathens; but the Conquests which continue to be beneficial to Sueden
at this day are of a much later Date.

For it was not till the Year 1560. that the Suedes got footing in Liefland,
When the Knights Templers, who were Masters of those Parts, being overthrown by
the Muscovites, King Erick of Sueden was invited by the Inhabitants of Revell,
and the Country adjacent, to take them into his Protection, which he consented
to; and the Door being thus opened, the Crown of Sueden has by degrees wrested
from the Poles and Muscovites the greatest part of Liefland, and some Provinces
of Russia adjoining to it; Countries of inestimable value to Sueden, as, which
both cover it from the Incursions of the Poles and Muscovites, and furnish it
with plentiful Supplies of Corn and other Commodities; besides the Benefit it
reaps by the vast Trade of those Parts. On the side of Denmark, besides
Yempterland and Hercadale, Two Northerly Provinces lying opposite to Norway,
they have recovered the rich Countries of Schonen, Halland and Blecking, which
join to the Body of Sueden; and gave the Danes, while they possessed them, free
entrance into the very Heart of the Country. They have also got from the Danes
the Territory of Bahnus, which prevents all Inroads from that side of Norway.
These, together with the Countries of Pomerania and Bremen, are so
considerable, that their Writers own, that the present Royal Family has
augmented the Kingdom near one half; only with this Disadvantage, that all the
Neighbors of Sueden are thereby disobliged, and watch all opportunities to
retrieve their Losses; so that Sueden can never firmly depend upon the
Friendship of Denmark, Poland, Muscovy, or any other Neighboring Princes.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Interest of Sueden.
THE great Domestic Interest of Sueden has been of late thought to consist in
the Advancement of the King's Revenue, and Authority at home, in order to make
him more formidable abroad; so that the Nation has had no Interest distinct
from the King's; as the King on the other side would seem to have an
inseparable Connection with the Prosperity of his Subjects in general, and most
especially of the Yeomanry, or Peasants, who are accounted the Basis of the
Kingdom, rather than the Trading part; therefore though the Peasants have not
been spared from bearing a considerable Share of the common Burden; yet more
care has been taken to make it sit easy upon them, than upon the rest, and
they delivered from the Oppression of the Fellow Subjects, which they formerly
labored under: the Encouragement of Trade and Manufactures is also the King's
Care, and great Wonders are expected from it; but doubtless there is much more
in their Imaginations, than will ever be found in the Effect.

It is also found the King's Interest to keep the Nobility and Gentry very low.
In Matters of Religion his Majesty has no other Interest than to maintain the
present Establishment, and keep the Clergy to the due Performance of their
Duty, which admits of little or no difficulty.

In general the chief Domestic Interest of the King of Sueden is to preserve
the Government in its present State, and secure it such to his Successors, it
being constituted so much to the Advantage of the Royal Family, that in that
regard it can hardly be bettered by any Change.

In relation to Foreign Affairs, it is apparently the Interest of Sueden to
avoid all offensive War, as being already in the quiet Possession of as many
conquered Provinces on all sides as it can well defend; though more would not
displease them, if they could be got with safety, to maintain a good
Correspondence with Moscovy by a due Observation of the Treaty lately
concluded, and endeavor to end the Point of Separation of the Limits, which is
the only Matter that can be like to create Trouble on that side with Poland.

Sueden has little occasion of difference, or reason, to apprehend any Quarrel,
neither does it seem the Interest of Sueden to aim at any further Enlargements
in Germany, but rather to use all good Offices to preserve the Treaty of
Munster, as the Foundation of its Right to Pomerania and Bremen; which
Provinces are of such Importance to Sueden, as rendering it much more
considerable to all Europe than it would otherwise be, that they will never be
parted with so long as Sueden is able to defend them.

The Intercourse with Denmark, has seldom been friendly, nor have there ever
wanted Grounds of Quarrels, when the Conjunctures were favorable; though at
present Sueden seems to have little occasion of Misintelligence with that
Crown, unless on the account of the State of Affairs abroad, and the several
Interests they have to mind therein; their Agreement in Point of Trade seems to
cement them, but their Emulation in regard of a Mediation, and in other Points,
is as likely to keep them at a distance; nor is it at all probable they ever
will, or can so far surmount their mutual Distrusts, as actually to take part
on the same side. But in regard of their own Affairs, Sueden has gained so much
from Denmark already, and the Interest of the Trading part of Europe is so much
concerned to hinder it from getting more, that being also inferior to Denmark
by Sea it is not probable it will in many Years have any design of enlarging
its Territories farther on that side, though it has undoubtedly a longing Desire
to Norway, which would make it the sole Master of all Naval Stores. And Denmark
is so much weaker at Land, that Sueden has no reason to apprehend it, unless
Domestic Confusions do happen, which in all times Denmark has been ready to
foment, and has frequently profited by them; and it is not very improbable, but
it may, in not many Years have an opportunity of doing so again; for which
reason especially it is the Interest of Sueden to carry fair, and live at peace
with Denmark.

In Point of Alliances the less Sueden can depend upon its Neighbors, the more
careful it has been to entertain Friendship further from home, especially with
France; which first began about 150 Years ago between Francis the First, and
Gustavus the First, and subsisted till of late Years, that the Emperor's Party
was thought more agreeable to the Nation's Interest, which it has accordingly
espoused.

The Friendship of England or Holland, or both, has ever been accounted
indispensibly necessary to Sueden, in regard of its Weakness by Sea; neither
has Sueden hitherto engaged in any War, where both those Nations were Parties:
and if such a Case should happen, it is not to be doubted but Sueden would use
all possible means to obtain a Peace; for that the Country cannot subsist
without a quick Vent of its own Commodities, and continual Supplies of such
Necessaries, as it must receive from abroad, of which it is very unusual to
make any Provision beforehand, or lay up greater Stores than what one Winter
consumes.

CHAP. XVII.
An Extract of the History of Sueden.
THE Original of the Suedish Nations which their Historians ascribe to Magog,
Son of Iaphet, whose Expedition thither they placed in the Year 88, after the
Flood, is built upon such uncertain Conjectures, as neither deserves to be
mentioned, nor credited any more than the Names of the Kings supposed to
succeed him, invented by the Writers to fill up the Vacuities of those dark
Times, of which other Countries, more likely to have been first planted, can
give so little account; therefore though the Country might possibly have been
early inhabited, yet nothing of certainty can be known of it, till the coming
of Othinus, or Woden, who was driven out of Asia by Pompey the Great, about
Sixty Years before the Birth of Christ. From this Woden, who (as their
Histories report) conquered Moscovy, Saxony, Sueden, Denmark and Norway; all
Northern Nations have been ambitious to derive their Extraction; with him the
Heathenish Religion, that afterward prevailed in the North, Witchcraft, and
other like Arts were brought in; as also the Custom of raising great heaps of
Earth upon the Graves of Persons of Note, and Engraving of Funeral Inscriptions
upon Rocks and Stones, which yet remain in all Parts of the Country.

To Woden, after his Death, Divine Honors were paid, as the God of War; and as
the two first Days of the Week were named after the Sun and Moon, and Tuesday
after It Is or Disa, an ancient Idol, so Wednesday had its Name from him, as
Thursday from Thor, and Friday from Frigga, which three last were long the
chief Objects of the Northern Idolatry. The Succession of the Kings after Woden
is full of confusion; the Nation being sometimes parcell'd into several little
Kingdoms, sometimes into two, Sueden and Gothia; often subject to Denmark or
Norway, and sometimes Master of those Countries, as also of others more
distant, where the Goths, that forsook their Native Soil, happened to plant
themselves; but when, or on what particular occasions, they made those
Migrations, is not certainly known, nor how long they had been abroad when they
first began to infest the Roman Empire, about 300 Years after Christ.

That the Saxons, who were called into England about the Year 450, were
originally a Colony of Goths is conjectured from the Agreement of their
Language, Laws and Customs. But that the Suedes and Goths, joined with the
Danes and Norwegians in their Invasion of England, about the Year 800, we are
assured from our own Historians, that expressly mention them, with the Character
of Barbarous and Pagan Nations, as they then were; and the same may be
concluded from the many Saxon Coyns, that are frequently found in Sueden, and
in greater variety, than in England, which seem to have been the Dane Gilt, or
Tribute that the Nation then paid.

The Normans also, who about that time settled in France, were in part Natives
of this Country, so that England, together with the Miseries that accompanied
those Conquests, owes a great part of its Extraction to these People.

But to pass on to Times of more certainty, it was about the Year 830, that the
Emperor Ludovicus Pius sent Ansgarius, afterward Archbishop of Hamburgh, to
attempt the Conversion of the Suedes and Goths, who at first had little or no
Success; but in his second Journey, some Years after, he was better received;
and baptized the King Olaus, who was afterward martyred by his Heathen
Subjects, and offered in Sacrifice to their Gods; nor did Christianity become
the general Religion of Sueden till about a Hundred Years after, when it was
planted by the English Bishops formerly mentioned, sent for thither by another
Olaus; in whose time the Kingdom of Sueden, and that of Gothia were united, but
became afterward to be separated again, and continued so near Two Hundred
Years; when they were again joined, on Condition that the Two Royal Families
should succeed each other by turns, as they did for the space of One Hundred
Years, but not without great Disorders, and much Blood shed.

This occasion of Quarrel, which ended in the Extirpation of the Gothic
Family, was succeeded by another; for Waldemer, Son of Berger, Ierle or Earl,
who was descended from the Royal Family of Sueden, being at that time chosen
King, by his Father's Advice, 1250.
he created his Three Brothers Dukes of Finland, Sudermanland, and Smaland,
with such a degree of Sovereignty in their respective Dukedoms, as enabled them
to disturb their Brother's Government; who was at last forced to resign the
Kingdom to his Brother Magnus, 1279.
which he left to his Son Berger, 1290.
who lived in continual Dissension with his Two Brethren, Erick and Waldemar,
till he took them Prisoners, and famished them to Death, upon which he was
driven ont of the Kingdom, and succeeded by Duke Erick's Son

Magnus, 1319.
who was persuaded to suffer his Son Erick to be chosen King of Sueden jointly
with himself, as his other Son Haquinus was of Norway.

Both these Brothers made War upon their Father, who thereupon caused the
Eldest to be poisoned, the other Haquinus, being reconciled to his Father,
married Margaret, the Daughter Waldemar, King of Denmark, in whose Person the
Three Northern Kingdoms were afterward United. This Magnus being deposed for
his ill Government made place for his Sister's Son

Albert, 1363.
Duke of Mechlenburgh, of whom the Suedes were soon weary, and offered the
Kingdom to Margaret, whose Husband Haquinus had left her Norway, and her Father
Denmark. King Albert, therefore being beaten in a pitched Battle, was taken
Prisoner by this

Margaret, 1388.
who succeeded him, and enacted the Union of the Three Crowns into a Law; which
was ratified by the States of those Kingdoms, but proved much to the Prejudice
of Sueden, and to the Advantage of Denmark, which People had always the Art or
Luck to get their King's Favor, and render the Suedes and Norwegians
suspected; conformable to Queen Margaret's Advice to her Successor.

Sueden shall feed you, Norway shall cloth you, and Denmark shall defend you.
At her request the Three Nations chose her young Nephew

Erick of Pomerania, 1396.
reserving to her self the Government during his Minority which she outlived,
and had time to repent; at last she died of the Plague, in the Year 1412. This
Erick married Phillippa, the Daughter of Henry the 4th. of England: of her
their Histories relate, that Copenhagen being besieged, and King Erick in
despair retreating to a Monastery, she took the Command of the City, and beat
the Besiegers, but afterward having in the King's absence fitted out a Fleet
that was unsuccessful, at his return he so beat and abused her, that she
thereby miscarried, and retiring into a Cloister died soon after.

The Oppression the Suedes lay under from Strangers, and to whom the King
committed the Government of Provinces, and the Custody of all Castles, contrary
to the Articles of the Union, made them at last throw off the Yoke, and
renounce their Allegiance to King Erick, in whose place they substituted the
General of the Kingdom, Carl Knuteson; with the Title of Protector, which he
held about Four Years, till they were persuaded to accept

Christopher of Bavaria, 1440.
whom the Danes and Norwegians had already chosen; his short Reign gave the
Suedes new Disgusts to the Union, so that upon his Death, they divided
themselves and chose

Carl Knuteson to be their King, 1448.
who had before been their Protector, and remains a memorable Example of the
Vicissitude of Fortune; for after he had Reigned Ten Years he was driven out by
a Danish Faction, and retiring to Dantzick was reduced to great want.

Christian of Oldenburg, 1458.
King of Denmark and Norway, succeeded him, and renewed the Union which was
soon dissolved; Christian after a Reign of Five Years being turned out,

Carl Knuteson was restored to the Crown, 1463.
which he held only Three Years, being overpowered by a Faction of the Clergy;
and forced to forswear the Crown, and retire into Finland, where he again fell
into want; upon his Deposition his Daughter's Husband

Erick Axelton was made Governor of the Kingdom, which was miserably shattered
by Factions, of which the Bishops were the greatest Ringleaders; in Favor of
Christian of Denmark, whom they endeavored to restore, but their Party being
worsted,

Carl Knuteson was the third time received King of Sueden, 1468.
and continued so till his Death, upon which

Steno Sture, 1471.
a Noble Man of ancient Family, was made Protector of the Kingdom, which he
defended a long time against King Christian, and his Successor, to the Crowns
of Denmark and Norway, but was at last forced to give place to

John, 1497.
who again restored the Union of the Three Crowns, but pursuing his
Predecessors steps in oppressing the Nation, and employing of Strangers, he was
soon expelled the Kingdom,

And Steno Sture was again made Protector; 1501.
and he dying,

Suanto Sture succeeded in the same Quality. 1504.
He had continual Wars with King John all the time of his Government, which at
his Death was conferred on his Son

Steno Sture the younger, 1512.
who withstood the Danish Faction which the Archbishop of Vpsall headed; till
dying of a Wound he received in a Skirmish against the Danes,

Christiern, or Christian, the II. King of Denmark and Norway, was advanced to
the Crown of Sueden, but behaved himself so tyrannically, and shed so much
innocent Blood, especially of the Nobility, which he designed utterly to root
out, that his Reign became intolerable, and the whole Nation conspired against
him under the Conduct of

Gustavus the First, 1521.
descended from the ancient Kings of Sueden, whose Father had being beheaded,
and his Mother had two Sisters imprisoned by Christiern: He was at first
received Governor of the Kingdom, and two Years after had the Regal Dignity
conferred on him; and as the Danes and Norwegians had also expelled King
Christiern, who had married Charles the 5th's Sister, and repaired to the
Imperial Court for Succor, which he could not obtain to any purpose, being
upon his Landing in Norway defeated, and taken Prisoner; in which State he
continued to his Death: Therefore Gustavus was freed from all further trouble,
on that account; and at liberty to redress the Disorders of the Kingdom, which
were great: His first Contest was with the Clergy, who had been the Authors of
much Confusion in former Reigns; to prevent which for the future, he took all
occasions to diminish their Revenues, reuniting to the Crown all the Lands that
had been given to the Church the last Hundred Years; which together with the
Reformation of Religion disquieted the first Ten Years of his Reign, and
occasioned frequent Commotions: Which being over, the remainder of his time
passed without any disturbance at home, or Wars abroad; save only with Lubeck,
and sometimes with Moscovy.

Hitherto the Kingdom of Sueden had for several hundred Years been Elective,
but was at this time made Hereditary to the Male Issue of Gustavus, in a right
Line of Succession; with reservation, that in default of such Issue the Right
of Election should return to the Estates. Gustavus by his three Wives had four
Sons, and several Daughters; his eldest Son, Erick, was to succeed to the
Crown; John was made Duke of Finland; Magnus, Duke of Ostrogothia; and Charles,
Duke of Sudermanland; whereby those Provinces were in a manner dismembered from
the Crown: An Error in Policy that Sueden has so often smarted for, that they
have since made solemn Resolutions never to be guilty of it again; thus having
in his Reign of Thirty six Years brought the Kingdom into such a flourishing
Condition, as it had not seen in many Ages, and entailed a Crown upon his
Family, in which it still continues: He left it to his Son

Erick, 1559.
who was thereby hindered from prosecuting his intended Voyage to England, with
hopes to marry Queen Elizabeth: He Reigned Nine Years, Five of which he kept
his Brother John close Prisoner, upon Suspicion of his designing to supplant
him, as he finally did, but not before Erick his making a Peasant's Daughter
his Queen, and by several cruel and dishonorable Actions had lost the
Affections of all his Subjects; so that he was without much difficulty deposed,
and condemned to a perpetual Prison, where he ended his Life. Upon his
Deposition, the Crown came to

John III. 1568.
notwithstanding the States of the Kingdom had engaged their future Allegiance
to King Erick's Son, that he had by the Queen before Marriage. The War with
Moscovy, which began in King Erick's time, about Liefland, was carried on by
this King with good Success, and several Places taken; to which not only
Muscovy, but Poland and Denmark also pretended; for as the Knights Templers had
transferred their Right to Liefland upon Poland; so the Muscovites had agreed
to deliver it to Magnus, Duke of Holstein, the King of Denmark's Brother; in
consideration of a small Acknowledgement to the Czar of Muscovy, as the Supreme
Lord: So that Four great Nations claimed this Country at once, which possibly
might facilitate the Suedish Conquests.

This Prince's Reign was disquieted by his Attempt to alter the Established
Religion, in which he made considerable progress; but was sometimes in doubt,
whether he should endeavor an Union with the Latin or Greek Church; to the
former of which he at last declared himself; but could not prevail with his
Subjects to follow his Example. He kept his Brother Erick Ten Years in Prison,
and then thought it necessary for Safety to have him poisoned, according to the
Advice which it is said the States of the Kingdom had given.

His Brother Magnus did not Minister any Cause of Suspicion, being disturbed in
his Brain, and incapable of having any Design.

But his Brother Charles gave him sufficient occasion of Jealousy, and it was
not without great difficulty, that things were kept from coming to an extremity
between them.

After a Reign of Thirty six Years King John died by the Fault of an ignorant
Apothecary, there being then no Physicians in Sueden; to him succeeded his Son

Sigismund, 1592.
whose Mother was Catharine, a Princess of the Iagellan Family in Poland: To
which Crown, Sigismund had been Elected Five Years before his Father died: His
Brother John was in his Minority; so that his Uncle Charles had the Government
of the Kingdom, till Sigismund came from Poland to be Crowned in Sueden; which
was not till about a Year after his Fathers decease. His Coronation was
retarded some Months, by the Difficulties that arose about the Points of
Religion, and the Confirmation of Privileges: All which were at last
accommodated, and the King after a Years stay in Sueden, returned to Poland,
leaving the Kingdom in great Confusion, which daily increased.

So that at his return some Years after, 1598.
he was met by his Uncle at the Head of an Army, which defeated the Forces the
King brought with him. Whereupon an Accommodation being patched up, he returned
to Poland, leaving his Uncle to manage the Government. Which Post he held, till
the States being weary of Sigismund, and having in vain brought him to consent
to his Son's Advancement to the Crown, which his Brother John also refused:
They conferred it upon his Uncle Charles the 9th, who thereby became engaged in
a War with Poland, as he was already with Muscovy; 1604.
the Scene of both being in Liefland, where the Suedes lost Ground, till the
Affairs of Muscovy fell into such Confusion, that they were forced to give
Sueden a Peace, that they might have its Assistance against the Poles and
Tartars; which was granted upon Terms very advantageous for Sueden, and sent
under the Conduct of Count Jacob de la Gardie, who did Muscovy great Service;
but the Muscovites failing to perform the Conditions stipulated, he broke with
them, and took the City of Novogrod, and disposed the Inhabitants, with others
of the Neighboring Provinces, to desire Prince Charles, (Phillip, the King's
younger Son) to be their Czar; which was so long in treating about, that the
Opportunity was lost.

The Year before this King's Death a War broke out with Denmark; in which State
he left the Kingdom to his Son

Gustavus Adolphus, 1611.
who having ended the War with Denmark, by the Mediation of James the 1st, of
England, applied himself to that in Leifland and Muscovy: To the Borders of
which he sent his Brother, not with an Intention to procure his Establishment
in that Throne, which he rather aimed at for himself; But to induce the
fortified Places adjacent to Finland and Liefland, to accept of Suedish
Garrisons in Prince Charles Phillip's Name, which succeeded in a great measure,
till another was chosen Czar; with whom, after various Success on both sides, a
Peace was concluded by the Mediation of England and Holland; by which Sueden,
besides part of Liefland, got the Country of Ingermanland, and the Province of
Kexholm, with several fortified Places, and wholly shut out the Muscovites from
the East Sea.

The Polish War, that had some short Intervals of Truces, was of a longer
continuance, and no less beneficial to Sueden; which, in the Course of it, took
Riga, and all other Places the Poles had in Liefland, except only one Fort, and
thence carried the War into Prussia with the like Success, till at last by the
Interposition of England, France, etc. a Truce was concluded for six Years.

This gave Gustavus leisure to engage in the German War, to which he was both
provoked by the Emperor, and encouraged by others. The Year following he began
that Expedition, and on June 24. arriving in the Mouth of the Odor, he Landed
his little Army that consisted of Sixteen Troops of Horse, and Ninety two
Companies of Foot, making about Eight Thousand Men, which, besides other
Additions, was augmented by Six Regiments of English and Scotch under Duke
Hamilton, but more by the King's incredible Success.

Upon his first approach Stetin and all Pomerania fell into his Hands. Sept. 7.
1631.
The Year following having joined the Elector of Saxony, he gave the Emperor's
Army under General Tilly, a total Overthrow near Liepsig: Whence he traversed
Franconia, the Palatinate, Bavaria, etc. till the next Year at the Battle of
Lutzen (where his Army was again victorious) he was treacherously killed, (as
it is believed) by Francis Albert, Duke of Saxon Lawemburgh; not only to the
great Joy of the Imperialists, but of France and other his Friends, who envied
and feared the farther Increase of his Greatness. By his Death the Crown fell
to his Daughter,

Christina, a Princess of Five Years old, in whose Favor her Father had gained
the States of the Kingdom to alter the Hereditary Union, as it is styled, which
restrained the Succession to the Male Line. In her Minority the Chancellor Axel
Oxenstiern had the Direction of the Suedish Affairs in Germany; where the War
was prosecuted with variety of Success, but much to the Advantage of Sueden;
which was possessed of above a Hundred fortified Places, and had an Army
exceeding 100000 Men, when Prince Charles Gustave was Generalissimo. A little
before the Conclusion of the Treaty of Munster, by which Sueden obtained for
its Satisfaction, the Dukedoms of Pomerania, Bremen and Verdeu, with the City
of Wismar, and a Right of Session, to Vote in the Diets of the Empire, and
Circle of Lower Saxony, as also the Sum of five Millions of Crowns. The Queen
had for several years entertained a Resolution to quit the Crown, which she at
last effected, and after having procured Prince Charles Gustavus, to be
declared Hereditary Prince (whom the States would gladly have had the Queen
married, but neither he nor she were inclined to it) with much Solemnity she
divested her self of the Crown, and released her Subjects from their
Allegiance, which the same day was conferred upon Jan 6. 1654.


Charles' Gustavus, who the year following made War upon Poland, to revenge the
Affront done to him, in protesting against his Admission to the Crown; his
Progress at first surprised not only Poland, but alarmed all Europe; for in
three Months time he had taken all Prussia, except Dantzick; a great part of
Lithuania, the Cities of Warsaw, Cracaw, and other places in the Greater and
Lesser Poland. Most of the People of those Provinces swearing Allegiance to
him, as being Deserted by King Casimir, who was fled into Silesia, but this
Career of Prosperity did not long continue; the first Consternation being over,
the Poles were as ready to fall from him, as they had been to embrace his
Party; besides, the Emperor, Moscovy, and Holland, became his Enemies, as also
Denmark; which gave the King of Sueden an honorable Occasion of quitting
Poland, where he could not long have subsisted; having therefore left his
Brother, Prince Adolph, Governor of Prussia, he hastened to Denmark, which he
soon reduced to a necessity of Buying Peace at the price of the Provinces of
Schonen, Halland, and Bleaking, which was concluded in the following Spring,
but broke out again in few Months.

The King of Sueden unexpectedly Landing an Army the following Summer in
Seelandt, 1658.
where he took the Castle of Cronenburgh at the Entrance of the Sound, but had
not the like Success at Copenhagen, which was besieged and stormed in vain; and
being the following Summer relieved by a Fleet from Holland, the Siege was
turned into a Blockade, and continued so till Charles Gustave, having by his
bold and successful Attempts in six years time drawn upon Sueden the Enmity of
almost all Europe, was taken away by a Fever, and left the Crown to his Son

Charles XI. the present King, 1660.
whose Ministers obtained Peace with Poland, Moscovy, the Emperor,
Brandenburgh, Holland, and Denmark, upon Honorable Conditions, which continued
till it was interrupted by the late War; of which an Account has been given
already.

FINIS.

