Roger L'estrange's QUERIES CONSIDERED; AND Some Queries put, for the
Consideration of those Persons, whose Judgments are in danger of being again
Poisoned by the Snare of smooth Words; calculated to the humor of a Biggot,
for the helping the Indigent Case of King James, and Vindicating the
Non-Abdicators.
1. WHether the Church of England ought not to be content, and very grateful,
that the King has so often declared himself for the Church of England, without
obliging his Majesty on pain of their Displeasure (and no less a Scandal than
Presbyterian in his Heart) to subjoyn a professed Abhorrence and inveterate
Enmity against all his Dissenting Subjects?

2. Whether the Church of England or Dissenters have most made it their
Business to Libel the present King, or whether indeed they ever did Libel him
to the Degree of our Query-maker in his sixth Query; and whether it be the sin
against the Holy Ghost, for the Dissenters to glory in the Friendship of their
King, who has given them his Royal Word for his Favor and Protection in the
Liberty of their Conscience, which is so much repined at, and the King so much
hated for?

3. Whether it be really the Church of England (or our Query-maker only that
makes her so) that makes her self a Sanctuary for all the Offenders of the last
Reign? and if so, What she can answer to her excluding the late King James,
while none of his Instruments are thought guilty enough to suffer, no, nor to
be excluded doing the same things again, if they have Opportunity?

4. Whether also it had not been as mannerly in our Inquirer to have set down a
List of all those Members that stood in need of Indemnity 1660. to make out
that it was a majority? or whether his Credit be good enough to pass without
Proof, who stands in so much need of an Indemnity himself, and of a Pillory now
for traducing 146 Gentlemen of the House of Commons as Republicans or old
Rebels, because against his Will they Voted his present Majesty King, and took
the Sword of Persecution out of the hand of the Church of England?

5. Whether his third Query be not insinuation enough to make the Church of
England loath him, who foster upon them his own Spirit of Blood and War, so
contradictory to the known and practiced Doctrine of the Church, Charity and
Passive Obedience? and what but Rebellion can this Libeller insinuate, when he
says, the Church of England will be esteemed Cowards and Stupid, if they do not
awake against those his Majesty has taken into his Protection?

6. Whether this Fellow is not a fit Person to be hugged by the Church of
England, that shall boast in Print that our Army in Ireland are but remains of
Regiments, and proposing other means to reduce Ireland than giving Taxes, (
viz. recalling K. James) if he does not mean that, we desire him to name those
other means, not doubting Majesty, as well as the Nation, will take it very
kindly of him, to put us in a way to reduce the Kingdom without Money, or a way
for Money without Taxes?

7. Whether any Dissenter ever denied his fifth Query; or what his reason is
for putting it; or how he will prove all those qualifications upon any Member
of the House.

8. Whether it be sit for this Query-maker to call in question the Actions of
Parliament; and if it be, how he will make it out that the House changed the
Right of Succession; and how will the Church of England answer to a Charge
against their boasted Loyalty, for suffering an Impudent Scribler to call the
making his Majesty King, a Voting Queen Mary out of three Kingdoms; or whether
this be not such an Affront to his Majesty and the present Government, as any
Subject that has respect for either cannot but regret?

9. Whether it is not as likely they should be his Majesty's Friends that Voted
for making him King, as those that were against it; and whether ever the King
told this Query-maker, he was sensible they had Republican Designs in doing it?

10. Whether the Temper of those Members does not deserve Censure, who were so
hasty for a General Pardon, that they could not stay to think of making
Inquisition for Blood, that so the guilt of all the Blood spilt in the late
Tyranny might devolve on the Nation, but preferred their own security against
the lash of the Law, to the just retribution that God Almighty expected from
their hands, in whom he had placed the dispensing of Justice, and to the King's
being just to his Declaration.

11. Whether it was not a sign of an excelling Loyalty in those Members who so
carefully provided that the King should swear at his Coronation to protect the
Bishops in all their Episcopal Rights, who at the same time refused to swear
Allegiance to him, or to own him as their Head. and how much it went against
the grain to have them suspended for it, is discernable in every Query he makes?

12. Whether Whipping Oats was not an Instance of Tyranny and Cruelty, in a
Nation that of all the World pretends to Humanity, and to have no Tortures
practiced; and whether the opposing that reversing Vote, was not more to show
their good Will than any Spleen to the Man himself?

13. Whether if all these things do not unqualifie a Member for a place in the
House, Qu. 6. Why being banished by the Cruelty of an Abdicated Tyrant, should
unfit a Man for the Service of his Country, remains to be proved?

14. Whether the boasting of Loyalty and the Church of England may not evince a
Factor for Popery, as well as saying, I am a true Engilsh Man, proves one to be
none; and whether the Loyalty so lately in Vogue, and the Zeal for the Church,
was not more in the Mouths of those very Men, who since in France and Ireland
went openly to Mass, than in any other; and whether the Church of England are
not now too much awake to be so ridden again?

15. Whether England is reduced to so much Exigence, as to make Composition for
time with the States of Holland, for what they expended on our Account; and
whether this Gentleman is not for lessening our Figure in the World, and our
Value abroad, which is indeed much for our Interest, by having a Message sent
to the States, viz. May it please your High and Mightinesses, your poor, and
needy Brethren of England are not able yet to repay you, but if you will have
Patience with them, they will be very honest, and pay you all. And further,
Whether this Gentleman ever looked over the Act for repaying the Dutch, to see
how many Years it will be before they will have their Money?

16. Whether the Gentleman did not design to leave some unanswerable Query in
his Paper, by not telling who did so, that so we might not examine the
particular Case; and whether if any Member saw an Act of Parliament evaded, and
the King cheated, as he was most loyally in that Bill, it was not a Noble and
Generous Honesty to move for a just Review even among his best Friends?

17. Whether his 13th. Query has not a little Nonsense in it; and whether he
can show any particular quality in the Parliament of K. James the second, to
distinguish them from all Parliaments that ever was, save that there was a full
Brigade of Swordmen in it, for which he in particular quarrels at this
Parliament, in which are very few?

18. Whether any Man may not start Questions that no Man can Answer? or what
Scruples any Man made at the Actions of K. James, which he so much repented of
as to make him desist in Point of Conscience from standing at the last Election?

And for a Query by the way; Whether it is not likely they have some other end
than a bare serving their Country in the House, who bid so high for Votes,
that an honest Man that has no self-end cannot afford to give; and that for the
pure and single benefit of Religion, and propagation of the Church of England,
Debauch the Nation with drunken Treats, to engage them to choose them to sit in
Parliament, that they may plead Privilege in Bar of their just I do not mean
Sir Peter Rich.
Debts; and whether this was not a grand Reason why a Bill for Regulating
Elections has so often been offered, but could never Pass in the last House?

19. Whether the 15th Query be not the bottom of all the rest, and the only
Card they have to play, who watch for our Division to overturn the Government
once again, in hopes of reaping the sweet Harvest of a common Calamity, to make
amends for their present Poverty, who formerly made great gain of the Pretense
of Religion. Heu! Quantum profuit haec fabula Christi?

20. Whether it is likely this Libeller shall be Judge of the good Nature or
sense of the People of England, or that his Opinion must be the Standard of
Elections to come?

21. Whether his Reflection on Mr. Sachaveril, and publishing a List of
Members, is not more their Honor and Vindication than Reflection, especially
from his sordid Scandal on them in his second Query?

22. Whether, To give one Instance of the Ingenuity and Generosity of the Party
this Fellow pleads for, it be not very remarkable, how our Four new Candidates
for London stood by, and see a profligate drunken Fellow, that calls himself of
the Church of England, bid the Sheriff of London, executing his Office with
unquestionable and indisputable Integrity, Kiss his Posteriors on the Hustings
in Guild Hall, and not so much as Reprove him for it, much less Commit him, as
they ought in Honor to have done? and whether in doing it they had not gained
more Honor, and more vindicable Credit, than by clandestine Calls on the
Livery, forestalling of Votes, and Sunday Cabals, engaging an Interest for
their Election?

23. Whether the Kings late Letter for the Reforming the Clergy and the whole
Nation, has in it any such horrible thing, as to have it publicly called A
damned Phanatical Cant? And whether the Church it self ever pretended to be so
Infallible as to need no such Admonition, or that no Reformation can be made in
it, either in its Hierarchy or in its Members, that can fall short of
Presbytery and Phanaticism?

24. Whether Dr. Sherlock's appearing in the Pulpit after a Deprivation by Act
of Parliament, be not the Effect of the same Spirit; who being advised by the
Learned in the Law, and permitted by his Superiors in the same Circumstances,
dare openly affront the Government, and bid Defiance to an Act of Parliament,
as a further Testimony of the Practice as well as Profession of the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience?

Lastly, Why the Church of England, should after all the Public
Acknowledgments of their calling in the P. of O. and after their Solemn Joining
with him in his Enterprise, and thanks to him for performing it, and to God for
the Success, now strive to have it agreed, that he came in by Conquest, which
is past my Learning to unriddle, and very little for the Honor of the Nation
for them to acknowledge.

LONDON, Printed for John Palmer, 1690.


