Loyalty and Peace Or, Two Seasonable DISCOURSES From 1 Samuel 24.5. viz. David's
heart smote him because he cut off Readiness skirt. The First, Of CONSCIENCE and
its Smitings. The Second, Of the Prodigious Impiety of Murdering King CHARLES
I. Intended To promote sincere Devotion and Humiliation upon each Anniversary
Fast for the late King's Death.

By Dr. SAMUEL ROLLS. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. James Mathematical Printer to the King's most
Excellent Majesty, for Joseph Hindmarsh at the Black Bull in Cornhill near the
Royal Exchange. 1678.

(...) but stand ready for such another? I had dedicated these my first fruits
in the Church, to him to whom all first fruits are due; but that I considered,
that Kings, like High Altars, ought not to be approached all at once, but by
steps and degrees; as also that such a Tragedy as I here relate, could not be
pleasant to his Majesty to read, though very profitable for his Subjects that
it should be written. The Loyal Contents of this small Treatise may assure the
world, that your Lordship has admitted into his Majesty's Service, a Person of
as unfeigned and fervent Loyalty as your heart could wish, or as the world
affords. And now my Lord, what remains but my most ardent wishes (in which I
know your Lordship will join with me) viz. That the Soul of our Lord the King
may be bound in the bundle of life with the Lord his God (as the Phrase is, 1 Samuel 25.29.) and the lives of his enemies may be slung out as out of the middle
of a sling; that his Enemies may be clothed with shame, but upon himself his
Crown may flourish; and that God would cover his head both in the day of
Battle, and of Peace. For your Lordship, I have no greater thing to wish, than
that the King of Kings may take your Lordship as much into his favor, as the
King of England has done; and instead of the Star which his Majesty has
bestowed upon you, may in due time give you that Crown of Righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous Judge shall give at the great day to all them that love
his appearing, which is the hearty Prayer, of

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, faithful and obedient Servant, S. ROLLS.

TO The most Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England, and Metropolitan; and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, S. R.
The least of all the Servants of the Church, and not worthy to be so called,
humbly dedicates his poor and unworthy Labors in the ensuing Treatise of
Conscience, etc.
May it please your Grace:
THough some Writings of extraordinary men may seem to need no Patron, yet I am
very sensible that mine do, and this of mine above all the rest (which for the
nature of the Subject may pretend to deserve one) because I do easily foresee
it will fall under the displeasure of many, both for the Author's and
Arguments-sake. for the Author's sake, because he has given his Service to the
Church of England, (which he had done many years sooner, but for an invincible
impediment, not unknown to your Grace) and now does with as much heartiness,
cheerfulness, and satisfaction, as ever man did, for which there are some that
do stomach him the more, because a doubting, trembling, s^^upulous Conformist,
is in their apprehension the honestest man that conforms, and in the most safe
and salvable condition, though the Spirit of God speaking by St Paul has told
us, That whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and that he that doubts is damned
if he eat.

No less distasteful to many prejudiced and malecontented people is the
Argument of the latter part of this Fook: For they cannot endure to hear that
Fact called a horrid and bloody Murder, which they have looked upon as a
gallant and heroic Enterprise, not unlike the signal Achievements of Jael
against Sisera, Ehud against Eglon, recorded in the Book of Judges. I doubt too
many had rather that Act had been made a Precedent, than the Actors thereof an
Example. My Lord, If I fly not to your Grace's Protection, men of that ill
Character will be ready to swallow me up quick, whilst their rage is kindled
against me. For having preached but one 30th. day of January upon the subject
of this Book, I know to my sorrow, what it, and a few more expressions of my
Conformity cost me; and how I was made to run the Gaunlet for it, and from some
men could have no quarter. But my comfort is, that I have fully satisfied my
own Conscience in this that I have written, and if your Grace's Judgment shall
be also satisfied therewith, I shall value it more, than I shall regard the
censure and clamor of a thousand disaffected persons, who for want of Capacity,
Learning, and Integrity, are not the thousandth part so able to make a judgment
of it. I therefore beseech your Grace, to take both it and its Author under
your wing, at least the Author for his good and loyal Intentions, which may
extend far toward the covering of his weaknesses, who will easily own that he
has nothing to be proud of (if he may be proud of any thing) but that he had
the honor to have been sometime of the same University and College with your
Grace, and admitted thereinto upon your Grace's personal Examination and
Allowance. I write not this as presuming to invite your Grace to water what you
have planted, but only to make a hedge about it, that no wild Creatures may
root it up. Now that he whose right hand has fixed your Grace in that place of
Eminency, where you now shine as a Star of the first Magnitude, would always
hold your Grace as a Star in his own right hand, and make you as hitherto your
Grace has been, a burning and shining Light, shining forth more and more like
the Sun toward the perfect day, is the hearty Prayer of

Your Grace's Most Devoted Orator, Humble Servant, and Obedient Son, S. ROLLS.

To the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Arlington, Lord Chamberlain Of His
Majesty's Household, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
S. R.
Humbly dedicateth the ensuing Treatise, wishing it may prove in any measure
worthy of your Lordships acceptance.
May it please your Lordship:
HAving lately received more immediately from your Lordships hand an Honor too
big for me to mention in print, I hold it my bounden duty thankfully to
acknowledge it. Were I able to write any thing that might be worth your
Lordships reading (which I can scarce presume to think) that were one proper
way of doing it: for the Calves of Men's Lips are as usual a Thank-offering as
any, and the Calves or Sacrifices of their Pens, are almost the same thing: For
Pens are a sort of Lips wherewith men speak so loud that the world may hear
them. My Lord, within the compass of this Book I have endeavored to express my
hearty Loyalty first to the King of Kings, in speaking highly and honorably of
his Vicegerent upon Earth, which is Conscience; and nextly to my good Lord and
Master, the King of England, by attempting to make the sin of Regicide as
odious in the eyes of all men, as it is in its own nature, that all After-ages
may fear and dread it next to the sin against the Holy Ghost, and for ought I
know, it is a sin of the second Magnitude, and next to that. Now if every man
shall become so persuaded, surely for time to come, men will as soon throw
themselves into caldrons of scalding Oils, or into hot burning Furnaces, as
either directly or indirectly contribute to the death of their King; whereas
whilst men make nothing of that first fact, what do they (...)

Reader,
I See no necessity of pre-advertising thee touching any more than one thing in
this Book, viz. the Title if it, Loyalty and Peace, which I have given it,
because I am well assured, that if men shall revere Conscience, more than they
regard Interest, and entertain those dreadful apprehensions of the Sinfulness
of murdering Kings, which this Treatise does bespeak, and receive the due
impression of some other passages therein contained, as soon may a Camel go
through the eye of a Needle, as they find in their hearts to be disloyal or
unpeaceable.

1 Samuel Chap. XXIV. Verse 5. And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart
smote him; because he had cut off Readiness Skirt.


MY Text is part of a Remarkable Story, referring to David and Saul. Saul had
been possessed with an Implacable Spirit of Envy (such as no Harp could lay) from
the time that the Women sang in their Dances, Saul has slain his thousands, and
David his ten thousands. Little did those sweet Singers of Israel, if they may
be so called, think, how great a Discord that their praising Melody, which gave
the preference to David, a Son and Subject, above Saul, his Father and
Sovereign, would make in the heart of Saul against David; in so much that ever
after he hunted him like a Partridge upon the Mountains. Thinking no sacrifice
great enough, to expiate for that his Crimen Alienum, or other folks fault, in
over-commending him; but the life and heart-blood of him that was so commended:
Which shows us, that Solomon spoke like an Oracle, when he said, Who can
stand before Envy?

Saul returning from following the Philistines (I had almost said like a Lion,
that has tasted blood and thirsts for more) was told that David was in the
Wilderness of En-gedi, ver. 1. Forthwith he took three thousand chosen men out
of all Israel, and went to seek David and his men upon the Rocks of the Wild
Goats. No Rock, but he who is called the Rock of Ages, was sufficient for
David's security, or can be for ours. In ver. 3. it is said, that Saul came to
the Sheep-Cotes by the way; thinking possibly that the Shepherds, of whose
Profession David formerly was, could inform concerning him; where, says the
Text, Was a Cave, which Saul went into, to cover his feet. It follows, that
David and his men remained in the sides of that Cave; and no wonder, because as
Strabo tells us, there were some Spelunca or Caves, especially toward Arabia
and Iturea, where, in time of War, Shepherds hid themselves and their flocks;
yea whereunto all the Inhabitants of Villages and small Cities, did repair for
shelter; some of them being able to contain at once four thousand men. The
Mouths of some of those Caves were so small and full of Windings, that no man
at his Entrance could espy those that were within; but those that were within
could espy those that were entering: so that David and his men saw Saul coming,
but he saw not them; whereupon he went on securely, little suspecting that he
was within one step of death, if God and David had so pleased. And possibly he
laid by his uppermost Garment, the Skirt whereof David was said to have cut
off, and might be more prone to do, when it was separated from that sacred Body
to which it did belong, than when Gods Anointed had it on; to whose holy
Anointing David had special regard, though his followers had none; Witness
their words, ver. 4. And the men of David said unto him, Behold the day of
which the Lord said unto thee, I will deliver thine Enemy into thine hands;
that thou may do to him as it shall seem good to thee: meaning that thou
may kill him. Counsel worthy of such Counselors as they, who were a parcel
of Runnagates, men in debt, and in distress, and of desperate fortunes; who
looked for nothing but a Jail or worse, if Saul should live to be reconciled to
David. Men likely enough to have been Readiness Executioners, if David had but
said the word, Strike off his Head, or, Cut his Throat: For of that sort of men
I presume are all the Executioners of Horrid and Bloody Edicts. But as bad and
faithless men as they were, they prefume not to give such counsel, as that,
without a religious pretext and color for what they said. They countenanced
this their sanguinary Advice with three specious things, viz. Divine Prophecy,
Promise, and Providence. For, say they, Behold the day of which the Lord said
unto thee, Behold I will deliver thine Enemy into thine hand. Which words seem
to refer to some Prophecy and Promise of that Nature, which God had made, to
David, by the mouth of Nathan, Gad, or Samuel; though there be no such Prophecy
or Promise recorded in Scripture; which causes some to think that Providence
was the only Argument which David's Ragged Regiment and Outlawed Crew of
Desperadoes made use of, to stir him up to take away the life of Saul. And then
they read the words thus, Behold the Day of which the Lord says unto thee;
putting in the Present Tense per Enallegen temporis, for the Preterperfect:
Carrying the sense thus, Behold this is the day in which the Lord by the plain
voice of a signal Providence, has told thee, that he has put King Saul into
thine hand, to do with him what seems good in thine Eyes. Having now so
tempting and charming a Providence before thee, be not thou like the Deaf
Adder, that hearkeneth not to the voice of the Charmer, though he charm ever so
sweetly. Yea methinks I hear some of them say unto David, as the King of Israel
said unto Elisha, concerning those Enemies whom he had led blindfold into
Samaria, My Father shall I smite? shall I smite? Or as he said, Let me smite
but once, and I will not smite again. Behold a Price is put into the hand of a
Fool, if he have not the heart to improve it.

So plain and powerful was the Argument taken from Providence, always amongst
those, whose Fingers itched to be doing, and whose mouths watered at that, for
which they had no better Arguments. The force and stress of which Argument lies
here, What may be done, may be done. That is, what may be done de facto, may be
done de jure; or whatsoever God makes possible by an unusual series of
Providence (as is the cutting off a Kings Head when it is once brought to the
Block) is thereby intimated to be lawful, yea necessary and our duty. So
opportunity makes a Thief, and a good opportunity makes it a Judges Duty to
condemn him, and an Executioners to put him to death. But possibly these
Subterranean or Cave Counselors of David's, that they might have three strings
to their Bow; did really intend to urge also a Prophecy, and Promise from God
in the Case (whether there were any or no) a Practice usual in more modern
Ages, to encourage Rebellion by some pretended Prophecy of success in the Case.
When men that intend Rebellion, can allege signal Providence pursuant of
Prophecies, and Promises for their purpose, as also Prophecies, foretelling
those things, which a train of successful providence seem to make way for;
they seem then to sail before Wind and Tide, doubt not but to get safely, yea,
and honestly too, into the harbor of their designs, and to get Accomplices
enough to bear them company.

But since that providence has tackt about like the Wind (though it held for
above twenty years in one Corner) I do imagine that the English Logicians (who
formerly made more use of that Topic than of any other, could wish that an
Index Expurgatorius might pass upon it. Because that Wind, which for so many
years past was with and for them, is now as much against them. And if they will
still hold that old Argument taken from Providence, it is to be hoped it will
make them good and loyal Subjects; because as miraculous a series of Providence
as any they could ever pretend to, has given us the happy Restoration of His
Majesty, and firmly settled him upon his Throne.

But to proceed, The Counsel of David's followers seemed to make some
Impression upon him, and that something did stick; (as they say there will,
when men do fortiter calumniari) for that he adventured to cut off Saul 's
Skirt: as who should say he would try whether the Ice would bear him, before he
would venture to walk or slide upon it; but finding it to Give, Thaw, or Crack
under him, I mean his Heart to fail him when he had done no more but so, he
presently started back, his Conscience recoiled upon him, and gave occasion to
the words of my Text, And David's Heart smote him because he had cut off Saul 's
Skirt.

Which words do plainly consist of three general parts, viz. first of all David
smitten, secondly, that which smote him, viz. his Heart; thirdly, the reason
why his Heart smote him, because he cut off Saul 's Skirt.

I shall spend but a few words to explain the several parts of the Text. By
David's Heart we are to understand his Conscience, for so some Interpreters
render it, Redarguit Davidem Conscientia sua. Now the Conscience of Man may
well be called his Heart, because Naturallists give this account of the Heart
of Man; that it is, Primum vivens ultimus moriens: so is the Conscience of Man,
viz. The first thing that lives, when man begins the Life of Religion, and the
last thing that dies, when a man forsakes that Life; for whilst a man has one
spark of Religion abiding in him, it remains in his Conscience. As for the word
smote him, though it be a Metaphor, I hope it may be pardoned, because I find
few Texts of Scripture in which is no Metaphor; and the sense of it is plainly
this, That David's Heart did rebuke him. As for the last words, because he cut
off Saul 's Skirt; they are so plain nothing can make them plainer.

It is most easy to espy, in these words thus divided and explained, these
Four Propositions, viz. First of all, That Conscience is a Smiter, or one that
will smite men first or last, if they give occasion. Secondly, That Conscience
does smite men sometimes for sins comparatively small, as David's Heart did for
cutting off but Readiness Skirt. Thirdly, That the same Conscience has and does
sometimes smite men for small sins, which for a time has given them no rebuke
for much greater transgressions; witness the Heart of David, which for a
considerable time rebuked him not for his Adultery with Bathsheba, nor yet for
murdering her innocent Husband Vriah, and yet now smote him for but cutting
off of the Lap of Saul's Skirt. Fourthly, That Affronts and Injuries offered to
Superiors are sins, for which Conscience is as apt to smite men, as for most
that are committed against either Table. Of which I shall give an account
hereafter.

But now for the first of these Propositions, It may take in the two Later, to
which I shall therefore apply my self; and in pursuance of it, inquire into
Nine Particulars (or whether I should rather call them Generals, I am not as
yet satisfied) viz. Quid, Or what is Conscience; secondly, Quod, the (...), Or
that Conscience is a smiter; Thirdly, Propter quod, Or for what it is that
Conscience uses to smite: Fourthly, Quos, Or who they are that Conscience
takes the boldness, or uses to smite: Fifthly, Quibus, Or by what means and
methods Conscience is stirred up to smite men: Sixthly, Quando, When and at
what seasons Conscience uses to smite: Seventhly, Quamdiu, How long Conscience
holds on Chiding: Eighthly, Quomodo, How or in what manner Conscience uses to
smite: Ninthly, Quare, Why or by what Authority Conscience presumes to smite.

Now these Nine Particulars will take up all we mean to say upon the Doctrinal
part of this Text, which we intend to finish in a short Application. We begin
with the first of these, namely the Quid, or to show what Conscience is.
Conscience is well defined by Amesius, to be Judicium Hominis de semetipso
prout subjecitur Judicio Dei. That is the Judgment of a Man concerning himself,
as it is subjected to the Judgment of God, Isa. 5.3. 1 Corinthians. 11.31. But more
plainly Conscience is, that which excuses when we do well; condemns us when
we do ill: If our Hearts condemn us, says the Apostle, etc. Commends us when
we do well; Confounds us, or rather puts us to shame and confusion of Face,
when we leave undone the things we ought to do, or do the things we ought to
leave undone; and on the other hand comforts us, and fills us with joy, when we
leave undone what we ought to leave undone, and do the things which we ought to
do, and as we ought to do them. Hence those words of the Apostle, 2 Corinthians.
1.12. For our Rejoicing is this, The testimony of our Conscience; that in godly
sincerity we have had our conversation in the world, etc.

Conscience is a Court set up by God in every man's Breast, and has a
threefold Office assigned it, viz. That of a Plaintiff or Accuser; Secondly,
Of a Witness or Evidence; Thirdly, Of a Judge; for Conscience is all these in
one. If any man put the Question, What is Conscience? as Pilate of old, What is
Truth? Methinks I see Conscience it self stand ready to answer him: Know not
thou who, and what I Conscience am, whence I come, and whether I would? Art
thou so much a stranger at home, so much a stranger to thy self, of whom I am
part? I am nearer to thee than he or she that is Flesh of thy Flesh and Bone of
thy Bone; than the Husband or Wife of thy Bosom: I was brought up with thee in
thy Nonage, and was thy Bosom Companion from the time thou did first know
thy right hand from thy left; I have been with thee early and late, talked with
thee many an hour in thy Bed, and in the still and dead of the night; I have
kept thee waking many an hour when thou would fain have slept, calling thy
sins to remembrance; and seting them in order before thee: Many a time have I
made thee blush, many a time have I made thee cry, and water thy Couch with thy
tears; sometimes have I made thee quake and tremble, and make thy very Bed to
shake under thee; And know thou me not all this while? Other times have I
spoken good and comfortable words to thee; come to thee with an Olive Branch of
Peace in my Mouth, and said to thee in Gods Name, whose vicegerent I am, Well
done good and faithful Servant: Or as the Angel of God said to Cornelius in a
Vision, Acts 10.4. Thy Prayers and thy Alms are come up for a Memorial before
God; or as the words are Eccles. 9.7. Go thy way, eat thy Bread with joy, and
drink thy Wine with a merry heart, for God now accepts thy Works. Sometimes
have I made thee a Feast of Fat Things, and of Wines refined on the Lees; for a
good Conscience, thou know is a continual Feast; of Fat Things full of
Marrow, of Wines on the Lees well refined. Hence forward ask no body but thy
self who I am; Who should know the things of a Man, but the Spirit of Man which
is in him? as the Apostle speaks. And surely among the things of a Man, I
Conscience am the greatest; I am that Spirit of Man, which Solomon calls the
Candle of the Lord, Searching all the inward parts of the Belly: I am that
great thing which some have called a god; for it is an old saying, (...).
Though indeed I am but Gods Vice Roy, or one of those that are called gods. In
a word, I Will say no more what I am, for I am so inconsiderable when my Savior
is but once mentioned, that I am not worthy speaking of; yet I am not just
nothing at all: therefore let him that was writing of me, proceed and tell you
how it does appear that I am that Smiter, that Reprover, that Bonarges, that
Son of Thunder, that he has told you I am; and that will bring him from the
Quid to the Quod; which is the next thing to be spoke to.

Secondly, I am obliged in the next place to prove that which may as easily
admit a proof as any thing, yea indeed needs no proof at all, viz. That
Conscience is a faculty in the Soul of Man, that will smite first or last if
occasion be given. I say it seems to need no proof, for what need is there for
any man to prove by Reason and Arguments, that there is such a thing as the
Gout, Stone, or Colic; or that these things are painful when they seize
People violently: seeing the sense and woeful experience of every man that has
been under the smart discipline of all or any of these, assures him that so it
is. What the Apostle says of Afflictions, may be applied to the chastisings of
Conscience: If you are without Chastisement, whereof all are partakers, ye are
Bastards and not Sons. The Scripture says, That by the mouth of two or three
witnesses, every word is confirmed. We shall therefore allege Three credible
Witnesses, viz. Scripture, Experience, and Sound Reason; whereby ex abundanti,
to establish the point in hand. It is none of the (...), or things but once
written in the Holy Scriptures; That Conscience is a Smiter: for this we find
asserted over and over, both in the Old and New Testament: Witness first the
famous instance of this truth, in the first Adam; Genesis 3. v. 10. And he said, I
heard thy voice in the Garden and I was afraid, because I was naked; and and
hid my self. The meaning whereof is, That when Adam had eaten of the forbidden
Fruit, his Conscience did forthwith fly or spit in his Face, and put him into a
pannick fear, and to a woeful shame; so that he could almost have buried himself
alive, or gone down to Hell; could he there have been hid from the presence and
displeasure of an angry God. Our next instance shall be in Cain. Did his
Conscience smite him or did it not? Yea almost as mortally as he smote his
Brother Abel; witness those words of his Genesis 4.13. And Cain said unto the
Lord, My punishment is greater than I can bear; behold thou have driven me out
this day from the Face of the Earth, and from thy Face shall I be hid; and I
shall be a Fugitive and a Vagaboud in the Earth: and it shall come to pass that
every one that finds me shall slay me; v. 14. See here the doleful Bodings of
a guilty smiting Conscience.

The Third Witness that we shall call, shall be that passage in Genesis 42.21. And
they (viz.) Joseph 's Brethren) said one to another, we are verily guilty
concerning our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he
besought us and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.

A Fourth instance would be one more than I promised, but you may have it in
Judges 1.7. And Adoni-Bezek said, threescore and ten Kings, having their Thumbs
and their great Toes cut off, gathered meat under my Table; As I have done, so
God has requited me.

Let the famous instance of Judas bring up the Rear, Matthew. 27.3. Then Judas,
which had betrayed him (viz. our Savior) when he saw that he was condemned,
repented himself; saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent
blood: And he cast down the pieces of Silver in the Temple, and went and hanged
himself; verse 4, 5. If Conscience had not smitten him so as it were with fiery
Scorpions, surely his soul had not chosen strangling rather than life.

We have been already compassed about with a sufficient Cloud of Scriptural
Witnesses. In the next place you may find those Witnesses backed with
Experience, I mean the Experience not of one, but of all Ages; which need not
be pressed, but will come in, in the Quality of Volunteers, and offer its
service to attest this truth. That there is a God, has not more suffrages from
the light of Nature, and common Experience of Mankind; then that there is a
Smiter, or Reprover in every Man's Breast, called Conscience; I had almost said
I appeal to every man's Conscience that there is a Reprover in his Breast, which
when he rusheth into Sin as the Horse into the Battle, and drinks in Sin, as
the Fish does Water; Curbs and checks him for so doing, tells him he ought not
to mispend his precious time, to waste those golden sands of time, which once
run out, can never be recalled: Tells him that he ought to mind the Errand for
which God sent him into the World, and set all men upon the face of the earth,
viz. To seek after God, if hapily they might feel after him, and find him, Acts
17. v. 27. And tells him in case he does otherwise, that he plays Jonah, who
set sail for Tarshish, when God sent him to Nineveh; and may justly expect,
that a storm of Divine Wrath will pursue him, that he shall be cast into the
Deep, into the midst of the Seas; and all Gods Billows and Waves shall pass
over him: as it is Jonah 2.3. Tells him that since he names the name of Christ,
he should depart from all iniquity; should deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts; live righteously, soberly, and godly, in the present world; and that
tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soul that obeys not the truth: Upon
the Christian first, and then upon the Heathen; for this is the condemnation,
that light is come into the world; and men love darkness rather than light,
because their deeds are evil.

Now I doubt not but every man is capable of this Appeal to himself or to his
Conscience, or to that which the Quaker calls, The Light within him: Unless
there be some few, that have served their Consciences, as desperate Persons
sometimes do those Bailiffs and Sergeants which come to Arrest them in the
Kings Name, viz. kill them outright, which yet I think is hard to do by
Conscience; for thoughsome have laid their Consciences in Swanes and Trances,
or cast them into a dead sleep, as did Herod, in reference to Herodias, with
whom he lived in Incest; yet they do generally awake and come to themselves
again, as appears by that famous instance of Herod, Mark 6.16. of whom it is
said, When he heard of the fame of Christ, he said, It is John whom I beheaded,
he is risen from the dead.

Now to Scripture and Experience, the two forecited witnesses; I shall add a
third, viz. Reason: That threefold Cord can surely never be broken: Hear then
what Reason can say on the behalf of Conscience, it being a Smiter: I know,
says Reason, it must needs be so, because the frame and make of Conscience is
such as it is; as well as I know that a keen Axe must needs be apt to cut,
because it has so sharp an Edge. Conscience is a Natural Logician, Apta Natu,
that is, naturally fitted to frame Syllogismes; concerning which it is a
constant and infallible Rule, That the Conclusion does always follow the worse
and weaker part of the Premises. Conclusio semper sequitur partem deteriorem.
If then Conscience shall thus syllogize (as often it does) he that believes
not in the Lord Jesus Christ, he that loves not Jesus Christ sincerely and
superlatively, he that forsakes not his Sins, he that mortifieth not the
Flesh, with the Lusts and Affections thereof, is condemned already, and the
wrath of God abides upon him; and then assumes or takes this for his minor
Proposition: But thou, O my Soul, believe not, thou love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, thou have not forsaken thy Sins, etc. Then will it be forced to fall
foul upon a Man, with this Conclusion, Ergo or therefore, thou art condemned
already, and the wrath of God abides on thee.

I hope by this time, I have proved the (...) or Quod sit, beyond all exception
(viz.) that Conscience is a Smiter, etc. Which brings me to the third
particular, namely, to the Propter quod, or to show what it is that Conscience
does usually smite men for. In general it is for sin, real or supposed, most
commonly real. Now though Conscience does many times wink at small faults
(though not always so neither) give me leave to tell you, it seldom forbears
to smite for great and crying Abominations, such are, first of all sins
committed against the clear Light of Nature, as well as of Scripture; such as
the Apostle charge them with Romans 1. v. 32. Who knowing the Judgment of God,
that they who commit such things are worthy of death; not only do the same,
but have pleasure in them that do them. When Christians venture to do those
things, which even Heathens know ought not to be done, namely, to do to others
what they would nor others should do unto them; to tell pernicious Lies, to
perjure, or suborn Perjury, to the undoing of others, etc. When Conscience
smites for such faults as those, will it not fetch blood, and make every blow
it gives pierce to the very heart? Secondly, Those sins whereto even corrupted
Nature seems to have an antipathy, aversation and abhorrence, as namely, Horrid
ingratitude toward our best Friends, recompencing Evil for Good; as Christ
says, I have done many good works among you, for which of these do you go
about to stone me? John 10.32. Cruelty to a man's own Flesh and Blood, as in
Parents toward Children, and Children toward Parents, and in other near
Relations one toward another; Incest and the like: When Conscience smites such
Fools as these, does it not, as it were Bray them in a Mortar, break them upon
the Wheel, put them upon a Rack, give no Quarter, and Refuse to ^^ure for their
much crying.

Thirdly, Those sins which are at once a manifest breach of both the Tables of
Gods Law, and which either smite at men, as it were through the Loins of God
Almighty, or at God Almighty through the Loins of Men: As for Example, When
Jezebel suborned Witnesses to forswear themselves against Naboth, that she
might take away his Life; What was that but a smiting of Naboth, through the
Loins of God Almighty: And on the other hand, When wicked men have persecuted
the Saints and Servants of God, spilt their Blood as Water upon the Ground,
because they bore the Image of their Heavenly Father; What was that but to
smite at God himself, through the Loins of Men? To crucify our Savior again
in Effigy, and to tell the World, (but that the Heaven of Heavens must contain
him till the restitution of all things) they would have done as much to him, as
they have done to his Friends and Followers. Now Conscience is wont to stir up
all its Wrath as it were, to heat the Furnace of its Indignation seven times
hotter than at other times, when such Miscreants as these are to be cast into
it.

Fourthly, Those sins which are of dreadful and horred consequence, which
produce amazing and astonishing evil Effects; which imbrew Nations in Blood,
and pluck down Divine Vengeance upon Cities and Kingdoms; like the sins of
Sodom and Gomorrah, which laid those famous Cities all in Ashes; or like David's
numbering the People, which exposed his Subjects to one of three dreadful
Judgments (choose him whether) the least whereof was the Plague or Pestilence;
when Conscience smites for such things as these it even breaks Men's Bones, it
makes them Magor Missabibs, that is Terrors round about to themselves, ready to
fall into the jaws of despair, cursing the day of their birth; as did Job,
Chap. 1.3. upon an other account, and crying out as he v. 11. Why died I not
from the Womb? Why did I not give up the Ghost when I came out of the Belly?
When Conscience smites at this rate, ah who can live?

But Fifthly and lastly (to name no more) Presumptuous sins, that is, sins
committed against full Conriction of their real and heinous sinfulness against
the Lord; Outcries of Christian Friends, Holy Ministers, and above all, of
Men's own Consciences, crying out and saying, O do not this abominable thing
which the Soul of God hates; sins against fairest warnings, given by Gods
signal Judgments, executed upon sinners of the like nature, sins against the
highest obligations of stupendous mercies, obliging men to the contrary; and
aggravated by whatsoever other circumstances do aggravate the sins of men:
These presumptious sins (as I call them) do make the Consciences of Men to
smite, till even themselves be sick with smiting; and to give the sinner little
or no rest day or night, causing him to cry out, My wounds stink and are
corrupt, because of my foolishness; there is no soundness in my flesh because
of my sin; mine iniquites are gone over my Head, and are a burden too heavy
for me to bear, etc.

Now that Conscience should smite for such crying and crimson sins as these is
no wonder; but what should be the meaning of its smiting men, as now and than
it does, for small sins, for motes in their eyes, for mere Peccadillo's: When
poor Jonathans have tasted but a little Honey upon the tip of their Staves, Why
must they die for so doing? Why must Vzza's Hand wither but for stretching it
forth, and that with a good intention to stay Gods tottering Ark? Why must the
Carcasses of so many Beth-shemites fall, only for the most pardonable
curiosity, as it may seem, viz. To look into Gods Ark, whilst the Angels of
God themselves are allowed (...), that is, to stoop down and to pry into Gods
Mysteries? Why must David lose so great a number of his innocent Subjects, as
he called them, when he said, What have these Sheep done? only because their
King and Shepherd made bold to number them: Why since it is a Maxim in the Laws
of England. Lex non curat de minimis. The Law troubles not it self with trivial
faults. I say, Why does the All-merciful God either smite himself, or suffer
Conscience to smite at so great a rate for small Transgressions; for cutting
off not the Head of a King, but merely the Skirt of his Garment? Or how can he
be said to be merciful that does so? Has he appointed Conscience not only not
to swallow Camels, but to strain at Gnats? Is this the manner of Men that are
accounted mild and merciful?

Ans. It were easy for me to take up the Authors of this objection very short,
saying no more than this: Who art thou O man that reply against God? But
since it may easily be done, I shall gratify them with a more full and
satisfactory account of this matter, in the following Particulars: First of
all, God does therefore punish small sins (such I mean in comparison of others)
with great temporal Punishments, and set Conscience at work sometimes to chide
for them at a great rate, to let the World know there is no sin small
absolutely but comparatively. For as much as every sin is committed against
God, who is infinitely good; and in that respect is Ex part objecti, a kind of
infinite evil. As there is no wilful Murder, Incest, Sodomy, Bestiality,
Perjury, or Treason, which is in it self a small crime; yet there are some of
all these which are small in comparison of other faults of the same
denomination, clothed with much more aggravating circumstances, as we commonly
hear of Petty Treason, in opposition to High Treason; so there are Petty
Thefts, Petty Oaths, of which sins we may say, as of the Stars of Heaven, viz.
They are all great, though not all of the same magnitude; for all Stars are not
Stars of the first magnitude. Secondly, God sometimes smites severely, both by
himself and by Conscience (his Viceroy) for small sins, to let men know that
the smallest sins deserve, though not the greatest of eternal, yet of temporal
Punishments; though not the worst place in Hell, yet the worst condition can be
undergone in this World: else God had been unrighteous, in laying what he did
lay upon Job; whose sins were mere Motes in comparison of the sins of many
other Men, which were like Beams; and yet his Afflictions were like great
Beams, whilst theirs were but little Motes or Atoms, dancing in the Sun. To
punish any man one grain above his demerit, were one grain of Injustice, which
is altogether incompatible with the Righteousness of God: Surely the greatest
of temporal Judgments are but finite, and therefore the least of sins being
infinitely evil, Ex part objecti, or as it is, against an infinite good,
cannot but deserve it.

Thirdly, Therefore does God suffer men to be smitten at a very great rate,
both by himself and their own Consciences, for small sins (which they use to
call Zoar 's, saying they are but little ones and their Souls shall live) to
declare his infinite Purity and Holiness; as being so great a hater of all sin,
that he cannot behold the least without indignation; as if the Apple of his
Eyes were thereby touched: and a very Mote will disturb the Apple of ones Eye.

Fourthly, We may humbly conceive that God puts a Rod into the hands of
Conscience, in order, to its smiting men for small sins, for this merciful end,
that he may restrain them from committing greater. He whose Heart smote him for
cutting off but Saul's Skirt, was in no danger of ever adventuring to cut off
his Head.

Lastly, God may be supposed by Conscience and by himself, to smite men
severely for small sins, that thereby he may make other men afraid of
committing greater; and they who have committed greater to quake and tremble,
when they consider what God has done by those whose sins were far less than
theirs; saying within themselves, If this be done to the green Tree, what shall
be done to the dry? And if Judgment thus begin, as it were, at the House of
God, where shall the wicked and ungodly appear?

I hope by this time my Reader is satisfied in the reasons why God does
sometimes punish sins comparatively but small, with great and grievous
Judgments, and particularly with sharp stings and reflections of Conscience.

If any shall now ask me why God does not punish all sins alike in this Life,
and every small transgression as severely as he did David's numbering the
People? I might answer him by another Question, namely, Why do not Magistrates
put to death all condemned Persons, Thieves and others; but only transport
some, whilst they hang others; and while some are executed within a day or two,
give others a long reprive, and possibly in conclusion a pardon? Is there any
Injustice in so doing? No surely, for Justice and Mercy do not interfere, but
do sweetly accord and kiss each other* whilst Mercy keeps within its Zodiac
(to allude to the motion of the Sun) though it has an Ecliptic Line, which
seems not so strait, yet it trespasseth not upon the Bounds or Landmarks of
Justice: Take it in the case of Pharaoh, who though he hanged his Baker, that
had displeased him, was not unjust, though his pleasure was to lift up the Head
of his Butler, who possibly was in the same Transgression, as well as in the
same Prison with him; not upon the Gallows, as he did the Baker, but in the
Preferments of his Court. A Creditor, who having two Debtors, shall cast one of
them into Prison, who all things considered, deserves to be so dealt with; is
not unjust, though at the same time he shall freely forgive the other as great
or greater a Debt.

It is highly comporting with Wisdom and the ends of Government, that small
sins be sometimes severely punished (especially at the first making Laws) to
give them sanction: So God commanded him to be stoned to death, who gathered
sticks upon the Sabbath day; and sent fire from Heaven to consume Nadab and
Abihu, for offering strange fire.

And it is on the other hand as agreeable to Wisdom and other Perfections, that
small faults should generally receive but small punishments, that the work and
reward, as well bad as good, should bear a manifest proportion each to other.

But the Riddle of all Riddles, as it may seem to some, is, that which is yet
behind, namely, Why does God sometimes suffer the Consciences of men to be
quiet and not to smite them at all after they have sinned with a very high
hand, when yet the Consciences of those very men are sometimes appointed by God
to fall foul upon them, for mere Peccadillo's? Of which we have an instance in
David, whose Heart smote him, not for the matter of Bathsheba and Vriah (the
two grand faults of his Life, and greatest blot sin all his Escutheon) till
such time as Nathan the Prophet came to him, which was supposed to have been
one or more years afterward, and opened his Eyes with the Eye Salve of a
Parable; whereby he was honestly trapann'd (if I may so say) into giving
sentence against himself. There are principally two reasons which offer
themselves to satisfy us in this point, One taken from the Nature of great
Sins, the other from the Justice and Wisdom of God. That from great Sins is
this, It Is the nature and property of great sins, to stun and stupisie the
Consciences of Men, and as it were to strike them dead; as a great blow is apt
to put a man past all feeling for the present: to deliver him up to an
Apoplexy, whilst a small blow shall fill him with Smart and Pain. It Is commonly
and truly said, Leves loquuntur curae Ingentes stupent. And it is most certain,
that all things which are a great deal too big and too much for us, do
naturally astonish and confound us, be they Griefs or Joys, Fears or Hopes,
Good or Evil Things; which suits well with what Naturalists say, viz. that
Nimium sensible ledit sensorium. As we see too much Light dazzles and blinds
our Eyes (though nothing so pleasing to the Eyes as that measure of Light which
they can bear) and too much noise (though moderate sounds, are the music of
the ear) do not please but deafen us; so it fares with Men, who by great sins
have stunned their Consciences, and lain them as it were sprauling at their
feet; they become as the Apostle calls it, Past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. (...), or
as it is expressed, 1 Timothy 4.2. (...); that is, having their Consciences seared
with a hot Iron. Conscientias Cauterio resectas, like Veins or Arteries burnt
in two; which have no more sense or perception of any thing.

Secondly, The reason of this, which is taken from the Justice of God; may be
thus explained, It Is a righteous thing with God, when Men have slighted the
frequent and earnest motions of their Consciences, to give them up to their own
hearts lusts; and to say unto Conscience, Let them alone, as of old concerning
Ephraim; Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone: Hosea 4.17. or as it is in
the 14 of that Chap. I will not punish your Daughters when they commit
Whoredom, nor your Spouses when they commit Adultery, etc. Or as it is in Psalm.
11. v. 11, 12. But my People would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would
have none of me; so I gave them up to their own hearts lust, and they walked in
their own counsels, etc. This is now the soarest of all Punishments in this
Life. As nothing afflicts a Sick Man so much as to hear his Physician say, Let
him eat and drink what he will, rise and go abroad when and where he will; for
then he concludes that he has given him over, and looks upon him as past all
cure; and so an (...), or pleasant Passage out of the World, is all he aims at
for him.

I forbear to add a third reason, viz. That Conscience, when it has found it
self often repulsed, resisted and baffled, begins to grow weary of admonishing,
takes pet, and says in effect, as the words are, Rev. 22.11. He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy
still; or as God himself, Isaiah 1.5. Why should you be stricken any more, you
will revolt more and more; the whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart is
faint, etc.

Let us now pass to the fourth thing, which I propounded to speak of; viz. The
Quos, or who they are that Conscience does make bold to smite. In answer to
that let me tell you, It Is much easier to declare whom Conscience has presumed
to smite, than whom it has not; for doubtless Conscience fears the Face of no
man: it has smitten as Wise Men as ever were in the World, not doubting to
make good its charge against them: witness Solomon for one, if the Book of
Ecclesiastes be his recantation, as it is generally supposed to be. It has
smitten as valiant Men and brave Soldiers as ever drew a Sword; witness David,
who feared not the Face of Goliath, that mighty amazing Giant; he who
undauntedly encountered with a Lion and a Bear; and gave Saul, as a Dowry for
his Daughter, two hundred Foreskins of the Philistines, slain by his hand; yet
was his Conscience too much and too hard for him, humbled him, laid him
grovelling in the Dust at its pleasure.

Nay it has smitten as great, rich, and powerful men, as most ever were;
witness David, aforesaid, and his Son Solomon, a greater Prince than he, both
in Wisdom and Wealth; both of which Conscience, when time was, made to lay
their mouths in the dust, if there might be hope: Did not Conscience make its
part good with Nebuchadnezzer, though a kind of Universal Monarch; Dan. 3.4. c.
As also with Belshazar spoken of, Dan. 5.6. In these words, Then the Kings
Countenance was changed, and his Thoughts troubled him, so that the Joints of
his Loins were loosned, and his Knees smote one against another; namely, when
he saw the hand-writting upon the Wall, Thou art weighed and found too light.
And so I have dispatched the fourth thing, or the Quos, showing whom Conscience
makes bold to smite, viz. As well High as Low, Rich as Poor, Wise as Foolish,
Learned as Unlearned, Princes as People, Men that have the fairest forms of
Godlias well as those that are openly Profane; for Conscience is no Child or
Coward, to fear Masks and Vizards: and no Changling to be taken with Painted
Faces and Artificial Beauties. The next or fifth Head to be spoken too, is the
Quibus, or by what things Conscience is ordinarily stirred up to smite and
chide; and some of them are as follow, viz. By the Word of God Read or
powerfully Preached: which is the reason why some Persons, conscious to
themselves of great sins wherein they lived, have studiously refrained coming
to Church, lest they should meet with rebukes; and others have as generally
abstained from Reading the Holy Scriptures, lest they should find the Word of
God to be quick and powerful, and sharper than a twoedged Sword, and a
discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart: Saint Austin Reading the
Holy Scriptures, was smitten to the purpose, with that Text, Romans 13.13. Let us
walk Honestly as in the day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering
and Wantonness, etc. Secondly, Conscience is sometimes set to work or set a
work by the private admonition of some faithful friend, Minister, or other good
Christian: So David's sleepy Conscience was roused and awakened by the Prophet
Nathan, his convincing Parable of the Ewe-Lamb, etc. Hence that Expression of
the Holy Psalmist, Psalm. 141.5,. Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a
kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not
break my Head: That is, by the figure Meiosis, which shall prove sanative and
healing to me; meaning that the wholesome reproofs of a faithful friend, like
those Medicines, which take off the stagnation of Blood and Spirits in the
Veins and Arteries of Men; and do put them into a free motion and equal
circulation, would as it were ferment his Conscience; and by so doing, cause it
to do him a kindness. Thirdly, Gods chastisements upon men, set their
Consciences a smiting. For when God smites, Conscience though it lay still
before, is apt to smite too; as we see in the case of Joseph's Brethren, who
when he ruffled with them, and swore by the Life of Pharaoh they were spies,
which might make them to expect to be used accordingly; then, and not till
then, they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in
that we saw the anguish of his Soul, and we would not hear; therefore this
distress is come upon us. In the 33. Chap. of Job, where we read of Gods
chastning Man with Pain upon his Bed, and the multitude of his Bones with
strong Pain; so that his Life abhoreth Bread, and his Soul dainty Meat; his
Flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen, and his Bones that were not
seen, stick out; his Soul draws near to the Grave, and his Life to the
Destroyers: then as it is v. 16. God opens the Ears of Men, and seals their
Instruction: then as it is v. 23. If there be a Messenger with him and an
Interpreter, one among a thousand; which may partly be meant of an awakened
Conscience, by what follows, v. 27. To show to man his uprightness, then God
is gracious to him, etc. I say the 27. v. may countenance the referring those
words to Conscience, or intending it by the Interpreter there spoken of;
because the words there are, He looks upon Men, and if any say, I have sinned
and perverted that which is right, and it profited me not, he will deliver his
Soul from going into the Pit, etc. Fourthly, Those Afflictions or Judgments,
above all others, which carry the Mark and Signature of our Sins upon them, are
most apt to set Conscience a smiting; for read, says Conscience (as he that
runs may) thy sin in thy suffering: behold the plain Prints and footsteps of
it, that Face does not more exactly answer to Face in the Glass: So in the case
of Adoni-Bezek, Judges the 1.7. Threescore and ten Kings, says he, having
their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table:
as I have done, so God has requited me, etc. So said Samuel to Agag, 1 Samuel
15.33. As thy Sword has made Women Childless, so shall thy Mother be Childless
among Women; and Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord, etc. Fifthly,
When men are spectators of Gods smiting others for the same sins, which
themselves have committed or do commit from day to day; but especially, if for
less degrees of those sins than they themselves are guilty of; then and thereby
is Conscience stirred up to smite them, and does cause them thus to bethink
themselves: If this be done to the green Tree, what shall be done to the dry?
As for Example, If Ananias and Saphira, were struck dead upon the place for
telling one lie a-piece, and that but a kind of equivocation neither: O what
shall become of me, who have told thousands of lies, who walked in the way of
lying, who compassed God about with lies and deceit; as it is, Hosea 11.12.
Who have pressed the God of Truth with Lies, as a Cart is pressed with Sheaves?
What can I expect but that the Earth should open its Mouth and swallow me
quick? Now these are some of the things, for I shall not pretend to call all to
remembrance, which do by the Conscience of Men, as the Mariners did by Jonah,
when fast asleep in the Ship, viz. Call upon them and awaken them, which
possibly would otherwise never awake, till they awoke in Hell, or till Men were
drowned in the bottomless Pit of Destruction. Sixthly, the next thing we
propose to query, is the Quamdiu, or how long the smitings of Conscience use to
last; how long it uses to be before an angry Conscience become pacified; or
before Conscience, having fallen out with Men about some great Sin or Sins,
become Friends again and give over smitting? Now to that I reply, No Man can
tell, there is no Prophet, that in this case knows how long; for it is with the
smitings of Conscience, as it is with the Diseases of the Body: Sometimes it
smites Men without any intermission, and that from day to day; and gives them
no rest day or night: but makes them cry out with David, Their iniquity is
always before them; or say with Job, Chap. 7. v. 13, 14. When I say my Bed
shall comfort me, and my Couch shall case my Complaint; then thou scarest me
with Dreams, and terrifiest me through Visions: Whereas others again have their
hot and cold fits, and between while their well days, wherein they are
perfectly exempted from the smitings of Conscience.

Again, Some have only now and then a fit or two of Conscience and away, which
some call their Dumps or Melancholies, and they are up again; the smiting of
their Consciences is but as the Morning Dew, or early Cloud, which soon passes
away; it is but April with them, now and then a Cloud and a Shower, and then the
Sun presently shines out again; but in others the smitings of Conscience, are
like a Burning Hectic Fever, never off them. Their Consciences seem to be
implacable toward them, and and resolve to admit of no reconciliation; but to
have War with Amalek for ever (if I may so allude)

It were not hard, it may be, to tell you of those who have been under the
smitings of Conscience Seven years together, or more, I think that was Mrs.
Honywoods Case; nay of those whose Consciences have killed them with smiting,
or provoked them so long and so lamentably, till they killed themselves; or
those who leapt out of the flames of Conscience into those of Hell. Neither can
I say that some who have been none of the greatest Sinners, nor guilty of any
enormous Crimes, have been kept a great while in the Furnace of a smiting
Conscience; witness Mrs. Honywood aforesaid: though ordinarily I do suppose it
is the lot and portion of sinners of the first and second rate to be so served,
rather than others; witness those words, Psalm. 39.11. When thou with rebukes
does correct Man for Iniquity, thou make his Beauty to consume away like a
Moth; as also those, Ezekiel. 33.10. Thus ye speak, saying, If our Transgressions
and our Sins be upon us, and we pine away in them, how should we then live? Now
Lord what shall we say to this, if the smitings of Conscience be so sharp, and
the shortest of them be so long, compared with Humane Corrections; and even to
be given not only to Children but Malefactors: who can bear them long, and who
can live when God does this? unless supported by that Arm which keeps even the
damned in Hell alive?

We now proceed to the Seventh query, viz. the Quando, namely, When or at what
times it is, that Conscience does use to smitein reference to sin? Whereto I
reply, First of all, Many times before a sin be committed, when Men have as yet
but sin in deliberation, or are but sitting upon it, like the Cockatrice upon
her Eggs, having yet hatched nothing, and are yet but parling with the
temptation, and listening to the tempter; even at that time of day, it is usual
with Conscience to shoot off her Warning Piece, and to bid men take heed what
they do; and to do by them as Pilate's Wife did by him, Matthew. 27.19. When he
was sat down on the Judgment Seat, sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to
do with that Just Man, for I have suffered many things concerning him in a
Dream, etc.

Yea it is not unusual with Conscience to smite Men, merely for parling with a
temptation, or lending their ears more or less to the tempter; for looking at
the bait, though they have not yet bit of it, much less received the hook into
their mouths; and to give such Counsel as Solomon does, Proverbs 23.31. Look
not thou upon the Wine when it is Red, when it gives its Color in the Cup;
when it moves it self aright; at last it biteth like a Scrpent, and stingeth
like an Adder. Thus in my Text, David's Heart smote him, but for entertaining a
Thought of Killing Saul (as some suppose he had done) or but for lending an ear
to those disloyal Miscreants, who counseled him so to do. Secondly, Conscience
sometimes smites men (...), in the very act of sin; (as Zimri and Cosby were
smitten by another hand.) Thus while Belshazzar was carousing in the Bowls of
the Temple (which he ought not to have so profaned) and probably debauched
himself and his Nobles round about him; at that very instant appeared the
Handwriting upon the Wall, in these words, Dan. 5. S5. Mean, Mean, Tekel,
Vpharsin, etc. They are much mistaken, who think that great sins, if long
adoing, are committed without great regret in the very doing of them:
Conscience poures in Gall and Wormwood into the stolen Waters, which Men
thought would have been altogether sweet; imbittering them in the very drinking
of them, and mixeth Colliquintida, which is a very bitter thing, with that
sweet bread, (as men hope to find it) which is eaten in secret. Conscience does
purposely disturb and interupt the pleasures of Sinners, and to spoil their
sport, does as it were set a Deaths-Head by them, in the midst of their
Feasting and Jollity; and does cast their Sins in their Dishes, whilst they are
Feeding without fear; and makes them now and then to drink a Cup of
Astonishment, and of the wrath of God; and to be like the Citizens in Esop's
Fables, Who whilst they were Banqueting, are represented scared and affrighted
with the noise in the Keyhole, viz. Some Creditor or Creditors came to attaque
them.

Now Conscience seems to do this, not only to imbitter so much of the Sin as
is past, but to make Men break off presently; like Soldiers quaffing and
carousing, when they hear the Drums and Trumpets of an approaching Enemy. David
seems to have been approaching toward the Murdering of Saul, when he cut off
his Skirt: It seems to imply he was trying what his Conscience would permit him
to do in that case; but blessed be God, he had such a check from hs God and his
Conscience, for doing but that, that he durst proceed no farther.

Thirdly, More especially Conscience is wont to smite Men after Sin committed,
and that sometimes sooner, sometimes later: I had almost compared Conscience to
an Usurer, who though he long forbear his Money, when it is well secured, as by
Motrgage of House and Lands; yet at last will be sure to call for Principal and
Interest, yea for Use upon Use; or to take the forfeiture of what is engaged
for his security.

There are particular reasons to be given why Conscience sometimes does not
smite men, either before the Commission of a great Sin, or in the very Act, nor
yet presently after; but as sure as Old Age will come upon Men (I mean the
infirmities of it) if they live to be an hundred years Old; so certainly
Conscience will call Men to an account, if not in Health yet in Sickness; if
not Living; yet Dying, yea if not dying so soon as they are Dead; for
Conscience is a King that never Dies: as they say in Law, Rex nunquam moritur:
And they will find it in the next World, by the Name and Nature of a Never
dying Worm; and as the Proverb says, Nullum Tempus occurr^t Regi. The Kings
time never lapseth. Some Men will find that Conscience has not lapsed or lost
any time; like Creditors that lose their Debts and Privilege of suing for
them, for want of demanding them within such a term of years; but will recover
all its Arrears. and sue them till they have paid the uttermost farthing.

We proceed in the next place to the Eighth Query, which I proposed to speak
of, viz. The Quomodo, Or how and in what manner it is thas Conscience does use
to smite men for sin? To which I answer, That Conscience does it (...), at
sundry times, and in diverse manners. First of all, Conscience does sometimes
smite men very gently and easily; with light and soft touches, as Old Ely did
his Sons; when he said, It is not a good report which I hear of you my Sons;
you make the Lords People to transgress; 1 Samuel 2. Chap. v. 24. It whips Men
sometimes as Mothers use to do their Infant Children, with a small Twig and a
soft hand, whereby they are rather scared than hurt: and touches them with
that tenderness as one would touch the Apple of ones Eye.

But Secondly, Conscience does many times correct Men smartly, smite them
severely, yet not so but that they are able to bear it; as you shall hear some
Men say of those fits of the Stone, Gout, or Colic, which they have felt,
that they were very painful indeed; but they thank God, such as they were able
to undergo, and but able. It is as much as ever some Men can do to bear that
burden of a wounded Conscience, which lies upon them, but they make a hard
shift, with much a-do rub along; a little more weight added to them, would sink
and over-whelm them: their Consciences correct them in full measure, though not
above measure; and this it may be is the case of thousands; their Consciences
give them their full Dose, though they destroy them not with a Hypercatharsis.

Thirdly, But some there are (a case two frequent in the World, though not so
common as the former) whose Consciences do smite them; Ad extremum viriuna, and
lay on upon them with all their might; whose Conscience thunder and lighten
upon them, as God did upon the Israelites, from Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.16. And
it came to pass that there were Thunder and Lightnings, and a thick Cloud upon
the Mount, and the Voice of the Trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the People
that was in the Camp trembled; and Mount Sinai was altogether on a Smoke,
because the Lord descended upon it in Fire; the Smoke thereof ascended as the
Smoke of a Furnace; and the whole Mount quaked greatly: With such like Terror,
so far as a Creature may imitate his Creator; so does Conscience sometimes
cloth it self: If a Beast does but touch the Mountain (to allude to the
passages at Mount Sinai) it is stoned or struck through with a Dart, Heb.
12.20. I mean if a brutish thought do but touch a man's mind, so terrible is
the sight thereof, as aggravated by Conscience, that he may say as Moses 21. I
exceedingly quake. Look with how grim a Countenance, and with how incensed a
Heart Ahasuerus looked upon Haman, when coming out of his Garden, he found that
proud Traitor fallen upon the Bed, where Hester his Queen was; and said of him,
Will he force the Queen also before me in the House? Hester 7.8. With such an
aspect, and with such a rage does Conscience accost some Men; cause their Faces
to be covered presently with shame and confusion: Does it not fall upon some
Men like a Bear robbed of her Whelps, or like a Man under Jealousy, upon him
whom he suspects? Of which Solomon says, It is the rage of a Man, he will not
spare in the day of his wrath.

Conscience seems sometimes to vie with Death in the point of Terror, and to
make it self more a King of Terrors than he; for Sin is the sting of Death, and
Conscience is as it were the sting of Sin. That Death is less terrible than an
enraged Conscience is manifest, because thousands fly or have fled from a
pursuant Conscience, to hide themselves in the valley of the shadow of Death;
and have chosen rather to fall into their own Bloody and Murtherous Hands, than
to remain in the hands of Conscience. How many pursued by Conscience, have
repaired to a Melancholy Beam (as one calls it) or any thing they could make a
Gallows of, as it were to a City of Refuge, or to the Horns of an Altar, that
is, have chosen strangling rather than life. The Jews allow but Thirty nine
Stripes to be given, even to Malefactors, 1 Cor. 11. But Conscience will give
Thousands and Millions, fetching Blood at every stroke. Stone, Colic,
Strangury, are the names of three little Tortures, compared to that of a
wounded and wounding Conscience (for so it is that a wounded Conscience will
wound) if we wound it, it will wound us, that ever Gnawing Worm if we tread
upon it will surely turn again. Nothing can make the Torment of Racking and
Burning seem small, but the greater Torment of a Tormenting Conscience.

All I have said is easy to believe, if we but consider some men have
preferred Hell it self before the smitings of an incensed Conscience; so Judas
when he went and hanged himself, though others it may be have been preverted
from doing the same thing, chiefly by considering that what is said of God, may
as truly be said of and to Conscience, Psalm. 139. If I make my Bed in Hell
behold thou art there. Some it may be fear that never dying Worm in Hell, more
than the Fire and Brimstone we read of, as supposing that the Torments of
Conscience are all in all, as to the Pena sensus, or the positive Punishment
which the damned do there undergo.

Say not the Lion is not so terrible as he is Painted, or Conscience as I have
described it, for it alone can tell thee how terrible it is. Of it as of the
great God, may be said, Who knows the power of his wrath, according to his
fear; so is his wrath. The terrors of Conscience are as boundless as the extent
of Fear, which is a passion that knows no limits. The Sea is bounded by Sands,
but the dreads of Conscience hardly by any thing; no Boanarges or Son of
Thunder like to Conscience; no high Court of Justice, nor yet of Injustice so
terrible as that. Two Witnesses serve in other Courts, Conscience is a thousand
Witnesses; that which makes it more dreadful is, In the Court of Conscience a
man becomes a thousand Witnesses against himself, yea, a Man becomes that Judge
that passes the Sentence of eternal Death on himself; as the Apostle says,
Acts 13.46. Yea, viz. Jews have put away the Gospel from you and judged your
selves unworthy of everlasting Life. Were there ever a Francis Spiro in our
days (as it is like some such there are) he would tell you that all that I have
said of the terror of a smitting Conscience, were but one half of what is true;
yea, but a Flea-biting to what he himself had felt, that eye had never seen,
ear heard, or it ever entered into the heart of man to conceive, how terrible
the smitings of Conscience sometimes are; and that whereas it is said that Deus
and Eternitas non patiuntur Hyperbolen, id est, that God and Eternity can admit
of no Hyperboles, or cannot be out-languaged. The same may be truly said of a
Conscience set upon smiting. I shall conclude this Head with those words of
Solomon, The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities; but a wounded Spirit
who can bear, Prove. 18.14.

Ninthly, Come we now to speak of the ninth and last Query propounded to be
spoken to (viz.) Quare, Why it is that Conscience does smite men when they do,
or have sinned against God? I answer, of that there are principally two reasons
to be given: first of all, because God has given Conscience a Command and
Commission so to do; saying to Conscience, as to his Prophet of old, Lift up
thy voice like a Trumpet, tell the people their transgressions. Conscience is
God's Attorney General (if I may so call it) God's Advocate to plead for God
against man, to exhibit God's Indictments against man, as the matter does or
shall require. Conscience is also Gods Executioner, God's Lictor (if I may so
call it) and therefore must smite when God bids it smite; it has God's fasces,
and secures, that is, God's Rods and Axes in his hands, and must not bear those
ensigns of Authority in vain, but do execution with them, as the great Consul
or Dictator of the world shall appoint. So much for the first reason. Secondly,
The next is this, God has every way fitted and framed Conscience in its own
fabric, nature, and constitution, for such a work as this, (viz.) to smite men
in reference to sin. Unto so doing it is conducted as it were by instinct from
God, as is the Sun to know its due time of Rising and Setting, and several
Creatures void of understanding, to know their proper seasons: yea, things
without life act according to that frame and make which Art has given them: so
Clocks do strike, and Alarms go, and sound at such seasons as they are made to
do: But for smitings of Conscience, there is further reason; for Conscience is
at once both a Law, a Witness, and a Judge, appointed of God so to be, and
qualified accordingly. As it is a Law of which the Apostle speaks, Romans 2.14,
15. These (speaking to the Gentiles) having not the Law, are a Law to
themselves; which law is Conscience, that (...), or Law written in their
hearts: Now Conscience as such is by Divines called Synteresis, being a
Storehouse of Maxims and Principles, informing us of the Eternae and
indispensabiles rations boni and mali, which Divines do so much speak of,
engraven with the (...) or common notions of good and evil.

Secondly, Conscience is a witness, yea a thousand witnesses, as we learn from
Romans 2.15. by these words, which show the works of the Law written in their
hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts mean while
accusing or else excusing one another. Now as Conscience is a witness, Divines
call it Syneidesis. Lastly, Conscience is a Judge, and as such is by Divines
called Crisis: witness 1 John 3.20, 21. If our hearts condemn us, God is
greater than our hearts, and knows all things: if our hearts condemn us not,
then have we confidence toward God: which words do show Conscience to be a
Judge; for it is the office of a Judge to pass sentence either of Condemnation or
Absolution. Moreover, in those words are intimated, that God has given to
Conscience, as it were, the power of the Keys, and had said unto it as unto
Peter and his Successors, Matthew. 16.19. I will give unto thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and whatever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven, and whatever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

But now methinks I have to encounter with a very grand Objection; namely this,
How can Conscience be said to be qualified as a reprover or smiter for sin,
since it sometimes smites men for that which is no sin? at other times when men
do really sin against God, it smites not at all, but rather applauds and
commends them; as did the Conscience of St. Paul, which told him he ought to do
many things against Jesus of Nazareth; and that it was true zeal in him to
persecute the Churches of Christ. Since Conscience sometimes puts darkness for
light, and light for darkness; evil for good, and good for evil: what matter is
it for its smitings, unless it were wiser, and knew how at all turns never to
justify the wicked, and condemn the righteous. Can it be, may some say, that
God should give a Commission to Conscience to smite those which ought not to be
smitten, or to chide those which ought rather to be comforted, or to comfort
and commend those who ought rather to be soundly chid and condemned. If
Conscience trifle at this rate, may some say, ought it not to be slighted like
a perfidious Jury, that brings in those guilty that are not guilty, and those
not guilty that are guilty. This Objection seems to stand like a Mountain, if
not like Mount Sion it self, which can never be removed; yet wait but a while,
you may see it made a Plane, if not turned into a Valley. I premise a word or
two by way of Concession; namely, that Conscience in this corrupt degenerate
estate of all humane faculties, does sometimes mistake comforting those which
it ought to chide, and chiding those whom it ought to comfort: but thanks be to
God, there is a way to prevent those mistakes. Time was when Conscience might
have served as a Law to us, and of it self, a kind of regula pure regulans: But
now it is a regula regulata, (viz.) a rule to be ruled by the word of God;
which is to Conscience as a light shining in a dark place; to which the
Consciences of men ought to take heed as to that which is a light to their
feet, and a lanthorn to their paths. There is a crookedness which has happened
in part to the Consciences of men by Adam's fall, and their fall in him, but is
such as may be rectified, or made straight, by attending to the word of God; as
the Psalmist says, A young man may cleanse his way by taking heed to Gods
Word. Look how a raw and unskilful Composer may do well enough, if he shall but
follow the advice of an able and careful Corrector of the Press; so may the
Consciences of men produce a correct edition of their lives, if they make but
such amendments as the word of God does direct. Far be it from us to charge the
holy God so foolishly, as if he did suborn and instigate the Consciences of
men, to condemn them for what they ought to be commended, or to commend them
for what they ought to be condemned: for shall not the judge of all the earth do
righteously? is not Jehovah a God that cannot lie? This premised, it must needs
be said, that God never did, does, or can give to Conscience, a Commission, or
command, to smite when it ought not to smite, or to strike when it ought rather
to smile upon us: but it cannot be denied, but that God does sometimes give
such a permission as that to the Consciences of men, and leaves them (as he is
free to do) to mis-represent things according to their corrupt and perverse
inclinations.

That passage in the first of Kings 22.22. which seems of all other Texts,
most pregnant to prove that God Almighty does sometimes give forth his command
and commission to instruments, to do that which is evil, as namely to lie, etc.
will be found upon due examination to signify just nothing to that purpose:
the words are these, And the evil spirit said, I will go forth, and I will be a
lying spirit in the mouth of all his, that is, of Ahab's Prophets: And (he that
is the Lord) said, thou shall persuade and prevail also; go forth and do so.
But upon due search it will be found that those words of God (go forth and do
so) are not words of command, and Commission, but a bare permission, and
sufferance; like those words of our Savior to Judas, John 13.27. And after the
sop Satan entered into him, That thou do, do quickly. As if he had said, now
the fullness of time is at hand, in which the Son of man is to be betrayed, I
will not hinder thee, but suffer thee to do what I know is in thy heart to do
as soon as thou please. Again, I say the words forecited, Go, and do so,
signify no more than did the words of Christ to the Devils who besought him to
suffer them to go into the Herd of Swine, Matthew. 8.31. And he said unto them,
go, ver. 32. that is not I command and appoint, but I permit and suffer you to
do. Moreover, it is to be noted, that so the Hebrew Language does often put the
Imperative Mood for the Future Tense; as in Prove. 4.4. Keep my Commandments and
live: where vive is put for vives, live instead of thou shall live. So Prove.
9.6. Forsake the foolish and live (that is, and thou shall live) of which there
are many more instances in the holy Scriptures. In like manner the words, go
forth and do so, in the Text I am explaining, signify no more but this, I will
not be thy hindrance, if thou will thou shall for me; thou shall have my
permission to go forth and do so.

By what I have said, it does plainly appear, that unless God were bound, as
surely he is not, to hinder all the sin, that is, or ever was, or ever shall be
possible for him to hinder, that is, all sin that ever was or shall be in the
world, there is no fault to be charged upon God for permitting, and but barely
permitting the degenerate purblind Consciences of men, like Ahab's false
Prophets to delude and deceive them. When the Consciences of men have defiled
and debauched themselves, it is at Gods pleasure and liberty whether hewill, or
will not restore and rectify them. However this may serve for ever to stop the
mouths of men, that though their Consciences in this fallen state be not a
light sufficient to guide them in all their ways, that they turn not aside from
God more or less, to the right or to the left hand, yet God has given another
auxiliary or supplemental light, if I may so call it (viz.) the Holy
Scriptures, which are said to be profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. For as man could not plead
ignorance after that God had given him the Ten Commandments, written in Tables
of Stone, though he had defaced the Law which was at first written in his
heart, this new edition of the Law in Tables of Stone, restoring to him what
was obliterated in the stony table of his heart: so neither now, can men plead
excuse for their sins, from the misdirectings of their Consciences: since, God
has given his holy Word, as it were another Conscience and guide to men, to
show them the way, in the which they ought to walk, and to please God. What if
the torch of natural light or Conscience has been well nigh blown out, so long
as there are the Sun Beams of Divine Revelation contracted in the holy
Scriptures, as in a Burning-glass wherewith to light it again? Put Conscience
and Scripture together, and where they two meet, there is light enough to make a
man's way plain to heaven; and if he will but mind his Compass, to bring him
safe to the port of everlasting happiness. So I have done with the doctrinal
part of the first doctrine (viz.) that Conscience is a smiter, or a thing that
will smite men first or last, if they give occasion.

I shall conclude this discousse with a few Corolaries or Uses. Use 1. Then God
has not left himself without a witness in the breasts of men, nor men without
warning. Sometimes Conscience witnesses for God and against men; other times
Conscience witnesses for men, and with God; so the Apostle speaks, The Spirit
of God witnesses with our spirits that we are the children of God. Conscience
is Gods Ambassador, lying leager in the souls of men, by which God is wont to
give men notice, when he is whetting his sword, bending his bow, making ready
his arrow upon the string, and preparing for them instruments of death if they
turn not, as in Psalm 7.12. God does not usually surprise men, or come upon
them unawares, before such time as he has shot off his warning-piece. Nineveh
had notice given it by the Prophet Jonah of its approaching ruin, if
Repentance prevented not. God by the preaching of Noah warned the old world of
that Flood which did await it, and was to fall upon it not till a hundred and
twenty years after. God would have men forewarned that they might be forearm'd,
Amos 4.12. Thus will I do unto thee, O Israel; and because I will do this unto
thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. God threatens that he may not smite,
wishing rather to scare men than to hurt them, and causes Conscience to smite
them, that if that will serve the turn, he may hold his hand; for it is better
to fall into the hand of Conscience, than into the hand of God. If God had not
such a witness as Conscience is, how could he convict men at the day of
Judgment of secret sins, as the Text says, God will bring every secret thing
to light, whether it be good or whether it be evil; and in the 1 Corinthians. 4.5.
is said, God will bring to light the hidden things of darkness and make
manifest the counsels of the heart.

What but Conscience can witness against Men at the day of Judgment; their
Heart Murders, Heart Adulteries; as Solomon said to Shimei, 1 Kings 2.44. Thou
know all the wickedness which thy Heart is privy to.

Now Conscience is such a witness as none can withstand or deny its testimony.
If two credible witnesses are sufficient even in matter of Life and Death, much
more Conscience which is a thousand witnesses: Hence it is that we read of him,
who coming to a Wedding Feast, without a Wedding Garment; that when the King
said unto him, Friend. How came thou in hither, not having a Wedding Garment?
he was speechless; Matthew. 22.12. Hence also we read of, Every Mouth being
stopped, and all the World becoming guilty before God; Romans 3.19. Hence it was
that no reply was made to our Savior, when he said, He that w^^ without sin,
let him cast the first stone at her; for the Text says, John 8.9. They which
heard it, being convicted in their own Consciences, went out one by one.

Now whereas some are brought in pleading thus for themselves, at the day of
Judgment; When did we see thee Hungry and fed thee not, Naked and clothed thee
not, Sick, and in Prison, and did not administer unto thee? Matthew. 25.44. The
reason is, because they knew not that which Christ tells them of; in the next
verse, In as much as you did it not to one of the least of these, you did it
not to me. If their Consciences had been sooner convicted of their unkindness
to their Savior; expressed in their unkindness to his Disciples and Followers;
they would not have had one word to say for themselves, or presumed to open
their Mouths.

It can never be doubted whether the Message were left with those Persons, whom
Conscience was appointed to warn; because Conscience always speaks with the
Parties themselves, and leaves its errand in their own Breasts: Indeed when
Christ shall come to judge the World, it is said, He will come like a Thief in
the night. Yea when God comes to ruin Persons or Nations, after fair warnings
given, but never taken, he oft-times does it suddenly: Hence Destruction is
said to come as a whirlwind, or as sorrow upon a Woman in Travel, who are
sometimes never better at ease, or more light-some or cheerful, than just
before their Pains: hence those words of Solomon, Prove. 29.1. He that being
often reproved, hardens his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy: There we read indeed of sudden destruction; but of frequent
reproof going before it. Now Conscience is the great Reprover, and a man is
never thoroughly convicted as to himself, till he be so of his own Conscience;
so I have done with the first use. Second Use, The next Use or Corollary is
this, If Conscience be such a Smiter, as has been showed, then it is no
argument that sinners escape scot-free, or go unpunished; because their sins do
not go before to Judgment, that is, are kept secret from men; and consequently
exempted from Humane Punishment, Pain, and Shame; because it is Punishment
enough, God wot, for a Man to run the Gantlet, and undergo the Rack of his own
Conscience: If God shall but say, take him Conscience, take him by the Throat,
clap Irons upon him, throw him in thy Dungeon, feed him with the Bread of
Spiritual Affliction, and give him those Waters to drink, which are more bitter
than the Waters of Marah. If the great Judge shall thus deliver up a man to the
severest of Jaylors, and say, throw him in Prison, and give him no hope to come
out till he pay the utmost farthing: Handle him as thou did Cain, Judas,
Francis Spira, (for thou can do it) teach him as Gideon taught the Men of
Succoth, with Briars and Thorns; tear him in pieces and let none deliver him;
Psalm. 15.22. If such a sentence as that shall come forth from the great God, he
upon whom it is past, needs no Poverty, no loss of near and dear Relations, no
Bodily Sickness or Pain; no Temporal Prison, no Reproach or Disgrace from Men
to make him miserable; nay he shall be so in spite of Riches, Honor, Power,
the best of Wives and Children, the kindest of Relations and Friends, and what
ever else this World can give him; he shall tremble, as did Belshazzar, even
when quaffing and carouzing with all his Friends about him; he shall fit
Uneasy, and as it were upon Thorns, though he sit upon a Throne with his Crown
on his Head, and his Scepter in his Hand; and Thousands of Nobles standing bare
before him: he shall not be heartily merry, though upon his Wedding day, nor at
the Birth and Baptizing of a brave Son, long desired; nor at a Princelike
Feast, when he has all his Kindred and Friends about him; the rarest Wines
shall not be able to make him merry, till they have made him not himself; and
then how he can be said to be merry who is not himself. I know not. Wine
commonly makes the Brute or Brutal part of Man merry; but what is that to the
Man, or to the Soul of Man, which is himself? God knows, if Conscience be
wounded, a Man can possess no Mirth, but what is rather to be called Madness;
or like the Laughter, or Dancing of those who are stung with a Tarantula; and
let the Beast or Beastial part of Man be never so Brisk and Jocond, that which
is properly called the Soul, viz. The Humane rational Soul or Spirit of a Man,
intermeddles not with its joys; which makes me think of the Apostles words, The
Widow which lives in Pleasure is Dead while she lives; for what is Death but a
separation of Soul and Body? and in this case Soul and Body are separated; for
her animated Body has Pleasure, but her Soul has none.

Reader, If thou had ever known what the smitings of Conscience mean, I need
not tell thee that they are sufficient to give a man a very Hell upon Earth,
whilst they who behold his outward Prosperity, not knowing where the Shoe
pinches him, do think him as it were in Heaven (if there be any such thing as
Heaven upon Earth.) So I have done with the second Use. The Third Use is this,
If Conscience be so great and terrible a smiter, it must needs be great folly
in Men, needlessly to provoke and inrage it (as too many do) from day to day;
for there are a sort of Men, of whom David speaks, Who are wont to transgress
without a cause, Psalm. 25.3. David speaks of some, who were his Enemies without
a cause, Psalm. 7. and without Cause had hid their net for him in a Pit; which
without cause they dug for him; Psalm. 35.7. May it not be said of some, that
they are Enemies to God, and to the Peace of their own Minds, by making work
for Conscience, and for Repentance, without any considerable cause: Of this
sort are those, who abound in needless Oaths and Execrations, crying at every
turn, I will be hanged if this or that be not so. Yea, here and there you have
a Monster of a Man, that fears not upon every slight occasion, to cry, God damn
me, as if he defied his maker; and scorned that Tophet which was prepared of
old, for such as he; which God has made deep and large; the Pile whereof is
much Wood, and the Breath of the Lord like a stream of Brimstone does kindle
it, Isa. 30.33. Or as if they could cheerfully drink of the Wine of the Wrath
of God, which is poured out with mixture into the Cup of his Indignation; and
endure to be tormented with Fire and Brimstone, in the presence of the Holy
Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb; and to have the smoke of their torment
ascending for ever, and ever, and to have no rest day nor night; Rev. 14.10,
11. Or as if when the question is put, Who can dwell with the consuming Fire,
who can dwell with everlasting Burnings? as it is Isa. 33.14. they could
roundly answer; That can we do: If so, they have stouter hearts than sinners in
old time were wont to have; for the Text says, The sinners in Zion are afraid,
fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites, saying, Who shall dwell with
devouring Fire, etc. Methinks I can resemble these Persons to nothing so much
as to the Priests of Baal, spoken of 1 Kings 18.28. of whom it is said, They
cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner, with Knives and Lances,
till the Blood guished out upon them. Many who laugh at the Papist for whipping
themselves on Good Friday, do worse; for that Papists do in point of Devotion,
aiming (...), to beat down their Bodies (as we translate it) by beating them
Black and Blew; but Atheists slash and gash their Souls with severe strokes;
for no good intent at all, but out of mere Irreligion and wanton Profaneness.

Lord I can but think, how these men will look when Conscience shall come to
reckon with them, and they find themselves not able to answer it one of a
thousand? I can but think how pale they will look, or rather how black in the
Face with fear and astonishment: what a dreadful echo those Oaths and bloody
Curses will have in Men's Ears when they come to be resounded upon a Sickbed or
Deathbed: Or rather in what a pickle those men will be when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming Fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and they see themselves punished with everlasting Destruction, from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. If it
be so terrible as it is, to hear but a zealous Minister, warmly discoursing of
the Torments of Hell, especially if a Man's Conscience at the same time second
what he says, and join issue with the Preacher, as did the Conscience of
Felix, of whom it is said, Acts 24.25. That when Paul reasoned of
Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, Felix trembled: I say, if the
bare hearing of Hell be so terrible, as to make a Heathen Judge, upon the
Bench, tremble at the words of his poor Prisoner at the Bar, standing there to
await his Sentence; how intolerable will it be to feel such things? And who
can choose, when in the midst of those Flames, but cry out, as did the Sinners
and Hypocrites in Zion; Who can dwell with devouring Fire? Who can dwell with
everlasting Burnings? You would be loath constantly to sit under the Ministry
of a Boanerges, that would be always thundering and lightning; preaching of
Hell and Damnation; flashing Hellfire in your Faces, with every Sermon, as if
Mount Sinah were his Pulpit; but were your Minister such, you could make a
shift and an excuse to go out of the Church, as often as he came to his use of
terror; and stay out of his way till the storm were over; but if you provoke
your Consciences, and make them burning as well as shining Lights within you
(as that phrase may be taken) whether will you fly from those flames, and
whereunto will you betake your selves? Go whither you will Conscience will
follow you, and if you have Ears to hear will make you hear, yea will find you
Ears, if you make as if you had none; yea, speak loud enough to be heard,
though you were almost dead, or were disposed to turn a deaf Ear upon it.

Conscience will have access to you at all hours, even in the dead and still of
the night; it will come stealing upon you like a Thief in the night: nay, that
it need not do neither, for it will make bold with greatest noise to burst your
Iron Bars, break open your Doors, and make a loud and forcible entrance upon
you, when it pleases, and look upon it self to be always at home when it is
where you are; yea to be Master of the House, and to have full authority to
speak and do within your Breasts what it lists: Conscience is as it were
every Man's Chamberlain, and carries the Key of every Man's Breast, as it were,
at his Girdle, and therefore can go or get into a Man when it pleases; and if
they do, as it were, bolt or bar the Door on the inside, it is able to make
even Brass or Iron Grates, to fly open before it; for nothing can keep
Conscience out. Now Conscience being such a thing as I have described, what
Solomon says, viz. He that passes by and medleth with strife, that belongs
not to him, is like one that takes a Dog by the Ears; may be applied to
Conscience.

And therefore it must needs be folly and madness in any Man, needlessly to
provoke his Conscience, and without great cause and temptation to make work for
it; as he were mad that would rouse up a sleepy Lion or Mastiff, when he had no
occasion so to do. So much shall serve for the 3. Use. Fourth Use shall be
this, Since it is the office of Conscience to smite Men, as in reference to sin,
it must needs behove us to keep our Consciences always in smiting case; I do
not mean to give them cause to smite us, for that we should by no means do; but
to keep them in an aptitude and fitness to smite us when just cause is given.
What is a Dog good for, if he will not so much as bark? Or what does a Sword
signify if it be rusty and has lost all its edge? Chyrurgeons can asill spare
their smarting as their healing Plasters; because proud Flesh must be taken
off by Corrosives. Give me a Fever rather than a Lethargy, since it is the
manner of Physicians to cure Men of Lethargies by casting them into Fevers: It
is better to be blistered than stupefied, therefore Epispastick Plasters are
applied when stupefaction is feared, but especially when incumbent. Let my
Conscience rather raise Blisters on me from Head to Foot, than suffer me to
fall into a dead sleep of Security, and fall into Hell in a Golden Dream of
Heaven and Happiness.

Now that Conscience may be in smiteing case, as the matter shall require, and
have that sharp edge which is due to it, take the following directions:

Dir. 1. Keep the Eye of Conscience always open and clear, that it may be able
to see when cause is given to smite. The will indeed is Coeca potentia, a blind
faculty, truly so called; and if not led by the understanding, will fall into
many a Ditch; hence it is commonly said, that Voluntas sequitur ultimum dictamen
intellectus practici. But as for the Conscience, that to be sure ought to be no
blind faculty, for that is understanding it self, therefore called, Intellectus
practicus; it does belong to it not to be led, but to lead; it is the very eye
of a Soul, I had almost said the very Apple of its Eye: therefore let not so
much as a Mote get into it, to dim and obscure it.

Direct. 2. Keep always a tenderness upon thy Conscience, though not a
perplexing scrupulousness. What said God to Josiah, 2 Kings 22.19. Because
thine heart was tender, I also have heard thee; says the Lord, etc. A tender
Conscience is soon wounded, and a Conscience that is wounded will certainly
wound and smite. Conscience of all things is not to be exposed to hardship; for
what Divines say of the Holy Ghost, viz. That Spiritus Dei estres delicatula.
That he is a tender thing soon grieved and quenched. The same in its measure
may be said of Conscience, it is a most tender thing. It Is preternatural, when
those parts of the Body that ought to be soft and tender, become hard and
callous; as when a Man's Kidneys become petrified and turned into mere Stones;
so it is when the heart of a Man becomes a heart of stone, which ought to be a
Heart of Flesh.

Direct. 3. Labor to escape the frequent and more fervent smitings of
Conscience, for by means of them it is, that the hearts of Men become perfectly
hardened. Just like Schoolboys, who having often felt the smart of the Rod or
Ferula, and are feeling of it from day to day, are wont to despise those
Corrections, and to become Rod and Ferul^

Direct. 4. Encourage Conscience to smite thee by mending upon it as often as
it tells thee thy faults; remembering that passage, Job 34.31, 32. Surely it is
meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more;
that which I see not, teach thou me: if I have done iniquity, I will do no
more. Conscience will have little heart to smite a man any more, but rather
consent that he be reserved to the day of Judgment to be punished, if when
smitten, he revolt more and more; and if he be not manifestly worse, is not one
jot the better for all its smitings.

Direct. 5. Be much in contemplation of Death and Judgment, and of the world to
come; or if thou will, of the quatuor novissima, or the four last things, viz.
Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell; for they are as it were the four wheels which
draw the Chariot of Conscience; and when they or any of them is quite taken
off, Conscience draws but heavily. Commend me to the good man that said, I
bless God I carry my dying thoughts always about me, and do use to try my most
solemn enterprises by the touchstone of this question: Will this or that give
me comfort when I come to die? How will Conscience look upon this or that,
through the perspective of Death and approaching Judgment? To think often of
our dying, and coming to judgment, is an excellent way to keep our Consciences
alive and awake, and in smiting case; so I have done with the 5. Direction and
4. Use. The 5. Use or Corollary is this, Since Conscience is so terrible a
Smiter, and so like to the Hand and Rod of Moses, which could fetch Water out
of a Rock (as has been showed) it behooves every Man to stand in Awe of his own
Conscience, and to take that advice as in reference to God himself, viz. Stand
in awe and sin not. It was an old and a good saying, D^sce revereri teipsum.
That is, That a Man should learn to reverence, respect, and dread himself. Sure
I am, There is no part of a Man's self, which he ought more, or yet so much to
dread, as his Conscience: But for Conscience, no one faculty in the Soul of Man
would be terrible to him, nor yet all his faculties put together, but
Conscience infuseth terror into every one of them. Who could not look upon the
Register of his Memory without any trouble or fear, were it not that Conscience
did severely reflect upon the evil action therein registered? Who could not
exercise his speculative understanding, in contemplating the worst things he
has done, without regret, or remorse, were it not that Conscience, that
Practical Intellect, did make such terrible use of them? Who could not disport
himself with his Fantasy and Imagination, and pleasantly act over all his
former enormities upon that stage; were it not for Conscience, that is apt to
spoil the Sport, to look a Man out of Countenance, and to speak to him in those
words of Solomon, Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice, O Young Man, in thy Youth, and let thy
Heart cheer thee in the days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thine
heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou, that for all these things
God will bring thee into judgment. They had wont to say, Cave Cato videt. Take
heed Cato sees you. But I say, Cave Conscientia videt. Take heed Conscience
sees you; get out of Consciences sight if you can and do your worst; but I had
almost said, you may as easily fly from God himself, who is Omnipresent, as
from Conscience, which is Gods Deputy; though it be not every where present as
God is, and present to all Creatures as God is, yet it is present to every Man's
self; and I was about to say of it, in reference to every Man's Soul, as is said
of the Soul in reference to the Body; that Conscientia est tota in toto and
tota in qualibet part. That is, Entirely in all and every part and faculty of
the Soul. Say often to thy self, It is more to me, that my Conscience is privy
to what I do, though all the World besides be ignorant of it, than if all the
World besides knew it, and my own Conscience knew nothing of it; for if
Conscience be disposed to take vengeance on me, and to call me to a strict
account for what I have done; I know it can create punishments for me beyond
all that men can inflict, or that can be inflicted by any hands save his, who
is able to cast Soul and Body into Hell Fire; and in that regard is the only
Person whom I ought to dread and reverence more than my own Conscience: for as
Self Murder is the worst and cruellest of all Murders, so Self-smitings (and
what are they but reflections of Conscience) are the terriblest of all
smiteings. They are those Arrows of the Almighty that stick in Men's hearts, and
the venom thereof drinks up their Spirits. What pity is it, that many men
never learn to fear themselves enough till they come to feel themselves so
sharp upon, and so uneasy to themselves, that they can bear it no longer; that
they seem a greater Hell to themselves than Hell it self would be: (which was
Spira's case.) It is one good answer wherewith to stop the mouth of the
tempter, How can I do this wickedness and sin against my own Conscience? How
can I look my Conscience in the face if I comply with such a temptation; or
rather how dreadfully will Conscience stare me in the face when I have done it?
I had rather displease the whole World than displease that part of my self,
which is called Conscience; for if that once be angry and continue so, I shall
have no joy in my Life; all my comforts will be imbittered; it will give me for
Beauty Ashes, for the Oil of Joy, Mourning; for the Garment of Praise, the
Spirit of Heaviness; it will be Colloquintida, or Death in the pot of all my
Enjoyments: They feel Conscience least who fear it most; and they who in one
sense are most afraid of Conscience, are usually least hurt by it (as Parents
love not to strike those Children, whom they can sufficiently overawe and
deter from mis-doing without striking them.) So I have done with the 5. Use.

A Sixth shall be this: Since Conscience is so dreadful a Smiter, it must needs
be every man's concern to maintain Peace, Amity, and a good Correspondence with
his own Conscience; that it may either not smite him at all, or in measure, so
as he may be able to bear it; staying (if I may so speak) its rough Wind in the
day of the East Wind; not thrashing out the Fitches with a thrashing
Instrument, nor turning about the Cart Wheel upon the Cummin, but beating out
the Fitches with a Staff, and the Cummin with the Rod: To allude to what is
said of God, Isaiah 28.27. Correct him but in measure, though it leave him not
altogether unpunished; as God promised his People; Jer. 30.11: School Boys who
have Masters eminently severe, are concerned to make as few faults as ever they
can, and to please them as much as ever lies in their power, as ever they hope
to sleep in a whole skin: such a Master is Conscience if it set on.

Now the way to give it content, and to keep it quiet with us, is as follows:

Direct 1. See that Conscience it self be well advised and informed, like a
Jury that have received full instructions from the Judge; else it may chance to
chide us sometimes upon pure mistake, as the weakest People are usually the
most querulous. What serves the Word of God for, what more proper use can be
made, of pious and able Ministers, of our acquantance with Judicious and
experienced Christians, than that by the help of all these our Consciences
might be guided into the way of truth? Neither is it easy for us to imagine,
that in case we did use all these means to inform our Consciences aright, that
God would suffer them to err in any great and dangerous instances.

Direct. 2. When we have got our Consciences well advised, our next business
should be to consult and advise with our Consciences. When Conscience has
heard what God has to say to it, we should hear what Conscience had to say to
us: As God gave his Law to Moses, and Moses to his People, so God speaks first
to Conscience, or gives his Law to Conscience; and Conscience in Gods Name
gives Law to us: If we pay not that respect to our Consciences to consult with
them, they will never be at peace with us, but think themselves slighted and
affronted: Conscience expects that every Man should say to it, By your leave,
and may it stand with your good liking; before he enterpriseth any matter of
concernment. When a Man has any thing in design, the first question to be
asked, is, Is it lawful to be done? And of whom should a Man ask that but of
his Conscience, leaving thar to inform it self the best it can, by all the
ways and means aforesaid: For as God took it ill when the Israelites sat down
to eat and drink with the Gibeonites, and asked not Counsel of the Lord: So
will Conscience when we do any thing of importance, and do not first ask its
Counsel, and repair to it as to an Oracle.

Direct. 3. If thou would not have Conscience smite thee, then when
Conscience is yet in doubt and suspense, be thou in suspense also; suspend
acting till Conscience become resolved: according to that good old saying, Quod
dubitas, ne facias. Remembering the Apostles Words, He that doubts is damned
if he eat, because he eats not of faith; for whatsoever is not of faith is
sin, Romans 14.23. As also the Exhortation which the same Apostle gives; v. 5.
Let every man be fully persuaded or assured in his own mind: Meaning of the
lawfulness of that which he takes in hand. He that would maintain peace and
friendship betwixt Conscience and himself, or rather that would have his
Conscience good friends with him; let him await the full resolution and
satisfaction of Conscience before he presumes to act.

Direct. 4. He that would escape the severe strokes and smitings of Conscience,
let him take heed of doing any thing contrary to the express distates and
commands of thereof; of going (if I may so express it) to Tarshish, as did
Jonah, when Conscience would send him to Nineveh; of going to the West, when
the Commission which he has received is for the East. Conscience is very
impatient of being contradicted; and that Men and Women should proceed point
blank, contrary to its Counsel and Command. Next to that indignation wherewith
you may imagine the great God resented it, when the Israelites of old made this
stubborn reply to his Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 44.16. viz. As for the Word that
thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee,
but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own Mouth; to
burn Incense unto the Queen of Heaven, etc. You may conceive that indignation
to be wherewith Conscience resents it; when any Man says to it, either in
words or in effect, As for what thou have spoken to me in the Name of the Lord,
I will not do it; but whatsoever proceeds out of my own Heart and Mouth, that
will I do. The day is yet to come, in which Conscience ever did, or ever will
speak peace to those that are in flat rebellion against it: and as the Text
says, Had Zimri peace who slew his Master? So may it be said, Had ever any Man
peace whilst he was in actual Arms and Hostility against his Conscience? No,
no, The way to peace and tranquillity of Mind, is to do nothing but by full and
free leave and consent of our well informed Consciences.

Direct. 5. If thou would shun the smiteings of Conscience, being so terrible
as thou have heard they are; give thy Conscience the preferrence and
pre-eminence above all other faculties of thy Soul; yea above all other
Creatures interest and considerations whatsoever. The interest of God and
Conscience is one and the same; and therefore that Interest should take place
of all others. Say not my Will and Affections, nor yet my Pleasure, Profit, nor
Honor, do incline or invite me, this or that way: If Conscience suggest other
things, and say, O do not that thing whereto thy will and affections are so
much inclined, or thou so much tempted by thy worldly interest: for Conscience
is more than all the rest. All other Sheaves ought to bow to the Sheave of
Conscience; to allude to what was prophesied, and as it were tipified,
concerning Joseph and his Brethren; that they should be subject to him. We have
a Proverb, My Mind to me a Kingdom is: To be sure every Man's Conscience is his
Kingdom. So long as any Man holds the possession of a good and unvanquished
Conscience, he may be said to be in his Kingdom; for surely among those Kings
of whom God says, By me Kings Reign; Conscience is one Dejure; and he admits
of Tyrany and Usurpation in his Soul, who suffers any other Creature to rule
over him, or any being, but he that is The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords:
One says well, That Peace is every thing in Gods Order; and that there is not
rue Peace but where it is so: you may therefore conclude that where the
sovereignty of Conscience, next and immediately under the great God, is not
owned and submitted to, there can be no Peace; for so long as Conscience can
hold a Scepter in his Hand, he will smite all such Persons, or do what is worse.

Direct. 6. If thou would disable COnscience from smiting or arresting thee,
labor always to carry a pardon about thee, signed and sealed with the Blood
of Jesus: have thy Discharge and Acquittance from the great God, always in
readiness to produce; then may thou presently stop the mouth of Conscience
if it begin to accuse thee with such words as those, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, it is God that justifies; who is he
that condemns, it is Christ that died; nay, rather that is risen again, etc.
Then may you say, using the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 6.11. And such (meaning such
great sinners) were some of you: but you are washed, but you are sanctified,
but you are justified in the Name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God. Lastly, Thou may build upon it, that a well informed Conscience will
never smite thee, so as to do thee any great hurt, if thou can but sincerely
say of thy self what Saint Paul says of himself; Acts 24.16. Herein do I
exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God and
toward Man. Nay let me tell you, the foregoing Directions, well observed and
practiced, will not only prevent the stripes and smitings of Conscience, but
also procure the smiles thereof, and cause it to speak to thee in such
Language, as the great Judge will to all true believers, at the great day,
saying, Well done good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord.

FINIS.
The Second DISCOURSE OF No Conscience, OR Of the Murdering OF King Charles I.
Calculated more especially to be Read on any Thirtieth Day of JANVARY.

BY DOCTOR SAMUEL ROLLS One of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed 1678.

The Second Discourse.
NOw Reader if thou art only for Practical Divinity, stop here and go no
further; for I confess to thee what remains will be partly Polemical, partly
Political; being such as the solemnity of the 30th day of January, and the
occasion of the Fast of that day does call for: For methinks, if I may presume
to know the Whispers of Men's Hearts, I hear some prejudiced Persons object and
say, What cause has any Man's Conscience to smite him for having been concerned
in the Death of King Charles the First? Why is he called a Martyr? or why his
Judges called Murderers? So many of them as died upon the account of that Fact?

Now why should I be thought uncharitable, for imagining this to be the
lauguage of some Men's Hearts, since David says, Psalm. 36.1. The transgression
of the wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his
eyes; (there taking upon him to judge the Root in their hearts, by the fruit in
their lives) there being so greata foundation in the practices of some men to
judge so of their hearts: Namely, That they think the King no Martyr, nor his
Judges no Murderers. Nay what if some do think, That they were the true
Martyrs, who suffered for putting the King to death. This will be more easy
for any man to believe, if he shall but consider that not one of all those men
that were condemned and executed for giving Sentence against the late King of
Blessed Memory, would ever acknowledge that he had sinned against God in so
doing. Since they did seem to be of that mind, who had the Microscope of Death
before them (which I so call, because death often makes men spy small faults in
themselves, who before could not espy great ones.) Doubtless there are many
others of the same mind, though a man would wonder that there should be such a
vail of ignorance upon the hearts of any that are called Christians, as not to
know so black and foul a Crime as that to be a sin. But since so it is, that
some if they durst, would rather applaud that Bloody Fact than profess to abhor
it; and would not doubt to say, That Ministers in observing the Thirtieth day
of January as a solemn Fast, do but mock God and flatter the State; being a
time which some had rather keep as a day of Thanksgiving (the more their Sin
and Shame) I think it but necessary, not in order to kindling of Coals or
increasing Animosities, or causing the surviving relations of the Kings Judges
to be more hated and scorned; for God knows I abhor any such thing: remembering
what Amaziah did, Who put to death those that slew his Father, but he slew not
their Children; but did as it is written in the Book of Moses: viz. Deuter.
24.16. where the Lord commanded, saying, the father shall not die for the
children, neither shall the children die for their fathers; but every man shall
die for his own sin; 2 Chronicles. 25.4. I say not in order to fixing any odium or
disgrace upon the survivors, but purely to convince as many as stand in need of
it; that Ministers and People may and ought to observe the Thirtieth of January
as an Anniversary Fast. Yea, and that our Rulers do well in appointing it so to
be kept, in order to bewailing and seeking the expiation of a most notorious
Sin; and fetching out the stain of Royal Blood. I say in order thereunto, I
hold it necessary and a Duty, to set a Mirror before the Eyes of Men, in which
they may see the true visage and complexion of that horrid Crime, which God
grant may never more be laid to Englands charge. Know then if either Perjury,
High Treason, Rebellion, Sacrilege, Wilful and deliberate Murder, Parricide,
or the killing of a Father, Patricide, or the ruining of our Native Country.
Justicidium, or taking away the life of a Just Person. Regnicidium, or the
destroying of a Kingdom. Monarchicidium or the destruction of Monarchy it self;
Legicidium, or the subversion of Laws; Suicid^um, or a man's killing of himself,
or being Felo d^ se; Animaecidium, Soul-murther, so far as in men is;
Multicidium, or the Murdering of many at once, both as to body and soul, if
Gods mercy prevent not; yea, Deicidium, or striking at the life of God himself;
(in a higher sense than most other sins are said to do) I say if all these
things put together, do amount to a very great and stupendous sin; then such a
sin it was to put King Charles the First to death.

And now you see, I have not charged the Kings Judges with Cumulative Treason
(or many Petty Treasons, or Non Treasons, pretended when they were all put
together, to amount to High Treason) for High Treason it self is but one
Article in this Charge.

Now it remains that so great a Charge as this, should be proved against them.
And had I not been conscious of its being easy to be proved, I would never
have exhibited it, for fear of violating the Ninth Commandment.

First Article of this Charge is Perjury, for I do aver that they who sentenced
the King to death, did in so doing horribly violate the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, as also the Solemn League and Covenant (though an Oath of their own
imposing) wherein they swore to preserve the Kings life and honor, etc. And as
many of them as were his Majesty's Servants (as some such there were) did also
break the particular Oath which they had taken as such; and thus breaking four
Oaths at once, may be said to be shod round with Perjury.

Some it may be would have added, that they had also violated their Baptismal
Vow and Oath, and as many Repetitions and Confirmations of it, as they had made
in receiving the holy Eucharist; because by those two Sacramental Vows, all
other Duties are bound upon men, and consequently the observation of all our
lawful Promissory Oaths; but I need not strain so far to find out Aggravations
of so Notorious a Fact.

Secondly, My Charge against these men i^ that of High Treason. It is Petty
Treason for a Woman to kill her own Husband, though but a private man, and what
petty Sovereigns are private men compared with Princes? It Is Treason by our
Laws barely to imagine the death of the King, Queen, or Prince, yea to kill the
Chancellor, Treasurer, or any Justice of either Bench; Justices of Assize, or
any other Justices doing their Offices; is by the Statute declared to be High
Treason. Statut. de Proditionibus, 25 E. 3. Stat. 5. cap. 2. Yea it is Petty
Treason for a servant to kill his Master, etc. Nay clipping, crashing,
rounding, or fileing for lucre sake any of the Peoples Moneys or Coyns of this
Realm, is adjudged High Treason; Stat. 5 Eliz. 11.

Is the Kings Money as it were inviolable, and not to be clipped or diminished,
but upon pain of death: and is not his person so? In a Statute 13 Car. 2. cap.
1. it is thus said, It shall be Treason in any persons whatsoever to compass,
imagine, invent, devise, or intend death or any bodily harm, maim, or wounding,
imprisonment, or restraint of the person of the King, etc. If to maim or
imprison his person be Treason, what is it then to put him to death?

But methinks I hear some say, Though the Laws of England do punish Treason as
a great and capital Crime, yet possibly it is not so in the eye of Gods Law?
Now though every Breach of Gods Commandment be a sin, yet possibly there are
some Laws of Men that may be broken without sin. To that I reply the sinful
Laws of Men are better broke than kept. Such as was Nebuchadnezzar's, when he
commanded all people to fall down and worship the Golden Image that he had set
up; Dan. 3.5. Such also was Darius his, Dan. 6.7. when he made a Decree, That
whosoever should ask a Petition of any God or man, save of the King, for thirty
days; should be cast into a Den of Lions. Such also were the Statutes of Omry,
Micah 6.16. But no man can imagine that those Laws are sinful, by which the
lives and liberties of Princes as well as of the People, are secured to them.
Now most certain it is that Humane Laws, when lawful, can never be violated
without sin, or without doing that which is in the sight of God as well as of
men unlawful.

I think at present of no less than fir^ Commandments of the Second Table which
were broken by those who put King Charl^ the First to death (viz.) first of all
the Fif^ Commandment, in these words, Honor the father and thy mother; for
Kings are Poli^^cal Fathers: and to kill them, is as (...) from honoring them
as any thing can be Secondly, It was a manifest violation of the Sixth
Commandment, which says, The^ shall not kill. Thirdly, of the Eighth
Commandment also, which says, Thou shall (...) steal. For was not the language
of the^^ hearts who put the King to death, the same with that of their mouths,
Mat. 21.38. who said of our Savior, Come (...) us kill him, and let us seize
on his inheritance Witness Cooks Confession, viz. That what be did in reference
to the Kings death, was not (...) of malice but covetousness; not out of hatred
to the King, but for the love of money. Habet^^ confitentem reum. The Ninth
Commandment, which is, Thou shall not bear false witness, etc. was as
manifestly transgressed by those who had a hand in that good Kings death, as
any of the former. For without the horrible breach of that Commandment, it had
been utterly impossible for them by a pretended High Court of Justice, and
seemingly formal process of Law (or rather Pageantry of Judicature) to have
sentenced so excellent a Prince to die the death of a Malefactor. It Is not yet
forgotten what one or more said of hm, when the pit was digging, and the net
spreading, for the life of the late renowned King, viz. Blacken him, blacken
him; meaning, Calumniare fortiter ut aliquid haereat; i. e. Brand him, smut
him, make him odious; lay those things to his charge which he never did:
represent him (for so did Cook, that was Solicitor against him in his printed
charge) as bad almost as was Nero himself; or as they did our Savior, John
7.20. The People said thou have a Devil, etc. i. e. Thou art possessed, Satan
has filled thy heart and body both; thou keep a familiar one or more, and
do cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. Since this was done to
the green dry, wonder not at what was done to the dry. I am confident Jezebel
did not more falsely accuse Naboth of Blasphemy, in the high Court of Justice,
which she procured against him, than was his Majesty of famous memory, accused
in the things that were laid to his charge; some of which were so horrid (the
more horrid and execrable the guilt of his accusers) as nothing could be more.

If our proverb be true, about losing a good name, He that wholly takes away
the good name, though but of a private person, though he do nothing more, does
worse than behead him. What then have they done, or wherewithal shall their
Crime be expiated, who did not only take away the Head of an excellent Prince,
one of a thousand, but his good name also (as much as in them lay) and did not
only extinguish his Life and Light, but endeavored to make him go out in a
snuff, and leave a loathsome stench behind him; which maugre all their malice
God has converted into a sweet odor; and now he who had no Funeral Sermon on
the day he was Buried, has hundreds, that may be so called, preached
anniversally on the day of his Death, viz. each 30 day of January, and his name
imbalmed a-fresh on every such day, and like to be so to all posterity.

Lastly, If their Treason, who imbrued their hands in the Blood of the late
King, were not attended with the breach of the Tenth Commandment no sin ever
was. This horrid Murder and Treason, was certainly one branch springing from
that bitter root Covetousness; which the Apostle calls the root of all evel;
and if of all evils, surely of this for one. They thought the Life of a King in
an ill sense more worth than the lives of ten thousand of his Subjects; I mean
a better prey, a greater booty, of which they could make more earnings and
greater advantage to themselves than of ten thousand other Lives. They would
have said of a common man, Quid laudis in nece tantillae bestiae? He had not
been worth the beheading, what should they get by his death? But doubtless they
had well computed what was to be gotten by the death of their King. He had
Fields and Vineyards. They knew how to part the Skin of a royal Lion if he were
but once dead: they would be his Executioners (as it were) that they might make
themselves his Executors, I mean serve themselves of his Revenues, and cause
him to die that they might live more splendidly. The Flowers and Jewels of one
Royal Crown are sufficient to enrich (though with a vengeance) many private
Families. That by their own confession some of them aimed at, and doubtless so
did the rest or most of them that did never confess it. Was it not the wedge of
Gold, I mean the Kings Revenues, and that which they called A Babylonish
Garment, viz. The Lands of Bishops, Deans and Chapters, which those Achans,
those Troublers, of Israel longed for, and made their way to, through the Blood
of their King? So Judas for the lucre of 30 pieces betrayed his Lord and
Master. Now if that be not a great sin which breaks five Commandments at once,
let the World judge.

And so I pass on to my Third Aggravation, of their sin who Murdered King
Charles the First, It was flat and downright Rebellion, open and palpable
Rebellion. In what can a Son more rebel against his Father, than if he seek to
take away his Life, yea do actually murder him? Now Kings are as well
Political Fathers to their Subjects de facto, as they are Nursing Fathers de
jure. Yea such Political Fathers are much more superior to their Political,
than Natural Fathers are to their Natural Children. Sons if abroad in the World
and at full age, are not indecently suffered to be covered in the presence of
their Fathers; but may ordinary Subjects be so in the presence of their King?
If then Kings be unquestionable Fathers to their Subjects, and of an order of
Fatherhood superior to those who begat them, then whatsoever is Rebellion in
Children against their Natural Fathers, the same thing if against their King is
as true and as great, yea greater Rebellion, Ex part objecti: Now the
Scriptare calls it Rebellion in a Son, but to resist and refuse the lawful
Commands of his Father, Deuteronomy. 21.18. If a Man have a stubborn and rebellious
Son, which will not obey the voice of his Father, or the voice of his Mother,
and that when they have chastened him, will not hearken to them: There you have
a Rebel against his Natural Parents de facto, viz. A Child that will not obey
or hearken to the voice of his Father, or of his Mother: And his Punishment is
set down, v. 21. All the men of his City shall stone him with stones that he
die. Is Disobedience in a Child to the lawful Commands, not only of a Father
but of a Mother, Rebellion, and such as God appointed to be punished with
death, and such a death too as is there described, viz. Then shall his Father
and his Mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the Elders of his City,
and unto the Gate of his Place; and they shall say unto the Elders of his City,
This our Son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice, etc. v.
19, 20. Where first of all his own Parents were to be his accusers, yea as it
were the Constables that were charged with him to bring him before the
Magistrates and give evidence against him, declaring his Crime, viz. saying,
This our Son is stubborn and rebellious, a glutton and a drunkard: Then his own
Countrymen or Townsmen, here called the Elders of his City, were to be his
Judges, and to give sentence against him, and that sentence of Death, and that
the Death of a Dog, viz. to be stoned, and that stoning by the hand not of one
strange Executioner, but by the hands of Countrymen or fellow-townsmen, every
one of which did or might fling a stone at him; so at once giving him, both his
death and burial, and killing him, as it were, by burying him; that is, by
burying him alive under a heap of Stones. This Punishment did the Law of God
award for rebelling but against the Commands of a private Father or Mother;
even death and such a death. If he that rebelled but against the majesty of a
private Father or Mother were so punished, surely we may allude to what David
spoke to Doeg, Psalm. 120. What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done
unto thee thou false Tongue?? who rebellest against the Majesty of a King;
sharp arrows of the Almighty with Coals of Juniper, as it is v. 4. Nay beyond
all this, if to rebel against the Will and Command of a private Parent were
made a capital Crime, how much more than capital (if a man had any thing dearer
to him than life to lose) might it justly be made to rebel against the very
Life of a King, and our own King? Hear the Prophet aggravating the sin of
Rebellion 1 Samuel 15.23. And Samuel said, Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft,
and Stubbornness is as Iniquity and Idolatry. Now whereas some may object that
that is spoken of Saul 's Rebellion against God, not of any Subjects Rebellion
against him (which is very true) yet for as much as they who rebel against the
lawful Commands of their lawful Rulers, in so doing do rebel against God, whose
Vicegerents they are, whose Image they bear, by whom Kings Reign; and who are
called The ordinance of God, Rom: 13.2. Hence may they be said to be guilty of
Idolatry or Witchcraft, or what is as bad, who rebel against their lawful
Commands; but a thousand times more who rebel against the Lives of Gods
anointed ones; I mean of those Kings whom God has set over them.

Then let no Man say Rebellion is no sin, unless he think that Idolatry and
Witchcraft be no sins neither. Why do we read of those who perished in the
gainsaying ( i. e. in the Rebellion) of Core, Jude 11. if Rebellion be no great
sin? Core and his Accomplices were a sort of Rebellious Levellers, or Levelling
Rebels, attempting to overthrow the Government both of Church and State, as
appears by their (...), their gainsaying or contradicting and murmuring
against both Moses and Aaron; and see what came of them, v. 32. The earth
opened her mouth and swallowed them up and their houses, and all the men that
appertained to Corah, and all their Goods. What had Corah, Dathan, and Abiram
done? Had they cut off the Head of Moses and of Aaron? no such matter, They had
only opened their mouths against them, and talked at such a rate as if they had
been as good men as they themselves; and for that did the Earth open its mouth
upon them, They and all that appertained to them went down alive, into the Pit,
and the Earth closed upon them and they perished from the Congregation, v. 33.
Which words give me fit occasion to mention what he, whom some have called Our
English Seneca, meaning Master of the Sentences, says to this purpose,
Vengeance against Rebels may sleep, it cannot die. A sure if late judgment
attends those that dare to lift up either the hand or tongue against the sacred
persons of Gods Vicegerents: Nay hear what a greater than he says, Romans 13.1,
2. The Powers that be are ordained of God, whosoever therefore resists the
Power resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation.

Now the word (...) (here translated damnation) is put in many places, not only
for Judgment, as some would mince the matter, but for Gods eternal wrath and
vengeance. So Luke 20.47. Acts 24.25. Romans 2.2. Heb. 6.2. 2 Pet. 2.3. 1 Cor.
11.29. See Dr. Hammond.

Thus having proved Perjury, High Treason, and Rebellion, against those who had
their hands in murdering of King Charles the First, I come in the fourth place
to lay Sacrilege to their charge; of which I shall easily prove them as guilty
as of the three former. Now that word Sacrilege is no sooner dropped from my
Pen, but I sancy that at the first sight thereof some there are that will
forthwith charge Superstition upon me, for using it; looking upon that which we
call Sacrilege, or upon the notion of Sacrilege, as a mere Chimaera or Ens
rationis; a Bugbear to scare Children. For their opinion is that there are but
fours sort of Holy things in the World, viz. 1. The Holy God, Trinity in Unity,
etc. 2. Holy Angels and Archangels. 3. Holy Men and Women, or Saints Triumphant
in Heaven, and Militant upon Earth. 4. Holy Ordinances of God, such as Prayer,
Preaching, Sacraments, etc. Now it is very true, if we speak concerning the
Holiness of Things, nothing but the Ordinances of God, if ye take that word in
the largest sense, viz. for Things ordained and instituted of God, as holy
separate and devoted to himself are holy; (for God is the Fountain of all kind
of holiness as Kings are of all temporal honors.) But the great mistake of
these who make nothing of Sacrilege, yea who despise the word Sacrilege, lies
here; by God Ordinances, they understand nothing but Scriptures, Praying,
Preaching, Hearing, Reading, Singing of Psalms, Sacraments, etc. These indeed
are Ordinances of God, but whatsoever else is of Gods ordinaing and appointing,
as set a part or devoted to himself, is Gods Ordinances Also: Civil Power and
Authority, is called the Ordinance of God, Romans 13.2. because ordained of God,
v. 1. and therefore surely it is in a sense sacred, because one of Gods
Ordinances. Upon that account it was that the Ark of God, though but a piece of
Wood, was called Holy, and that we do read so often of Holy days, the Sabbath
and other festivals; yea of holy places, yea of the holy of holies, or most
holy place (which was the inmost Temple (called the Sanctuary) and that
Jerusalem is called the Holy City. Also of the Holy Vessels that were in the
Tabernacle, 1 Kings 8.4. And of the Holy Garments made for Aaron and his Sons,
Exodus 28.3. and 29.29. Hence the Priests and Sons of Aaron are said to be Holy
to God, by virtue of their Office, Levit. 21.8. Yea hence those words, Levit.
25.12. It is the Jubilee, it shall be holy unto thee. i. e. it shall be observed
as a thing of Gods ordaining, and therefore inviolaible and sacred.

Now in this sense it may be truly nnd soberly said of all Kings, as such, that
they are sacred, viz. Because the Powers that are are, ordained of God, and
cannot be resisted but upon pain of damnation, because they are the Ordinance
of God, Romans 13.2.

Now Sacrilege being the violation of sacred things (for that all Scholars
know to be the true notion of it) and the Persons and Authority of Kings being
sacred (as has been proved at large) they must need^ be guilty of notorious
Sacrilege, who not only despised the Authority, but destroyed the very Life of
that excellent King of whom we have been speaking.

But there is one cause more of men's despising the great sin of Sacrilege and
making nothing of it, viz. A great mistake which they are and have been under,
as touching the holiness of Persons, viz. That they know and acknowledge no
holiness of Persons, but that which the Scripture intends, when it says,
without holiness no man shall see God: Whereas most evident it is, both from
the Old and New Testament, that Persons are very often called holy upon a much
more laxe, large and loose account. Ex. gr. 1. Upon account of being dedicated,
though not by themselves to God, yet by God to himself, to his own use and
honor, Luke 2.23. Every Male that opens the Womb shall be called holy unto
the Lord. Surely that is not meant of a saving but of a ceremonial Holiness, of
a typical rather than of a substantial Holiness. 2. Upon account of Gods
external Adoption of a people to the title and outward privileges of his
Children and Holy ones. Hence it is said of the Jews or Jewish Nation, though
it were not savingly true of all or of the most of them, 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye are a
chosen Generation, a holy Nation, a peculiar People, etc. The reason of which
Apellation is, because they were Israelites, to whom pertained the Adoption and
the Glory, and the Covenants, etc. Romans 9.4. Not so far forth, as that all of
them were thereby finally saved, but only put into a much better capacity for
Salvation than others were who did not enjoy the same privileges. 3. Upon
account of mere profession and outward appearance, men are often called in
Scripture Holy and Saints (which is all one, etc.) So 1 These. 5.27. Let this
Epistle be read to all the Holy Brethren. So he calls the whole Church. So Heb.
3.1. Wherefore Holy Brethren, partakers of the Heavenly Calling, etc. So we
find the word Saints scattered so freely, and used so commonly in Saint Paul's
Epistles, that we may rest assured it is not there applied to them only who are
Saints indeed. Romans 12.13. Distribute to the necessity of the Saints, i.e. Of
all poor persons professing the Christian Religion, for they could not search
or judge of their hearts, Romans 15.25.26. Romans 16.15. With innumerable other
Texts to the some purpose. 4. Upon the account of federal Holiness, are they
called Holy who are not all so in strictness of speaking, or i^ relation to
eternal Life. So 1 Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving Husband is sanctified (or rendre^
holy) by the Wife, and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the Husband, else
were your Children unclean, but now are they holy; meaning federally (not
savingly) holy; as the unbelieving Wife is said to be sanctified by her
Husband, not savingly (for so many never are) but federally. 5ly. and lastly,
Persons may be called sacred upon the account of their being inviolable, or
such as do not lie open and exposed so as common persons do, but there is a
noli me tangere upon them; Touch not, handle not, hurt not to be sure: Touch
not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. So the Feast of Jubilee was
called Holy, because inviolable, Lev. 25. Now though none but religious and
godly Kings be holy, so as is meant when the Scripture says, Without holiness
none shall see God; yet every King professing the Christian Religion is sacred
upon the five accounts last rehearsed, and in a peculiar manner upon the last
of them, viz. As being more inviolable and unapproachable for the matter of
hurting, more guarded from the violence of men, by the sacredness of his Office
and Supremacy of his Condition, than Subjects are. Yea and upon one account
more, 6ly. ^ings and Rulers as they have more of the Image and Stamp of God, in
point of Authority, therefore called Gods in Scripture, and they are set apart
by God for his more especial service, as his Deputies and Vicegerents upon
earth, may and ought to be counted sacred persons. Now being Sacred, the injury
done to such, especially the destroying of theirlives, may very fitly be styled
Sacrilege. Now when I have spoken to two things more, viz. 1. That Sacrilege
is a very great sin; and 2. That this Regicide was very great Sacrilege: I
shall dismiss this 4th Article, and proceed to another.

May not the heavy judgments of God inflicted for Sacrilege, be alleged as a
great proof of the hainousness of that sin; for though God has now and then
signally punished sins seemingly but small (yet it is possible they might be
really much greater, all things considered, than we know of) yet ordinarily
they are great and heinous sins, for which God visits men with great and
heavy Punishments. And such are the Judgments which God has inflicted for
Sacrilege, witness Mal. 3.9. Ye are cursed with a curse; for ye have robbed
me, even this whole Nation, Witness also what we read touching Eli and his
Sons, 1 Samuel 2.25. When Hophni and Phineas took away pa^^ of the Flesh which
the People brought for offerings, to roast for themselves, Eli th^^ expostulated
with them: If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him, b^^ if a
man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? Where their Sacrilege i^
spoken of as so great a sin, and so immediately against God, that they would
find it hard to get any body to intercede for them (though in Lawsuits betwixt
man and man, Advocates and Council (a^ they are called) are allowed on both
sides:) In Jer. 7.16. God said to Jeremy, Pray no^ you for this People, neither
make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee. And in Exodus 32.10. The Lord
said to Moses, let me alone that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I
may consume them. Now Eli spoke to his Sons, as if their sin had made God so
angry, that he scarce knew what mortal man would dare to intercede for them, or
be suffered by God to stand in the gap. Yea the following words are very
severe, viz. Notwithstanding they hearkened not to the voice of their Father,
because the Lord would slay them, i. e. God was so provoked by their liquorish
Sacrilege, that he was resolved not to prevent their ruin by any special
interposure of his Grace, nor yet to put their Father upon what further means
he might have used for the reclaiming of them, viz. By hard blows, instead of
soft words: Yea so angry was God with Eli's Sons for their Sacrilege, that it
reached not their heads only, but also run down upon the Skirts of their Father
Eli for not punishing of them at an otherguess rate, than his tender
over-indulgent heart had suffered him to do; because he smote them not as with
Rods, God smote him and his as with Scorpions, 1 Samuel 2.34. This shall be a
sign unto thee that shall come upon thy two Sons, on Hophny and Phineas; in one
day they shall die both of them; v. 31. There shall not be an old man in thine
House, v. 36. Every one that is left in thy House shall crouch for a piece of
Silver and for a Morsel of Bread, and shall say, Put me into one of the Priests
Offices that I may eat a piece of Bread. These were the things which God bid
Samuel foretell old Eli, 1 Samuel 3.11. I will do a thing in Israel, at which
both the ears of every one that hears it shall tingle: I will perform against
Eli all that I have spoken, etc. Nay in this case the All-merciful God seemed
to be inexorable; I have sworn that the Iniquity of Eli's House shall not be
purged with sacrifices or offering for ever, v. 14. All these passages of Gods
severe animadverting upon the Sacrilege of Eli's Sons, may bring to
remembrance what Bish. Hall says in his Contemplations p. 19. Neither is Achan
alone called forth to death, but all his Family, all his Substance: The Actor
alone does not smart with Sacrilege; all that concerns him is enwrapped in the
Judgment. Those that defile their hands with holy goods, are enemies to their
own Flesh and Blood.

But let us look a little farther into the story of Achan that great
Warning-piece shot off by God to make the World for ever afraid of Sacrilege.
Eli and his House sped ill by reason of that sin, but Achan and his Family sped
worse upon that account, if worse can be. It Is the easiest thing that can be to
prove that Sacrilege was the sin for which so great and sudden destruction
befell Achan and all that did belong to him, witness Josh. 6 17. And the City
(meaning Jericho) shall be accursed, i. e. a cherem, an (...), or devoted it
and all that are therein to the Lord. v. 19. All the Silver and Gold and
Vessels of Brass and Iron, are consecrated to the Lord, they shall come into
the Treasury of the Lord. Now to rob God of that or any part of that which he
had so solemnly set a part for himself, was as plain Sacrilege as ever was.
Hear Achan confessing against himself, Josh. 7.20, 21. Achan answered and said,
I have sinned against the Lord, and thus have I done; when I saw amongst the
Spoils a goodly Babylonish Garment, and 200 shekels of Silver, and a wedge of
Gold of 50 shekels weight, then I coveted them and took them, etc. These were
the things which he had sacrilegiously stolen, but how did they thrive with him?
what did he get by robbing God? See v. 24. And Joshua and all Israel took Achan
and the Silver, and the Garment, and the wedge of Gold, and his Sons and his
Daughters, and his Oxen, and his Asses, and his Sheep, and his Tent, and all
that he had, v. 25. And all Israel stoned him with stones, and burned them with
fire, after they had stoned him with stones. So highly was God provoked by that
sin of his, that not only his own life must go for it, but also the lives of
his Sons and Daughters (O overflowing guilt) yea his very dumb Cattle, his
Oxen, Asses, and Sheep (and what had they done, or what was their crime, save
that they were the servants of so bad and Sacrilegious a Master?) yea into the
same flames were thrown his Babylonish Garment, nay his Silver and his wedge of
Gold (as if it had been said, Thy money perishes with thee) yea (...) if one
sort of death had not been enough for so great an offender, he was both ston^
and burned, he and his; and as if every man had been bound to have been h^^
Executioner, or had an ambition so to be the text says, All Israel stoned them
a^ burned them with fire, v. 25. Every hone^^ man had a stone to fling at a
Sacrilegio^ Person, but Israel was particularly pr^voked so to deal with Achan,
for his s^ had proved a general Calamity; on whi^^ Bishop Hall thus descants,
Only one Acha^ troubles the peace, and his sin is imputed (...) Israel. The
innocence of so many thousa^^ Israelites is not so forcible to excuse his one
si^ as his one sin is to taint all Israel. When the^ went against Ai, the wedge
of Achan di^ more fight against them than all the swords (...) the Canaanites.
How common a pest Acha^ had been, you may gather from Josh. 7.2^ Joshua said (
to Achan) Why have thou tro^bled us, the Lord shall trouble thee this day, etc.

How much Joshuah and the rest of Israe^ were troubled by means of Achans sin,
you may read Josh. 7. v. 5, 6, etc. Lord wha^ monster of a sin is Sacrilege,
that a little of it, whereof but one man neither wa^ personally guilty, should
trouble a whole Nation (and turn it into a valley of A^cor?) Is this the sin
that a few years since was so much slighted and reckoned for no sin at all? Is
this that Zoar to which so many thousands of professors fled, not thirty years
ago, and said, Their Souls should live? Was not this that foul spot, of which
in those days men were no more ashamed than women are of wearing black patches?
Did not many of them who seemed most zelously to abhor Idols, give occasion to
be asked that question which St. Paul puts, Romans 2.22. Thou that abhorest Idols,
do thou commit Sacrilege?

But of all the Sacrilege committed in those days, give me leave to say, that
of robbing King Charles the First of his Life, God and his People of so good a
King, was certainly the greatest. It must always be granted that Persons are
more excellent than Things; the least of Persons are to be preferred before the
best of Things, the Life of a Man above Silver and Gold, Houses and Lands; for
(all that a man has would he give for his life) one says, There is more
excellency in a Fly, because it has Life, than in the Son because it has none:
Of all Thieves Menstealers are the worst called, 1 Timothy 1.10. (...). Now the
Men-stealers her spoken of, were such as stole Children (...) make Slaves of
them, or to sell them so Slaves: But of all Men-stealers, they ar^ the worst
who steal away the Lives of Me^ who rob Men of their precious Lives: An^ of all
the stealers of Men's Lives, are n^ they the worst who steal away the Live of
Princes, of good Kings? etc. (Where as the people said of David, and it is tru^
of all such as he, Thou art worth ten thousan^ of us, 2 Samuel 18.3.)

Is it Sacrilege in the first, and immediat^ acceptance of the Word, to rob
Temples (...) Churches of Stones, or other dead Materials, and is it not far
greater Sacrilege to demollish and destroy one of Gods Livin^ Temples? yea one
of the greatest and mo^^ noble of them? Had London so great a lo^^ when most of
its Churches were burnt to the Ground, as when that one great Temple, of which
I am now speaking, was demollished? Were ever any Temples build with Stone, or
Brick so sacred to God as he was? Did the great God ever dwell so eminently, so
sensibly in any Temple mad^ with hands, as he uses to do in all Christian
Princes, who are the Temples of the Living God in a more noble sense than any
thing without Life and Reason, ever was or could be? Could ever dead Temple be
as it were a nursing Father to God Israel which Christian Princes are said to
be?

Some have charged Belshazzer with Sacrilege for alienating the Vessels of the
Temple, only so far forth as to drink in them, when he feasted a thousand of
his Nobles at one time; others have called the sin of Annanias and Saphira
Sacrilege, and so it was to keep back any part of that which they had
dedicated to God and to his Church; but since the two first instances of
Sacrilege, are much more notorious than these two latter, if I shall prove
that Murdering of King Charles the First was greater Sacrilege than either of
them, viz. Than that of Eli's Sons, and that of Achan, by proving the greater,
I have certainly proved the less: for Omne majus in se continet minus. As for
the Sacrilege of Eli's Sons it was but this, They took a part of Gods Meat
(for so were Sacrifices as the Altar was Gods Table) and whereas it should have
been boiled for Gods use, they caused it to be roasted for their own. They robbed
him of part of his Meat, who if he were hungry would not tell us, for his are
the Beasts upon a thousand Mountains, Psalm. 50.12. The World is his and the
fullness thereof, etc. They were over-kind to themselves and over-bold with God,
which cost them dear, as you have read; but what is all that in comparison of
being cruel to the Life of a Man, a Christian, a Prince, and our own Prince?
The Sacrilege of Eli's Sons compared with that of Murdering the King, seems
(if I may so speak) to have been lighter than vanity and nothing: Nay doubtless
it did far exceed that Sacrilege of Achan, which was greater than that of
Eli's Sons: For what was it that that Achan (who for his sin was stoned to
death and burned, and called the troubler of Israel, because of the sad
consequence of it) did steal from God? Was it not only a Garment, some Silver,
and one wedge of Gold? Now what trifles, what mere bawbles are all those
things, if weighed in a balance against the Life of the King?

I thought to have wholly passed by the instance of of Annanias and Saphirah,
their Sacrilege, which together with the lie that attended it, was punished
with present death. How much less was their Sacrilege than theirs who put the
late King to death? They robbed the Church but of a sacred estate, if I may so
call it, because devoted to God; but these of a sacred Life: nay they stole
away but part of an estate, these destroyed a precious Life not in part but in
whole. They withheld but what themselves had given and might have chosen
whither they would have given, and could give again; but the Murderers of our
King withdrew that which they never did or could give, and which when they had
once withdrawn, they nor all the World could never give again. They destroyed
but one small sinew of the Church (if money may be so called, as it is called
the sinew of War) yea did but strike that one little sinew, but these cut off
the temporal Head of the Church (for so we own the King of England to be next
and immediately under God Supreme Head and Governor.) How great then was that
Sacrilege which has clearly outdone that of Annanias and Saphirah, that of
Eli's Sons, that of Achan; yea the most notorious of all the Sacriledges
recorded in Scripture, if not all those Sacriledges put together. Who now cries
not out as the Prophet Jer. 9.1. Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain, etc. slain
with the Aggravations of multiplied perjury, high Treason, horrid Rebellion,
transcendent Sacrilege. And so I have made good the four first Articles
exhibited against the Murderers of King Charles the First, etc.

5. The putting of the late King to death was Homicidium, i. e. down right
Murder: I need not fear to say, greater than that of David in the matter of
Uriah: For there a King murdered a Subject, but in this case Subjects
murdered their King, and Servants their Master. What is Murder but taking
away the Life of Man without just cause, and without a just authority? If so to
do be not murder, I wonder what is? If either of these be in the case, it is
single murder (as I may call it) but if both do meet it is murder upon
murder (if I may so phraise it) or redoubled Murder. Now they both meet in
the case of King Charles the First. For First, If he had done any thing worthy
of death, who but the King of Kings had authority to punish him for it, or to
inflict upon him the death which he had deserved? If equals have no power of
each other, as the Law tells us, that Par in pares non habet potestatem. What
power can Inferiors have upon their Superior? Now he must needs be Superior to
all the people of England, and they all his Inferiors, whom the Nation swears
to own as the Supreme: The Law of England being such as allows of no man to
be put to death but by his Peers; whither Lords or Commons does surely suppose
that no man has any legal authority to put a King of England to death, for
what Fact soever, since he has no Peers (as that word signifies equals) for
every body else in and of the Kingdom is his Subject. Flagitious Princes, such
as Nero (whatsoever become of their evil Servants and Counselors) must be left
to the justice and judgment of God, but our hand must not be upon them. Did not
Saul by the hand of Doeg, whom he employed for that purpose, kill in one day 85
persons wearing Linen Ephods, 1 Samuel 22.18 for which and for many other things
he had well deserved to die: Yet I no where find David (who of all men was most
provokt to do it) attempting upon his Life: yea I hear him saying, The Lord
forbid that I should stretch forth my hands against him, seeing he is the
anointed of the Lords, 1 Samuel 24.6. Muthology represents Achilles to have been
impenetrable and invulnerable, so far as he was anointed with Ambrosia, but
Kings in a sense are anointed all over with the ointment of Divine Authority
and Power, therefore impenetrable and inviolable dejure, whatsoever they may be
de facto. Give me leave to change the mode, and cry instead of Plectuntur
^lectantur Achivi. If Princes err for want of good advice from those Subjects
of theirs who ought to give it them, let Subjects pay for it, but presume not
to meddle with the persons of Sovereigns, whom God has reserved to his own
immediate Justice: Let them stand or fall to their own Master, and who is that
but God Almighty?

Would it not be murder in him who is no Executioner, nor appointed by the
Magistrate thereunto, to put to death the fowlest Malefactor that was ever
brought to a Jail, because he has no authority so to do. To be sure they who
put the late King to death, neither had or could have any authority or (...),
for what they did; for we have no such Law or Custom in England, thanks be to
God, as to put our Kings to death if they do not please us: They may be free in
their own persuasion to do such things if commissioned from Rome, for that
purpose, who doubt the Supremacy of all Princes but the Pope, to whom they
apprehend all other Princes to be of right in subjection; but we Protestants
have not so learned Christ and Religion, as to think that the Heads of all
Secular Princes are at the Popes Devotion, and their lives in his hands, and
that they are to hold them but durante illius beneplacito: During his Holiness
Pleasure. Therefore I am amazed to think what kind of Heteroclite degenerate
Protestants they were (if we may call them Protestants) who took the boldness
to behead King Charles the Martyr.

Sixthly, The sixth Article which I exhibit against the Murderers of the late
Royal Martyr is, that their fault was Regicide, the murdering not of a private
person or subject, but of a King, which gave a great accent to their crime, and
made them as it were double-died in blood. Though the blood of Jesus Christ may
and will upon true and lively repentance wash away the Guilt of Royal Blood, so
as to prevent the eternal damnation of them that shod it (and oh the virtue and
value of that Blood, that can do so) yet I know no Laver that God has
appointed to wash out the stain thereof; I mean the blot and stain which it
always leaves upon the names and memories of them whose hands have been so
imbrewed. To attempt that were to wash a Blackamore.

All injuries become greater by the greatness of the object, or party against
whom they are committed. Read the greatness of their sins in the greatness of
the punishments, which God has inflicted on them (as the Scripture tells us)
who have so much as resisted or rebelled against their Kings, but more against
them who have put their Kings to death. When the Moabites, who had paid tribute
to King Ahab, rebelled against his Son Jehoram, 2 Kings 3.5. They were sorely
beaten, and the King of Moab brought to such distress, that he took his Eldest
Son, that should have reigned in his stead, and offered him for a burnt
offering upon the Wall, v. 27. Again we read how Ho eah the King of Israel was
punished, and the Israel;ites carried away Captive (though the Governors were
Heathen and the Subjects the People of God) 2 Kings 17. because after he had
made himself servant and tributary to Shalmonezer, King of Assiria, he
afterward denied him tribute, etc. In like manner Zedekiah King of Judah was
punished, as you may see 2 Kings 25.1. compared with chap. 24.20. Through the
anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, until he had cast
them out from his presence ( viz. giving them up to Famine, Desolation,
Captivity, Destruction of their City and Temple, chap. 25, etc.) that Zedekiah
rebelled against the King of Babylon, yea, see what is added chap. 25.7. They
slew the Sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out the Eyes of Zedekiah,
and bound him in Fetters of Brass and carried him to Babylon. Lord what a
dismal train of Consequences insued upon a Jewish King, his rebelling but
against a Babylonish King? Instance we next in Sheba, who rebelled against
David, and drew all the ten tribes after him; was he not by him besieged in
Abel, had his head cut off by the advice of a Woman, and thrown out to him, 2 Samuel 20.22. The Amalakite that said he had slain Saul, though he had not slain
him, and though he said that Saul bid him, was notwithstanding presently put to
death at the command of David; saying this to him, 2 Samuel 1.14. How wast thou
not afraid to stretch forth thy hand to destroy the Lords anointed? Yea, David
was so incensed at it, that he cursed the Mountains where Saul was slain, v.
21. Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be rain upon
you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the mighty is v^lely cast
away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with oil. The mere
murmurings of the Israelites against Moses, are both spoken of and punished as
murmurings against God, Exodus 16.8. So Num^^ 20, 13. it is said, the people
chode with Mose^ for water; and yet v. 13. it is said that the water was called
the water of Meribah; be cause the Children of Israel strove with the Lord.
Hannaniah persuaded the Jews to revolt from the King of Babylon only, an^ yet
it is said, that he taught rebellion again^ the Lord, Jer. 28.16. Was not
Miriam punished with Leprosy but for speaking against Moses, Numb. 12.10. Mind
what God said and did upon that occasion, ver. 8. were y^^ not then afraid (ye,
viz. Miriam and Aaron) to speak against my servant Moses? ver. 9 And the anger
of the Lord was kindled against them, and he departed. v. 10. And the Clo^^
departed from off the Tabernacle, and behold Miriam became leprous. Nay, we
find disobedience to the very Priests and Lovite^ threatened with Leprosy,
Deuteronomy. 24.8, 9. Tak^ heed of the plague of Leprosy, that ye take heed
diligently to observe, and do according t^ all that the Priests and Levites
shall teach thee; ver. 9. Remember what the Lord thy God d^^ to Miriam, viz.
who was stricken with Leprosy, for murmuring against Moses, who was no Priest,
and.

To persuade men to revelt from those Princes whose subjects they are, is yet a
farther Crime than bare murmuring, and see how God punished it in Ahab and
Zedikiah, who were roasted to death by Nebuchad-nezzer, Jer. 29.22. And how
Shemaiah's whole Family was likewise extirpated, v. 32. Hear David's Sentence
against Readiness Servants for not using their utmost endeavors to preserve his
Life, 1 Samuel 26.16. As the Lord lives ye are worthy to die, because ye have
not kept your Master, the Lords anointed. See how miserably Rachab and Banah,
two of Ishbosheth's Captains came off, who murdered their Master, and carried
his Head as a present to King David, hoping for a reward, v. 12. David
commanded his Young Men and they slew them and cut off their hands and feet and
hanged them up (possibly in Chains as a terror to others.) Had Zimri peace who
slew his Master Elah King of Israel? Surely no, for when he was besieged by
Omri, and saw that the City was taken he went into the Palace and burnt the
Kings House over him and died, 1 Kings 16.18. How sped the Servants of Amon
King of Judah, who murdered him in his House? See 2 Kings 21.24, And the
People of the Land slew all them that had conspired against King Amon, and made
Josiah his Son King in his stead. Joash his Servants conspired against him and
slew him, 2 Chronicles. 24.25. (which was a most just thing on Gods part, to avenge
the Blood of the Sons of Jehoiada the Priest, v. 25.) but how came they off;
see 2 Chronicles. 25.3. When the Kingdom was established to him, he (i. e. Amaziah)
slew his Servants that had beheaded the King his Father.

If the Murderers of private persons be now and then reserved to the judgment
of the great day to be punished, yet Divine Justice and Vengeance, as if more
concerned about the death of Princes than of Private Persons (by the instances
forecited) seems to have always overtaken those, even in this Life; who have
spilt the Blood of Kings as Water upon the Ground. Whence is easy to infer
that though Homicide be a very great sin, yet Regicide is greater, and that he
was a King whom the Men I am writing of put to death no man ever doubted.

Seventhly, Neither was it Regicide only, or the murdering of one who was
merely a King, of which these men were guilty, but also Justicidium, or the
murdering of a good King.

Who knows not that the wilful murdering of any man, though a bad, yea though
the worst of men, is a great and crying sin? but the murdering of a good and
virtuous man, a man of a thousand, is worse than that; and beyond either of
them is the murdering of a good and excellent King, yea of one of the best
Kings in the World, which is the case before us. Now by how much better the
murdered person was, by so much worse was the murder, for Corruption optimi
est pessima; is a never failing rule. I dare not apply to this occasion those
words of St. Peter, Acts 3.14. Ye denied the holy one and the just; because
they are peculiar to our Savior, who is the holy and the just one, (...), (and
there is no man so besides him) but that the martyred King was a man of great
virtue, is I think as generally acknowledged by them, that either knew him, or
have seen what is in History concerning him, as almost any thing is. Who could
ever tax him with Intemperance more or less? Who knew not the greatness of his
Patience under his unparalleled Sufferings, his professed forgiveness of his
most provoking enemies? Who ever did read more Divine Lines, more pious
Contemplations dropping from the Pen of any afflicted Prince, than his
incomparable and unimitable Book does contain? But it will not stand with the
brevity here intended, or with the Symmetry of this part with the rest of this
Book, to write a History in this place, of that renowned Kings Virtues; but he
that shall read his Life excellently written, as it is, by Dr. Perringshief and
others, if he have any faith in Histories (as what wise men has not some?)
will not as much admire the greatness of his Virtues as the barbarousness of
his Sufferings, and both together most of all?

Herein appeared the barbarousness of his murderers, that they could find in
their hearts to use a Prince so immensely ill who deserved so excellently well.
The Apostle says, Romans 5.7. Paradventure for a good man some would even dare
to die. Were they Men or Monsters, or Devils incarnate, or what were they then,
who instead of dying for a good man, put a good man to death? An untimely
death, I had almost called it a shameful death, for so it in true tended, but
that I know no shame was in martyrdom.

If any man doubt the piety of that Martyr, and the tenderness of his
Conscience, let him but read the 2. chap. in his excellent Book, viz. upon the
Earl of Strafford 's death: Because when almost wearied out of his life by the
importunity of those that he believed did wish him well, and used it as a
Maxim, Better one man perish (though unjustly) than the people be displeased
or destroyed, he had complied to sign a Bill against the Earl of Strafford's
life (though without plenary consent to his destruction, as he himself says.)
Lord! how uneasy was his Consciscience: Reader, forbear weeping if thou can,
when thou read those melting warning words of his. I see it a bad Exchange
to wound a man's own Conscience, thereby to salve State-sores; to calm the
storms of Popular discontents, by stirring up a tempest in a man's own bosom.
But I will not prevent thy reading of that whole most excellent Chapter, which
may almost warrant us; to call him, A father of Penitents, as Abraham was
called, A father of the Faithful.

I shall conclude this seventh Article of my charge against the Murderers of
King Charles the First, with a short reflection upon David's words to Baanah and
Rechab, who cut off the head of Ishbosheth, and brought it to him, looking for
a reward, 2 Samuel 4.11. How much more when wicked men have slain a righteous
person? shall not I require his blood of your hand, and take you away from the
earth? As if David had said (for that he meant) Saul was a wicked King, an
enemy to God, as well as me, and yet when one told me, saying, Behold, Saul is
dead, (viz. the Amalekite, who said he slew him by his own command, to put him
out of pain, 2 Samuel 1.10) I took hold of him, and slew him, who thought I would
have given him a reward for his tidings. If he were worthy of death who only
reported himself (upon a pick-thankly account) to have killed Saul (who seemed
otherwise about to kill himself) and at his own appointment, who was then full
of anguish, though Saul was a very wicked man (as aforesaid) what have they
deserved who beheaded a virtuous King sore against his will, and best
endeavors to the contrary, and that with many circumstances of barbarity, as
you will hear hereafter.

And so I proceed to the eighth Article, wherewith I charge the said King's
Judges, viz. Hypocrisy; I say with great Hypocrisy, practiced in that fact.
It was Homicidium maxim Hypocriticum. It was even the Masterpiece of
Hypocrisy, and the grandest Cheat under the Notion of Piety that ever was
imposed upon the world. Now all Hypocrisy is a perfect Lie, and the fault that
needs a Lie grows two thereby (as Mr. Herbert tells us.) Who that understands
the intrigue of that Business, does not cry out, Tantum Religio potuit suadere
malorum? Could such a Monster spring from the Womb of Religion? Who laid that
Brat at her Door? For it was none of hers. So Politicians talk most of
Religion, when they mean nothing less; as if they would compensate by taking
God and Religion often into their mouths, for their having nothing of either in
their hearts. Commend me to a famous Story which I heard from a Reverend and
dignified Divine, not far off, and not long since, which was to this purpose:
An excellent Knight told me (says he) that a year or two before the late War
betwixt the King and Parliament broke out, there were several Meetings held at
his house ( then in Covent Garden) betwixt some great Officers of State that
were then in play, and other popular Gentlemen who had a great mind to their
places. The late King was privy to all their Conferences (if not sometimes
present) and finding where the Cardo Controversiae, or Hinge of the
Controversy was, viz. that some Popular, but yet private, and unpreferr'd
Gentlemen thirsted to get into public Offices, such ( as Mr. of the Court of
Wards, etc.) and that they would never be quiet till it were effected, yielded
that all of them, save one, to whom he had some particular and unpardonable
exception, should have and enjoy the Places and Offices which they sought for;
but the King refusing him, and they being resolved upon one and all, hit or
miss, the meeting was quite dissolved; and not long after the War broke out;
which, says he, could every one of those great Seekers have found the
Preferment which he sought for, had been prevented. But that which the Author
of this Story said most of all to my purpose was this: Whilst we were thus
bandying at this our meeting from time to time, one half to hold the places
which we were possessed of ( or parta tueri) the other half of the Company to
throw us out and get themselves into our places; without those Walls nothing
was talked of but Religion, what great contrivances there were at that time for
reforming and settling Religion, whilst, God knows, within those Walls there
was not all that while one word spoken concerning Religion, but some of us were
willing to hold our Preferments, and others to get them away from us. O Nation
sweetly cheated! O thou blessed Name Religion! how often have thou been misused
and made use of to christen the most horrid Villainies: For the Proverb has
proved too true, In nomine Domine incipit omne malum: Was it not under pretext
of Religion, because Religion, as was alleged could not be preferred; if he
were suffered to live, that that Martyrs blood must be made shed for the
Church? that the King's Head was said to be cut off? As if to cut off the Head
of the Church of England, were the only way to keep life in the Body thereof:
Now how fond and irrational a thing was it, how groundless and malicious a
slander and censure, to say or think that the life of King Charles the First
could not consist with the true Christian and Protestant Religion?

Moreover, they knew no more than their heels, when the Religion established in
the Church of England by Law was gone, what to put in the room of it; for they
themselves were not of one Religion: nay, what if many of them were of no
Religion. What think you of St. Martin, and St. Scot, were they not pure
Saints? with several others of those Aeacus's and Radamanthus's, who gave
Sentence against the late King? Oh, how did they burn? Was it with zeal for
Religion? A man would hardly think that Religion to be chaste and honest, which
such men courted or seemed to court. What Religion, I beseech you, in pulling
down all the fences of the Church, and letting in all sorts of little foxes and
wild bores to spoil God's Vineyard. If this were Reformation, it was not unlike
that in Egypt, when the whole Land did swarm and was overrun with Frogs and
Lice, and Flies, Exodus 8. Whilst these men pretended to the honor of Religion,
who ever disgraced it more? to the preservation of true Religion, who
endangered it more? to the Reforming of Religion who ever deformed and undid it
more? Look how the Ivy whilst it creeps into the wall, and clasp's close about
it; embracing it as it were with greatest kindness, does mean time rot, decay,
and perish it: or look how the Ape so hugs her young ones, as that she kills
them with her kindness; so kind and no kinder were those bloody Reformers to
true Religion, which they could have as ill afforded to have looked in the face,
as a Debtor his severest Creditor, or a Malefactor his Judge. Surely they were
never intended by God for Reformers, considering what God said to David, 1
Chro. 28. Thou shall not build an House for my Name, because thou have been a
man of war, or have shed blood. Who could expect a Reformation of such men's
making, worthy the cost of that Royal Blood wherewith they purchased it: That
which they gave us was to dear by every drop which the purchase cost them. When
I am convinced that Jezebel took the course which she took with Naboth upon a
Religious account, that a zeal to reform Religion put her upon writing Letters
in Ahab's name, and sealing them with his Seal, as it is 2 Kings 21.8, 9, 10.
saying, Proclaim a Fast, and set Nabal on high among the people; and set sons
of Belial to bear witness against him, saying, Thou did blaspheme God and the
King; and then carry him out and stone him, that he may die. I say, when I
believe that a true zeal against blaspheming of God, made her do as she did;
who it is most certain, did all this merely in order to what we read ver. 15.
When Jezebel heard that Naboth was stoned and was dead; Jezebelsaid to Ahab,
Arise, take possession of the Vineyard of Naboth, which he refused to give thee
for money; for Naboth is dead. I say, when I so believe, then, and not till
then, shall I think that an unfeigned desire to promote true and undefiled
Religion, to keep out Popery, and to reform Protestantism, as practiced amongst
us, was that which prompted the unhappy Judges of King Charles the Martyr, to
send him packing out of the world. How hypocritical and false was the name that
was given to the Court which tried him, called The High Court of Justice? For
1. we know it was no Court, for it was not any such thing legall^; and nothing
is a Court but what is legally so: and moreover his Majesty would never own it
for a Court. 2. It was no ways High^ but in ^ride, presumption and Arrogan^e to
undertake what they did. 3. It was to be sure no Court of Justice, for it was
called together only to serve one turn (like Jezeb^ls Court that was summoned
against Naboth aforesaid) to do one wi^ked job or feat, that is, per fas aut
nefas, right or wrong to cut off the Kings Head, and there was to be the end of
it. But do men think that God will always be thus mocked? When Ananias and
Sapphira added as little Hypocrisy as this comes to, to their Sacriled^e, did
it not cost them their lives, and were they not charged with lying not only to
men, but to the Holy Ghost?

Now there is nothing of greater tendencie and efficacy to bring Religion into
hatred and disgrace (if a man had a real design so to do) than to make a Cloak
of Religion for all sorts of Villainies and to entitltle them thereunto; to put
Rebellions and Treasons, and Sacriledges, and Murders, and Regicides all to
its account, and to shelter them under its wings. They that make Religion the
(...), which some do say signifies the Dung-cart, which passes by a City to
receive all its filth; or like to those persons whom the Latins called
Piacula, i. e. Sacrifices, on whose head all the sins and curses of the people
should be laid, and expiation made by sacrificing of them. I say, thus to do by
Religion, is the way to make every one smile at the naming of it, and bid
defiance to it. Their sin had been less, if they had said in so many words, we
will kill the Heir that the I^heritance may be ours, etc. To conclude this
Article, Woe to you Regicides, as because of Perjury, Reb^llion, Treason,
Sacrilege: so no less, because of what I mentioned last, viz. notorious
Simulation and Hypocrisy. And so I proceed to the Ninth particular.

Ninthly, To all the former, I must needs add, That the putting of King Charles
the Martyr to death, was Parricidium, Parricide, or the Murdering of a Father,
a Crime which uses to make the ears of all that hear such a thing done, to
tingle. If a Son or Daughter happen to kill either of their Parents, all the
Country rings of it; and it makes as it were an Earthquake throughout the whole
Kingdom. But the Parricide of Parricides was then committed, when K. Charles
the First was put to death, who was not only a Father to them that had a hand
in it, but to the whole Nation: besides, a common Father, a Political, though
not a natural Father. To be fure he was one of those whom the fifth Commandment
intends, by the name of Father, when it says, Honor thy Father and thy
Mother; meaning every whit as much Kings and Princes, whom God has somewhere
promised to make nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers to his Church; as those
whom the Scripture calls the Fathers of our Flesh. For though we owe not our
Being to them, as to our natural Fathers, yet our well-being we do owe to them
under God; though we owe not our Generation to them, yet our Preservation we do
owe to them under God. Every good King is a Protector of his People, as to
their Lives, Limbs, Estates, good Names, Relations, Property, Religion, etc.
And is not that a great piece of Fatherhood (as I may call it?) Are not his
Subjects safe under the shadow of his wings? Philosophers say, That
Preservation is a continued Creation. If that be so, do we not owe as much to
those by whom we are preserved under God (though not so preserved as by God
himself) as to them by whom we were propagated. David did both represent
himself, and was represented by others unto Nabal as one that had deserved very
well at his hands, and the hands of his; because he was able to say, as it is,
1 Samuel 25.7. Thy shepherds were iwth us, we hurt them not, neither was ought
missing to them all the while they were in Carmel: As who should say, It is a
favor in those who have power over us (though no lawful Princes neither) if
they do us no hurt. Also in the 15th ver. we find one of Nabal's Servants thus
pleading with Abigal the wife of Nabal; But the men (meaning David's Soldiers)
who came to salute our Master, and he raild on them, were very good to us, and
we were not hurt, neither missed we any thing, as long as we were with them.
This they looked upon as a great obligation, though that which follows as a
greater, ver. 16. They were a wall unto us by night and by day all the while we
were with them keeping sheep. Nay, David himself insists upon it as a piece of
merit, ver. 22. Surely in vain (says he) have I kept all that this fellow has
in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that pertained to them,
and he has requited me evil for good. Now Nabal's returning a churlish answer
to a Captain and his Company, who had not only not plundered, but protected
him, tempted David to say in a great passion, as ver. 22. So and more also do
God to the enemies of David, if I leave of all that pertain to him by the
morning light any one that pisseth against the wall. Did Nabal owe so much to
David and his Soldiers for not injuring him, or suffering others to injure him
whilst they were near him, what then do we owe to good Kings for their fatherly
kindness to us? In not dealing with us, as Samuel told the Israelites should be
the mishepat hammelec, or the manner of a King's dealing with them, 1 Samuel
8.11. He will take your sons, and some of them s^all run before his Chariots:
ver. 14. He will take your fields and your vineyards, and your oliveyards, even
the best of them, and will give them to his Servants. ver. 16. He will take
your goodliest Servants and put them to his work, etc. i. e. he will use them
as he list, and you shall be able to call nothing your own; but he will let ye
know that whatsoever ye call yours is now his, and shall be more at his command
and dispose than at your own. If they who have power enough in their hands to
serve us so, do not, even for that we have cause to thank them and bless God on
their behalf; but if they defend our Lives, Limbs and Estates; and above all
the true Christian and Protestant Religion (as thanks be to God His Majesty
that now is does, and so did his Father before him;) we have cause to own them
as our Fathers, yea Nursing Fathers. Such Fathers they are, as we are bound to
honor, fear, and obey, more than our Natural Parents; for though we are bound
to obey them in all lawful things (and are not bound to obey Kings in what is
sinful) yet when the Commands of the Parents of our Bodies interfere with the
commands of our Political Parents, or of our Kings and Rulers, we ought to obey
the later rather than the first, viz. because what is enjoined by the former
becomes unlawful when it is forbidden by the latter. I was about to say that
respective Kings are not only our Fathers but our Fathers Fathers, our
Grandfathers, yea our great Grandfathers Fathers, if they be living and within
their Territories. Soon should we lose what our Parents gave us, viz. our Lives
and Estates, if we had no King or Rulers to protect us. Receive it therefore
for an indubitable truth, that Kings are Fathers, what then are they that
murder them but mere Parricides? yea and the worst and most flagitious of all
Parricides. The Scripture foresaw some such would be, 1 Timothy 1.9. The Law is
not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, (...), i. e.
for murderers of Fathers and murderers of Mothers, etc. But what punishment
short of Hell its self, can be thought great enough for those that are such?
Since Death the greatest of all temporal punishments had wont to be inflicted
upon Chiidren, who were only disobedient to their Parents; yea since there is
such a passage as that of Solomon, Prove. 30.17. The Eye that mocketh at his
Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick
it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it, i. e. Such persons as these shall
not live out half their days, but shall come to untimely and shameful ends; as
to be hanged, or such like; and so their Bodies exposed to be devoured by such
revenous Creatures, as are Crows or Eagles, which are observed to aim
especially at the Eyes of dead People (whether because a very tender part and
grateful to their palates, or for what other causes I know not) what then shall
be done to those who not only mock but murder Kings, who are their Fathers in
a more eminent sense than were they who begat them?

We propagate to the Children of our Bodies original sin and actual misery
(which yet they ought to excuse us for, as because no man can help it, so
likewise because they will do the same by their Children, when they come to
have any, and so will all men in all ages; and we must not set the whole World
a quarrelling) so do not Kings to their Political Children, i. e. their
Subjects. Kings as Kings are Fathers to us only for our good and real benefit,
therefore called the ministers of God to us for our good, Romans 13.4. a terror
not to good works but to them that do evil, v. 3. i. e. Whosoever therefore
shall ravish the Lives of them that are such Fathers by Office, but especially
if such by a due execution of their office, punishing Vice and encouraging
Virtue: what may or can they expect (to use and allude to the Apostles words,
Heb. 10.27.) But a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery
indignation, which shall devour the adversaries.

Tenthly, Neither was their Crime mere Parricides, as great a sin as that is)
but also Patriaecidium, if I may have leave (...), or to make a new word upon
this occasion: Now by Patricide I mean the murdering of their Native Country,
putting that to death for which they ought to die if need were. The phrase of
killing ones Country may seem harsh, but will be rendered more soft and
suitable, if we call to mind an ancient wise saying, viz. That England is a
great Animal which can never die unless it kill its self. If it may be called
an Animal it may be killed; for whatsoever Creature here below is possessed of
Life, may also be dispossessed of the same; but that none but its self could kill
that Animal, was a great mistake, unless they took the word Self
synecdochically; i. e. for a part of its self; for by a part of its self it was
indeed destroyed, or brought to the very brink of destruction, killed
outright, or brought within one step of death. Witness the grand and signal
symptoms of death, which they brought upon it, for in that number are they
reckoned by Physicians. Magnae Jactationes multae bigiliae, motus convulsivi,
and ipsissimae convulsiones Pulsus Intermittens Facies Hippocratica, etc. All
whichill symptoms, or what was analogous to them, were found upon England in
the time of their reign who cut off the Head of King Charles the Martyr. Let me
add two or three more, viz. Deliquium, or frequent Lipothymies, Faintings or
Swoonings: Also Delirium, Doting and Frenzy: I might have brought in
Singultus or Hiccops, as another deadly sign, but that it is one species of
Convulsions. Now give me leave to say our Ruling Regicides had brought upon
this poor Nation and their Native Country, all the conclusive signs of death
aforesaid, whereby it appears they had given England its deaths wound, but
that God who kills and makes alive, who brings down to the grave, and
says return again; yea God who raises the dead, was pleased most miraculously
to restore it to life again.

A short proof may serve for each of the particulars aforesaid, they being so
much known to all ingenious men, that have either seen or read of the affairs
and transactions of the late times: the truth is, the names of symptoms, which
I mentioned, because by Metaphor applied to politics or morals, may need some
little explication, but when that is done they will easily command assent and
acknowledgement. Briefly then were there not Magna Jactationes, that is, great
tossings and tumblings up and down in those days (as dying men turn from side
to side, sit up, lie down again, call to rise and to be removed from bed to
bed, and chamber to chamber, finding themselves uneasy in every posture,
seeking rest in change of posture though they find none.) How often did we shift
and change Governments in one year? pull down one and set up another, and pull
down that again; Sic cum voluit fortuna jocari. So were we banded as it were by
fortune, or maladministration rather, from end to end; so reell'd we too and
fro like drunken men, or like a ship ready to be overset with stiff and
contrary winds; so sound we no rest for the sole of our feet; and it was most
easy to make the prognostic, that nothing but a miracle of divine power and
goodness, could save us from sudden death and ruin. Such Governments as they
then set up, seemed to be things that would not keep above a month or two, or
little Gourds which had a Worm at their root, which caused them to wither
presently. And as the Nation had at that time little rest in one sense, so
little sleep in another; for were not the minds of men continually kept awake
with fears and sad apprehensions, like people that live in an old rotten
decayed house who cannot sleep in tempestous nights for fear the house they
dwell in should fall upon their heads? These were the magnae vigiliae which I
spoke of, or rather the causes why men could not sleep in those days as they
desired to do, and ought to have done.

Again, whosoever knows what State-Convulsions mean, must needs understand that
we had a great many of them in those days. There are particular and universal
Convulsions spoken of by Physicians, i. e. some of particular parts only, as of
the eyes, when they are distorted; of the mouth, when that is drawn awry, etc.
Others again of the whole body, whereby a man is rackt, as it were, from head
to foot; we had of both sorts in those unsettled times, Disturbances in
particular Counties, otherwhile almost all the Nation over. We were pulled and
hall'd forward and backward, as one sort of Convulsion is called (...), another
(...); yea, sometimes the Nation seemed to be stiff as a stake, to have no
motion with it, answering to the Convulsion, called (...), when it is so with a
Body: Was it not often so that we knew not how or which way to turn our selves?

Again, Could any Natural or Animal body have a worse Pulse than England had in
those days? One while the Pulse of the Nation beat as high and feaverishly as
could be, that is all things were done furiously, the Army called up to the
City (which was to be the Trojan Horse for that time) the very Gates of the
City appointted to be broken down, etc. Otherwhile the Pulse of the Nation did
beat exceeding low, so it could scarce be felt, was very unequal, intermitted
often; it was often slow or languid, like that which goes by the name of
Pulsus mynrus, vermiculans, which is very bad; yea, Formicans, which is worst
of all: The first of which viz. Mynrus, betokens a Pulse that dwindles less and
less like a Mous's tail: The second, viz. Vermiculans, a Pulse that creeps or
crawles like a Worm: And the last, viz. Formicans; i. e. a Pulse that takes
many steps like an Ant, but the poorest strides that can be thought of, as if
it moved but a hairsbreadth at a time. It were easy, but that I would not be
too tedious, to find out things in the late times that did bear proportion to
each of these.

As for Deliquiums, Lypothimies, or fainting-fits, nothing was more ordinary
than them in those days: For, as the whole head was sick, so the whole heart
was faint, men's hearts failed them very much, for fear of those things which
were coming upon them.

That the Nation was then in frequent Deliriums or Frenzies is the easiest
thing of all to prove; for how madly would men talk in those days, and how
wildly did they act? Who has not heard discourses of drying up the River
Euphrates, interpreted to be seizing upon the Gold and Silver Mines of Popish
Princes, which was to have been effected by taking Hispaniola, in lieu of which
we accepted of Jamaico; also of sending an Army to Rome to pull down the Pope.
Of our Saviors coming in the year 1666, now past and gone, to reign upon the
earth; (and you know who intended or pretended themselves to be his
Forerunners.) And did not men act as wisely in those days as they talked? How
did they do and undo, set up and pull down again, and could come to no
consistency?

That England in those times did fetch its breath very short, and was, as they
say, very much out of breath (for so we had run our selves) was obvious to
every man's eye and observation.

As for Singultus or Hiccough (a very dangerous symptom in sick bodies) how to
apply that to the case of England in the late times may seem hardest; but the
definition of that Disease does agree thereunto, therefore the thing designed
must needs do so likewise. What is a Hiccough, but a convulsive motion of the
Stomach, laboring to cast off something which sticks upon the coats thereof,
and by either its quantity or quality rather, does much offend it? Sure I am,
many things did stick upon the Stomach of the Nation in those days, which fain
they would have cast off, and did use their endeavors so to do, but could not
effect it.

Lastly, That the Nation had faciem Hippocraticam in those days (or did look
like death:) I appeal to all that were judicious Spectators of it. Did we not
look so ghastly as would even fright one? so pale, so thin, so wan, so sharp
like a Skeleton, or like a deaths-head; so like a body that the Grave waited
for, and the worms stood ready to devour? Were were not then the pity of our
friends and the scorn of our enemies? Thus low was a once flourishing Nation
brought by the hands and management of cruel Regicides, men profound to make
slaughter, to ruin and demolish, but how to cure the breaches and distempers
of a Nation they had no skill. More I could say upon this head, but for
brevity-sake, I pass on to the next.

Eleventhly, Taking away the life of the King was Regnicidium, or the
destruction of a Kingdom. For one and the same blow cut off the head of King
and Kingdom both at once. For what Kigdom can there be without a King? What
signifies a body without a head? That Notion or Maxim of the Law, viz. That
Rex nunquam moritur, i. e. The King never dies, was methoughts become very
Metaphysical, when the late good King did not actually reign either in his own
Petson, or in his proper Heir or Successor, or any of his Line and Family. I
have been oversavorable in talking of their destroying one Kingdom, whereas the
truth is they did destroy three Kingdoms at once, that were united under that
one good King. The mischief of their so doing will more fully appear, by what I
shall say under the next head.

Twelfthly, This their horrid murder was not only Regnicidium, and Regicidium,
or Monarchicidium, but Monarchiae-cidium, i. e. not merely the destruction of
one King and three Kingdoms, or of one Monarch and Monarchy, but of all
Monarchy or Kingship; of all that most excellent form of Government in all
parts of the world, so far as in them lay. For 1. They gave other Nations a
most pernicious Example of deposing Kings, and casting off Kingly Government.
2. Did they not make it their business by writing and speaking to disgrace
Monarchy, and to bring all Nations out of conceit with it, and to make it
odious to the whole world? 3. Did not the Army that then was, swear against
being ever after governed by a single Person; but they only exchanged (or
suffered to be exchanged) a Rowland for an Oliver (you know my meaning) and so
therewith all was salved.

Now give me leave to tell you, in laboring to destroy Monarchy, they labored
to destroy the best form of Government in the world (as they that know me, do
know that I have often said and undertook to prove.) For Monarchy is that
Government which the light of Nature leads men to, and necessarily casts them
upon. For the truth is, all Governments in the world by what names soever they
are called or distinguished, are nothing else but disguised and imperfect
Monarchies. And this holds true both in public and private Governments, as of
Courts, Cities, Towns, Families, Socieeties, Corporations, as well as in
States, Commonwealths, public Aristocracies or Democracies, as they are called
both in Church and State. Take the instance in Juries, Is there not commonly
one leading man that sways all the rest? So in all Committees, in Courts of
Judicature or other Courts. So in Republics: so in Congregational Churches.
For admit the diffused power of the two last should happen to be equally
divided (as is possible for it to be, and yet to have a power of determining it
self and turn the Scales) must not that be done by some one man? will it not
necessarily issue there? For say, All power were in a Senate, consisting of a
thousand men; admit there be all the Members of that Senate present at a
debate, save only one; by means of whose absence, there being five hundred
Votes on the one side, there can be but 499 on the other; upon this so great
division you see the whole Affair is carried by but one voice. Even amongst
those who by their constitution have an equal share in Government, is there not
generally a Dominus fac totum, a Chieftain, or Superintendant, a Leading-man, a
man that has the casting voice generally given him, in whose advice and
counsel all the rest or the major part of them, do acquiesce? And what is such
a man but a Monarch in his place, and amongst those over whom he governs so
absolutely, so uncontroulably, let him go by what name he will, either of
Justice, Magistrate or Minister, etc. Kings themselves do not act without their
Privy Council and other persons of Honor, who are assisting to their Affairs;
but in conjunction with them, their advice and assistance, they do what they
please. And truly so do those petty invisible Princes or Kings, that walk
incognito and under disguise. They in conjunction with some of the best
Head-pieces that are about them, and by the assistance of their party which
adheres to them, carry what they please, carry all before them, in spite of
all opposition. Thus it was from the beginning, thus it now is, and will be to
the end of the world. Were it not easy to say, Who is in effect a Monarch
amongst the Anabaptists, and, amongst the Quakers, etc? So that all the
Governments in the world are virtually, and in effect Monarchies, though the
people see it not, and their Votes are little more than for fashion-sake, and
to please them with a shadow of Power and Liberty, when their real power is
little more than to sit still. He then that is an Enemy to Monarchy, and to
every thing that is like it, will presently become an enemy to all sorts of
Governments all the world over, which are indeed and truth but so many Virtual
Monarchies, all things considered. So men fly the Name, whilst they continue
the Thing; and alter the Shadow, whilst they accept the Substance of Monarchy,
over them. Amongst those who are equal in power, the wisest will always govern
the weakest, and they that by their Wealth or Prudence, or otherwise, can make
the greatest Party will carry all before them. If then the light of Nature, and
universal practice of the world has determined Monarchy to be the best and
most necessary form of Government, who can sufficiently decry their sin, who
did not only destroy an excellent King and Monarch, but also aimed at the
destruction of Monarchy, or Kingly Power throughout Europe, that if it were
possible the Name and Thing might be rooted out, and might be restored no more.
And so I have made good the 12th thing which I charged upon them, viz. an
attempt to destroy Monarchy, though it be the best Government in the world.

Thirteenthly, It must needs be confessed they were Self-murtherers, or Felo de
se's, who murdered the late King. For in taking away his life, they forfeited
their own. If an Earl or a greater Subject, do wilfully but murder a poor
Footman, or Beggar, by so doing he forfeits his life according to God's Law,
yea, and the Law of England too. He then that kills a King, had he a hundred
thousand lives, would by so doing forfeit every one of them, and be made to pay
his forfeiture too, unless great clemency interpose. I remember no one Regicide
in all the Scripture but what is punished with death, save only that of Jehu
committed upon the person of Joram, which being done at the express command of
God, ought not, I think, to be called Regicide. But I pass on.

Fourteenthly, The murdering of the late King was Animaecidium, not only
Self-murder, as to each of their Bodies, but Soul-murther, as to every of
them, unless the infinite Mercy of God should step in and prevent it. Is
Hellfire the wages of them that wilfully murder but a private person; witness
those words, 1 John 3.15. And ye know no murderer has eternal life abiding in
him: i. e. no wilful murderer has jus in re, as to eternal life, i. e. any
present actual capacity, to enter into life eternal; as he that was under a
Leprosy under the Law might not for that time be admitted to eat the
Passover, though jus ad rem, i. e. a dormant suspended right, which may or
shall be restored and redintegrated upon his repentance, that he may have as
David had when he defiled Bathsheba: But diverse do say, If David had never
actually repented of that great sin, he had never had eternal life, but had
been everlastingly damned: So Baronius in his excellent Book De peccato mortali
and veniali. If the wilful murdering of one private man be enough to sink a
Soul into Hell, what will not the murder of a King do? Will not God heat that
Furnace yet ten times hotter for Regicides? Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, are
called sinners against their own Souls, Numb. 16.38. for rebelling against
Moses and Aaron, i. e. for but murmuring against them, though not one drop of
blood was shed by their hands. How greatly then have they sinned against their
own Souls, who have rebelled and resisted even to blood? I have before quoted
that Text Romans 13.2. They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. I
leave that word to fasten this head on their Consciences, as a nail in a sure
place, and pass on to the next.

Fifteenthly, The murdering of the King was Multicidium (pardon the making of
a new word in such a case as this) or Caedes multorum; or Homicidium
multiplicatum and complicatum, i. e. it was a great many murders in one.
First, it was virtually so according to the computation which we read of, 2 Samuel 18.3. But the people answered, Thou shall not go forth (i. e. David should
should not go forth to Battle) thou art more worth than ten thousand of us,
etc. Secondly, It was actually so, as the Accomplices in that violent action, by
encouraging and emboldning each other thereunto, were guilty of the sin and
death of one another. Thirdly, As the death of the late King was remotely the
death of many persons and families, I mean the ruin and destruction of
multitudes of Families, which depended upon him, which was worse than death its
self.

Sixteenthly, Putting of the late King to death, was Legicidium, as well as
Regicidium, i. e. the death of the Law, as well as of the King. For first, By
the King's death a stop was put to the making of any more Laws, which might be
judged necessary for the good of the Nation. For without the King no Law can be
made: His Royal Assent, Sanction, and Fiat, makes every Law to be a Law:
Therefore the Parliament did never presume to call any things by the name of a
Law, which they made without the King; but by the name not of Acts, but of
Ordinances of Parliament. Secondly, there was stop put to the execution of
those good and wholesome Laws, which were before in being. Execution (say they)
is the life of Laws, and who but the King is the great Executioner of Laws, or
the life of their Execution? When Judges and other great men in the Law went
off by death, who but a King could legally substitute others in their room? If
any Justice be done by Officers not legally called and constituted, we must be
beholden to usurpation for it Laws are things full of life and spirit, if they
be such for the constitution and execution of them as they ought to be; and
upon the life of good Laws depend all our Lives, Liberties, good Names,
Estates, Properties. It is as it were the breath of their Nostrils. If the true
Soul of the Law go out of it (which is the King) they must either be restored
by some Usurper, or usurping spirit, or fall to the ground. They who destroy
our Laws, or the due execution of them, had as good in effect burn up all our
Ships, break down all our Forts and Fences; yea, they had as good almost cut
down all our Banks and Buttresses upon the Seashore, and let in the Sea upon
us, as do what they do. He that destroys one good Law, or the effect and
progress of it, may do the world more mischief, than if he had destroyed twenty
men, yea, a hundred such as they might be. I had almost said, If a man could
stop the motion of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all their Influences upon the
earth, their light, and height, etc. for ought I know, would not be more missed
than the free course or progress of Laws would be. What Death then could be
greater than their demerits, who killed not only the Lawmakers, but the Laws
themselves, which are all in all in all that we have to show or plead for any
thing that we call ours in this world.

Seventhly. Alas! alas! that I should yet have more wherewith to accuse those
poor unhappy men, who put the late King to death; I say it was Homicidium
barbarum, a barbarous Murder in reference to the circumstances of it. Who
knows not that cruelty may be showed even toward a noxious Brute, which ought
to be put to death; as toward a wild Boar, or the like, namely, by making its
necessary death more painful, or more lingering than it need to be; but if the
same thing be done to a harmless Animal, as to a tame Dove, or such like, the
cruelty and barbarousness is yet greater upon that account. If the severity be
applied to a reasonable Creature, man or woman, it is counted ten times so
barbarous; but when barbarous usage shall be applied to a Prince, a King, our
own King. a virtuous King, and one that had been a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with griefs for many years together not to grant him as handsome an
Exit out of the world, as could consist with an untimely death, was such a
transcendant instance of inhumane barbarity, as I think no age can parallel.

Reader, If thy heart can bear the mention of them, which I assure thee mine
hardly can, and if thou art content to weep a while (for the following Lines
are scarcely to be writ or read with dry eyes) I shall quote a few instances of
the barbarous usage which our dear and dread Sovereign, that then was met with,
as I find them recorded in Dr. Perrinshief's excellent History of the Life and
Death of King Charles I. To say nothing of the King-killing Party in Parliament
and Army their overruling all the vigorous endeavors which were used from
time to time by the whole House of Lords, together with the major part of the
House of Commons to compromise all matters with his Majesty, having
courageously Voted (though the Army was drawn up to London to overawe them)
That the King's Concessions were a sufficient ground for Peace, Dr. P. p. 174.
But to come immediately to such passages as do refer to his Death. Some would
have the King (says Dr. Perrinshief, page 185. first formally degraded and
divested of all his Royal Habiliments and Ensigns of Majesty, and then as a
private person exposed to Justice. Others designing a Tyrannical Oligarchy,
whereby they might have a share in the Government, would have the King
proceeded against as King, that by so shedding his Blood they might extinguish
Majesty, and so m^rther Monarchy. For several of them did confess that indeed
he was guilty of no Crime more than that he was their King, and because the
excellency of his parts and the rights of his birth would not suffer him to be
a private person; page 186. In their second debate about the matters of
Accusation, all embraced the advice of Harrison to blacken him, etc. Ibidem.
Accordingly they impeached him as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and an
implacable common Enemy, because he had levied war against the Parliament. Upon
which the Author afterward descants thus excellently, page 187. Those who had
none but the light of nature to make them generous, never reproached their
conquered Enemies with their Victory; but these men would murder their Prince
against whom they had nothing else to object, but the unhappy issues of a war,
which leaves the Conquered the only Criminal, while the name of Justice and
Goodness are the spoils of Conquerors. Most barbarous was their cruelty,
because most inexorable. For (says he, page 187. while they were thus engaged
to perpetrate their intended mischiefs, all Parties declare against it. The
Presbyterian Ministers, almost all those of London, and very many out of the
several Countries, and some, though few of the Independents: The Scots also by
their Commissioners declare and protest against it. The States of Holland also
by their Ambassadors did intercede and deprecate it, as most destructive to the
Protestant Interest. Some of the most eminent of the Nobility, as the Earl of
Southampton, the Duke of Richmond, the Marquess of Hertford, and the Earl of
Lindsey, and others, neglact no ways either by Prayers or Reasons to save the
King; yea, they offered themselves as Hostages for him, and if the Conspirators
must needs be fed with blood, to suffer in his stead. page 189. The Prince of
Orange did daily send as Arents the Kindred and Allies of the Conspirators with
full Power, and to propose any Conditions, make any Promises, and use all
threatenings to divert them from their intended cruelty. But all was in vain:
For no conditions of Peace could please them, whose Ambition had swallowed the
hopes of Empire; therefore they would remove the King to enthrone themselves.
To me it seems so barbarous, as nothing can be more, not to suffer his Majesty
to plead for himself, because he would not own the Authority of the Court,
which they themselves knew in their own Consciences was not vested with any
lawful Authority, but was a mere usurpation, and a high affront, to bring a
King before such contemptible Judges. See in page 194. At his departure he was
exposed to all the ind^gnities that a base rabble could invent and commit; when
the barbarous Soldiers cried out Justice, Justice, Execution, Execution. See
also page 199. The Conspirators meet in a Committee to appoint the manner,
time, and place of the murder. Now blush, O Heavens, and be ashamed, O Earth,
at the reading of that which follows. Some (says he, page 199, and 200.)
would have his Head and Quarters fastened upon Poles (as it is usual with
Traitors) that the marks of their cruelty might outlast his death. Others would
have him hanged, as they punished Thieves and Murderers. Others gave their
Votes that he should suffer in his Royal Habiliments, with his Crown, and in
his Robes, that it might be a Triumph of the People's power over Kings. At
last, they agree, That he should lose his Head near White-hall-gates before the
Banqueting House that so from thence where he used to sit on his Throne, and
show the splendour of Majesty, he might pass to his Grave, there parting with
the Ensigns of Royalty, and laying them down as Spoils, where he had before
used them as the Robes of Empire. Thus did they endeavor to make their malice
ingenious, and provided Triumphs for their revenge. And because they suspected
he would not stoop to the block, they caused to be fastened in it some Iron
staples and Rings, that by them, with cords, they might draw him down if he
would not comply.

Who can forbear to tell one signal Passage of most barbarous and blasphemous
Hypocrisy, which the same Author writes, page 203. Some of the chief
Conspirators suspecting lest the Lord Fair fax should hinder the Execution,
came to him that morning that they had signed the Warrant for the Kings
Ass^ssination, and disired him with them to seek the Lord by Prayer, that they
might know his mind in the thing: which he assenting to, Harrison was appointed
for the duty, and by compact to draw out his profane and blasphemous discourse
to God in such a length as might give them time for the Execution, which they
privately sent to their Instruments to hasten; of which when they had notice
that it was past, they rose up and persuaded the General that this was a full
return of prayer, and God having so manifested his pleasure, they were to
accuiesce in it. But for further tormenting my Readers heart and my own, I
would add what the same Author tells us, page 205. Thus the King finished his
Martyrd^m, but the Enemies not their malice, who abused the headless trunk.
Some washed their hands in the Royal Blood; others dipped their stav^s in it, they
sold the chips of the block and the sands that were discolored with his Blood,
and exposed his very Hairs to sale, which the Spectators bought for different
uses, some as the Relics of so glorious a Prince, and some out of a brutish
malice, would have them as Spoils and Trophies of their hatred to their lawful
Sovereign. One is said to have curiously surveyed the murdered Carcass, when
it was brought in the Coffin into White Hall, and to assure himself the King
was dead, with his fingers to have searched the wound, whether the head were
fully severed from the body or no; page 206. Afterterward they permitted the
Body to be unbowelled to an Emperick of the Faction, together with the rude
Chirurgions of the Army (not permitting the King's own physicians to this
office) and commanded them to search (which was as much as to bid them so
report) whether they could not find in it Symptoms of the French Disease, or
some other evidences of frigidity and natural impotency, that so they might
have some color to slander him, who was eminent for chastity, or to make his
Seed infamous. Show me who can, a Murder committed, though upon but a private
person, with more barbarous circumstances of cruelty, inhumanity and malice,
then was this upon the King? of which you may read more at large in the Book
forementioned, p. 171, to p. 207. Read those passages over and over, and see
how they make that sin out of measure sinful; and then consider if for the
Nation to be humbled before God once a year for so prodigious and public a
Villainy, be any more than is fit and necessary.

Eighteenth Aggravation, The Scripture will bear me out in the expression, if I
call the murder of the late King by the name of Deicide, because the Scripture
calls Kings by the name of Gods. I have said they are Gods; only allaying it
with the following words, but they shall die like men. Though the true and the
living God be immortal, yet there are certain mortals who are called Gods, even
by him who is the true and only immortal God, or who alone has immortality (
viz. in and from himself.) And of this sort of Gods, are all Kings or Rulers
therefore so called (because they have the Image and Inscription of Gods
Authority and Majesty upon them, so and in such a manner as private men have
not) though Parents and Masters, as such are vested with some lower degree of
Power and Authority in their respective Persons and Places. Now the murdering
of King Charles I. was the murdering of a mortal God. which is a greater sin
by much than is the murdering of a mere mortal man. There are three forts to
which the name of God is applied, The first is, God (...), God by essence, that
is, he that made the World; all other are but mortal gods, and much inferior
to him: To us there is but one; the true and the living God. 1. There are Dij
(...), False Gods; such were all the Idols of the Heathen. 3. There are Dij.
(...), Gods so called by Grace and favorable condescension. Such are Angels
and Magistrates: Kings are inferior to the true God, but superior to all false
Gods; yea, in their own dominion superior to him who exalts himself above all
that is culled God, etc. It Is much to be feared that whilst a sort of men busy
themselves, and are much concerned about that Image of God in Princes, which
consists in righteousness and true holiness, and do either ascribe, or not
ascribe it to them, and have been wont to respect or disrespect them
accordingly, I mean as they have taken them for Saints or no Saints. I say,
whilst men trouble themselves about that which is a matter of hope and charity,
not of science or certainty; it is much to be fear^d they overlook that Image
of God which is certainly in all Kings and Rulers, as such, viz. in point of
Authority and Dominion, which they ought to honor and reverence, though they
knew the other were wanting. For most sure it is, That Dominium non fundatur in
gratia. A man may be a King, and ought to be reverenced as such, though he be
no Christian, but a professed Ethnic or Heathen. God has given the earth to the
Children of men: Woe would be to Princes if none were bound to obey them but
such as do, and will own them for Saints. Then would they be Sainted and
un-Sainted toties quoties, as often as they pleased or displeased the people; for
so has been the manuer of men. Who cannot instance in men, who but a little
while before were generally vogud to be but carnal or moral men, that to serve
an end, have presently been run up to Saints, canonized all of the sudden; and
they who but a few weeks before were thought not to have grace so much as a
grain of muster-seed, amounts to their grace in an instance, was become (by
common same) like as a great tree, so that the birds of the air might come and
lodge on the branches thereof. But let me tell thee (Reader) even such Princes
as were Antiochus, Epiphanes (or Epimanes, as some call him) and such as Nero,
who respective to their morals, have appeared in the world like Devils, yet
were Gods by Office and Denomination from Scripture (and we must always allow
that God who is the fountain of all honor, is the best Herald, and best knows
what title to give to every one) and in their place and sphere ought to be
respected as such. Saint Paul when inadvertently he called Ananias the high
Priest a whited-wall, Acts 23.3. for judging contrary to the Law, when it was
said to him, Revilest thou Gods high Priest; replied, I wist not that he was
the high Priest, for it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of
thy people: Not but that he of whom he spoke it, was in and of himself as a
whited wall or painted sepulcher; but nevertheless the respect due to a a great
Noble ought to have been paid him in his place. Yea, to kill a very bad Prince
were Deicide, or the killing of a mortal god, for as a Prince he is a god. But
what if a King that resembles God, not only in his Greatness but Goodness, not
only in his Power and Authority, but in his Purity and Holiness, in his Wisdom
and Mercy; and several other of his most glorious Attributes (and such a one
many have told us, that knew him, if we did not, was King Charles the First,
what if he be murdered by his own Subjects, are they not Regicides with a
witness, that shall do it? yea, they have done it?

Now if any man shall ask me that indivious question (as some account it) which
of the Kings Subjects was it that put him to death? I answer first of all
Negatively, Not the Body or Community of the Nation, not the major part or
generallity, but a few in comparison of them. 2. Not the representative of the
Nation, the Parliament I mean; for all the Lords disclaimed it, and and most of
the Commons, and were laid aside to make way for it; but positively first, All
that were active in the War betwixt King and Parliament, must be confessed to
have remotely and ignorantly, though not voluntarily and intentionally
contributed thereunto, because that the murder of him had never been but for
the War. Some classical men sore against their will and intention, were partly
accessory to that most unclassical and illegal action.

But they must needs be charged with the murdering of the King, who suffered
themselves to be made his Judges and to sit as such. His very Executioner,
whosoever that disguised Caitiff was (for whom it bad been well if he had been
born without hands, if not that he had never been born) was not so guilty of
his death, as was every one of his presumptuous Judges. For Plus peccat Author
quam Actor, is an old and a good rule; i.e. The Author is worse than the Actor.

Thirdly, Some chief Officers of the Army that then was, though possibly they
were not nominated amongst his Judges, had as great a hand in his death, as any
body had, and possibly were the first means of it, and the greatest sticklers
for it. Their names and ends are sufficiently known.

Fourthly, That sort of men who not only adhered to the Parliament, but had a
respect for the Covenant till near the time of the King's death; and then of a
sudden had wont to cry out, The Covenant was an Almanac out of date. And why
said they so? but because the Covenant did seem to stand in their light, and to
be a block in their way, who had a mind to have the King's Head cut off? I say,
Those who cried up the Covenant till toward the year 1648 but then cri^d it
down as much, and made an Almanac out of date of it, and about that time and
ever after, did always more adhere to the Army than to the Parliament, they
were the well-willers to the death of the King; they were promoters,
countenancers and abetters of it. I have met with a parcel of Names,
Characters, and Periphrases somewhere, which if I am able to expound them, do
describe that Generation of men, who were best pleased with the King's death,
and gave most countenance to it, before and afterward, viz. The Cantonizers of
the Church, the dividers and subdividers of it in semper divisibilia. The
Mother Church of Enthusiasts and Enthusiasm in England. The Ecclesiastical
Democracy. The close Persecutors of such as dissent or depart from them. They
who pretend to run so far from Babylon, as that they run beyond Jerusalem. The
Punctuallists, who demand Scripture for every punctilio or circumstance in and
about the Service of God, but can show none for many of their own Practices:
ex. gr. Their Auricular Confessions of faith, etc. The people that talk much of
a Judgment of Charity, by which they make Saints of those they have a kindness
for; and yet have less charity in judging of others than most men have. The
Antpodes to ^rclacy and Monarchy. The Disciples of the Council of Savoy, such
as d^scribe the Church of God, as if it were like to that which is
unintelligibly said of the Soul of man, viz. tota in toto and tota in qualibet
part, Men of the newfound Discipline. The Trap door men, who from that passage
in the Covenant, which was for preserving the L^fe and Honor of the King, found
this door of ^scape, viz. in the preservation of Religion, and insisted much
upon it, That the life of Religion and the life of the King could not consist
together. They who dscourse and act as if every Member-Church were the whole
body mystical of Christ, or as if Christ had innumerable entire bodies, or his
whole body mystical in every place; where two or three are met together (as
Papists say of his body natural.) The younger Brethren of Presbytery: For says
one, Our English Amsterdam was founded since our English Geneva. They who cried
down the Covenant, as it was for Monarchy, and for the preservation of the
King's Life and Honor; but did and do still cry up the Covenant against
Prelacy, and to upbraid all Conformists with Perjury, who have declared the
Covenant not to be obligatory. The great Freeholders in point of Discipline,
who brook no Landlord in that point, or to have any Authority over them. The
Hance-town Churchmen, who claim to have all Power and Jurisdiction within
themselves, and say, Who is Lord over them? That sort of men, who of all sorts
of Christians seem to have least regard to one Article of our Creed, viz. I
believe the Holy Catholic Church; or they by whose practice one would think
that were no Article of their Creed. If there be no sort of men to whom the
Characters aforesaid do agree; since no Party is named, none need to be
concerned; but if any such there be, or have been, they were they who said of
the King's death. Ah! ah! so would we have it. The Limner who drew the
foregoing Picture thought it a disparagement to write under it. This is the
Picture of such an one: for if it be like no body, it is good for nothing. It Is
possible that some whom it does not concern, will out of a jealous humor,
apply it to themselves; but let them be warned by what was said of one that did
so. I (said the Author of a certain Character) have made a Fools Cap, and such
an one has put it upon his head, and fancies that it fits him. But in good
earnest, if the Painter have not wronged those people whose Picture he meant to
give us, but such be their real Feature and Portraicture, if it be as like them
as can be they are a people worthy to be exposed, chid, and rebuked, and most
unworthy to be esteemed by others, at any such rate as they esteem themselves
and one another. Let those Characters be intended of whomsoever (for I shall
not pretend to know of whom they are intended, but I have found them somwhere)
methinks the men of such a Complexion and Constitution as they seem to
describe, must needs be some of those men that were well-willers to the death
of King Charles the Martyr. For they can never love Kings well, who would be
Kings themselves. John 19.12. Whosoever makes himself a King, speaks against
Caesar.

Fifthly, Doubtless Fifth-Monarchy-men gave no discountenance to the death of
the King; for many of them thought long for the expiration of the fourth
Monarchy (which they supposed might be at the death of the King or soon after:)
For when all was overturned, overturned, overturned, then they thought he would
come whose right it is.

Sixthly, But that the Papists should be so hearty for the King's Murder, as
it should seem they or some of them were, is not that the wonder of all
wonders? May not such a truth as that is be confirmed by the Testimony of two
great Orthodox Divines? If so, they are forthcoming. The first shall be Dr.
Perrinshiefe, page 195. For there mentioning Jesuitical Counsels, he adds,
whose Society, it is reported upon the King's offering to give all possible
security against the corruptions of the Church of Rome; at a Council of theirs,
did decree to use their whole Interest and Power with the Faction to hasten the
King's death, which sober Protestants had reason enough to believe, because all
or the most of the Arguments which were used by the Asserters of this violence
on his Majesty, were but gleanings from Popish Writers. Also page 213. the same
Author says thus: How little the Papists credited what the Faction would have
the world believe, was too evident by the Conspiracies of their Father against
his Life and Honor, which the discovery of Hubernefield brou^ht to light. They
were mingled likewise amon^st the Conspirators, and both heated and directed
their fury against him. They were as importunate in their calumnies of him,
even after his death, as were the vilest of the Sectaries. For his sake they
continued their hatred to his Family, abetted the usurpations of the following
Tyrant, by imposing on the world new Rules of Obedience and Government;
invent^d frrsh calumnies for the Son, obstructed by various Methods his return
to the Principality, because he was heir as well of the Faith as of the Throne
of his Father. My next witness (and two such witnesses may suffice as well as
twenty) shall be Dr. Mo^ul^n, Prebendary of Canterbury, in a Book of his
called, A Vindication of the Protestant Religion in the point of Obedience to
Sovereigns, etc. page 58. The late Rebelion was raised and fostered by the Arts
of the Court of Rome, Jesuits professed themselves Independent, as not
depending on the Church of England, and in the Committees forth destruction of
the King, they had their Spes and their Agents. The Roman Priest and Confessor
is known, who when the fatal stroke was given to our holy King and Martyr,
flourish^d his Sword, and said, Now the greatest Inemy that we have in the
world is gone, I Will ^uote no more, but rather commend that excedent Book to thy
reading. Thus have we made a competent discovery at whose door the death of the
late King does principally^ie.

Her upon, methinks, I hear some saying, But what is the King's death to us,
who had not the least finger in the death of the murdered King? What is that
to us? Let them look to it, as was said to Judas, when in despair. Answ. There
are many ways and circumstances whereby a man that was not principally
concerned, yet may be brought in as truly accessory to the Kings death, or to
any such thing as it was, viz. 1. Connivendo. 2. Non reprehendendo. 3. Non
praeveniendo. 4 Non dolendo. 5. Demerendo. 6. Non deprecando. 7. Imitando. 8.
Non detestando satis, and contra protestando. 9. Provocando. 10. Non puntendo
cum possumus. It Is much to be feared, that this whole Nation may come in for a
share in the Kings death thus remotely, or upon account of one or other of the
foresaid particulars: For 1. Some did as it were connive at it when it was in
fieri, or bringing about, and dic not do all they could have done to prevent
it. Now to such that passage, 1 Samuel 26.15, 16. may be applied, David said to
Abner, wherefore have thou not kept thy Lord the King? For there came one of
the people in to destroy the King thy Lord. As the Lord lives, ye are worthy
to die, because ye have not kpt your Master the Lords Anointed: And now see
where the Kings spear is, and the cruse of water that was at his Bolster. Was
not old Eli therefore charged with the sins of his wicked Children, because his
Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not, 1 Samuel 3.13. There is a
Saying that would bear hard in this case, Qui non prohbet cum potest jubet. 2.
Some did not enough deprecate the death of the King, which every one was able
to have done, though many could do nothing else but that to promote it. The old
Armor of Christians, which are Prayers and Tears ought to have been taken up by
all men, and managed to the best advantage for the defense of his Majesty's
life. If that were not done, you were remotely accessory to his death. 3. If
you did not sufficiently lay that to heart, mourn over, and bewail it, you are
in some degree guilty concerning it. So had Lot been of the sins of Sodom, if
he had not vexed his righteous soul with the ungodly conversation of that place
(as he is said to have done, 2 Pet. 2.8.) The Apostle charge the Corinthians
concerning the Incestuous man, 1 Cor. 5.2. saying, Ye are puffed up and have
not rather mourned that he who has done this thing might be taken away from
among you. God sent his Angel, as we read, Ezekiel 9.4. to set a mark (of
preservation) upon the foreheads of the men that sighed and cried for the
abominations done in the midst of Jerusalem, and upon them only: as who should
say, the rest were involved in the common guilt. 4. If we have not duly
reproved and reprehended such as had a hand in the King's death, according to
what opportunities we have had so to do; laboring to convince them of the
horrible evil and sin of which they were guilty, and to call them to repentance
then are we in part guilty of, and accessory to it our selves. So much is
intended in that passage of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the
fruits of darkness, but rather reprove them; implying, that they who reprove
them not, are reckoned by God to have part or fellowship with them. 5. If we
have not sufficiently detested the putting of the King to death, and seasonably
entered a Protestation against it; surely we are in part guilty of it. David
has an expression to that purpose, Psalm. 101.3. I hate the work of them that
turn aside, it shall not cleave to me: intimating, that the only way to have
nothing of other men's turnings aside, or sins to cleave to him, was for him to
hate their ways: and as for entering our protest against other men's sins, see
how careful Joshuah was to clear himself by doing that, Josh. 24 14, 15. Put
away the gods which your Fathers served in Egypt, and serve ye the Lord. And if
it seem evil to serve the Lord, choose ye this day whom ye will serve; but as
for me, I and my house will serve the Lord. 6. They who do any ways provoke,
stir up, or encourage others to a sin, the acting whereof they themselves do
not touch with the least of their fingers, are for that reason guilty of that
sin. Witness that most remarkable passage, Exodus 32.35. The Lord plagued the
people because they made the Calf that Aaron made. The people are said to have
made it, because they put Aaron upon the making of it. 7. They who were any
ways contributing and assisting toward the death of the King, though
ignorantly, and far from intentionally, or to any of those things which did
make way for the acting and accomplishing of that bloody Tragedy, were in part
accessory to his death. As the men who broke off the golden earrings which
were in the ears of their wives and daughters, and brought them to Aaron,
therewith to make a golden Calf, are therefore said to have made that Calf,
though they made it not a Calf, but only Aaron gave it a form and shape, Exodus
32.20. And Moses took the Calf which they (i. e. the people) had made, and
burnt it. Causa causae est causa causati, is an old Rule. 8. We become guilty
of the sins of other men, which we imitate and follow; for in so doing we do as
it were vouch, vindicate, and justify them. Luke 11, 49, 50, said the Wisdom
of God, I will send them Prophets and Apostles, and some of them they shall
slay and persecute: That the blood of all the Prophets which was shed from the
foundation of the world may be required of this Generation, etc. 9. Lastly, (to
name no more at this time) We may be guilty of other men's sins (and so of
murdering the King in particular, Deem rendo by our other sins, whereby we
have provoked God to let so great a judgment (for it may be considered as a
judgment as well as a sin) befall the Nation. Witness that pat Text, 2 Samuel
24.1. And again the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved
David against them, to say, Go, number Israel and Judah, Now quit himself who
can from all those remote ways of accessoriness to the late Kings death.

Now I am very prone to think that the Accessoriness of men to the sins of
others in such way and manner as has been expressed, is one of the best
accounts that can be given why God punishes some men for other men's sins; ex.
gr. Israel and Judah for David's numbering of the people, 2 Samuel 24.
Particularly for men's justifying the sins of others, by treading in their
steps, and doing wickedly as they did before them, which is very provoking to
God; witness Deuteronomy. 32.13, 14. The Lords anger was kindled against Israel, and
he made them wander in the wilderness forty years, etc. And behold ye are risen
up in your Fathers stead, an increase of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce
anger of the Lord against Israel. Possibly one main reason of God's imputing
Original sin to any besides him that committed it (and whose actual sin it was)
is because men do justify the same by their actual transgressions. For if Adam
did not do well in doing what God had forbad him; why do we the same thing,
presuming from day to day to eat as it were of forbidden fruit? Yea, I do
verily believe, that God never did and never will impute Original sin to the
eternal condemnation of any one person, male or female, that has not or shall
not rise up and justify the same by his or her actual transgressions.

But now lest the hearts of them, who were primarily, immediately,
intentionally, and wilfully guilty of murdering King Charles the First, should
be hardened by hearing that almost every body had remotely or indirectly a hand
or finger in the death of that good King, give me leave to tell you, that there
is no comparison betwixt the greatness of their guilt who are the principal
Actors the wilful and deliberate Contrivers and Executots of such a bloody fact
as that was; and of others, who by some of the ways beforementioned are
become, sore against their will and intentions, and beyond all that they could
ever imagine, in some sort Accessory to, and remotely concerned in it, and at a
great distance guilty of the same. It was occasioned by a Lie of David's, that
as we read, 1 Samuel 22.18. The King ( i. e. Saul) said to Doeg, Turn thou and
fall upon the Priests. And Doeg went and fell upon the Priests; and slew on
that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen Ephod. ver. 19. And
Nob the City of the Priests smote he with the edge of the sword, both men and
women, children and sucklings, and oxen, asses, and sheep. Hear David's
Confession, ver: 22. that it was long of him; David said to Abiathar, I knew it
that day when Doeg was there, that he would surely tell Saul, I have occasioned
the death of all the persons of thy Fathers house. Now had David been as deeply
guilty of the death of so many Priests, and other People as Saul was, who
commanded Doeg to kill them, or as Doeg was, who did so willingly execute that
bloody command of Saul directly opposite to the Command of God, it is like he
had been overwhelmed with the sense of it; but as the case stood, he was not
so, because, though he was not altogether unaccessary to the slaughter
aforesaid, yet he had so small a hand in it, and was so very remotely,
indirectly, and vnintentionally concerned therein, that his Conscience had not
much to say to him concerning it. For it fares in such cases as these, as it
does in some small and slender Errors in judgment, which may be charged with
dangerous Consequences at the long run, they may possibly be no great prejudice
to these that hold them, or are deceived by them, because they do utterly abhor
those Consequences wherewith they are charged, neither do they apprehend that
they are chargeable with any such Consequences. Ex. gr. Suppose that be an
Error that some have made such ill use of, That Christ shall reign upon the
earth a thousand years, though Fifth monarchy-men have taken occasion from
thence to raise Arms and rebel, under pretense of bringing Christ to his
Throne, yet ought not all that ever were of that opinion, or now are, to be
courted Rebels. For there are and have been men of that persuasion, who knew
full well that the Kingdom of Christ upon Earth stood in no need of men's sins
and Rebellion to set it up, but would make way for its self when the full time
was come. God forbid, that I should be so unjust as to charge every body, with
the death of the martyred King, at any such rate as his Judges are charged with
it; but this I am bold to say, viz. that the whole Nation, at leastwise by
deserving that so great a judgment should befall it, as was the cutting off a
good King, or by not sufficiently bewailing that such a thing was done, or
notenough abhorring the tsinfulness of that fact, are become so far forth
accessory to it, as does give every man sufficient occasion to cast in his Lot
amongst those that do fast and mourn upon every 30th. day of January.

And now, methinks, I hear some people objecting against the Law which has
established a perpetual Fast upon that occasion to be celebrated every year,
and on such a day; as if it were a thing of which no good account could be
given, or more than needs, and concerning which the great God would say, Who
has required this at your hands? As if it did but kindle coals, keep up
revenge, renew heats and animosities, raise and disturb the Ghosts of the dead,
which should be at rest; upbraid those who have received their punishment, and
upon the whole matter do more hurt than good. Now to those who ask us, Quo
warranto do we keep our Anversary Fast on every 30th day of January? To that I
answer: 1. We have frequent instances in holy Writ, of Magistrates taking upon
them to appoint Religious Fasts, 1 Samuel 7.5. And Samuel said, Gather all Israel
to Mizepeh: And they gathered to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured it out
before the Lord, and fasted all that day, etc. (Which passage the Chaldee
Paraphrase does thus gloss upon, viz. Hauserunt aquas e puteo cordis sui and
abunde lachrymati sunt coram Domino, resipiscentes, i. e. They drew waters out
of the wells of their hearts, and wept abundantly before the Lord; but that by
the way.) See also 2 Chronicles. 20.3. Jehoshaphat feared ( viz. because Moab and
Ammon were come up against him) and set himself to seek the Lord, and
proclaimed a Fast throughout Judah. See also Ezra 8.21. Then I proclaimed a
Fast (says Ezra) that we might afflict our selves before our God, to seek of
him a right way for us, and for our little ones, and for all our substance.
Also Esther 4.16. Go gather together all the Jews that are in Shushan (said
Queen Hester) and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night
or day; I also and my maids will fast likewise, and so will I go in unto the
King, which is not according to the Law, and if I perish, I perish. See Jonah
3.5. So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a Fast. ver. 6. For
word came to the King of Nineveh, and he covered him with sackcloth, and sat
in ashes. And he caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh, by
the decree of the King and his Nobles, etc. All these Texts do manifest beyond
all contradiction, That even the best of Rulers and Magistrates, such as
Samuel, Jehoshaphat, Ezra, etc. have taken upon them to proclaim and enjoin
Religious Fasts when they saw causes for it: which doubtless so good and
knowing men as these would never have done, if it had not belonged to them. So
then, there can be no fault in Magistrates assuming to themselves to appoint a
Fast, and Fasts, upon sufficient and meet occasions; though some cannot endure
to hear of Civil Magistrates their meddling or making, more or less, about
matters of Religion, no though it be to promote it; but I think they are more
nice than wise in that particular.

But may some say, Will the occasion bear a Fast, viz. The Death of the King so
many years ago? To which I answer, Why not? Surely it will. Great Judgments
either incumbent or but impendent have been the occasions of Fasts. So of
Jehoshaphat's and of Esther's Fast; and why are not great sins as much and as
just an occasion of a Fast, for they are causes and procurers of great
Judgments? Have we not as much cause to fast and pray in reference to that
Guilt which is upon our heads, as to War or other Calamities, which do but hang
or hover over our heads? Now whereas some may think that though such an
occasion as that may well bear a day or two once for all, yet an Anniversary
Fast upon such an account as this is too much. I am not of their mind: For why
not Anniversary Fasts upon great and and public sins, as well as Anniversary
Feasts upon great and public deliverances? and that appointed by Magistrates
too? Such was the Feast of Purim, i. e. of Lots, which was instituted by
Mordecai, (who you know was a very good man) in remembrance of the Jews
delivery from Haman, before whom Lots were cast from day to day for the
destruction of them. We read also of an Anniversary Feast, called the Feast of
Dedication, (...) (a Feast wherein something is renewed, because those things
only are reputed consecrated, which are separated from their old common, and
dedicated to some new and holy use. That Feast was appointed by Judas
Macchabeus to be observed from year to year for the space of eight days
together in the Month Cafleu, which answers to our December. Of this St.
John, chap. 20.22. speaks and mentions our Savior's presence there: It was
at Jerusalem the Feast of the Dedication, and it was winter. And Jesus walked
in the Temple in Solomon's Porch.

God has given us standing general Rules for set days of Fasting or
Thanksgiving as the matter shall require; but has left it to the Rulers of the
Church or State to appoint the time, whether every year, or as they please, and
made it our duty to obey them in it, as in all other lawful things. God forbid
that we should not obey the Magistrate in those Commands of his in which he
obeys God; and surely he obeys God in commanding those things to be done which
God also has commanded, or for which he has given general Rules to be applied
to particular times and places, as the Magistrate shall think fit

If any do think that the Fast which I am now speaking of, is merely a Fast for
strife and for smiting with the fist. I utterly deny that any such thing does
appear to have been the Magistrates intent in appointing it, neither ought we
to be so uncharitable as to think so, neither is there any necessity of making
it to be so. For upon that day we call to remembrance a great and shameful sin
which diverse men have suffered for, yet it is not to make their persons more
odious, whose lives have paid for what they did, but to stigmatize their fact,
that the like may never be committed in this or any succeeding age; it is not
to make the Murderers infamous, but the Murder, the Regicide, to cause that
to stink in the Nostrils of all men. It Is not to grieve the hearts of their
surviving Relations, Widows, or Children, etc. I say, it is to grieve no body
that had no hand themselves in the death of that excellent King; but it is,
that others may hear and do no more so wickedly.

I look upon a 30th. day of January to be the most proper day in all the year
to preach up Loyalty, and to preach down Rebellion, not in any railing or
reviling, but in a sober rational convincing way, and may all Pulpits ring with
Loyalty on every such day, and Rebellion be rendered as odious on that day, as
we use to render Popery and his Holiness on each fifth day of November. Did I
know any person or persons that were so wretched and cross-grained as to turn a
30th. day of January into a kind of Festival or Thanksgiving-day, I would not
doubt to apply to him or her those words, Isai. 22.12, 13. In that day did the
Lord call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with
sackcloth. And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, killing sheep, eating
flesh and drinking wine. ver. 14. Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from
you till ye die, says the Lord God of Hosts. I was about to say, that as many
people as do rejoice at the remembrance of the late Kings death, do as it were
put him to death afresh (as some are said to crucify our Savior again, if I
may so allude) and do what in them lies to bring the guilt of his Royal Blood,
as much upon their own heads, as it was upon the head of his Judges.

Now in the close of all, If any man shall say to me, Cui bono? or Quorsum
haec? To what purpose is it for any man to set forth the murdering of the late
King in its colors (as you have done) since the thing is past and gone, and
cannot be recalled, and now there is no help for it, etc. To that I answer, By
the same reason may you think it needless to call to remembrance any great sin
of your own; saying it is past and gone, and now there is no help for it, To
what purpose should I mourn over it? any more than David did over his Child,
when perfectly dead? or why should not I rather do as he then did, of whom it
is said, That when the child was dead he washed and anointed himself, and
changed his Apparel, and eat bread, 2 Samuel 20, etc. I answer, Though we ought
to sorrow as little as we can for those Afflictions which are gone over our
heads, and cannot be recalled, and to forget them as soon as we can, yet it
ought not to be so with us, such ought not to be our carriage, in reference to
our sins: David says, That his sins were ever before him. Who ever condemned
Peter for weeping, after the crowing Cock caused him to reflect upon his
denying his Master? Who ever found fault with David for watering his couch with
his tears, after he had polluted it with Adultery? If we could forget our
Afflictions more, and our sins less, it would be better for us. Sorrows are
best forgotten, but sins are best remembered.

Possibly it is no more than God expects, that so notorious a fact should be
publicly lamented every year. I am deceived if a good advantage may not be
made of that days Solemnity, if piously and prudently managed, whereby to make
more Converts and Proselytes to Loyalty, than have been in England of late
years, and to bring men better acquainted with the Doctrine and Duty of
Obedience to the lawful Commands of Magistrates, than they seem to have been
hitherto: A Doctrine in which some men, the more their sin and shame, find no
more relish than in the white of an Egg, and is one of those sound Doctrines,
which some men will not endure, which is a part of that (...), that healthful,
wholesome, or healing Doctrine, of which the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 4.3. The time
will come when men will not endure sound Doctrine. Moreover, I was about to
say, out of that Viper, or viperous Action, viz. Regicide (at lestwise as one
principal ingredient thereof) may a good Theriaca, Treacle, or Antidote be made
against all Sedition and Rebellion for time to come; which things have now the
death of a King to answer for, and are become more infamous and hateful than
ever before, because stained and tainted, and made more execrable by the guilt
of Royal Blood.

Upon the 30th of January, of all days in the year, let Parents instruct their
Children, and Masters their Servants in the fifth Commandment, particularly as
it contains the duty of Subjects toward Kings and Rulers. Possibly your
Children and your Servants will be more obedient to you than now they are; when
you have learnt to be more obedient to those whom God has set over you in the
Church or State; Nay, some good and pious women, whilst they are teaching their
Children and Servants obedience to the King, may reflect and learn more
obedience to their own Husbands. Upon that day, let every thing that is under
Government be taught to obey. I do really think it a very great defect in
Parents not to train up their Children in Loyalty (amongst other Principles of
Religion, for that is one head of the Fifth Commandment) not to train them up
in that way of their youth, that they may not forget it when they are old.
Perhaps some Parents had kept their Children from those untimely ends which
their Disloyalty has brought them to, if they had done so. Let us possess our
Families with awful apprehensions of Magistracy, and the necessity of obeying
those whom God has set over us in all lawful things; and this especially upon
every 30th. day of January. For want of this many are undone by scrupling what
they need not, viz. indifferent things, and not scrupling what they ought, viz.
Rebellion.

Is it not to little purpose generally for men to give their Children Learning,
unless they instruct them in Loyalty; for if they are to seek as to that,
where, and in what capacity shall they use their Learning? What shall be the
Sphere of their activity? A little Learning would serve the turn to preach to
so few hearers, as the Law will afford, or allow them, who are not instructed
in obedience. How many Lads of excellent parts and hopes, having sucked in
d^sloyal Principles, as it were with their Mothers milk, have been put to mean
and Mechanic Trades, and forced to live by their hands, who could have lived
by their heads or head-pieces as well as most men, had they not been denied
that Education that should have enabled them so to do.

It might prevent the ruin of thousands if such Texts, as some that I could
name, were preached upon on every 30th. day of January, and handled as they
should be; I mean so, as that the Reason and Consciences of men might feel what
the Minister says, and go away more fixed in Loyalty and Obedience, than they
came thither. Ex. gr. one of the Texts I mean is, Prove. 24.21, 22. My Son, fear
thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change:
For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?
What we translate given to change, some render by the word Rebellibus Rebels,
others by nova Molientibus, such as project or attempt new things, i. e. new
Governments. There are two expressions that bid fair for the sense of those
words, who knows the ruin of them both? 1. Who knows what ruin may fall upon
them who honor not God and the King from them both: i. e. both from God and
the King. 2. Or the words may be rendered, who knows, Sheneicem, i. e. terminum
annorum, the end of their years and days, who are given to change and overturn
Governments, how soon they may perish in their Rebellion, as did Corah and his
Accomplices?

Another Text which I wish that Parents would mind their Children, and Masters
their Servants of upon every 30th, day of January, is Prove. 17.26. To punish
the just is not good, nor to strike Princes for equity. Methinks at the first
hearing the words do sound as if the meaning of them were, That it is not good
to strike Princes, under pretense of bringing them as Delinquents to condign
punishment, of trying them by a pretended Court of Justice, or Process of Law,
as Jezebel tried Naboth. Surely, if a man be either a just man, or a Prince, he
ought not to be stricken by the hand of any man. If just, because he deserves
it not; if a Prince or King, because if you could suppose him to have deserved
it, he is to be reserved to the judgment of the King of Kings, as David said
concerning Saul, 1 Samuel 26.10. The Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come
to die, or he shall descend into battle and perish. The Lord forbid that I
should stretch out my hand against the Lords Anointed. ver. 9. And David said
to Abishat, (who said to him, Let me smite Saul once with a spear to the earth,
and I will not smite him again) for who can stretch forth his hand against the
Lords Anointed and be guiltless? Cause your Children and Servants to read such
Texts as these upon every 30th. day of January. A disloyal Education, I
persuade my self has been the temporal ruin of many a hopeful Person. Let no
Parents convey those groundless prejudices into the minds of their children,
which may prove the seeds of Rebellion in time, at leastwise of Faction and
Sedition, which will ever keep them from ever signifying any thing in this
world, and consign them over to the woeful temptations of want and beggary; and
what if Parents, when they have compassed Sea and Land to make their Children
Froselytes to their own persuasions, have proved but ignes fatui to their own
children, merely misled and misguided them? And whilst they being blind
themselves as to those matters, lead their children as blind as themselves,
both of them fall into the ditch? God secure all conscientious Loyalty and
Obedience in this and all following Ages; and let all good and wise Parents
cause their Childrn to suck it in with their Mothers milk, that such days of
Rebellion, Treason, Perjury, Sacrilege, and Murder, as our eyes have seen,
may never return upon us again.

Tell your Children that in such a year begun a Civil War in England, which
ended in the murdering, the barbarous murdering of a good King; say that, and
you need say no more to make any conscientious person tremble at the thought of
another Civil War, o^ of contributing thereunto. Let the murder of the King be
exposed to deter all after-ages from ever thirsting more after the blood of
Kings, or at leastwise daring to gratify and quench that their thirst, etc.

If Ministers will please to lay aside all invective language (if any be prone
thereunto, of which I can charge no man particularly) upon each 30th. day of
January, and whatsoever may give people just occasion to say they railed in the
Pulpit, using as (one expresses it) soft words and hard Arguments, whereby to
convince all gainsayers, that the putting of the late King to death, was an
action monstrously wicked and an unaccountable sin to God or men: and if people
will be so obedient to Authority, and so true to themselves, as to attend
public preaching and prayer on that day, the Anniversary Fast, may with the
blessing of of God, turn to a very good account, namely, of securing the Peace
and Safety of the Nation, and of the respective Kings of England; and
particularly of his gracious Majesty that now is, for ever after. Let us
Ministers tell the people on that day how just and righteous God is, how God is
known by the Judgments which he executes, the wicked being taken in their own
snare, and in the pit which they dug for others; how he causes men's sins to
find them out, and long forborne Murder and Regicides, to pursue men like
Bloodhounds; how he brings the wheel upon ungodly men after long-forbearance,
how though he be long-suffering, yet not ever-suffering; and when he makes
inquisition for blood, he will not forget the Blood of Kings, or suffer the
shedding of Royal blood to go unpunished.

Mind your people how dangerous the beginnings of public Disturbances and
Changes are, even like sparks of fire in the midst of a Magazine of Gunpowder,
and may prove of as dangerous consequence. When a King and his people are once
ing aged against each other in a War, ten to one but the issue will be, either
he will hang them if he have the better of it, or they will behead him if the
day be theirs. Think of Solomon's words, Prove. 17.14. The beginning of strife is
as when one lets out waters, therefore leave off contention before it be
meddled with. Think also of the words of St. James, Jam. 3.5. Behold how great a
matter a little fire kindles.

Labor on that day especially to bring one French fashion into England, viz. to
cause the people of England to love and honor their King, as universally as
the people of France are said to do, whose humor (and it is a very good one)
is this (as I am inform^d) viz. If their King enjoy great renown and
prosperity, if he be victorious and successful, a little matter else will
content them, they are content with any thing, looking upon their happiness as
bound up in his; and that if he be happy, they ought not to think themselves
miserable.

A 30th. of January is as good and suitable a day as can be to exhort the
people, as St. Paul does, 1 Timothy 1.1, 2. That not only supplications, prayers,
and intercessions, but also giving of Thanks, (...), be made for Kings and for
all that are in Authority; and in order thereunto, to make them sensible how
many and great mercies, benefits, and privileges they enjoy under the
Government of his Majesty that now is. Does not the blood and spirit of Justice
(if I may so call it) freely and uninterruptedly circulate in all the veins of
this Nation? Was there ever less complaint of Maladministration in public
Courts than has been ever since his Majesty's return? What great numbers are
there of able Lawyers, Judges, Sergeants, and others Learned in the Law? And
possibly as many Gentlemen of honesty and integrity as have been known of that
Profession in any one Age. How well furnished are both the Universities with
good Scholars and good men (though it cannot be expected they should all be
such) especially Masters and Fellows of Colleges. And that I may instance in
every of the Liberal and Learned Professions. How many Learned Physicians are
there in England, far surpassing the number of Learned men of that Profession,
it may be, in any part of Europe (for so I have heard.) Nay, how many scores of
Pious and Learned Divines are there at this day in England? (doubtless in no
age all Divines were such) and amongst them how many painful and excellent
Preachers, acurate Disputants, noble champions for the Protestant Religion,
mighty Goliahs to encounter the greatest Leviathan's, and as rational
clear-headed enemies to Atheism, Enthusiasme and Nonserse as ever drew sword
against those Enemies.

I was about to fay, If God had given us leave to bespeak a King after our own
hearts, or made one on purpose for us, such as we desired, he could not in
sundry respects, have excelled what he now is: Ex. gr.

1. In point of Mercy and Benignity; I think he has forgiven more than any King
did before him, or may do after him; a more unsanguinary Prince never was in
the world. Blame him not if he exact that Obedience, which is due to him; but
he cares as little for Sacrifice as ever King did, and as small a matter has
atoned him, as ever did atone any Prince so provoked and injured as he has
been. If he has not fed his enemies when he saw them hungry, and clothed them
when they were naked (many men that were his enemies both in war and otherwise)
never did any man do it.

2. In point of Peaceableness, for all know him to be the true Grandchild of
King King James. He is none of those that delight in War, and are ever and anon
immersing their Subjects in Seas of Blood. He loves not to quarrel his
Neighbors round about him, and to Hector them into War, and to give up his
people to the Sword, to eat their flesh, and drink their blood; but had rather
have them sit under there vines and under their fig trees, none making them
afraid.

3. If Humility and Condescension be an ornament to a Prince, and the advantage
of his Subjects, I am much deceived, if his Majesty does no abound therein; and
yet reserveth to himself the Majesty and Greatness which does become his place:
What Prince in the world more affable, more accessible than he?

4. If it be a mercy to have a wise Prince, who understands his own business
(as doubtless it is) it is well known by this time of day that he is one: none
but a wise Pilot could steer safely in so great storms as his Majesty has been
in, and preserve a Ship from being lost, sailing amongst so many Rocks, and
Shelves, and Sands, as he has done.

The wisdom of his Grandfather King James, as being one of the greatest Royal
Scholars that ever was, began early to appear; for the warm Sun of so literate
an Education quickly brought him to maturity. But the wisdom of King Charles
the Martyr did then most gloriously shine out, when he himself was under a
cloud of Adversity, and was like Music, which makes the sweetest melody upon
the waters. So did his Piety and Wisdom upon the waters of Affliction. As a man
may bebold the Sun in a shady pit or well, better than above ground, for there
is no reflection from the earth to divert our eyes: So they who beheld King
Charles the First in the deep pit or well of Affliction, saw his wisdom to
greater advantage than it was taken notice of before, and in him that Maxim
verified, viz. Vexatio dat intellectum. Quite contrary it happened to his Majesty
that now is (whom God bless for ever.) In the years of his Adversity, his
wisdom and other excellencies were better known to Foreiners than to us his
natural Subjects: for that he was then upon force-put, a stranger to his own
Country and Kingdoms, and evilminded men took the advantage of his Exile and
absence to represent him as they pleased. But since his Return we have had as
much assurance as we need to wish of the greatness and goodness of his Princely
Intellectuals, of his being endowed with excellent natural parts (which brings
to mind a Scotch Proverb, viz. That one inch of Mother-wit (meaning natural
ingenuity) is better than an ell of Clergy. (And those natural parts improved
and exalted by foreign Travel, converse with all sorts of men. Experience both
of Adversity and Prosperity, dispatch of business for many years together, the
constant and assistance of wise Counselors, and the advantage of his great
office and Dignity;) and you know by how much higher any man stands, by so
much farther off can he see. So that now I know no man can question whether he
has great fitness and skill for the business and purposes of a King, great
understanding how to govern in all points, and better skill to manage a
Scepter, than any man who has not a Scepter to manage.

5. If it be yet a further mercy or happiness to a people to have a King that
is active or nimble, not dull or sluggish; so is he: I had almost said, that
his Majesty seems to be as much an Vbiquitary when he pleases, i.e. here, and
there, and every where (as his Affairs require his presence) as any man that
wears a body. I had almost said, he has not only a body so agile and active,
as if it were a Soul; but also a Soul so active, as if it were an Angel, rather
than the Soul of a mortal man.

6. Is not that King a great mercy and blessing under whom his Subjects do live
as easily, as freely, and as much like men, as any Subjects in the world do?
Where more liberty, more peace, more plenty than amongst English men? who by
their Representatives in Parliament may be said to carry the purse at their
Girdles, whilst his Majesty carries the Sword by his side. Go but over Sea to
other parts of Europe, or of the world, and when you see how it fares with
Subjects almost every where else, what mere Slaves they are in comparison of
Englishmen, you will look upon England as the most temperate Climate that any
Subjects do live in; and think with your selves that if there were but a Bridge
betwixt England and other parts of the world, all Subjects would choose to come
and live here: (as is said in another case.) Verily, the Subjects of England
are little Princes to what the Subjects are in other parts; and to them I may
apply those words of the Poet, Foelices nimium sua si bona norant. We are too
too happy, if we did but know it. If there be at this day a Canaan upon earth
like that of old flowing with milk and honey, I mean, abounding with all manner
of good things, England is one, not for Bodies only, but for Souls also. In
England God is known, and his Name great in England; he has not dealt so with
every Nation, nor have they known his Statutes as we have done. Why then hear
we such bleating of the sheep, and such lowing of the oxen? Why such murmuring
and complaining, and not rather serving God with cheerfulness in the midst of
all the good things which we have in England. Is it not a great wonder that we
should be the most happy of all people, and yet the least contented, the least
thankful?

If it be a happiness to a trading people to have a King that makes it his
business to promote the Trade and Traffic of his people, we have such a one?
I could safely produce a person of great worth and eminency, and of as much
skill in Merchandise possibly as most men in the world, who has told me time
after time, bona fide, that no Prince, to the best of his observation, was ever
so much concerned for the good of Trade or had more denied himself for the
advancement thereof, than his Majesty that now is has done? which I doubt not
but he is ready to demonstrate to every rational man. But if after all this
Trading be but dead,, as that is the great complaint, and the very cardo
controversiae, and hinc illae lachrymae, may not his Majesty say to his people,
Am I in Gods stead? If the Lord help ye not, in that point (as the King said to
the woman of Samaria, that cried to him for bread in the time of famine?) How
should I help you? So it fares with many private Families, they are but poor,
and yet the Master of the Family is a man of double diligence, providence,
forecast, rises early, and eats the bread of carefulness. Is it just and equal
that his Children and Servants should be ready to stone him because he does not
grow rich upon all his labors: Nay, it is as God pleases for that matter;
witness Deuteronomy. 8.18. Thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that
gives thee power to get wealth. If he that is poor in spite of all his
diligence and care, had been careless and slothful, possibly his Family had
been starved, which now is only not rich: So had we not had a Prince who had
been such a Nursing-Father to Trade, as his present Majesty is, it may be by
this time there had been no Trade at all, or next to none.

8ly. If Kings be Defenders of the Ancient, Catholic, Apostolic Faith, The
faith once delivered to the Churches, of the true Christian Protestant
Religion, have we not cause to bless God for them as such? And such an one is
he whom God has set over us. Is not the Protestant Religion defended by him?
Are not Protestants by him defended and protected in the public, open, and
free exercise of their Religion? So as Papists are not (who fly about like Bats
rather than otherwise) Are not all the Preferments of the Church bestowed upon
the Protestant Divines? have not they all the Archbishopricks, Bishoprics,
Deaneries, Prebends, Masterships of Colleges, etc. amongst them? Are not good
and learned Books against Popery licensed from time to time, and Popish Books
suppressed whether they come from beyond Sea, or endeavor to get out of our
English Presses? Are not all public Ordinations, Administration of Sacraments,
and other Church-Offices dispensed after the manner of Protestants? Are not the
Articles of the Church of England defended by his Majesty, and are not they all
purely Frotestant? Those things considered, who can deny his Majesty to be
really a Defender of the Faith? And why should any man go about to clip his
Title, any more than he dare to clip his Coin? May he not be truly a Defender
of the Faith, though he be no Defender of Presbytery, either Scotch or English,
nor yet of Independency, nor of Anabaptism, nor of Quakerism, nor of
Fifth-Monarchism? I say, though he be no Defender of any of them in the
Abstract (but only of their persons in the Concrete, who are of those
persuasions) I say, he may be a Defender of the Faith nevertheless, and so he
is, for none of these are the Faith: These are but Mint, Annise, and Cummin in
respect of the great things of Religion, the Magnalia Dei, the two Tables of
the Law, of which he is Keeper. Those are but the arbitrary Modes, Habits, and
Dresses of Religion. Clothes do not belong to the essence of a man. A man is a
man to all intents and purposes, whether he wear a Cloak or a Coat, or neither,
or both. Christianity is the same thing in all good men, whether they wear
Gowns or no Gowns, Cassocks or no Cassocks, and who are called either
Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, or whatsoever else. So long as the
essentials, Vitals and Fundamentals of Religion are guarded by the Laws of
England, and the vigilant care of his Majesty, what becomes of those little
airy vehicles of disciplinary names, divisions, and distinctions is the least
thing of a thousand. For so long as a man lays no other foundation than that
which God has laid, viz. Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. building upon him by
faith, love, and obedience, if he should choose besides Gold, and silver, and
precious stones, to build upon the foundation wood, hay, and stubble, that his
superstructure would be burnt, yet himself should certainly be saved. If a man
may go to heaven out of the Church of England, as well, yea, more readily than
from Geneva or Amsterdam, and from under the Discipline of any of those places,
let him look to it that he be a good Christian, exercising himself to have a
Conscience void of offense toward God and men; one that worshippeth God in the
spirit, rejoices in Christ Jesus, and has no confidence in the flesh, as it is
Phil. 3.3. and my Soul for his, having thus his fruit unto holiness, his end
will be everlasting life. So a man come to Heaven at last, fighting a good
fight, finishing a good course, and having kept the faith ( i. e. having been
true to the great Doctrine and Rules of Christian Religion defended by the
Church of England, and his Majesty more especially, the Supreme Governor
thereof under God) by a sincere life and practice thereof, I say, if a man
persevering thus to do, come to Heaven at last, whether he come in the Kings
high way (as I may call it) I mean, in the more eminent and beaten Road of
Episcopacy, or in the more private, narrow, and unfrequented paths, the matter
is not great. But I make account no man can ever come there, who shall live and
dye an incourager of known Schism in others (which is as truly a damning work
of the flesh, as Adultery or Murder) or a wilful allower of it in himself.

It Is no complement, much less flattery or blasphemy, to call him Defender of
the Faith, by whom as much of Religion as is necessary to Salvation is
defended, or rather we his Subjects in the free and safe exercise thereof,
though the same favor be not shown to those who turn aside from the only
established Discipline (for but one Discipline can be established in one place)
as to those who conform thereunto. If a man travel upon the Kings high way
betwixt Sun and Sun, and be robbed, he may sue and recover his Money: but so may
not he that travelleth in By-roads, or cross the Country, or over hedges and
ditches. I say, if any man rob them that shall choose to travel in such by,
obscure, and unguarded paths, no amends is made him; only if he chance to be
killed or murdered in any wood or wilderness, the Law will lay hold on him that
did it. Let who will govern, or the Government be what it will be, they who
conform thereunto will always find more regard and countenance than those who
do not, though others may be tolerated and protected also. And so much of our
Kings being Defender of the Faith, truly and properly so called, upon account
whereof we have cause to bless God for him.

9thly. We have cause to give thanks to God for those Kings, by and under whom
all the great ends of Government are provided for, and therefore for his
Majesty that now is. By him all the great ends of Government are provided for.
What are they, but in two words, Religion and Property? How Religion ot the
preservation thereof, and our protection in the profession and practice thereof
are provided for, I showed under the 8th, and last head. It Is manifest that
care is taken that we may lead a quiet and peaceble life in all godliness and
honesty, as it is 1 Timothy 2.2. Also how Property is secured to us, may be
gathered abundantly out of the formentioned particulars. Now if you have any
thing more to expect from a King, declare what it is: For I confess I know
nothing else that there is for him to do as a King for us, or for us as his
Subjects to expect.

10thly, and lastly, I do solemnly appeal to the discontented people of the
Nation, and to those whose mouths are most full of complaints; I say, I appeal
to them in two cases, which I shall propound in the two following Questions. 1.
Quest. If you meet with less misery, enjoy more mercy under his Majesty that
now is, than ye did expect or look for, have you not cause to bless God for
him? Quest. 2. Do you not really meet with less misery and more mercy under his
Majesty that now is, than you thought you should have done? How often have I
heard many that were Parliamenteers say, If ever the King were restored they
should not be left worth a morsel of bread, there would be no being for them
then in England, he would make the Land too hot for them, and all such as they.
They had as good buy Bishops, or Deans and Chapters Lands as not, for if a
change came, they should as certainly lose their Lands of Inheritance, and what
they got by their own labor, and was as free as any in the world, as Kings and
Bishops Lands, if they intended to buy them. I know that many did look upon the
King's return as the giving up the Ghost of all their joys and comforts,
possessions and enjoyments. But did it prove so? Have not many of them seen as
good days as ever they saw before? Where is the Popery you prophesied of, that
would come in presently? For you saw it flying toward us, as upon the wings of
the wind? Where has been the bloody Persecution, the Marian-days which your
minds boded to you? Have you not since that seen days of Grace and Peace, and
of the Son of man? Is the Ark taken, as you thought it would be? Is God gone?
Is the Glory departed? Is the Gospel extinguished? and the Sun set as it were
at Noon day, as you fancied it would be? O leave your dreaming of Dreams, and
divining of Divinations; away with those hypocondriack vapors which turn to
new Light and Prophecy. Silence and slight your mistaken fancies: Your eyes yet
see your Teachers, and your ears hear them. Now, even now, there is an accepted
time, a day of Salvation. You were worse scared than hurt with the Alarm of a
King: Such is not the manner of the King that rules over us, as is described 1 Samuel 8.9. ours is no such King. Are not your Estates (all but those that were
ravished from the Church or State) continued with you? Is not the Law open and
ready to defend you and yours if required, as much as any other of the Kings
Subjects? If you be as quiet, may you not live as quietly as any people in
England? To allude to that Text, Psalm. 126.1. When the Lord turned again the
Captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream.

Are you not like men and women in a dream to see your selves in so good a
plight and posture as you never expected to have been if God restored the King?
Had God given you a new Law of thankfulfulness upon condition it should have
been so well with you as now it is, would you not have accepted it with all
your hearts upon those terms? If God has been better to you than his word or
promise, your obligation is so much the greater.

Learn we then to bless God for our good King, to love, honor, and obey him;
and let us cry out with the man after God's own heart. Psalm. 118, 28. God is
the Lord which has showed us light, bind the Sacrifice with cords, even to the
horns of the Altar. ver. 29. O give thanks to the Lord, for he is good, for his
mercy endures for ever.

Now, Reader, let thine own invention tell thee how these heads may be further
enlarged, and upon what other heads it may be most proper for thee to
discourse, either in public or private upon a 30th. day of January sacred to
the Memory of King Charles the first his Martyrdom.

I will detain thee no longer, than whilst I have made a little enquiry into
one great Mystery, and resolved one perplexing Question, which is this: Quest.
If the murdering of the late King were so great a sin as I have deciphereed it
to be, How comes it to pass that none of all his Judges (one excepted, who by
common fame is presumed to be a man of more Conscience and Religion than the
rest) no not of those who were executed for it, were ever, for ought I heard,
learn to confess and bewail what they had done, but rather to carry and brave
it out with such confidence and seeming innocence as the adulterous woman,
Prove. 30.20. of whom Solomon thus speaks: She eats and wipeth her mouth, and
says I have done no wickedness. This their confidence has cast such a mist
before the eyes of some people, and so perverted their judgments, as to make
them think there was nothing amiss in what they did, yea, to be almost
persuaded, that they did God good service in it, and quitted themselves like
Phineas, who stood up and executed judgment, and it was accounted to him for
righteusness. Answ. But oh the mistakes of men! Oh the false Glosses which
dazzle the eyes of poor filly mortals! Oh the common fallacy which imposes upon
the world, viz. Non causa pro causa! They must needs have had the most false
and flattering Consciences, the most deceitful hearts that ever men had, if
ever they presumed to tell them they had done well, or bid them, when taking
their Viaticum, or last repast, to eat their bread with joy, and drink their
wine with a merry heart, for God accepted their work, or that with such a
sacrifice as that God was well pleased. Had an Israelite instead of sacrificing
a Lamb, cut off a dogs neck, or offered Swines blood for an oblation to God, or
blessed an Idol instead of burning incense, or slain a man instead of killing
of an Ox, as God expresses in Ifa. 66.3. he might as well have promised
himself Gods acceptance thereof, and his smelling a sweet savor of rest from
thence, as those Murderers of an excellent King could do of that bloody
barbarous Sacrifice which they had prepared; to which I may aptly apply those
words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.10. But I say, the things which the Gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils and not to God. No drink offering ever
cheered the heart of Devils and wicked men, so well (according to Judge. 9.13.)
as did that of Royal Blood. If ever there were mirth in Hell, surely it was
upon that day. That was such a Hecatomb, as the infernal Fiends never had a
greater offered to them; never a Feast of more fat things sacrificed to their
malice.

That they who were the Actors in this bloody Tragedy were no more sensible of
what they had done, might spring from two causes. 1. Because the sin, being so
great and horrid as it was, might well bring a kind of Apoplexy upon their
Consciences, and in some such apoplectick Fit, they, or some of them, seemed to
dye. For great sins, as well as great sorrows, and blows are apt to stun and
stupifie, as I proved before. 2. Because there were many of them that were
concerned in it, and it might seem to them to be in this as in other cases,
viz. That many hands make light work. It Is a very true and common observation,
that when a great many men join together, when they go as it were in herds and
droves, they do often venture upon doing of those things by consent, which were
they invited to do alone, they would be ready to say as he, Is thy Servant a
dead dog, that I should do this thing? One would think men were deceived with
some such idle fallacy as this, viz. That if an hundred men join together in
one Murder, or other high act of Injustice or Dishonesty, every one of them
were but the hundredth part of a Murderer; as if multorum manibus grande
levatur onus, were a Rule that held in this case, but as thus applied, it is a
very great mistake: For what our Law says is consonant to right Reason, viz.
That in murder no man is mere accessory, but all are principals and obnoxious
to death. Shall I add a third. This their sin was not so universally gone
before to judgment, as is a plain ordinary Murder, because it was colored
over with a pretense of Law and Justice, there were a great many that were
ready not only to vindicate but applaud it; the mask was not quite taken off
from it, nor the vail of darkness from the hearts of all the Spectators. This
with a good strong Cordial, a sufficient opiate, and a seared Conscience, and
an ambition to set a good face upon what they had done, to make the best of a
bad market, to dye like men and Soldiers, and those that some would not doubt
to Canonize for Saints, even for the sake of their Regicide (could they but
keep their own counsel, by dying such in point of Resolution and seeming
Assurance) those with some other things I could name, might be the true causes
why they did or seemed to die without the least remorse for what they had done.
But far be it from us to think the better, or more favorably of that sin, the
committers whereof did or seemed to dye without repentance.

Now what I have written touching this matter, I call Heaven to witness, did
not spring from any hatred that I do, or ever did bear to the persons of them,
or theirs who had the infamous honor, or seeming honor, but eternal infamy of
being the King's Judges; but from detestation of the fact, and a true desire
that the like may be prevented for time to come; and whereas it is commonly
said, that some do love Treason but always hate the Traitors; I by a reverse,
do profess my self to have heartily pitied the persons of those Traitors, to
have true compassion and good will to their innocent Relations that yet survive
them; but mean time from my heart to abhor and detest that and all other
Treason.

Did I say that as much as I hate Treason, I have heartily pitied and do pity
the Regicides, I do not mean that I think it any pity, that being what they
were, they should be brought to an untimely end, to an ignominious death, that
I thought them too good to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, who had been so
vile as to behead their King; all that they suffered in that nature was far
less than they deserved. But I do really pity them in relation to their poor
Souls: For I wish from my heart, that all men might be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth; and am not willing if I could help it) that any should
perish everlastingly: I wish no man so ill as to wish him in hell, or that he
might die in his sins, that the bottomless pit might open its mouth and swallow
him up. Sure I am, the Regicides did run as great a risk and bid as fair for
Hell and Damnation as men could do by any one action, their fact being so
transcendently and complicatedly wicked and abominable as it was. Had they
courted Hell, and been fond of Damnation, what could they have done more to
have enjoyed it, than to bain their own Souls, as much as in them lay, by an
eternal Poison compounded of all sorts of deadly Ingredients, one of which
might seem sufficient to effect the work in spite of an Antidote. The great
compounded Antidotes, Treacle, etc. do hardly consist of more Alexipharmacal
Ingredients than this fact of theirs did of deleterious, and deadly things (or
shall I call them damnable Ingredients.)

For first, Is Perjury a damning sin, or is it not? If not, what mean these
words of St. James, Jac. 5.12. Above all things swear not, neither by the
Heaven nor by the Earth, nor by any other Oath, but let your yea be yea, and
your nay nay, lest you fall into condemnation. Now in these words swearing, but
vainly and frivolously, and that but by Heaven or Earth, or other Creatures,
seems to be threatened with damnation; and is it not far worse and more damnable
to swear falsely, and that by the Name of God, than to swear frivolously by the
Name of any Creature? yet even the later of those does St. James deprecate with
the most earnest obtestation: Above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither
by Heaven, etc. 2. Is there no damnableness in Rebellion think you? No danger
that Rebellion should damn any man? Is that a venial and no mortal sin? Surely
no: Witness the words of the Apostle; Romans 13.2. Whosoever resists the
powers, resists the Ordinances of God, and they that resist them, receive to
themselves damnation. Now in this case there was resisting unto blood.

3. Was no man ever damned for Treason? What think you of Judas who was a
Traitor to his Master and Savior; of whom the Scripture says, It had been
good for him that he had never been born. If he went to Heaven, if he were not
damned, it was well for him that ever he was born: therefore those words do
intimate that he was damned.

4. Can Sacrilege damn no man? Is not that of its self a damnable sin? Surely
it is. For 1. Sacrilege is Theft, and the highest sort of Theft: For will a
man rob God? says Malachy. Now Thieves are brought into the Muster-rolls of
persons that must be damned. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,
nor thieves, etc. It is well if Ananias and Saphira feel it not to their
sorrow, that Sacrilege can damn Souls. In Zech. 5.3. we read of stealing and
swearing, as things each or either of which will bring men under the
flying-role, or curse of God. This is the curse that goes forth over the face
of the whole earth: for every one that steals shall be cut off as on this
side, according to it. I will bring it forth, says the Lord, and it shall
enter into the house of the thief, and of him that swears falsely by by my
Name: and shall remain in the midst of his house, and it shall consume it, with
the timber thereof, and the stones thereof, ver. 4. Against whom but Thieves
and Robbers is that threatening denounced Hab. 2.11. The stone shall cry out of
the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it, (applied to the
unsatiable Chaldeans.) Now in Sacrilege there seems to be a complication of
Theft and Perjury, because it is a Robbing of God of that which was due to him
by a Vow, or that men have sworn (for a Vow and an Oath come much what to one)
that they will give to God. So was the case of Ananias and Saphira. Indeed the
Sacrilege of some men is their robbing of God, not of what they themselves,
but of that which others have made God's by a Vow. Now even they do fall under
a horrible curse or execration. Things given or devoted unto God, called (...),
because they are devoted to God, with the accursing of them which should
convert them to their own use; and so by a translated sense, the word signifies
a perpetual separation from Christ. The Rabbis say of Votum cherem (now the
Hebrew word cherem, answers to the Greek word (...), as face to face in a
glass) est maximum votum. But to hasten.

5ly. Is Murder, wilful murder a damnable sin? If not, why says St. John, Ye
know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him; i. e. has any actual
aptitude or capacity to enter into Heaven. Now if the murdering of any man, be
he good or bad, high or low, superior or inferior, be a damnable sin, sure I
am the murdering of an innocent good man, yea, of a King, a good King, which
are great aggravations, must be so too. Yea, if the wilful murdering of any
one man expose to damnation, much more needs must the murdering of many men at
once.

Now the Regicides may be said to have been all of them murderers each of
other, because they did abet and encourage each other in and unto the murder
of the King, in which was included their own consequentially. If there were
forty of them, each of them was guilty of the death of forty, not the forty
only guilty of the death of one man viz. the King; but each of them of forty
murders, viz. each of other; for that they strengthened each others hands in
and unto the work.

Again, If naked Murder be a damnable sin, as has been proved, that murder
which is clothed with barbarous and inhumane circumstances must needs be so
much more. In Judge. 19.25. we read of a Levites Concubine not only killed, but
with circumstances that were very barbarous, viz. forced to death by the
Benjamites dwelling in Gibeah, Chap. 20.5. But what dreadful things ensued,
ver. 6. I (says the Levite) took my Concubine, and cut her in pieces and sent
her through all Israel, for they have committed lewdness and folly in Israel.
The product of this was what we read, Judge. 20.34, 35. And there came up
against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and the battle was
sore. And the Lord smote Benjamin before Israel, and the children of Israel
destroyed of the Benjamites that day twenty and four thousand, and an hundred
men, all these drew the sword, or were men of valor, as is said, ver. 44.
Though wilful murder it self, clothed with the most extenuating circumstances
be a great sin; yet the barbarous circumstances wherewith it may be clothed,
may make it twice so great a sin as otherwise it had been, and much more expose
it to the Divine vengeance, as appears by the instance aforesaid. But to
proceed,

6thly. Is Hypocrisy a damning sin or not? It must needs be so, because Hell,
or the place of weeping and gnashing of teeth, is called a portion with the
Hypocrite, Matthew. 24.51. intimating that Tophet was prepared of old as much for
Hypocrites as for any sort of men. Does not our Savior let fly as many Vae's,
or Woes against Hypocrites, as against any sort of men, Mat. 25.14, 15, 16, 23,
25, 27, 29. and does he not utter those dreadful words in the close, ver. 33.
Ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers; how can ye escape the damnation of hell?
Now with what direful circumstances of Hypocrisy the late King's death was
managed, I have told you before.

7thly. If it be a mortal damning sin to murder but one man, especially if a
King, a Monarch, or any thing so great, is it not more, so to murder a whole
Kingdom, Country and Monarchy at once? The whole species of Monarchy is much
more than one individual Kingdom or Monarchy. Now I have showed before that was
aimed at in putting the King to death, which was not only Monarchicidium, but
designed to issue in Monarchiaecidium, or in the ruin of all Monarchy.

8thly. Is it not a horrid and damning sin to subvert and destroy the good and
necessary Laws of a Nation all at once? Yea. Not the Laws only, but also the
very Legislative Power, or the Power of making more good Laws, as the matter
should require? If they who resist (or disobey) the powers that are, shall
receive damnation, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 13.2. What will become of them,
who in effect destroy and disanul all the Laws of a Nation at once, and all the
Lawmakers? Such were the Regicides. For when there was no King in England
armed with power, no new Laws could be made, nor the old ones executed neither
Legally; for who but a King has power to give Commission to Judges and other
great Instruments of the Law upon all emergent occasions, etc? What the Apostle
says of the Law of God, viz. The Law is good if a man use it lawfully; is true
of the Law of England, it is good if it be used lawfully or legally; but how
could that be done when there was no King in being?

9thly. Is it not a damning sin for a man to murder himself, as did Judas,
Ahitophel, etc? And did not they murder themselves who murdered the King? For
besides that they were dead men in the Eye of the Law, the first moment they
did or attempted it; did it not cost most of them their lives, and expose them
to an untimely and shameful death, though no punishment could be so shameful as
was their crime.

10thly and lastly. Is Deicidium, or striking at the life of God himself a
damning sin? If that will not damn men without great repentance what will? The
murdering of earthly Kings in Person, is it not a kind of murdering the King
of Kings in Effigy? For his Stamp and Inscription they bear, and from thence
are called gods in Scripture frequently; not that they are equal to the true
and living God, yea, not but that they shall die like men, but because in point
of Power and Authority, of Honor and Majesty they do resemble God much more
than Subjects do. Now as he that should spit upon the Kings Coin or Picture
would be dealt with as one that offered an affront and indignity to his Person,
and were highly disaffected to him, so in this case. Now all those Soul-damning
sins that I have mentioned, being in the womb of that one sin, viz. the
murdering of the late King, let the Reader judge whether the Regicides did not
take as direct a course to damn their own Souls as men could take? And whether
if any shall hereafter attempt to do the same thing to his Majesty that now is,
as they did to his Father (which God forbid) it will not prove as ready and
certain a course not only to throw away their corporal lives with ignominy, but
also to damn their Souls, and the Souls of their Confederates, as any that men
could take.

I am hardened against those that shall say (if any such there be) That this was
done in favor of Religion, and for the preservation thereof in power and
purity; by a Story which a noted Parliament Man, and Purchaser of the revenues
of a Bishopric, told me about the year 1648. Whereas (says he) it is given
out that all the change which has been made has been in order to the
preservation and Reformation of Religion, there is no such thing. For (said he)
had there been Preferments enough in Church and State wherewith to have
gratified all men of parts and interest, who were ambitious of them, I do
assure you, there had been no war. He was as capable of knowing what he said,
as any man could be, being at that time a Member of Parliament, and a great man
amongst them, though more plain-hearted than some others were.

The discoveries which I have made of notorious Hypocrisy and blasphemous
pretenses to God and Religion, whilst men did uti Deo at fruantur mundo, i. e.
use God that they might enjoy the world, together with the little difference,
which I could ever discern betwixt the conversations of those that called
themselves the Godly Party save in a few instances, here and there one, etc.)
and of them whom they censured as carnal and ungodly, or but moral people at
the best (for that the morality of some of them did much outstrip their own)
has put me out of conceit with what had wont to be called The Good Old Cause,
more than any thing else has done. And then to see that the Chieftains and
greatest Bigots of, and for the good old Cause (as they called it) could
swallow such a Camel as was the murdering of the King; yea, be themselves some
of the Camels that murdered him, or caused him to be murdered, whilst they
seemed to strain at mere Gnats, could say, This is the heir, come, let us kill
him, and the inheritance shall be ours. Those I say, are the things which have
made me think cheaply of those times, those men, and their pretensions, to
suspect (if not more than so) a very grand cheat and a bottomless-pit of
worldly interest and carnal design in and under all those things, and to wish
heartily, that the Church and State might always continue as now it is, much
rather than to fall back again into the hands of such Tinker-like Reformers, as
were in those days (making ten holes where they mended one) and be re-invaded
by hypocritical Usurpation, Sacrilege, Enthusiasme, and Confusion. If I know
any thing of my own heart, I do at this very day sincerely love every body that
I know or think to be truly good (and possibly my charity is as large as most
men's, and my censoriousness as little) but as for those who make the highest
pretenses to Religion, and seem to be Piety-like Calomelanos, as Physicians
call it, six or 12 times sublimed; or like the Pharisees of old, who said to
other men, Stand off, I am holier than thou; who rather blaze and blare like
great Comets, than shine like Stars in the Firmament of Religion; if I find
them playing the Knaves, becoming the Ringleaders of Murder, embrewing their
hands in Royal blood; under pretense of abhorring Idols committing Sacrilege,
and bringing all to confusion, and under color of Reforming Church and State,
to design nothing but the feathering of their own Nests, getting wealth and
power into their own hands per fas and nefas, overturning, overturning,
overturning, till they themselves, whose right it is not come and take all; and
when they have done all, entitling God and Religion to all their Villainies:
(like those with whom the great God does thus expostulate, Jer. 7.9. Will ye
steal, murder, and commit Adultery, and swear falsely, and come and stand before
me in this House, and say, we are delivered to do all these abominations? etc.)
I say, the people to whom this Character is due, whose Inscription this is, are
to my Soul (as one calls it) the firstborn of Abominations.

Now after all that has been said of the exceeding sinfulness of their bloody
fact, who were the Murderers of the late King and of the woeful hazard which
their precious and immortal Souls did incur thereby, give me leave to hope,
that if the same opportunities should ever come again (which God forbid) i. e.
if ever the now dissenting people of England should have so puissant an Army at
their back as then they had, and so subtle, skilful, and resolute a General to
conduct them, and so many covetous people at their heels, waiting to enrich
themselves by the spoil of the Kings and Churches Lands (so dividing the Lions
skin when once he were dead) from a real dread of thereby plunging themselves
into everlasting flames, they would rather burn at a stake, than have their
hands in such another business.

To shut up all, I have been induced to insist so long upon the heinousness and
danger of their sin who put the King to death, because a through belief, and due
consideration of what I have said (and I do aver it is all true) might and
would in my opinion, be a very great security against all public Mutinies,
Insurrections, and Civil Wars hereafter. For if the people of England did
universally, and all as one man dread the thoughts of Regicide, as of a sin
next to that which is unpardonable, there would be no cause to fear Rebellion;
for then would men be governed and over-awed by this Dilemna: If the King
against whom we rebel shall always keep his head, we shall lose our lives first
or last; but if he lose his head by our means and contrivances, we shall be in
great danger to lose our Souls, which is worse. For what will it profit a man
to gain the whole world, and to lose his own Soul?

FINIS.

