THE Christian-Quaker, Distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator.

In FIVE PARTS.

WHEREIN, RELIGIOUS DIFFERNCES amongst the People termed in Derision, Quakers
are treated on.

GEORGE FOX, one (at least, if not the chief) reputed Author thereof, is
detected.

DOCTRINES of TRUTH owned by the Children of Light, (and cleared from
Objections) are laid down, according to Holy Scriptures, and Revelation of the
Spirit.

By WILLIAM ROGERS, on behalf of himself and other Friends in Truth concerned.

Eccles. 2.9. There is no new Thing under the Sun.

Gal. 2.11. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the Face,
because he was to be Blamed.

LONDON, PRINTED in the Year, 1680.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT was the Saying of Christ, As I Hear, I Judge. I hope, that Christ's Example
in that Case, will be such a Bond on every one that may concern themselves
touching this Treatise, as that I may have no just Occasion, to reflect on any
Christian-Professor; even as Nicodemus, a Pharisee, once did, on those of his
own Sect; Joh. 7.51.
Does our Law Judge any Man, before it Hear him? In Confidence, that this
Treatise may meet with so much Justice, at least from True (if not from all
Pretended) Friends, it is now brought to Light. And though some amongst the
People, termed (in Derision) Quakers, appearing to stand as Neuters in the
present Controversy amongst them, (not knowing the Christian and Orderly
Proceeding of others) may conclude, That it is an Untimely Birth: Yet let such
know, that the Moderation of those, who are concerned in the Publication
hereof, has for many Years past been manifested, Note, The Divisions amongst
the People called Quakers, have been at least Eight Years increasing to the
Height they now are at.
by endeavoring as much as in them did lie, (as hereafter will more largely
appear) that those small Differences, which at first seemed but like unto
little Sparks, might not arise unto so great a Flame, as they now are. And were
it not so, that many Meetings of the said People, for the Worship of God, in
diverse Parts of the Nation, have been entertained with frequent Contention and
Opposition; and in particular, that both Priest, Professor, and Profane have
become Eye and Ear-Witnesses, of such Rude and Unchristian-like Deportments; as
of late have been mafested, by many speaking at once in their Publick-Meeting,
within the City of Bristol, before many Hundreds; by which the Meeters have
been reputed as in an Uproar, and their Meeting House accounted rather a Stage
of Scolding, than a Place for Worship of God: It might not as yet have been
brought to Light, without some further Endeavor, to have sought a
Reconciliation, if so be the least Hopes should have been given of its
Acceptance. But being void of all such Hopes; Now so it is, that so great a
Concern of Conscience lies on many, to encourage the Publication hereof, as
that we can no longer forbear; lest it should be reputed, That the Doctrine and
Life of Christianity, were wholly Extinct amongst the aforesaid People.

My Desire now is, That the Reader may seriously weigh the Four following
Notations, and the Observations thereon; and then 'twill easily be savored, at
what Door the Public Disorders have entered; and whether or no, they are not
the very Birth of some Politic, Unchristian-like Contrivance.

First, Many in that City retain their Ancient Respect for John Story and John
Wilkinson, (Two Ancient and Honorable Laborers in the Gospel of Christ, whose
Conversations and Doctrine I have not known or understood to be Exceeded in
Godliness, by any Mortal Man whatsoever;) and on that Foot, are accounted such
as Join to Separates, or a Separate Spirit, as the Term or Nickname sometimes
is; because some Upstarts and Innovators (Adherents to George Fox) have been
pleased to disown the said John Story and John Wilkinson, though they could not
justly Charge them with Evil.

Secondly, In a Paper given forth by an Eminent Preacher, (and Opposer of John
Story and John Wilkinson; whose Name I omit, for the Reasons herein after
mentioned) thus directed, viz. To God's Friends every where, concerning the
present Separates, and their Spirit, it is thus said: Let not this Spirit be
reasoned with; enter not into Proposals and Articles with it: but feed it with
Judgment; that is God's Decree. So may the Souls that are deceived, come by the
Right Door into the Heavenly Unity.

Thirdly, The same Person that writ as aforesaid, was also concerned in a Paper
subscribed by Charles Marshall, and Sixty-Five more, given forth at Ellis Hooks
his Chamber, the 12th. Day of the 4th. Month, 1677. wherein it is thus writ,
with Relation to John Story and John Wilkinson: Therefore, Brethren, every
where stand up in the Power and Wisdom of God, for the Testimony of Truth,
against that Wrong, Jealous, Murmuring and Dividing Spirit: And where they
come, warn them in the Name of the Lord, to go home, and not go thus up and
down to offer their Gifts.

Fourthly, The very same Person, that writ as aforesaid thus, That is God's
Decree; did also some Years past threaten, That Bristol should be as an Anvil
to beat upon; meaning with Respect to Religious Differences.

My Observations now are; That in as much as the Meeting at Bristol has become
as an Anvil, whereon many Apostates or Innovators (Opposers of John Story and
John Wilkinson) have, in a Disorderly Manner, frequently beat; it may not
rationally be taken to be the Fruit of a Politic, Unchristian-like
Contrivance, in the best Sense. And that albeit they have been apt to stamp
their rude Discourses, and severe Judgments in the Name of the Lord; resusing
to reason with such against whom they strike, or in a Christian Spirit to treat
of the Differences; yet therein I am fully persuaded, that they act rather from
the Line of Another, than Their own: And not only so, but from the Line such an
one as has taken Liberty to Violate that, which he would Impose (as by a
Decree from God) on others. For though he Imperatively thus said, as aforesaid;
Let not this Spirit be reasoned with; Enter not into Proposals and Articles
with it: but feed it with Judgment; that is God's Decree: Yet he himself did (a
few Months after) accompany George Fox to the City of Bristol; and there
entered into Reasonings, Proposals and Articles with such as owned John Story,
though termed a Separate, or Separate Spirit; which by the Scope of his
Writing, may reasonably be taken by those, who understand his Meaning (by these
his words, viz. This Spirit) To be an Acting contrary to his own Counsel.

When I compare this with these kinds of Declarations, frequently published
amongst the aforesaid People; viz. Let us Exclude the Reasoning, the Wisdom,
and the Jealousy; and let us have an Eye to the Brethren: Further insinuating,
as if God had ordained Ministers amongst them, that are to see and hear for the
Body, and common Members of the Churches, (as the Printed Terms are:) I cannot
but be full of Jealousy, that these Things have a Tendency, to insinuate
Submission without Conviction, to nurture up Ignorance instead of Wisdom, and
to introduce Bondage instead of Freedom in Christ, as much as ever was under
the Cover of a Black-Coat, in the Dark Night of Apostasy; where this Maxim,
viz. Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, is known to be true, with respect to
a Zealous Observation of what the Clergy have imposed and taught.

What is already signified, may give some little Taste of Apostasy, or
Innovation, unto such as have been acquainted with the Primitive Doctrines, and
Practices of the True Christian-Quaker, (or Children of Light, for so we were
called in the Beginning:) But yet, it is with me a little to treat of one other
grand Mark of Apostasy, or Innovation, viz. Judging the Merit of a Cause,
without Hearing the same.

As before is signified, 'Twas the Saying of Christ, As I Hear, I Judge: But
yet I am a Witness, that Ignorance, or Envy, or that which is worse, has so
abounded, as that the True Christian-Quaker has been judged and censured, (by
such as retain that Name, but not his Nature) when See the Appendix to the
Second Part of the Christian-Quaker.
unheard in the Defense of Himself, and the Cause of Truth, which he has stood
for.

When I consider the aforesaid Words of Christ, As I Hear, I Judge; John 5.26,
27.
and that it sprang from him, who was Partaker of his Father's Life and Power,
and knew all Things; John 16.30.
its to me a real Confirmation, that a Pretense to Life, Power, and Discerning
of Spirits, cannot be sufficient Plea, to justify a Practice contrary to that
Example: And therefore, since I know, that such a Pretense has been the only
Plea for that Practice; I conclude it no better, than the Fruit of Ignorance or
Envy, or that which is worse. Ignorance in those who have believed, that
outward Ministers are Ordained of God, amongst the People called Quakers, to
See for the Body, and Hear for the Body; and on that Foot, sign and glory in
other Men's Lines, made ready to their Hands, whether they know any thing of
the Truth thereof, or no. Envy, or that which is worse, in such an one, as has
used both Acquired and Natural Parts, from the Strength of Reason, Testimonies
of Scriptures, Arguments from the Light of Christ, Citations out of Ancient and
Modern Writers, as well as Examples of Ancient Fathers to convince some
Professors of Christianity of their Errors; and yet imperatively signify, To
God's Friends every where, (as before is cited) on this wise: Let not this
Spirit be reasoned with; enter not into Proposals and Articles with it: but
feed it with Judgment; that is God's Decree. And indeed, the Endeavors of some
have taken such an Effect, as that the abused Parties Readiness to abide a
Hearing, before a competent Number of Persons, equally to be chosen, if any one
had Matter of Evil Fact, or False Doctrine to lay to their Charge, would not be
accepted; but instead thereof, a Persevering to term them dark and rending
Spirits, without evidencing wherein: Which is far short of that Justice, which
appeared in Festus, when he directed the Jewish Informers against Paul, to
Accuse him of Wickedness, if there be any in him.

These Things considered, What ingenious Reader can conclude, that Persons so
qualifyed, are of any better Spirit, than those Persecuting Jews were of, unto
whom the aforesaid Festus, on the Behalf of Persecuted Paul, said: Acts 25.16.
It is not the Manner of the Romans, to deliver any Man to Dye, before that he
which is Accused, have the Accusers Face to Face; and have License to answer
for himself, concerning the Crime laid against him. And though the Testimony of
Festus runs not parallel, with respect to the taking away of the Natural Life;
yet several Instances might be produced, to manifest, that there are amongst
the People termed Quakers, such as practice (so far as in them lies) the
bringing a Death upon the Good Name, and Reputation of the True
Christian-Quaker, without giving Opportunity to know, Whether they pretend to
Accuse of Matter of Evil Fact, or no.

These Things considered, puts me in mind to note, That one great Part of the
Matter of Controversy, is touching John Story; who, in Public Meeting for
Worship, has (in my Hearing) been accused for a False Prophet; and when the
Accuser has been desired to prove him so, the Answer has been, He is of a
Dividing Spirit; and therefore, a False Prophet: But when in Answer, it has
been said, (as of late it has) Bring forth, and prove Matter of Evil Fact, or
False Doctrine against him, and we will disown him; then nothing of that Nature
has been brought forth, much less proved against him. Which considered, I
rationally infer, That such Opposers of the Christian-Quaker, whom in this
Preface I intend, are guilty of one other Mark of Apostasy, or Innovation, in
not admitting to be put in Practice the Rule of Christ, when he said, Ye shall
know them by their Fruits; Matthew. 7.16.
meaning, as the Scripture declares, such as were False Prophets: And that they
may the better evade the Rule prescribed as by Christ, sometimes affirm, That a
Good Cause may be ill managed, and a bad Cause well managed: Thereby
insinuating into Ignorant People, that though John Story, and his Friends have
managed their Cause well, whilst their Opposers have managed their Cause but
ill; yet that John Story, and his Friends are Persons of Bad Spirits, and their
Opposers Persons of Right Spirits. And for my own part, I no way doubt, but
that this sort of Argumentation has become a Defense, and Cover for False
Certificates, Lies and Slanderous Accusations, whereby some have been
proselyted to oppose the Truth it self. Oh, great Abomination!

If Living Well, and holding forth nothing but Sound Doctrine, shall not be
brought to the Measuring Line of Christ; What Defense can there be against a
Slanderous Tongue? And if Evil Practices, and Unsound Doctrine, (pretended to
be published in the Name of God) shall admit of this Cover, he is,
notwithstanding, of a Good Spirit: A little Religion, and common Sense, will
give an Understanding, of what Absurdities, and Gross Darkness may be
introduced under those Notions.

It Is then easily to be discerned, that if the Envy of a Proud Man, that seeks
Lordship over the Consciences of others, do but once put (to speak
comparatively) the Bare-Skin upon the Back of a Friend in Truth, there will not
be wanting a Company of Ignorant, or Envious Persons, ready to bite and devour
him; and to spread abroad Certificates of Defamation (Right or Wrong) amongst
Enemies, as well as Friends; according to the Example given by G. F. when
writing to H. S. R. T. and another Person of Harford, he thus said; Here is a
Certificate enclosed from Two of John Story's Neighbors, who very well know,
he has been an Encourager of the Separate-Meeting in Westmoreland; which you
may show both to Enemies and Friends, with the other Two Certificates. Which
being compared with what he writ from Amsterdam, the 14th. Day of 7th. Month,
1677. on this wise: And you that have given your Testimony against that Note,
By the word, This Spirit, I take his Meaning to be J. S. and J.W. and such as
are at Unity with them; because in another Paper I find him thus expressing
himself, viz. This Separate Spirit of J. S. and J.W.
Spirit, stand in your Testimony, till they Answer by Condemnation; and do not
strive and make Bargains with that which is out of the Truth; clearly shows a
Design of Imposition, and that (so far as in him lies) to obstruct Friends
from Bargaining with such whom he Condemns: By which, if his Meaning be, that
he would not have Friends Discourse with such, nor yet to agree about any
Orderly Conference, in order to a Reconciliation, or Hearing of Differences,
than his own Practice afterward, in submitting to a Limited Meeting with me, on
a particular Occasion within the City of Bristol, in the 12th. Month, 1677.
before Twelve Persons chosen on each side, condemns his own Direction. Besides,
such a Meaning from the Great Apostle of Christ, (which doubtless G. F. is at
least reputed by many to be) seems wholly repugnant to the Counsel of the
Apostle, who said; Jude 3, 4.
It is needful for me to write unto you, that you should earnestly contend for
the Faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints; for there are certain Men
crept in unawares, viz. Ungodly Men. We also find, That Gainsayers (according
to Paul's Counsel to Titus) were to be Convinced by sound Doctrine and
Exhortation: Titus 1.9.
Which leads me to query, Whether there be any Room left to convince
Gainsayers, by sound Doctrine or Exhortation, or otherwise earnestly to
contend for the Faith, with such as are crept in unawares, etc. unless
Conference be admitted with such, as are supposed to be so, that so they may be
made manifest to all? And, Whether it is not rational to conclude, That G. F.
who endeavors that others should avoid such Conferences, does not give just
Cause of Jealousy, that he is of that Number, whom the Apostle reputed
Ungodly, Vain Talkers, and Deceivers? But if otherwise G. F's Meaning be, that
such whom he Condemns, have no Right to Note, Some perhaps may think this a
Groundless Insinuation; and therefore, I thought meet thus to note: That one of
my Correspondents, highly affected with G. F. and who for many Years past, has
been Partner with me in a Merchandizing-Trade, to several Parts beyond the
Seas, is of late come so far, as (on the Score of my Concern in Religious
Differences amongst the aforesaid People) to break off all manner of Dealing
with me in Partnership; declaring by his Letter (as a Reason for his so doing)
in these Words, I CANNOT BUT REASONABLY EXPECT THE HAND OF THE LORD MAY BE
AGAINST THEE, AND THAT PERADVENTVRE IN THE THINGS OF THE WORLD. I omit his Name
amongst others concerned in the Differences, for the Reasons hereafter
mentioned. Let now the Ingenious and Impartial Reader consider, whether this is
not at least next Door to a Discouragement, to Buy and Sell with me: For if all
should so serve me, I should be obstructed to proceed in that Method of Trade,
by which I have been enabled, not only to provide for my Family, but to
administer to the Relief of others also.
Bargain, Buy, or Sell, until they Answer by Condemnation; then I may justly
term That, to be a Mark of the Beast, spoken of Rev. 13.17. where it is thus
said; No Man might buy or sell, save he that had the Mark, or Name of the
Beast. Let the Reader take either of these Two Meanings, (for a Third I cannot
think of) and it is the Mark of a Deceiver of such as dwell on the Earth, which
are the Terms wherein John (Revel. 13.14.) described the Beast: He that has an
Ear to hear, let him hear.

Having thus far proceeded, in some measure to manifest the Reason of the
Publication hereof, as well as to note a few Marks of Apostasy, or Innovation;
that so the Reader from the Preface, may have a little Savor of that Spirit,
by which the Opposers of the Children of Light are led: I now come to signify,
that the further Design of this Preface, is chiefly to Answer the Three
following Queries, which (on the Perusal of the ensuing Treatise) I am sensible
(from Discourse already had) may arise in the Breasts of some, called Quakers.

Qu. I. Why have thou omitted to mention the Names of some Persons, and Authors
of some Books, and Papers reflected on, in this Treatise?

Qu. II. Why have thou treated on Principles, held forth by the People called
Quakers; since many Books have already been given forth by some amongst them,
treating on many (if not all) of those Things, which thou have done?

Qu. III. Whether thy Publishing this Treatise in Print, may not in
probability, give unto others a Knowledge of the Differences amongst us; and so
obstruct the Increase of our Meetings, and the Gathering of some (yet walking
in the Broad Way) into the true Faith; and cause many already gathered
thereunto, to stumble and fall?

Before I shall make direct Answer to these Queries, it is needful to inform the
Reader of some Things, (relating to Orderly Proceeding, and Constraint of
Spirit) which (being considered) may be well taken for a Just Apology, thus to
appear in Print; and not only so, but may render the direct Answers more
satisfactory: And therefore, I do first proceed to signify, that in the Year
1678. the Religious Differences, amongst the People called Quakers, were so
publicly manifested, that several of my Brethren seemed not only grievously
burdened therewith; but also concerned, that the Things which became their
Burden, might be stated in Writing, and Remonstrated to such amongst them, who
(as was supposed) might be Instruments to put a Stop thereto. This being
several times treated on by some, I was desired (and at length it became my
Concern of Conscience) to put Pen to Paper on that Subject; which accordingly I
did, until at length I completed an Historical Manuscript, consisting of Three
Parts.

In the First Part is manifest, A Part of those Things, wherein the Faithful
were at Unity; and by what Ways and Means that Unity came to be broken.

In the Second Part are cited, Many Papers, Epistles, Testimonies, Proceedings
and Practices, which were the Effects of Disunion, Separation and Division.

In the Third Part, Certain Doctrines are treated on, and that Sense
manifested, wherein they have been and are received, believed and owned,
amongst the Children of Light; who (being not affected to leave that Teacher,
which cannot be removed into a Corner, to follow the Dictates of such Men,
whose Doctrines and Practices do manifest them fallible) have, and do keep
their Place and Habitation, in the Unchangeable Truth.

After the said Manuscript was prepared, Four Friends (whereof my self was One)
writ unto George Fox, and Two other Persons, eminent amongst the said People;
and therein laid down many Particulars, relating to Doctrine, Discipline and
Practice, Printed, Written, Published and Acted; which (we were persuaded) were
Erroneous, and ought to have been Testified against: And therefore, did propose
unto them, to join with us, to give Testimony against such Things, (if in their
Consciences they were satisfied so to do) as one proper Expedient, for the
Removing Stumbling Blocks out of the Way; as by the said Letter (Dated Bristol
the 22th. of the 2d. Month, 1679.) may more largely appear, unto any of the
said People, who may desire of me to peruse the same.

In the aforesaid Letter, we did advise, That the Manuscript made mention of,
was prepared, and that the Contents thereof were, as is already cited: But
forasmuch as no Answer came from the Parties written unto, before the
General-Meeting, and that the Matter treated on, was not with an Intent, that
it should be kept private in the Breasts of those, to whom 'twas written; but
be communicated to the Body of the People called Quakers: therefore, we sent
the aforesaid Letter unto the General-Meeting, next following, for the same
End, as we did unto those Three Persons, to whom we first writ; giving a Cover
thereto in these following Words: Only, it is to be noted, that a Blank thus [
-- ] is left instead of the Name of a Person, for the Reasons hereafter
mentioned.

Bristol, the 4th. of the 4th. Month, 1679. Friends,
" THe Enclosed (being Two Sheets, and a Part of a Sheet) is a Copy of what was
sent unto [ -- ] the 11th. of the last Month, to be Communicated unto the rest,
unto whom 'twas directed; and is now sent unto you, with request, That it may
be read amongst you, for this end; that when it is so read, you may (if free in
Spirit) declare your Approbation, that it may be read in all Men's and
Womens-Meetings of Friends. Whatever your Thoughts may be touching the
Enclosed; yet know this, that it was neither given forth, nor yet is now
recommended to you, but upon very Serious Consideration, and Concern of
Conscience: And therefore, it is now requested, that you will Seriously, and
Conscientiously weigh the Matter; that so neither your Tongues nor Pens, may be
so Exercised on this Occasion, as that you may (for the future) see Cause to
Repent the same. One of us, viz. William Rogers, intended to have come up to
the General-Meeting, not only to recommend the Enclosed to be read amongst you;
but also, to have offered unto you, that the Manuscript, whereof it makes
mention, might be read in the General-Meeting, if you would assent thereto: But
some Emergent Occasion (which he has Communicated to his Correspondent, James
Claypoole (under whose Cover this goes) has obstructed that: And therefore,
it is now proposed unto you, That before it be made public amongst all Friends,
you may appoint a Meeting, as General as you please, to have it first Read; and
if you think so to do, this now informs you, that 'twill be assented unto;
provided you appoint the Place of Reading the same, to be either in the County
of Wilts, or City of Bristol, before the last Day of this instant Month. But
if that Time and Place please you not, and yet are willing to have the Hearing
thereof, it is now desired, that you will be pleased to signify so much, and
make your Desires known to our selves, Directed to William Rogers in Bristol;
And we doubt not, but you shall have such an Answer, as may answer the Truth in
all.

The End wherefore this is now proposed, is, because You, and other Friends,
(as well as They unto whom we first writ) if you shall not be at Unity with us,
may have Opportunity to clear your selves unto, and concerning us, before the
said Manuscript become public amongst all Friends. And if the Word of Truth
shall be in your Mouths, we doubt not, but 'twill have Place with all
concerned, in preparing the said Manuscript: But if in the Word of Truth, you
and others shall have naught to say, against the Matter contained therein; then
let all such for the future, be wary of Rash, and Unjust Censures, lest they
should be found Fighters against the Lord.

It Is desired, that an Answer may be given hereto, and left with James
Claypoole, by the 16th. Instant, at farthest, to be sent unto us, Directed to
William Rogers, Merchant in Bristol. We are

Your Friends, William Rogers, William Forde.


This Letter (wherein the Former was enclosed) was delivered Sealed, in the
General Meeting, by James Claypoole; who (according to my Request) there
declared, That it came to him under Cover from me, with Direction to be
delivered Sealed, in the aforesaid Meeting. James Claypoole having thus
Faithfully discharged the Trust reposed in him, 'twas then committed to Six
Persons, to Unseal and Peruse, and Report the Contents to the Meeting; who
thereupon made this ensuing Report: (only, it is to be observed, that instead of
the Names of Three Persons (where of George Fox was one) in one Place, and of
One Person in another, a Blank is left) The Letter delivered Sealed to the
General-Meeting, and so delivered to us to Peruse, contains a Copy of one
lately directed to [ -- ] and Signed by him, William Rogers, etc. bearing Date
the 22th. of the 2d. Month, and sent the 11th. of the 3d. Month to [ -- ] And
our Judgment is, That it should be left to them to Answer, as they find Freedom
in Truth; and that the General-Meeting ought not to be concerned with it,
seeing they have not refused to Answer, nor had convenient Time or Opportunity
thereto, neither jointly nor severally.

The aforesaid Report Occasions me to make these ensuing Observations:

First, That the rest of the General Meeters, who are kept ignorant of any
Letter directed to them, were therein deceived.

Secondly, That Wrong was done to the Persons concerned in writing to the
General Meeting, because their Minds were not Communicated unto those, unto
whom they writ.

Thirdly, That the Generality of Friends in the Nation, might deem it Injurious
to them, because the said Letter was of a General Tendency, with respect to
Friends, and Affairs relating to them.

This Proceeding increased the Jealousies of many Friends, that a Spirit of
Partiality, seeking to exercise a Gentilian sort of Lordship, was entering some,
under the Profession of Truth, and that the Door was so shut against some
others, besides my self, as that those things which become our Burdens, must
not be represented to those, whom we were concerned to advise thereof, or to
treat withal in a Christian-Spirit, that so some Expedient (agreeable to the
Truth) might be found, to remove our Burdens, and so (if possible) prevent the
Publication in Print, of the Manuscript prepared; in which the Names of several
Hundreds on each part, concerned in the Division, were mentioned.

But yet, the Noise of Printing had this Service, seveveral Friends from diverse
Parts of the Nation, came to the City of Bristol; being the Place (as before is
noted) that one (Eminently concerned in the Division) threatened, should be the
Anvil to beat upon; and interceded, that we would forbear making mention of the
Names of Persons reflected on. To this the Answer was; That it seemed unlikely,
to bring forth a Credible History, touching Religious Differences, without
naming the Authors of Books, Papers, and Names of Persons reflected on;
evidencing the Reality of such Principles, Doctrines, and Practices, which
occasioned Disunion and Separation, amongst some of the aforesaid People.
However, Truth obliged us to have a Tender Regard unto those, who came unto us
in Brotherly Love; and for the Sakes of such, our Desires have been, that the
Lord might permit us to Bear, Forbear and Suffer; having a secret Hope, that
the Lord might make such Instruments in his Hand, by a Tender and Brotherly
Mediation, to cause the High and Lofty to bow to Truth and Righteousness, that
so the Government of Christ might be exalted in every Heart, where his Law is
written; and that none, who make mention of his Name, might conclude themselves
entered into an Heavenly Possession or Inheritance, because of a Strict
Observance of some Outward written Order, prescribed by Man.

After we had long born, it then more particularly became my Concern, to
prepare another Manuscript, (and that chiefly out of the Second Part of what
was first prepared, in relation to diverse Persons concerned in the Divisions)
to discover that one Man, George For, guilty of many Things reproachful to the
Truth; and that, because it was, and yet is clearly manifested unto me, and (as
I have understood) many others, that that ONE PERSON has been the very Chief
Instrument, (or at least, an Abettor of such as have) whereby a Biting
Devouring Spirit, is entered in amongst the Flock; and yet great Part of the
Contention of one Party with another, seems to be but about the Shell, and not
the Kernel: My Meaning thereby is, about Outward Forms and Methods, relating to
Marriages, Relief of the Poor, etc. as if Hells Gates must be opened to receive
all such, as walk not in that Outward Path, which (in Relation thereto) has
been prescribed by that ONE MAN.

Moreover, It Is observable, that before I undertook to prepare the Manuscript,
relating to that ONE MAN. I writ unto him Seven Letters, (Dated as follows,
viz. the 27th. of the 1st. Month, 1677. the 3d. of the 10th. Month, 1677. the
4th. of the 11th. Month, 1678. the 11th. of the 11th. Month, 1678. one other
on the same Day, signed by Thomas Gouldeny, William Forde, and My Self; one
other the 22th. of the 2d. Month, 1679. signed by My Self, and Three other
Friends, directed to Him, and two Others; and one other from My Self only,
Dated the 6th. of the 12th. Month, 1679. manifesting the Ground of my
Dissatisfaction, with relation to many Things of a Public Concern amongst
Friends, as well as Personal Injury; which became him to clear, or else give
Satisfaction: And yet to this Day (being the 16th. Day of the 6th. Month,
1680.) I cannot in Truth say, That any Answer is come from him to me;
notwithstanding Messengers were sent unto him on purpose with several of them,
and Advice given me of the Delivery. And though a Paper came once to my Hand,
in which Mention is made of Two of the said Letters; yet I cannot take it to be
his Answer; but rather (as by the Language thereof appears) the Answer of
another on his behalf, and chiefly stuffed with Queries; so that my Concern to
expect Satisfaction, or Detect him, is increased.

At length, when I perceived 'twas not probable to obtain what I expected from
him, by making manifest my Burden and Exercise, either to Him, or One or Two,
(whom I supposed, he might esteem to be of the Church) nor yet from the General
Meeting; though (as I suppose) they are esteemed by some (though not by all)
the Representatives of the Church in general: I then (for the Sakes of many
Brethren) Traveled in several Parts of the Nation; manifesting, that
(according to the Understanding given me of God) I had proceeded toward that
ONE PERSON, G. F. in a Gospel-Method; and that, if I then should have proceeded
to Print against him, nothing could be justly laid to my Charge, for want of
Orderly Proceeding to obtain Satisfaction: which hitherto was not given me. But
yet my Condescension to my Brethren was such, as that, though the Manuscript
relating to him was prepared, I very publicly proposed in Writing under my
Hand, and spread the same abroad, directed to Friends in several Counties;
signifying, that if any one of them were free to write unto that ONE PERSON, or
at least to give this Testimony under their or any of their Hands, that since I
Charge him to be Guilty of Things reproachful to the Truth, It Is but Just and
Reasonable, that he should submit to a Hearing thereof, before Friends in
Truth; to the end, that if Guilty, he may Condemn the same; if not, he may be
Justified, and I Condemned for Accusing wrongfully: I should then forbear
Printing against him, until such time I should send such a Letter or Testimony
unto the Place of his Habitation: And if he should be pleased to give Answer
thereto, (on Request to him, to be made by the Messenger that should go
therewith) then my Purpose was, (as I then declared) to Communicate such Answer
to Friends; that so we might consider further, what might be agreeable to
Truth, to be done on this Occasion.

One Part of my End in thus doing, was, To discover whether there be such an
Erroneous Principle in any, so to stand by a Man, charged to be guilty of
Things reproachful to the Truth, as that he must be exempted (though Guilty)
from the Stroke of that Justice, which in the like Cases of Guilt he has
prescribed for others. For though the Apostle testified, That Charity suffers
long, bears and endures all things; yet his Meaning was not, that any Member
of the Church of Christ, of what Degree soever, should not be treated withal,
when over-taken in a Fault; else the same Apostle would not have given these
Testimonies; Gal. 6.5.
Every Man shall bear his own Burden. Col. 3.25.
He that does Wrong, shall receive for the Wrong, which he has done; and there
is no Respect of Persons. Besides, it is observable from the Scriptures of
Truth, Rev. 2.2.
that 'Twas Praiseworthy, not to bear Liars, though they might say, they were
Apostles.

I now come to inform the Reader, that the ensuing Treatise, is for the most
part Collected out of the Manuscript, first made mention of: But yet with the
Omission of some Marginal Memorials, directing the Reader to the several
Sections of the Second Part of the said Manuscript,; that so from Matter of
Fact therein contained, the Truth of Reflections made, and the Reasonableness
of Objections raised, (and that from the Books, Writings, or Practices of some
particular Person, or Persons reputed of the People called Quakers) might be
proved. And therefore, since it is not thought fit, for the Reasons mentioned
in this Preface, to Publish the Second Part of the said Manuscript; we (instead
thereof) for the Satisfaction of all Friends, do declare, That it is ready for
the View of any Friend, in order to prove the Reasonableness of the Reflections
made, or Objections raised.

Having thus premised, I now come again to lay down the Three beforementioned
Queries, and to give direct Answers thereto.

Quer. 1. Why have thou omitted to mention the Names of some Persons, and
Authors of some Books and Papers reflected on in this Treatise?

Answ. Though I have been reflected upon at an Ungodly Rate by many, because I
have been concerned to oppose an Erroneous, and Persecuting Spirit, which I
have beheld entering amongst the Flock of God; yet, Blessed be the Lord, he has
so preserved me by the Arm of his Power, as that none of my Opposers have (so
far as I know) laid any thing unto my Charge, but for Matters wherein I have
acted, (though misrepresented by them) to keep a Conscience void of Offense
toward God. And as it became my Concern of Conscience, to prepare the
Manuscript first mentioned, that so the Truth of some Material Matters
(occasioning, or accompanying Division and Separation amongst the People called
Quakers) might lie on Record, at least Until an Union might again be witnessed:
So also it has been my frequent Breathing unto the Lord, That I might not
bring forth an Untimely Birth; but might so be led, and guided in this Affair,
as that I might Answer the Witness of God in all Consciences. And to my inward
Peace and Joy in the Lord, I can say, That I have the Evidence of his Spirit,
(notwithstanding, what any Man may say to the contrary) that he has owned my
Proceeding therein hitherto: And not only so, but that there has been an
Answer thereto in many Brethren. And as I was seriously waiting on the Lord, I
became satisfied in my Conscience to forbear, reflectingly to mention in this
Treatise, the Names of many reputed Quakers, that (as yet I doubt) remain
deviated in some things from the Line of Truth; And I hoped such a Spirit of
Mediation and Justice, would have appeared amongst some of our Friends, (who
would not be understood to be concerned in the Difference between others) as
that they might have been a Means to cause G. F. to stoop so timely to Justice,
as that there might have been no Concern upon me and others to discover any
Part of his Errors, so publicly as now they are.

The Considerations occurring in my Breast, when I became so satisfied, as
aforesaid, were these:

First, Several of my Brethren (as before is premised) interceded to forbear;
and if for my thus doing, any should reflect upon me, they might as well
reflect upon the Apostle's Counsel, when he exhorted the Ephesians, To submit
themselves one unto another, in the Fear of God. For I was sensible, that those
who so concerned themselves, had a true Sense, that the Cause wherein I was
concerned, was the Cause of Truth: On which Foot, their Treatment of me was in
much Love and Tenderness; and forasmuch as I perceived, they were not without
hope, that a little longer Forbearance might work for the better, I became
satisfied, 'twas my Place to submit, and forbear a while.

Secondly, Though Hardness of Heart has so overtaken some, as that they may
still continue to oppose their Brethren in the Truth, without the least just
Ground, or Pretense either from the Light of Christ within, the Scriptures of
Truth, or Right Reason; yet I am not without hope, that some others (concerned
against their Brethren, in the present Differences) may in some time come to a
Sense of their Failings, and Repent: and then either the Memory of their
Offense may be blotted out, or their Repentance therewith (if timely known)
recorded, and that according as Opportunity may permit, and Truth require.

Thirdly, It Is hoped, that this Treatise may become a Warning to many; but more
especially, to such as have departed from the Anointing in themselves, that
they may Repent, and turn to their First Love; viz. The Appearance of Christ by
his Light in them; and not (in neglect of God's Teachings) lie doting on
Outward Orders; As if that which was promised to be written in the Heart, were
now to be sought after in Pieces, and Scraps of Paper; or that the Written
Orders of any at this Day, should become a Certain Rule, through which a
Heavenly Possession may be obtained by such, as could not own the Scriptures
themselves (though by the Spirit given forth) to be that Certain Rule; but
instead thereof, the Spirit it self to be it. And if any think themselves
hereby reflected on unjustly, because at some Times they have appeared of
another Language; yet, if such by their Fruits have given the Lie to the
Offering of their Lips, the Deceit is the greater, and more worthy to be
discovered.

Fourthly, This Treatise is chiefly intended for the Service of the People
called Quakers; amongst whom the Religious Differences are so publicly known,
as that I have no Cause to doubt, but that the Matters treated on, will be
intelligible by them, though the Names of some Persons, and Authors of some
Books and Papers, be not mentioned. However, if any amongst them, for want of
that Public Converse, which others have had, shall manifest the least
Jealousy, that there is no Reason so to Object or Reflect, as in the ensuing
Treatise; I shall then be ready to give unto such, particular Satisfaction from
Matter of Fact, relating to Person or Persons. And forasmuch, as it was not
possible, that all Papers and Books, which may evidence the Reasonableness of
all Objections and Reflections, could lie at once in many Hands, and are for
the most part with me; therefore, this Treatise is Signed thus: By William
Rogers, on Behalf of himself, and other Friends in Truth concerned. And so the
Names of those others (my Brethren concerned with me in this Work) are omitted;
partly because they might not be capable to give a ready and satisfactory
Answer, for want of the Books, or Papers signified of, as aforesaid.

Quer. 2. Why have thou treated on Principles, held forth by the People called
Quakers, since many Books have already been given forth by some amongst them,
treating on many (if not all) of those Things, which thou have done?

Answ. It Is the Duty of all Christians, to clear their Consciences, as by the
Light of Christ in their Consciences they are directed, which doubtless was the
Real Ground, whereupon many Ancient and Honorable Friends (already fallen
asleep) have given forth their Testimony, touching the same Principles,
publicly held forth (both by Word and Printing) by some other Servants of the
Lord before them: And if no more were said to this Query, it ought to suffice.
But yet, for the Sakes of some, I shall lay down the Considerations attending
me, when I became Conscientiously concerned so to do.

The Deportment of some Unruly Women, and Ignorant Self-conceited Men, on the
Part of our Opposers, in public Meetings for Worship of God, have frequently
been Cause of Stumbling to some; so that, it is to be doubted, that Jealousies
have been ready to enter many, that though the Name of Christianity is retained
amongst the People called Quakers; yet that the Nature, Life, and Doctrine
thereof has suffered Shipwreck amongst them, if all (under that Name) ought at
this Day to be measured by the Deportment, and Doctrine of some. The particular
Instances of such Deportments and Doctrines, (whereof I have been Eye and
Ear-Witness) might fill a large Volumn: And therefore, if this be granted, it
cannot but by every Considerate and Impartial Reader, be thought needful
enough, that a Testimony unto the Principles of Truth (anciently held forth
amongst them) might once more be Revived, and Committed to Posterity, on behalf
of that Party amongst them, who account themselves Persecuted, Reviled, and
evilly Entreated, when they know no other Cause thereof, than in their steadfast
Adhering to (and Persevering in) the Way of the Spirit of Life, in Christ
Jesus; and having begun in the Spirit, cannot be in Unity with such, as to them
seem to expect Perfection, through a zealous Exalting of other Men's Lines made
ready to their Hands. And thus the Generations to come (as well as at this Day)
may know, that though some Lovers of Pre-eminence, Innovators, and Unskilful
Preachers, (that know not how to divide the Word aright) have been pleased to
stigmatize others with these Terms, viz. Dark, Leavened, Rending, Dividing,
Separate Spirits; yet it has been manifest, that it is because such others
cannot, in a Temporizing Spirit, change their Way, and depart from their
Ancient Path; which by the Spirit of God they have been led into, and wherein
they have had Fellowship with their Ancient Brethren, whom the Lord Anointed to
publish his Everlasting Gospel, and to gather others from the Lo here is, and
the Lo there is, to take heed unto the Holy Unction in themselves, as a
Sufficient Guide unto the Father of Life.

Quer. 3. Whether thy Publishing this Treatise in Print, may not (in
probability) give unto others, a Knowledge of the Differences amongst us; and
so obstruct the Increase of our Meetings, and the gathering of some (yet
walking in the Broad Way) into the True Faith, and cause many already gathered
thereunto, to stumble and fall?

Answ. Nay. The Considerations inducing me so to Answer, are these*

Though this Treatise declares, that there are Divisions amongst the People
called Quakers; yet that is no more, than what to my Knowledge is publicly
known, both to Professor and Profane: and that from Observations of such, (in
the Public Meetings for Worship, for many Months, if not Years past) as are
not reputed to be of the People called Quakers. The Occasion of such
Observations in some Meetings, has been so frequently given, as that it seems
to me to be as impossible, to cover the Knowledge thereof, as that which has
been Proclaimed by a common Bell-Man; and the Instruments, which for the most
part have been the Proclaimers hereof, have been such, as (under the Notion of
Preachers in God's Name, though in a Reality, but idle, ignorant Praters in the
Will of Man) by their Declarations, run against the Friends of Truth, sometimes
by Name, and other times not so particular, though intelligible enough; and yet
incapable to detect such as is Evil, either in Conversation, or Doctrine: Which
being considered, (and compared with many Imaginary Discourses, in Public
Meetings for Worship of God, whereby the Publishers thereof appear Unlearned in
the School of Christ) it is irrational to expect, that any Person,
Conscientiously seeking after the Way of Truth, should be gathered to such, as
are at Variance each with other, and whose Public Assemblies have been at some
times the very Stages of Contention; and if they should, it is most certain,
they would not therein be gathered unto such, as are in an Heavenly Fellowship
each with other: but if on the contrary, such as are seeking after the way of
Truth, amongst the People called Quakers, have been disaffected with them in
general, from a certain Knowledge of their divisions, and the unsound Doctrines
held forth by some; and yet shall but seriously ponder this Treatise, it may
become a means unto such to eschew the Evil, and embrace the Good, by inclining
their hearts unto the Principles of Truth herein held forth, and not suffering
the offense (given by such amongst them, as have retained the Name but not the
Nature (nor yet in some respects the Doctrine) of Christianity) so to enter, as
to hinder their Perseverance and Growth in the true Faith, until at length
they may come into Union, and Fellowship with the faithful Friends thereof.

Moreover to me it seems impossible, that the seasonable asserting the Truth,
and pleading for it, can occasion any to stumble and fall from it; but rather
the Contrary. However I must confess, it is probable enough, that it may
occasion many to disregard such kind of Preachers (or rather Praters) whose
Doctrines and Practices have not only caused the Name of the Lord to be evil
spoken of, but whose Necessities have seemed to be a Bait unto them, to Follow
for the Loaves; and no marvel if these, instead of Gathering to God, Gather to
themselves; and as a proper expedient to obtain such a gathering, publish in
the open Meetings for Worship of God, such like Doctrines as these, (according
as I have already hinted) and which, I am a witness, (from the hearing of my
ear) have in public meetings for worship been published, viz. Have your Eye to
the Brethren (meaning thereby Public Preachers) If you do not see your selves,
follow us that do see. And frequently exhort to shut out the reasoning, the
Wisdom and the Iealousy without distinction: which being compared with these
primitive and wholesome Exhortations, and Doctrines [Wisdom is Justified of her
Children; look not unto us, but unto the Lord; take heed unto the Light of
Christ in your own consciences; Draw water out of your own Wells, let it be
your own and not anothers] it seems to me more like the Language of those
Shepherds, who (as the Prophet said) Sought for their gain from their Quarters,
than the Language of such whom the Lord has anointed to cherish and feed his
Sheep.

To Conclude this Preface, it is with me to say, unto every one (through the
Nations) called by the name Quaker, on this wise.

Let the remembrance of the days that are past come before you, wherein the
Servants of the Living God, Laborers in the Gospel (in the beginning of the
latter Day of the Ministration of Light) sounded by his trumpet an Alarm to the
Nations. And what said the voice of the Eternal Power through them? It spoke to
this effect unto the inhabitants of the Earth. Awake, Awake from the sleep of
Death, that the Lord may give unto you Life. He that was, and is, and is to
come, is arisen in a remnant; and Christ, the Son of the Eternal God (who was
with the Father before the Foundation of the World was laid) is become the Horn
of their Salvation, and has brought Immortality to Light in them, and revealed
that Teacher, that can never be moved into a corner; and therefore these cannot
depend any longer on the teachings of man, nor yet on outward Canonical
Articles, Creeds, Directories, or Church-Faiths prescribed by man: but on the
teachings of Christ alone, by his Light and Spiritual appearance in themselves,
to lead and guide unto the Father of life. The sound of this Alarm (as many can
yet witness) became a joyful sound to that soul, which was hungring after the
Lord; though piercing as a Dart through the liver to the man of sin, so that
astonishment and amazement seemed to take hold on many, whereby they became a
Byword, a Mock, and a Taunt unto such, whose dependencies were on their
outward Teachers, etc. as aforesaid. I say again, Oh Friends, let the
Remembrance of this Day come before you, and consider further, what was the
voice of the Eternal Power unto such, who were struck with amazement, after
they believed the appearance of that power, whereby they were so struck, to be
the appearance of the Power of God; I well remember the voice was on this wise,
To your own, To your own, To your own. Meaning thereby that they should turn in
their minds to the Light of Christ in their consciences, which was declared to
be that teacher, which could never be removed into a corner, that so they might
witness the fulfilling of that loud voice, uttered by the Angel flying through
the midst of Heaven, Having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that
dwell on the Earth, etc. Fear God and give glory to him, for the Hour of his
judgment is come, and worship him that made Heaven and Earth, etc. For no doubt
but the Spirit of the Lord, revealed unto those first laborers in the Gospel,
that there was a pronenesse in the Sons and Daughters of Men, to admire, to
depend upon, and sometimes (through an affectionate part or blind Zeal) to
worship such are were instruments, to give forth outward Directories, or
Church-Faiths. For we find that the Apostle tells us of worshipping Angels
(which are Messengers whom God has sent) by him that intrudes into things
which he has not seen; therefore I am persuaded that the voice of Truth
through them was not only thus, viz. To your own (which being observed, leads
into an independency upon others) but also frequently on this wise, We preach
not our selves, look not unto us.

In the Consideration of these things I cannot but cry aloud, in the aforesaid
words of the Angel, that had the everlasting Gospel to Preach, Fear God, and
give Glory to him. And then no doubt but every such one, that has concerned
himself to condemn his Brother, on no better ground than from the example and
prescription of another, will come to see, that therein he has not kept to his
own, and so has been led into a By and Erring Path. Oh Friends! let therefore
this cry pass through every heart. To our Own. To our Own. To our Own. (That is
to say, to every ones own measure of Christ's Light or Grace of God Received,
which the Apostle says is sufficient) with this secret breathing of Spirit
unto the God of our lives, that all may be thereto retired. For if that Counsel
might but take place, it seems to me, that there could then be no room for any
to impose, or press the observation of other men's Lines upon any (which no
doubt is one great occasion of the religious differences treated on) and not
only so, but it would mould all, (who retain the name of Christianity) into the
very nature thereof, and so consequently, a reconciliation in the everlasting.
Truth might quickly ensue: For if that Door be but once shut, through which
variance and disunion entered, there may then arise a hope of cessation to such
contention and strife, as is out of the Truth: but if not, I may then say, how
can the effect cease, whilst the cause remains?

I well Remember, and many with me, that whilst friends kept to their Own, and
concerned not themselves to promote a zealous observation of other men's Lines
made ready to their hands, we then heard not of so much contention, strife and
debate, both public and private, as of late years has been: but since the
promotion thereof, Confusion, Disorder, Emulation, Malice and Envy has been
its Offspring which has been manifested by public unjust revilings against
some, when zealously contending for the Faith of Gods Elect; and though these
are of that number that prefer obedience to their own measures of Grace
received, before obedience to the measures of others; yet other some there are,
who have endeavored to bring Friends into conformity to the pretended Dictates
of the Spirit through others; or at best through that one man G. F. before
spoken of: and that under the penalty of being accounted guilty of Corah's sin,
for scrupling to conform; and thus the variance is like to continue, unless the
God of Heaven for his Names sake, by the Arm of his own Power, shall put a stop
thereto.

And forasmuch as I could not but say, in all seriousness of Spirit, for the
clearing of my conscience; Let the remembrance of the days that are past come
before you, wherein the Servants of the living God sounded by his trumpet an
Alarm to the Nations, and that the Servant of the Lord Edward Borough (many
years deceased) is honorably spoken of by some, if not by all of both parties,
of the People called Quakers at variance, one that had the Trumpet of the Lord
to sound, and has therewith sounded (as a Son of thunder, as well as of
consolation) many Alarm unto the Nations. I shall conclude with the citation of
a part of an Epistle written by him, in the Year, 1658. to the Friends of the
City of London, and so leave the consideration thereof to the Impartial Reader,
to savor whether according to the sense of his counsel, we ought not to know
the Spirit of God in our selves, to be the ground of all our actions; and if
so, then to practice from other men's Lines, without an inward conviction by the
Spirit in our selves, can be no more accepted (as indeed it is not) than the
offering of the halt and the blind for a Sacrifice, under the first Covenant
was.

Here follows the citation out of Edward Burrough's aforesaid Epistle.
"YEa, it is peace to the Soul, and gladness to the Heart, and refreshment to
the Life, to feel and witness the teaching of the Spirit of the Father, leading
into all Truth, and preserving out of all transgressions; wherefore I beseech
you all, let this be your whole desire, and the full practice in your life; and
then shall the Countenance of the Lord shine upon you, and his face shall make
you glad, if in all things you look unto him for counsel, and wait upon the
teachings of his Spirit, which dwells in you, which the Father has given
unto you, because you are his Children, and this he requires from you, that
his own Spirit in you, which has begotten you, may be the root and moving
cause of all your works, and words, and herein will you receive Acceptance with
him, and Peace from him, and Righteousness in him, and everlasting Joy by him
continually; and this is the inheritance unto which you were begotten heirs to
possess for ever.

Bristol the first day of the eight Month. 1680. William Rogers.


It Is thought meet to inform the Reader, that though the five parts of this
Treatise, are now bound up together; yet 'twas once designed, that they should
also be published in single parts, which has occasioned the inserting of some
things oftener, than would have been, and the wording of other things not so
proper and concise as it might, had it at first been so concluded.

Postscript.
UNderstanding, that some among the People called Quakers, within the City of
London, either from Knowledge, or Jealousy, that of late I have been concerned
to publish in Print something against George For, have already concerned
themselves to Dislike, and give pretended Reasons against my so doing; (which
if past over in Silence, and the Truth not cleared, may have a Tendency to
defile the Minds of some of the Friends of Truth, and to establish the Opposers
thereof in their present Evil, and wrong Sentiments of those, who encourage the
bringing forth of this Treatise) I am now in Conscience concerned, to add this
Postscript, for this End.

First, That all Friends may have a further Caution, to hear, see, and savor
for themselves; and not too hastily censure any unheard in their own Defense.

Secondly, That they may not be ensnared by the evil Insinuations, false
Suggestions, or unreasonable Constructions, whether of the Blind Zealot
(principled to Eye the Brethren, in stead of the Light in himself) or the
Lukewarm Partial appearing Note, I would not be hereby understood, that all
who appear Newters, are either Lukewarm, or Partial, because I am satisfied,
many honesthearted Friends; that know the Truth, have not a Knowledge of all
the Differencies, and so may be accounted with Respect to some parts of the
Controversy, as Newters; and others not being concerned in the Controversy, may
be termed Newters, and set such as walk in the Ancient Path of Truth in all
Sincerity.
Newter, that is sensible of the great falling away, and yet either for Ease,
and Interest Sake, or a slavish Fear, stifles his own Knowledge. For the time
is come, wherein a Discovery must be made, of the Ignorance of the one, the
Hypocrisy of the other, and the irreligious, unchristian-like Deportments and
Constructions of both.

To the Matter in hand on this Occasion, I now proceed.

First, The Vatter (as I understand) disliked, is my proceeding to print
against George Fox.

Secondly, The Reasons pretended to be given behind my back, without so much as
First signifying any thing by Word or Writing to me (so far as I know) against
my so doing, are these.

First, That though I pretended, I had often sent to George Fox about giving me
a Meeting, and that I also came up to London, to read a Charge against him,
behind his back, at which time (as it is said) I was then told by some, that
they understood Grorge Fox would be at the General Meeting; yet when he did
come to it (although I had advice from James Claypoole of his being come) I
neither took any notice thereof, nor yet sent to him: and yet further also (as
I now am informed) some do raise as a great Argument (in their Esteem) against
me this also, viz. That when I was last in the City of London, since the
General Meeting, I was also informed by the said James Claypoole, that George
Fox was but a few Miles off, and yet did neither go to him, nor stay until he
came to the City; but instead thereof, hasted out of Town, with great
Diligence; which (as some say) showed, that whatever I had pretended to meet
George Fox, yet I had no desire thereto.

My Concern now is for the Sakes of such simple ones, who may be apt to take
Shadows for Substance, and impertinent irrational (as well as irreligious and
unchristian-like) Discourses for Oracles, when dropping either from the Mouth
or Pen of one, unto whom (according to their Principle) they may think
themselves obliged to have an Eye, to discover the Impertinency and
Fallaciousness of the Reasons urged against my proceeding to print against
George Fox.

In order thereto, I first observe, that from the aforesaid pretended Reasons,
this pretended Argument may be urged.

James Claypoole, being at London, informs William Rogers, then at Lristol,
that George Fox was come to the City, and afterward informs William Rogers,
when at London, that George Fox was but a few Miles from the City; but William
Rogers takes no notice thereof, nor yet sent to him, nor waited for George
Fox's coming to the City; therefore William Rogers had no desire to meet G. F.
when he formerly so pretended.

Were this to come only to the View of Men of Understanding, and impartial, I
might well stop my Pen from any further attempt to discover the weakness and
fallacy of such idle sort of Discourses; because such would first be apt to
enquire, For what End I desired a Meeting with G. F? and when they should be
Informed, That 'twas to prove him guilty of things reproachful to the Truth
and that he would by no means assent to such a Meeting; they would be ready to
conclude, that 'twas his best defense to cover his Guilt from the Knowledge of
such, whose Faith might be in him; and so conclude, that no Obligation in Truth
might be upon me to take any further notice of him as to a Meeting (had it so
happened, as that I had accidently meet him in the very Street; much less ride
94 Miles upon bare report from the said J. C. that he was in London; as if my
Business were the Business of such a poor Pensioner, that had nothing to do,
but to attend G. F's Motion) but rather to endeavor to clear my Conscience
otherwise, as now I am about to do. However, for the Sakes of others, I shall
proceed to clear the matter objected somewhat more.

First, Then, I must tell those evil Insinuators, who say, That I had no desire
to meet G. F. when I writ to him of my readiness so to do, that therein they
belie me.

Secondly, The Argument pretended to be deducible from the aforesaid Reasons,
cannot be good, unless this following Assertion ought to be owned by every one,
that has desire to meet with George Fox, on the like occasion as I had, viz.
First, That on the said J. C's notice, that George Fox is, or will be at
London, then it is the Duty of any Friend, that has a desire to meet G. F. to
come ninety four Miles to London out of all the throng of his other Occasions;
or if in London, to wait for George Fox's coming thither, when near it, to ask
him by Word of Mouth, that which has been before asked by Writing, and no
Answer given, signifying the least assent to meet, as hereafter will appear.
This indeed will be a very ready way to bring Outward Blasting, according to
the Prophesies of some of my Opposers, if they could but create a Belief in me,
that on I. C's notice, that G. F. will be in London, I must then run after him,
and attend upon him, on no other Foot, but to know whether he will meet me,
without any assurance that he would be willing, notwithstanding I have labored
and endeavored so long before to obtain it, and all in vain.

On this Occasion, two things are worthy of some Enquiry.

First, Whether George Fox is really so dignifyed, as that it is an Additional
Error in one whom he accounts a lost Sheep, not to run after and wait on him.
If he were in reality the great Apostle of Christ (as esteemed by some)
methinks he should have in his Remembrance, the Parable spoken of by Christ,
touching leaving the Ninety nine Sheep to seek the One that was lost; and so
account it his Duty to seek after (much more be ready to meet) one accounted a
Lost Sheep, that has been so desirous to meet him, as I have been?

Secondly, Whether James Claypoole be in reality so dignifyed, as that on his
Notice it is the duty of a friend, having a concern upon him relating to George
Fox, to ride ninety four miles or wait, out of all his urging occasions many
days to attend on G. F. When not willing to Answer the end to be waited for, or
else must incar such like Censures as are pat upon me for such an Omission? I
cannot but conclude, that the Lord has not so dignifyed either of them; and
that the Occasion of this Enquiry is the Fruit of Pride, or a Gentilian sort of
Lordship, which the God of Heaven is determined to abase.

As to the report, That I came up to the City of London, to read a Charge
behind George Fox's Back, I thus Answer; as it is above represented, the Action
seems vile and unchristian-like, because from that Representation, it may be
understood, as if I would in a Secret way endeavor to back-bite and reproach
George Fox, and avoid all Occasions of meeting him Face to Face, which I abhor:
and as on the one hand I so do, so on the other hand, I account it vile and
unchristian-like, to spread such a Representation of the matter, and not
declare the whole Truth, and End for which my coming then was, which if it had,
I might not then have had Occasion to have added this Postscript; but since it
is so, I think it needful to inform the Reader of the very naked Truth, from
whence I take that evil Insinuation or partial Report to arise.

After I had by several Letters, signified to G. F. diverse Things, touching
which I expected Satisfaction from him, and had sufficient ground to believe,
that he would not give it; and having a Jealousy that many under the Name of
Quakers, looked upon him as Infallible; I was constrained in my Spirit to
prepare a Manuscript, to discover his Errors, out still with this reserve,
that if Friends would so assist, as that I might have Justice among them, in
relation to him, I might forbear. Amongst other Places I came to London, and
spread the matter before James Claypoole, and three other ancient Friends,
reputed of the chiefest, from whom I could have no hopes, that a Meeting would
be assented to on the Occasion desired, to clear my self; and therefore a
concern of Conscience was upon me, to write the ensuing Letter to James
Claypoole and those other three Friends, to give cover unto the ensuing
Remonstrance to the Friends of London, from both which the purpose of my Mind
may be collected, and whether or no I did not therein Act Christian-like, and
do as much as in me did lie with a clear Conscience, that G. F's Nakedness
might not be so publicly discovered, as now it is.

William Rogers his Letter to James Claypoole and three other Ancient Friends
of London.
London 25th. of 12th. Month 1679.
James Claypoole, etc.
FRiends, you may remember, that when I parted with you Yesterday, you were
desirous to know, where I would be in the Evening, I told you to this purpose,
I knew not certainly, but yet also acquainted you to this purpose, That if you
would appoint me to meet you, I should readily assent thereto: and though you
did not appoint me, yet I was in Expectation that you, or at lest some of you,
might have had a Desire to speak with me again: but understanding nothing
thereof, I am clear in my Spirit to depart the City, and to let you have the
Enclosed with an earnest breathing unto the Lord, that he may direct you to
make that use thereof, as may tend to his Honor. And that I may not be wanting
to open unto you that Counsel, which I believe is the Counsel of the Lord in
this Case, I thus say, that my Persuasion is, 'twill tend most to the Honor of
God, not to keep the enclosed from the Knowledge of the Friends of the City,
and if you are not free to appoint a Meeting for the reading thereof, then to
consider of some other Way, to communicate the same unto the Flock of God in
this City. For you know not, but that a Word from the Lord may arise out of the
Breast of a Babe or Suckling, that may in this Case be piercing as a Dart, to
cause the High and Lofty to bow to Justice, and no longer give Occasions of
Jealousy, that any one amongst those who profess the Truth, should stand as an
Infallible and Justified Person, when such an One (being charged with things
reproachful to the Truth) endeavors to evade the stroke of that Justice, which
in like Cases he has prescribed for others.

Oh Friends! In the presence of the Lord, I affirm, the Sins of G. Fox to have
been notorious. God in his Mercy has manifested him to be a Fallible Man, and
according to a Gospel Method his Errors have been laid before him, and he will
not hear; and now my Concern of Conscience is, to cry aloud for justice, and to
signify, that I am constrained to detect him for his Evil, and Errors by a
printed Record, unless some Expedient may be found agreeable to Truth, to
satisfy my Conscience otherwise. And if you and others, appear not to take
Notice of the Call, and Cry, so as in Truth you, and they ought, then (since he
will not hear the word of Truth from my Pen) let both you and all such unto
whom this Cry, and Call may, or shall come, stop your Mouths from gainsaying
my proceeding, to clear my Conscience, in the method that may seem to me most
expedient, lest you be found fighters against that which the Lord by a
Constrant of his Power leads into. And Builders again of the things that you
have destroyed. For as the Principle of Truth, never led us to respect Persons
in Judgment: so has it not led us to refuse to call upon the Highest, as well
as the Lowest to stoop to a just hearing, when Matters of Error and Evil Fact
shall be laid at the Door of such an one.

That I may as much as in me lies, be eased in my Spirit, with Relation to you,
I cannot but in Bowels of true Love warn you, that these my few Lines may be
read in the Fear and Dread of the Living God, that so if it may be with you to
Answer, or Act any thing in Relation hereunto, you may not Add to my Burdens,
by grieving that which the Lord never grieved. Having thus far cleared my
Conscience to you, as it was with me on my Bed this very Morning, I have Peace
herein, and remain,

Your Friend, William Rogers.

A Postscript.
That which has dropped from one, or some of your Lips since my coming to
London, has occasioned me to add this Postscript.

MY End in communicating unto you, what is with me on this Occasion, is not
that either you, or any should take upon you to Judge the Cause, without assent
or hearing both of George Fox and my self: and if any has, or shall endeavor
to insinuate the contrary, from any thing which I have either Spoken, or
Written, the God of Heaven will blast that Spirit from whence it has or may
come, as that which seeks Occasion against me undeservedly. The like Practice
is that Crying Sin, which my Conscience has been concerned to cry against,
knowing that it has entered many under the Profession of Truth, and for which
their Names lie on Record to their Shame; but yet, I am not without this secret
hope, that the Day will come, wherein many of them may repent of the same: I
cannot also but inform you, that it is the Fruit of Gross Darkness, to compare
such as are at Unity with John Wilkinson and John Story on a Religious Score
(and that on the Foot of such Unity) to John Parrot and his Followers in the
Practice of keeping on their hats in Prayer; because John Perrot's Practice
therein, might properly be termed such Innovation in the Church, as tended to
Schism, contrary to the approved Practice of the Church of God, and so was
worthily Judged, and Condemned: but as to John Wilkinson and John Story, I
remember not, that ever any accused them, for introducing any Practice into the
Church of God, contrary to the Scriptures of Truth, Light of Christ Jesus, or
the approved Practice of Friends, when at Unity in the Truth: and not only so,
but I am well satisfied in my Conscience (and that on sufficient ground, too
large here to insert) that the very secret reason wherefore John Story and John
Wilkinson have been Judged by many, though unheard by such to speak for
themselves, and that Certificates against them have been either sent, or
approved to be sent abroad by George Fox, with direction to send them both to
Enemies and Friends, is, because they cannot stoop and bow to Innovation, not
practiced by Friends when in Unity in the Truth; nor yet justifyable from the
Scriptures of Truth, or the Light of Christ in their Consciences. And if any,
to whom these Lines may come, have, or may think me too Zealous, I earnestly
desire, that such may Watch against a Lukewarm Spirit, and that which is
inclinable to Respect Persons in Judgment; and not only so, but against that
Spirit that has been ready to proclaim the supposed Infirmities of some on the
Housetop, whilst Endeavors are made to cover the Sins of the High and Lofty
one, George Fox, though the so doing, has tended to the stumbling of many
amongst the Flock of God, whoever may so do, and for the Accomplishment thereof
shall pervert the Counsel, and Intent of the Apostle, when he exhorted to bear
all things, as if that Scripture might be produced to cover the Notorious Sins
of One, that may pretend himself Infallible, I then say, It is the ready way to
introduce a Justification of Rantism it self.

I now am further to acquaint you, that if either of you, or any Friend unto
whom this may come, being written for public View amongst Friends, shall
within twenty days time after the date hereof, write unto George Fox, and
therein signify to this Purpose, That since I call for Justice and Satisfaction
for Wrongs done, and Things acted by him reproachful to the Truth, he then
ought to submit to a Hearing thereof before Friends in Truth, that so if
guilty, he may Condemn it, and if not, he may be Justifed; I then shall freely
forbear printing against him, until such time he either sends Answer to such
a Letter, or else sends no Answer, when it may be desired of him; but yet
with this proviso, that such, so to be concerned, send the said Letter to me,
to be sent unto him, and if he shall Answer, and propose such a Method for a
Hearing, as may be approved in my Conscience, I may then submit thereto.

William Rogers.
[To this Letter I never received any Answer.]




Here follows William Rogers his Remonstrance (to which his aforesaid Letter
gave cover) to the Friends of London in relation to G. F. to the intent that
some Expedient might be found to prevent Printing against him.
Friends,
IT is not unknown unto many of you, that I have been concerned touching the
Differences arisen amongst Friends, and whatever Censures some may pass upon
me, yet I have this Evidence in my Conscience, That my Concern has been for
the Cause of God, his Truth and People, and so through his Mercy am inwardly
mad Partaker of his Peace, though many under the Profession of Truth, have
endeavored to give me Outward Trouble, and were it so, that with Peace of
Conscience I could have forborne, to come up unto this City of London on the
Occasion I now am here, I should much rather have stayed at home, about my
outward Business, than have taken this Journey, which I have done, and that
through a Constraint upon my Spirit, to lay before Friends in several Parts of
the Nation, a part of those things which have been, and are my burden; to the
end, that as much as in me lies, I may endeavor, that an Expedient may be
found, whereby they may be removed, and laid at the Proper Door, and that so
the guilty, after serious Examination, by an equal Consent of Parties, may be
by those, who retain their Integrity to the Lord and his Truth, visited,
exhorted, and warned to repent, and turn from that Spirit, which has beguiled;
so may the Judgments of the Lord be witnessed, to the renewing of the Spirit of
the Mind unto God again.

Amongst Friends in general, the Friends at London were before me to visit on
this Occasion: but to be very plain, and lest my so doing, should become a
Stumbling Block to any of the Friends of Truth, it is with me also to say, that
I do not so with Expectation that the Friends of London should look upon
themselves, as having any Authority, or Jurisdiction in any Matter or Concern
whatsoever, relating to the Friends of Truth, without the Consent of Parties
given them. But my chief End in choosing to lay such things, which I at present
have Freedom to do, before the Friends of this great City is, because I suppose
that there are several Persons in, and adjacent thereunto, who may be more
capable to negotiate a Matter, tending to Reconciliation in this Case, than
some in some other places may, and that because of the Influence which (as I
suppose) some amongst them (if any at all elsewhere) have with George Fox,
touching whom my present Concern of Spirit and Conscience is, and my End in
thus opening my self to several Friends in diverse Parts of the Nation, whereof
you are a part, is not that upon my thus writing to you, you should take upon
you to Judge the matter; but that when you have heard the Matter that at
present I am free to communicate to you, you may then seriously wait upon the
Lord, and weigh the Matter laid before you, and if any thing shall be with you
to propose unto George Fox and me, in order to a Decision of the Differences
between us, and it shall appear that which may be approved by the Witness of
God in my Conscience, I have this Faith, that a Constraint will be upon my
Spirit, to submit thereto for Conscience Sake, so far as may concern me.

That now you may be made sensible of what I am at present free to communicate
unto you, I think meet to transcribe a Letter written by me unto George Fox,
for the further clearing of my Conscience, and that if possible (with clearness
to my Conscience) his many Errors, and Slanderous false Accusations, may not
lie on a Printed Record to his Shame unto Posterity.


The said Letter now follows,
Bristol, the 6th. of the 12th. Mo. 1679. George Fox,
I doubt not, but that thou may remember, that in a Letter unto Joan Hily in
or about the 10th. Month, 1678. thou thus writ: I do understand that William
Rogers and his Company has spread abroad a Bad and Lying Paper against me, and
that he and they have, contrary to their Order and Friends Agreement (when I
and we were at Bristol, and had a Meeting with them, he has made a kind of
Narrative of the same, and sent it abroad in the Nation among Bad Spirits.

Thus far, thou in thine to Joan Hily.


The report thereof coming to my Ears, and understanding, that 'twas the Ground
of a Wicked Report in the Mouth of another not professing the Truth, I
concerned my self to enquire into the Matter, and thereupon obtained the
following Certificate.

WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed do testify, that Joseph Forest of
Bristol, Button Maker ( one that was never accounted, as we know or ever heard,
to be of the People called Quakers) related, that he saw a Letter in the Hands
of Joan Hily of Bristol, Widow, wherein William Rogers was much vilifyed, as a
wicked and bad Man by George Whereupon William Rogers desired us to go to Joan
Hily to see the Letter, who this Day showed us a Letter, etc. at the End
whereof we saw written the above recited Note. The Lines mentioned to be above
recited, are the same mentioned in this Letter as written by thee, touching me.
Lines which Joan Hily said, were written by George Fox's own Hand, and
subscribed by him; we also do believe it was his Handwriting.

Dated Bristol 4th. of 11th. Mon. 1678. Alexander Pyott.
Cornelius Sarjant


This occasioned me to write unto thee in the presence of Joan Hily, Alexander
Pyot, and Cornelius Sarjant the same Day, and therein repeating the Matter of
Accusation, etc. as abovesaid, I then thus answered: And forasmuch as Joan Hily
was desirous to know what I could say for my self, I thought it necessary to
acquaint thee, that I thus said unto her, I have not concerned my self to
spread abroad any bad or lying Paper against thee, nor yet have been any way
concerned in spreading a kind of a Narrative, contrary to any Agreement wherein
I was concerned, and that thy Writing to Joan Hily touching me is a Slander,
and a Lie, etc. and so will become thy Burden: wast thou an Innocent Man, thou
would have endeavored, in a Christian Method, to clear the things touching
which I have often written unto thee.

Thou may also remember, that on the 11th. of the 11th. Month 1678. I writ
unto thee again, and sent it by a Messenger on purpose, that so I might have an
Account of its Delivery unto thee, etc. and the End of my so doing was twofold:
First, lest the other should miscarry, which Joan Hily undertook to send unto
thee under her Cover.

Secondly, To signify my Expectation of Satisfaction from thee, for the Wrong
thou have done me, etc.

Thou may also Remember, that by Letter dated the 22th. of the 2d. Month,
1679. written by my self and three others, unto thee and two others: 'Twas
signified unto thee on the Occasion of my being rendered a Covenant-Breaker, or
to that purpose, that thou had used many Aggravating Expressions concerning
me, viz. Rendering my practice therein in these Words, Below Common Morral Men,
not for the Society of Civil People, short of Christianity, a Truce-breaking
Spirit, a Covenant Breaking Spirit, not to be Credited, and below some Priests,
to spread such things behind our Backs in a secret underly way, which does
clearly manifest, is not the Spirit of Christ, nor honesty amongst Men. And in
the same Letter I declared, That 'twas but reasonable that thou should prove
the Matter whereof thou accusedst me, because I declared thou wast a False
Accuser.

Thou may also remember, that Thomas Gouldney, William Ford, and my self,
signified unto thee by our Letter, dated the 11th. of the 11th. Month, 78. and
because we would be sure it might come to thy Hand, we caused it to be sent by
a Messenger on purpose to thee, and then we gave the Copy of a Letter, dated
from no Place, and subscribed S. H. Thou may also remember, that in the said
Letter these following Reflections were made upon us, on the aforesaid
Occasion, viz. You in a secret underly Way, sent Papers behind the backs of
them that were concerned; this Practice of yours is worse than the Priests, and
made your selves of no Reputation, nor Credit amongst Men; such Work, etc. not
fit for the Society of Men; all Judicious Civil Men would abhor your Practice;
made yourselves of no Credit, degenerate from Common Civil Men in Breaking
Covenants. And forasmuch as we were jealous that thou wast the Note, The
Language used by him, and already cited, is so near like this, that sew will
suppose that it dropped from two distinct Persons.
Dictator thereof, we writ unto thee, desiring thee to acquaint us, if thou
could, who it was that wrote such a Letter, or a Letter to the like Import;
and whether thou did know of any thing acted by us, or either of us,
according as in the said Copy was mentioned, telling thee also, that Truth
seeks no Corners.

But notwithstanding the aforementioued four Letters on the aforesaid Occasion,
yet nothing is come to this Day to either of our hands, as Answer from thee, so
far as I know, which considering how forward thou have been in other Cases to
answer in thy Vindication, its to me a Demonstration, that thy Guilt is such,
as that no Answer in Truth, can render thee an Innocent Man.

This is not all the Abuse, which thou have offered to me as well as to the
Truth it self. But thou have farther (and that at a large rate too) persisted
by thy Lies, Slanders, etc. to gainsay the Truth, as I have sufficiently
manifested in my rejoinder (which thou have not yet Answered, so far as ever I
understood) to thy Reply, and John Blackings Postscript, which was written in
Answer to what I writ unto thee, dated the 20th. of the 7th. Month, grounded on
thy sending Queries to be read in our Men's Meeting in Bristol, and not only so,
but thy Agents have been very busy to publish thy foresaid Reply, into diverse
parts of the Nation, to the corrupting the Minds of many, who give Credit
thereto; all which being in much seriousness of Spirit weighed by me,
increases the Concern of Conscience on me, to wipe away thy Refuge of Lies, by
detecting thee in Print (if by any reasonable means, the Door may be open so to
do) for thy manifold Abuses of me, unless some other Expedient, agreeable to
the Truth may be found, to satisfy my Conscience: touching which, I hope, I
shall forever have an Ear open to any one, that may speak unto me in the Word
of Truth. And thus I am concerned the more, for that I have been by several
Friends from diverse Countries, and Places called upon, to Vindicate the Truth,
as well as my self, against thy Reproach.

However I doubt not, but I may yet forbear to Print against thee, if per the
next Post after thy receipt hereof, thou give me that satisfaction as is
proposed in mine above cited, of the 11th. of the 11th. Mounth, 1678. and
acknowledge the Errors, Lies, Slanders, and Forgery, etc. whereof I have
detected thee, in my aforesaid Rejoinder, sent unto thee several months past,
with direction that it may be read amongst Friends, as publicly, as thy false
Scandalls have extended; or otherwise, if thou shall pretend, that thou art not
convinced of being guilty of, Lies, etc. if thou furnish me before the General
Meeting with such a number of fair Copies in Manuscript of my Rejoinder, as may
be sufficient to Inform all such of the Truth, as have been misinformed by thy
Fallacious Reply, and give thy Directions, that it may be read in the General,
and other Men's Meetings, it may be, for ought I yet know, a consideration to me
to forbear. For my desire is not to discover thy Errors and Evil Practices,
further than amongst those, who Profess the Truth, if by any means posible I
can, and yet so clear my Conscience, as that they may have a Proper
Looking-Glass to behold thee in, as thou art, and ought to be seen. If thou
condescendest to what is last proposed, it may also be ground of Hope, that
thou will condescend to give Satisfaction for other thy Miscarriages. And of
this I desire to hear from thee, by a Letter to be directed to James Claypoole,
under thy Cover, desiring him to send it unto me. If thou answer not my
Request, I then think it needful to inform thee that my self and others may
then have no ground of Hope, that thou will give us Satisfaction, for other thy
Offenses, committed against thy Brethren, to the Dishonor of God and his
Truth, which the Friends thereof profess: and so my Concern will then be, not
only to detect thee, for such thy Errors and evil Practices, which thou have
occasionally committed with respect to me; but forasmuch as I am fully
satisfied in my Conscience, on such grounds as I think not my self obliged to
reiterate, that thou have been one chief Instrument, or at least an Abetter of
such as have, whereby Note, This Letter is intended to be spread abroad amongst
Friends, and the Reason wherefore I Insert these general Reflections, without
particular Evidence, is chiefly to become a Remembrance unto Friends, that they
may consider, whether they have not been Witnesses that my Sense is true; for I
know, there are many amongst us, who if Occasion required, are ready to give
the like Testimony. I certainly know the particular evidences hereof producible
are so many, as might fill a large Volume, and for that reason also improper on
this Occasion.
a biting and devouring Spirit is entered some amongst the Flock; and that
Heaps of unsound and aerie Teachers, that appear amongst us, as if they were
sent to call for Fire from Heaven, receive Life from thee, and thereby are
emboldned to entertain the Congregation with Empty and Idle vain Discourses, to
the obstructing of such, as I firmly believe, have the Word of God to deliver,
in the demonstration of the Power, and Spirit; and therefore my Concern has
been, to treat on several Particulars, which have been as so many several
Steps; by which Divisions have ascended to the Height they now are at. To send
the Copy thereof is unreasonable, because thou may (when I have so done) take
no more notice thereof, than thou have of the four forementioned Letters.
However, lest thou should now imagine, that I will act against thee in a secret
underly way, and to prevent thee from running into further Error, by such evil
Suggestions, from thy Imaginations, as heretofore, with Relation to me, thou
have done, I think meet to signify unto thee, the Matters whereon I have
treated in that Manuscript, prepared by me for the PRESS (unless my Conscience
can be otherwise satisfied) in Relation to thee, wherein I doubt not, but to
every Impartial Reader, there will appear matter, whereby thou will be
manifested guilty of many Evil Practices and Errors, for which thou ought to
give Satisfaction, both to Particular Persons, whom thou have wronged, as well
as to the Church of God in General.

In the said Manuscript, I treat on the seven Queries sent unto John Wilkinson,
the sixteen Queries sent unto John Story, making Observations on Proceedings
thereon, and which had Relation thereto; I also take notice of two of thy
Letters to John Wilkinson and John Story, and of several of mine to thee, and
of John Story's Letter to the two Meetings in the North; the Dissatisfaction
relating to thee at Bristol, thy Queries read at Bristol, and other things
relating thereto.

I now come to take Notice, that John Blaickling in his Postscript to thy Reply
to me, thus says: But let me ask William Rogers, and them that take his part,
has George Fox showed forth the Fruit of a Careless, Loose, Libertine, or Dark
Spirit? Let that Man come forth in the whole Nation, that can justly charge him
with such a Spirit from his Childhood. This seems a Challenge made by John
Blaickling on thy Behalf, and approved by thee, since it is sent by thee to me,
annexed to thy Reply unto me; and therefore I am concerned thus to Answer, that
if thou will acknowledge, that the Publication of Lies, the Making use of a
Certificate in thy Favor, given forth by a Man that thou thy self knows, knew
nothing of some of the Matters whereof by the Words of his Testimony, he
undertook to clear thee, giving Instructions to others to perform Duty, and yet
take Liberty directly to violate the same thy self, as if thou would have
Friends follow thy Words, but not thy Example, be the Fruit of a Careless,
Loose, Libertine, or Dark Spirit, then I am the Man in this Nation, who am
ready to come forth to charge thee with the Fruit of a Careless, loose,
libertine, Dark Spirit, and to Justify the Charge against thee, and not only
so, but shall at that time very freely give thee Liberty to take copy of what
is prepared against thee, as aforesaid, after the Reading thereof in such an
Assembly, as we may agree upon. And to be plain, I cannot, but for the clearing
of my conscience tell thee, that if thourefuse to come forth on this Challenge,
occasioned as aforesaid, I hope all Friends, who shall come to the Knowledge
hereof, will be on their Watch, that they may escape the Snare in which many
have been caught, through the Belief of Lies published by thee, and that none
for the future, will account, That all Friends Disunity with thee, is an
Infallible Demonstration, of being out of Unity with the Lord and his People. I
am,

Thy Friend, William Rogers.


In the abovesaid Letter to G. F. together with what I have written preceding
the same, is contained as much as at present I am free to comunicate unto you,
until such time I may understand, whether my Lines may be by you deemed worthy
your notice; which if it be, my desire is, that I may hear from you in writing
touching the matter presented to your view; and as I said before, if any thing
shall be with you to propose unto me, and it shall appear, that which may be
approved by the Witness of God in my Conscience, I have this Faith, that then a
constraint will be upon my Spirit to submit thereto for Conscience sake I am,

Your Friend William Rogers.


There was a Postscript added, which I omitted to take Copy of; but suddenly
after Remembering it, I noted, that to the best of my Rememberance, 'twas to
this purpose.

Had you obtained a Meeting of the Friends of the City, as was desired, I
should, if it had been proposed, readily assented to the Reading amongst them
of the Manuscript prepared. To the aforesaid remonstrance I never received any
Answer, neither have I understood that 'twas at any time communicated by those
unto whom it was sent unto any other Friends within the City of London.

One thing more yet worthy observation, viz. That George Fox had no inclination
to meet me, for which many evidences might have been produced, had there been
occasion; but lest any one should think it an unjust Reflection, I desire that
what follows may be duly weighed.

William Rogers to Daniel Smith of Marlborough.
Bristoll the 13th. of the 4th. Month, 1680. Daniel Smith;
UNderstanding that thou had some words with G. F. concerning me and that in
relation to my proposition of giving him a Meeting before Friends, to the end
that if he were guilty of any thing reproachful to the Truth, he might condemn
it, if not, he might be cleared, I thought meet to request thee, to send me a
few Lines, signifying what his Answer was, to that Proposition; and forasmuch
as thou appeared a plain man, and accounted (to the best of my Remembrance)
that my Proposition was rational, I hope thou will Answer this my Request, etc.

Thy Loving Friend, William Rogers.


Now follows so much of Daniel Smiths Answer, as relates to the above Request.
Malborough the 6th. of 5th. Mo. 1680. William Rogers,
FRiend, thine I received, and this Account I can give thee, thy Charge
concerning George Fox, writ by thee at Calve, I gave to him, and showed thy
Mind concerning a hearing; and he judged it would prove but a Jangle, as it was
at Bristol, etc.

Daniel Smith.


The above said few Lines from Daniel Smith the Elder, in Answer to mine,
compared with G. F's Silence to what I have written to him desiring a Meeting,
and his Neglect to give Answer unto two Letters sent unto him by John Rance,
and written on purpose to entreat him to give a Meeting, clearly show, that
George Fox had no mind to concern himself to meet me, and therefore, I had no
Reason at my last being in London, to attend and wait for George Fox's coming
to the City.

To conclude; much more might in Truth be written to evidence the Matter
intended by this Postscript, which at present I shall omit, having this Faith
and Confidence, that as in Conscience I have been concerned to prepare and
publish this Treatise, and at this Moment and Conclusion have the Answer of
Peace in my Bosom, so there will be a Service for the Lord, his Truth and
People therein. And though some may make Lies their Refuge, evil Insinuations
and false Constructions their Defense, to abuse both it and me, and other
Friends in Truth concerned, as well as to cover the Head of Deceit, and to
uphold that which the Lord (as I firmly believe) has determined to bring down
into the Dust; yet my Faith is, that the Lord in his due time will discover the
Skirts of such, and take away the unjust Reproaches from off his Peculiar
People, and cause (...) Vengence and Indignation to take hold on the Adversary,
and give unto those who are Obedient unto that Spirit, in which the Election
stands, an Increase of the Ancient Love, Peace and Joy in the Everlasting
Light, so that being enabled to sit down together under their own Vine and
Fig Tree (where none shall make them afraid) they will be made Partakers
(notwithstanding all False Prophecies, and Imaginary Visions) of the Joy of
Gods Salvation, to the Consolation of one another Souls in the Lord. Amen,
Amen, says my Soul.

William Rogers.
Dated Bristol the 3d. of the 9th. Mo. 1680.

Bristol the 8th. of November. 1680.
NOtwithstanding that all this Treatise excepting the Postscript, Index, and
Errata, is already printed, yet as a further Evidence of my Readiness to meet
George Fox, and his declining thereof, I thought meet to insert this Additional
Postscript. A Friend from London advised me, That my Proceeding to print, was
much discoursed of in the City of London: And that William Mead desired
Nicholas Lucas, that it might be intimated to me, that now George Fox would
give me a Meeting. Which I did understand (or at least suppose) was urged as an
Argument, that I ought thereupon to forbear Printing, which occasioned me
immediately on receipt thereof to take care, that my Mind might be communicated
unto Nicholas Lucas of Hartford, who thereupon, as I am advised, acquainted
William Mead, that their Desire (meaning that I would give George Fox a
Meeting) was accepted by me, provided that George Fox would give it under his
Hand (meaning thereby to meet me) to which William Mead said, he would speak to
George Fox about it; and afterward the said William Mead told Nicholas Lucas
he had spoke with G. F. and his Answer was, He will not give it under his Hand,
nor write to me; By which all impartial Readers may further Judge, whether G.
F. have any Inclination at all to give me a Meeting for the clearing of Matters
laid to his Charge.

I do hereby testify, that which is contained in the Additional Postscript, so
far as relates to me and William Mead is Truth.


Nicholas Lucas


Bristol the 10th. of November, 1680.
FOrasmuch as it has of late been frequently discoursed, amongst some of the
People called Quakers, That I intended to Print against Friends: and not only
so, but such my reputed Intentions have been made use of as a Argument to
render me Wicked, and thereby to disaffect Simple-hearted well meaning Friends,
toward my self and other Friends in Truth: it is now become my further Concern
to add these few Lines.

First, Such Insinuators cannot be therein guilty of less than Injustice, and
Slander, because it was not then known what would be printed by me.

Secondly, They have had no ground to conjecture, that my Intentions were to
treat on any thing more, than the Ways and Means by which the said People
(once at Unity) came to be divided; together with some part of the Fruits of
that Division, and the Doctrines and Practices we stand for, which if brought
to Light, so as that nothing but the Naked Truth might be published (which
ought to have been supposed, until the contrary should have appeared) the
Question then needful to be answered is this, Whether it is matter of evil Fact
in me, to publish in Print an Historical Relation of the Truth, as aforesaid;
and that for the clearing of my Conscience, that the Sin of Disobedience may
not lie at my Door? The Answer in short is, Nay. To every impartial and
unprejudiced Reader, I doubt not, but that the Preface to the Reader, the
Introduction to the First and Fourth Parts of this Treatise, may give
sufficient Satisfaction: but lest the Ignorance and Blindness of any should be
so great, as not from thence to perceive the Righteousness of my present
proceeding to Print, or that the Partiality of any that do so, should so
abound, as to Strengthen Evil Insinuations against me on that Account, I have
this to say: That such as have been of Party against us (concerned in the
Publication hereof) have been the First (and frequent) Promulgators by
Declaration, by Manuscript, and by Printing, That there have been Divisions
amongst the aforesaid People.

As to a Publication thereof by Declaration, I refer to what I have already
written in the Preface to the Reader, the Introduction to the First and Fourth
Parts of this Treatise.

As to the Publication thereof by Manuscript, I referr to the Fourth Part, and
in particular to the Title Page thereof; to the Forty Four Articles of
Accusation, drawn up against John Wilkinson and John Story, to the Paper
subscribed by Charles Marshal and Sixty five more, at Ellis Hooks his Chamber;
(both mentioned in this Treatise) to the Note, in the said Paper, these Words
(relating to John Story and John Wilkinson) are, viz. And we do hereby warn
all, to have a Care, that they be not lifted up by reason of the Temptation and
hurt that is come upon these Men, nor yet insult over them: for that Spirit is
not of God: but rather let all watch, in the Fear and Dread of Almighty God,
against that Spirit, that they enter not into Temptation. The aforesaid Words
are cited to show the Inconsistency of John Wilkinson and John Story, their
Opposers Actions with the aforesaid Advice. For it is well known, that contray
to the aforesaid Counsel, Their Opposers have been so drunk with Prejudice, and
an Insulting Spirit, as that the said Paper ( called a Narrative) has been
read against them in several Counties, in public Meetings for the Worship of
God; from which Assemblies no Persons whatsoever (though not professing the
Truth) are excluded. This Action may reasonably be concluded to spring from the
same Spirit, that dictated a few Lines subscribed by George Fox, whereof
mention is made in the Preface, directing to show Certificates against John
Story, both to Enemies and Friends.
Paper called The Brethrens Narrative at Drawel: And to an Epistle written by a
public Preacher (and one of Party against such as are concerned in the
Publication hereof, whose Name for the Reasons mentioned in the Preface I omit)
directed to be read, (and accordingly was read) in a Public Meeting for
Worship of God, within the City of Bristol, held in the great Meeting House on
the 21st. of the 11th. Month 1678. in the presence of several, not accounted to
be of the People called Quakers, wherein mention is made of Rents, Schisms,
Contention, Difference, Breach, Strife, Distraction, Discord, Quarrel, late and
present Division, and of a Separation in some Parts of this Nation, on such
wise, as that in the Authors Sense, it is Evident, that they are mentioned with
relation to one party of Friends, amongst those who have professed the Truth as
rent and divided from another Party.

But that which on this Occasion is chiefly my Concern, is to evidence that
there has been a Publication of the aforesaid Divisions in Print before the
Publication hereof, and that by (and on the behalf of) some of George Fox's
Party.

On the 8th. Instant came to my Hands two Sheets of Printed Paper, Entitled An
Epistle (pretended to be for true Love, Unity and Order in the Church of
Christ, against the Spirit of Discord, Disorder and Confusion. In the bottom of
the Title Page thereof, it is thus written, Printed by Andrew Soul, and are to
be Sold at his Shop in Devonshire Buildings, without Bishopsgate, 1680. That
direction for Sale is a sufficient Notification to me, that 'twas not Printed
for a limited Service Note, Besides, as I am informed, they are publicly
exposed to Sale by other Booksellers in London.
and forasmuch as it is well known that Ann Whitehead and Mary Elson (the
Subscribers thereof) are such qualifyed Persons, as not to Print any thing on a
Religious Score, without the Approbation of a Meeting held in London every
Second Day (usually consisting of uncertain Numbers of uncertain qualifyed
Persons) who therein pretend to take upon them the approbation, or the contrary
of what is intended for the PRESS. I reasonably conclude, that whatever is
written in the above cited Sheets, was there approved.

I should now proceed to cite a few Sentences out of it, which amounts to a
Publication of Divisions.

Page 4. The Lord has suffered Blindness in part to happen to some, through
declining their First Love, who came out amongst us, and had a Part in the
Belief and Discovery of the Way of Truth; but now some only have the
Sheeps-Cloathing, and others have lost that too, who through a prejudiced Mind,
are alienated from that Unity of Spirit, and Bond of Peace, in which we keep
our wholesome Practices, which we have received in the Unity, and Order of the
Gospel of Peace, and Truth of Christ Jesus, in the Fellowship of the Spirit, in
Bowels of Mercy, being like-minded, and of one accord, in whatsoever things are
True, Just, Honest, and of good Report, not that we should think of them only,
but be in the Practice of them, as we are. In the same Page, it is further thus
written; But to our Burden, and Grief, we find amongst some a Contrary Spirit,
that will not subject to Unity in wholesome Practices amongst us, and that will
needs Interpose, to destroy Unity in some Places, and obtrude it self to
Confound our wholesome Order and Practices received amongst us, as a Church and
People: and through this contrary Spirit, and Prejudiced Mind, the Accuser of
the Brethren is broken out, under a specious Pretense, crying, Liberty of
Conscience, Liberty of Conscience, in Opposition to those needful, convenient,
and wholesome Practices exercised amongst us in outward Things. Also Page 5th.
thus, This Note, An accusing Spirit is now accounted a Confounder of Order: by
this Rule, may not the Accusers of I. W. and I. S. be accounted Confounders of
Order.
Accusing, Opposing, Dividing Spirit, that is at work in this our Day, to
confound Order against the Peaceable Government of Christ amongst his People,
This Dividing, Accusing, Prejudicial Worker would introduce a Belief, that an
Apostasy is Entering, and we are gone from the Beginning and First Principle,
and the Power lost, and now Forms are setting up, and Imposition on
Consciences, and the like, and amongst whom is all this say they, but amongst
us who are in Unity of Spirit both in Faith and Practices, and it is amongst
such, that they imagine this Fearful Imposture, and Arbitrary Rule, Imposing
Prescriptions and Laws on the tender Consciences of the Weak, is now gotten up
to exercise, and so the Liberty of the tender Conscience is lost; and you say
they are entangled with the Yoke of Bondage to this Day. And Page 10th. thus;
Inasmuch as the envious Worker is suffered to proceed, that would even race out
the Foundation of Christ's Kingdom and Government under which his Subjects do
only own their Christian-Freedom and true Liberty of Conscience, etc. In the
12th. Page it is thus written: And he (meaning G. F. as by his Name before
cited in the same Page appears) was moved of the Lord to advise to a Women's
Meeting, etc. and when Dear G. F. declared unto us, what the Lord had made
known unto him by his Power, that there should be a Women's Meeting, that so all
the Sick, the Weak, the Widow and the Fatherless should be Note, here is no
mention made of bringing Marriages before them.
minded, and looked after in their Distresses. And Page the 13th. thus: I have
a word in my Heart to say unto you all Back-Sliders, Obstructors, Opposers (and
such as Countenance them secretly) of this our heavenly Order of Men and Women's
Meetings; which the Lord by his Power has set up (and further thus) You that
have despised Dignities to speak Evil of the Servants of the Lord, such that
faithfully have labored amongst us from the Beginning, which the Lord has
found worthy of double Honor; for I do know, and the Lord has sealed it in my
Heart, that that Spirit which has opposed the Blessed Unity, and Order of
Truth in those our Men's and Women's Meetings, shall never prosper, nor they who
are in it, inwardly to God without Repentance. And in the 15th. Page it is thus
written: And a true Sense has been upon me of our Dear Friends up and down the
Nation, of their great Trial and Exercise that has been upon them because of
this Wicked Dividing Spirit, and especially in my Native Country, viz.
Willshire. Thus much out of the aforesaid Sheets, to manifest that this
Treatise contains not the first printed and published Papers, evidencing
Divisions amongst the People called Quakers.

I am now sensible some may be apt thus to Object. If the Meeting held on every
Second Day, whereof thou makes mention, may be Justified, in approving the
aforesaid sheels to be printed; yet it can be Plea to Justify thy Printing,
because thou have descended more particularly to describe wherein the
Difference does consist, and have mentioned some Names of both Parties
concerned in the Difference. But in the aforecited Sheets, we find but some
Names of one Party only, viz. G F. and the two Subscribers of the said two
Sheets.

Answ. I confess, the latter Part of the Objection to be true, but yet not
sufficient for any to condemn my printing, who may Justify the printing of the
aforesaid Sheets. For, if the mentioning of one particular Matter, wherein the
Difference is reputed to consist (even as in the said Sheets it is) be
according to Truth in one Party, I know not why the mentioning of more may not
be justifiable in the other Party; and if it be justifyable to mention a Part
of the Names of one Party concerned in the Difference, why not also of the
other? And though in the aforesaid Sheets, there is not so particular a
Description, wherein the Differences do consist, as in this Treatise is
mentioned. Yet the understanding Reader may collect many things of importance
from it, and in particular, that in the Sense of the Subscribers thereof, and
such as are at Unity with them (who may reasonably be taken to be of one Party)
they are such as are for True Love, Unity, Order of the Gospel of Peace,
Fellowship of the Spirit, Bowels of Mercy, and things that are True, Honest,
Just, and a good Report, etc. And that the other Party whom they oppose, are
such as are for Disorder, Confusion, unto whom Blindness has happened, and
that they are declined from their First Love, having only the Sheeps-Cloathing,
of Prejudiced Minds Opposing, Dividing, Confounding Order against the Peaceable
Government of Christ; Envious Workers, that would raze at the very Foundation
of Christ's Government, Despisers of Dignity, etc. All which leads me to this
Observation, that since no matter of Fact is signified, to evidence any under
the Profession of Truth worthy of those General Reflections, nor yet any thing
referred to for Evidence; I may reasonably conclude, that the Intended
Opposition to Christ's Government, is in their Sense no other than a supposed
Dislike to Womens-Meetings, distinct and separate from Men; Because I find that
a Dislike to those Meetings is the Chief Matter treated on, which being duly
weighed, seems to me very Unchristian-like so to reflect, as aforesaid;
especially, when on such, whose Persons and Purses have not been wanting to
Administer to the Necessities of the Sick, the Weak, the Widows and the
Fatherless, which are the Ends declared in the aforesaid Sheets, wherefore
Womens-Meetings were set up, and advised to by George Fox.

To conclude, I now leave it to the Impartial Reader to consider, whether the
Method that is to be learned out of the before cited sheets, or that in this
Treatise, be most justifiable. The First being to praise themselves, and defame
others in a general way, without evidencing matter of Fact, worthy either of
such Praise on Defamation; and so consequently can convince none, but such as
are ready to pin their Faiths on the Sleeves of others. The other being a
Demonstration from matter of Faith, or Fact, leaves every Readers Judgment
free.

The Desire of my Soul now is, that the Lord in his Mercy may open the Eyes of
Truths Opposers, that they may come to see, to hear, and understand themselves,
and not be found any longer rejoicing in those Imaginary Sparks which they by a
false Fire have kindled.

W. R.


ERRATA.
ERRORS in the PREFACE.
Page Line Error Corrected 34 18 as is of 38 ib. are as

ERRORS in the FIRST PART.
Page Line Error Corrected 2 last Variance Variance are 4 1 Governments
Government is 15 16 Part Parts 15 17 where were 38 27 Hypocrite Hierarchy 46 3
Twelfth Twenty-First 47 27 Christians Chieftains 58 20 form from 64 23
Marriages Marriage 66 21 whence when 70 33 are: not are not: 73 12 can it can
73 35 Lev. Rev. 86 20 his this 86 27 Fox Fox his 87 33 their the

ERRORS in the SECOND PART.
Page Line Error Corrected 5 15 that the 44 4 lawful unlawful 63 32 prove
proceed 81 2 be by 85 24 ye we 86 20 in on 91 31 Words the Words 91 33
Subscribes Subscribers 91 34 in is

ERRORS in the THIRD PART.
Page Line Error Corrected 7 8 ( Isa. 11.) o 14 4 to o 14 32 discourse of which
discoursed of, which 21 24 Centure Sentence 29 14 Treatises Treatise 34 17
having leaving 37 17 to as 40 6 neither never 40 12 with with the 52 27 intiate
intimate 69 23 But out 74 23 promised premised 79 27 convinced convened 80 4
Christ. Christ; Note also, The Paragraph should not end at [Christ;] 115 34
closed chosed 119 7 Division Decision 122 27 little Title 123 33 related
Relation 124 14 plain Plainness 125 4 any occasion my Occasions 127 16 or on
135 last would it would 136 14 confess confessed 137 5 this his 137 8 Orders
Order 138 last If they have this to say If they have not, I have this to say,
140 In the Marginal-Note, for [of] read [after]

ERRORS in the Observations on Robert Barclay's ost-script.
110 11 held forth held forth and obeyed 117 6 occ^sioned occasioning 119 23
this his 120 8 an that 120 24 to (...) 120 37 Peter's Peter

ERRORS in the FOURTH PART.
Page Line Error Corrected 3 2 those o 25 28 amongst other (amongst others) 27
last which o 33 15 be informed to o 62 3 Tythe-Payers as Tythe-Payers 62 9 it is
it is said to be 62 10 for for it is said 63 3 this this said 63 the 5th. Line of
the last Marginal-Note, for [Deserts] read [Deserts, and our Information.] 92
26 the this 93 5 the thy

ERRORS in the FIFTH PART.
Page Line Error Corrected 12 16 follow: follow together, with observations
thereon, cited out of the 13th. Section of the 2d. Part of the Manuscript,
first mentioned in the Preface. 34 25 thou then 40 5 proceeding proceeding 65
16 Answers Accusers 67 12 Ward Ware 71 17 says the less; says; the less 77 4
are there there are

Several small Errors, not noted in the Errata, have escaped the Press, which
will be obvious enough to the Understanding Readers, who are desired to Correct
the same; and also to note, That wherever it is thus written, [ Preface to the
First Part, etc.] it ought to be only [Preface]; and that, if at first it had
been conclude to Publish the Fiv^ Parts all together, as now they are, and not
in distinct Parts, referring in some Cases to the Manascript made mention of in
the Preface, might have been omitted, and instead thereof a Reference to some
Part of what is now Published.

The FIRST PART OF THE Christian-Quaker, Distinguished from the APOSTATE and
INNOVATOR.

WHEREIN, An unhappy Difference arisen amongst the People called Quakers is
treated on, and therein a Part of those things touching which they were at
Unity, and the Ways and Means whereby that Unity was broken, Manifested.

ALSO, An Epistle evidencing the Qualifications of such, whom Satan has made
Use of to Rend, and Divide the Church of Christ.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A Paper Touching the Scattered of Israel, given forth in
the Year 1661, by Edward Borough Minister of the Everlasting Gospel, which
clearly shows, that the Spirit of the Lord thorough his Servant, has in a
Parable very lively described, a Part of what has happened amongst the Flock
of God in these latter Days.

ALSO, A Particular Discovery of that Bait, by Which George Fox has been
Tempted and Ensnared, to Oppose and Reproach some (without Manifesting of any
Just Cause) who cannot own, That his Directions or Prescriptions should be
urged with Severity, which is no less than an enforcing on Gods Faithful People.

By WILLIAM ROGERS on Behalf of himself and other Friends in Truth concerned.

Jer. 10.21. Jer. 12.10. For the Pastors are become brutish, and have destroyed
my Vineyard.

Isai. 3.12. As for my People, Children are their Oppressors, and Women Rule
over them: Oh my People, They which lead thee, cause thee to err, and destroy
the way of thy Paths.

Tim. 2.19. Nevertheless the Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal,
The Lord knows them that are his, and let every one that names the Name of
Christ, depart from Iniquity.

LONDON, PRINTED in the Year, 1680.

The Contents.
Section I. THe Introduction wherein the Case is Stated, manifesting that there
was an Union, and the Ways and Means by which it came to be Broken. Page 1.
Sect. II. An Answer to the First Position ( deducible from an Objection raised
toward the Conclusion of the First Section) to wit, That the Lord has ordained
George Fox, to be in that Place amongst the Children of Light in this our Day,
as Moses was amongst the Children of Israel in his Day. Page 10. Sect. III. An
Answer to the Second Position ( deducible from an Objection raised toward the
Conclusion of the First Section) viz. that Monthly and Quarterly Meetings are
called the Church, and ought to be submitted to. Page 11. Sect. IV. An Answer
to the Third Position ( deducible from an Objection raised, toward the
Conclusion of the First Section) viz. That it is Folly and Hypocrisy to profess
our selves Members of the True Church, and yet not Believe thus, as the True
Church Believes. Page 36. Sect. V. What we stand for, viz. Truth and
Righteousness, and that Christ's Government, may be exalted in every Heart,
under which we are Instructed not to depend on Man, but on the sufficiency of
Gods Grace. Page 27. A Testimony against Tithes, and for Meeting together in
time of Persecution, the neglect whereof may be the Fruit of Weakness or
Disobedience. Page 28. The Government of Christ, and the Laws thereof are
Inward; some part of the Fruits brought forth, under the said Government are
Described. Page 29. An Objection relating to the securing any part of a Man's
Estate, on a Foresight of a Praemunire, or Fines for Meeting Answered. Page 31.
Sect. VI. On the Occasion of an Objection raised, touching the Sufficiciency
of Gods Grace: Unity is treated on from the words of Paul to the Corinthians,
that they should all speak one thing. Page 36. Touching the Word Independency,
occasioned by a Public Preacher. Page 38. That leaving Friends to the Grace,
Light, and Spirit of God, is not the way to lead into Rantism. Page 42, 43.
Sect. VII. Touching Church Government, and the meaning of the Word Church
Government, in the Sense of our Opposers, as we on (sufficient Ground) take it,
laid down. Page 44. Our denial of that meaning. Page 46. Several Scriptures,
from whence a Proof for Church Government has been pretended, are treated on;
showing, that from thence no Pretense can be, to claim a Power over
Conscience, or Outward Property. Page 46, 47. The Doctrine touching Power over
Conscience, and Outward Things, relating to meum and tuum ( as R. B's Terms
are) which, we therefore call Outward Property, examined and testified against,
as contrary to the Principle of Truth, and Liberty we have in Christ Jesus.
Page 47. Our Sense what ought to be done for the Decision of Controversy, with
Relation to Property, between Brother and Brother. Page 48. An Objection raised
to this purpose, that what is given forth by the Spirit, through the Brethren,
ought to be obeyed, and not accounted the Dictates of Fallible Men, and that if
thou see it not thy Duty to obey, the reason is thy want of Diligence, and not
waiting in thy Measure, and so no Plea for thy Disobedience is good. Page 54.
The said Objection Answered. Page 54. An Examination from the Scriptures,
Whether Christ gave any Encouragement to his Disciples, to become Rulers over
one another. Page. 59.
Sect. VIII. A Manifestation, that the variance has originally Reason, from a
Different Sense touching George Fox, the General Meeting, or Women's Meeting.
Page 61. Sect. IX. An Epistle, evidencing the Qualifications of such whom
Satan makes use of to Rend and Divide the Church of Christ. Page 68. A Paper
given forth by Edward Buroughs, Anno 1661. touching the Scattered in Israel;
wherein by a Parable is lively described, a part of what has happened amongst
the Flock of God, in these latter Days. Page 78. The Conclusion; manifesting
several Passages, very material and worthy Observation, as a further Discovery
of the Fruits and Cause of Division, and in Particular what has been the Bait
whereby George Fox has been Tempted and Ensnared. Page 85.

The FIRST PART OF THE Christian-Quaker Distinguished from the Apostate and
Innovator, etc.
SECTION I.
The INTRODUCTION. Wherein the Case is stated, manifesting, That there was an
Union; and the Ways and Means by which it came to be broken.
TO all the faithful People of God ( called Quakers) throughout this Nation of
England, or else where, we your Brethren do send greeting in the Lord;
breathing unto the God of our Lives, that the same Everlasting Arm and Power,
whereby we have been gathered unto God, and into an heavenly Fellowship and
Union one with another in the Life of Righteousness, may preserve us all to the
End of our Days, in the Bond of perfect Love each toward other, established upon
that sure Rock of Ages (Christ Jesus) against which the Gates of Hell never
did, can or shall, prevail: And in this Love, our Desires are, that the
Faithful (unto whom this Treatise is directed) may communicate the same unto
others, as, in the Wisdom, and Love of God, they may see a Service thereof.

Dear Friends and Brethren;
WE are truly sensible, that all those, who keep their Place and Habitation in
the unchangeable Truth, have with us a Sense of the many Snares, and
Temptations, whereby Satan has endeavored to betray the Innocent, whose Faces
have been Zion-ward: And that his most subtle Invention has been, to appear as
an Angel of Light, thereby to turn those, whose Hearts have been inclined to
follow the Lord, out of the way of Truth.

And now Friends, that which in the Grief of our Hearts, we have to signify to
you, is this; We are sensible that the Evil Seeds-man is crept in amongst many
of those called Quakers, who (as we believe) have in Days past walked together
in true Fellowship each with other, and that in the sensible Feeling of that
Immortal Life, whereby we with them were knit and united together, as Bone of
one another Bone, and Flesh of one another Flesh, having the Evidence of such
our heavenly Union, springing from that, which neither the Carnal Eye, nor the
Carnal Ear, could be Witnesses of.

In order hereunto, we have this following Observation to make.

That the day was, wherein those very Persons amongst the People called
Quakers, who now are at great varience, and out of Unity each with other, were
once in Unity, and therefore we think necessary to lay down, Viz.

First, Some part of those things touching which the Faithful were at UNITY

Secondly, By what Ways and Means that UNITY came to be broken.

And so leave the Consideration thereof to the Consciences of all, who profess
the Truth; that so in the Light of Christ Jesus they may weigh and consider,
Whether their Unity stood in the unchangable Truth, and which of these Parties
now at variance deviated therefrom.

The Consideration of this Observation does lead us in relation to the first
particular, thus to testify, Viz.

That about Twenty Six Years past, it pleased the Lord to send forth many
faithful Laborers of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, who in his Name, Dread, and
Power testified, that their CALL was not of MAN, but of GOD; and that their
Message was both to the Professor, and to the Profane. To the Profane crying
on this wise, [Turn from the Evil of your Ways, and Doings, and meet the Lord
by sudden Repentance of your open Transgressions] To the Professors (who were
not in the Common Pollutions of the World) on this wise, [Your Outward Forms,
your Outward Ordinances, and Outward Church Fellowships, they are even but as
Rudiments of this World, and the Lord has no Regard thereto] And to both of
them, [Turn in your Minds to the Light of Christ Jesus, that shines in your
Consciences] exalting the Measure thereof (as given to every man to profit
withal) to be that Law, that Order, that Rule of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, unto which every one respectively ought to be subject, and yield
Obedience; not by Constraint, but of a willing Mind, and that for Conscience
sake: And as we were so subject, we became Members of that Body against which
the Gates of Hell never did, or can prevail; nor yet against any one Member
thereof, whilst abiding on the Rock Christ, which is that Body the unworthy
Eaters discerned not.

And thus for many Years it continued amongst the Friends of Truth (or Children
of Light (for so were we called in the beginning) magnifying by their
Testimonies, Obedience unto the Light of Christ Jesus (which as the Scripture
Testifies, lights every man that comes into the World) as the only RVLE and
GOVERNOR in the Church of God, unto which whosoever took heed, and was
obedient, was esteemed to live under the Government of Christ; knowing and
believing, that as Christ's coming is to be waited for in the Hearts of the
Sons and Daughters of Men, so there his Governments to be exalted; and that
whosoever should endeavor by outward Ways and Means, to establish an Outward
Government, and Outward Rules, Orders, Laws, or Prescriptions over the Heritage
of God, under the Notion or Pretense of Christ's Government, would be found
Invaders of Christ's Prerogative, and building the things which in the Light of
Christ Jesus had been often testified against, as more agreeable to the First
Covenant than the Second, under which we are; and touching which it is thus
said, by the Prophet, I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in
their Hearts, and they shall teach no more every man his Neighbor, and every
man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the
least of them, to the greatest of them, says the Lord. Jer. 31.33.34.

In these things we with many others were at Unity. We now recommend the same
to every Conscience in the Sight of God, whether this our Unity was not (and
yet is) consisting with, and agreeable to the unchangable Truth.

The next thing we are to treat upon, is, By what ways and means this Unity
came to be broken.

In order to the Discovery thereof, we think it necessary to answer one
Question, which (probably) may be asked by some Persons, who may not be
sensible of such a Variance hinted at, Viz.

How does it appear that there is such a great Difference, and Disunion?
To this we say; The public Testimoneis of many Persons in those public
Meetings for Worship, where we have been conversant (and that when many others,
not under the same Profession with us, have been present) against dark, bad,
leavened, rending, dividing, or separate Spirits, with Application to such who
are under the Profession of Truth, and (as we believe) have born the Brunt and
Heat of the Day, and do yet continue unchanged, as to the Principle of Truth,
and as blameless in Life and Conversation as ever they were in days past, when
their Opposers were at Unity with them (so far as we know) does evidently
demonstrate, that the Breach is not only very wide, but so public, as it
cannot but concern some of the wrongfully scandalized Party (whereof we are a
part) as Men, and as Christians (for our Reputations, or at least the
Reputation of some of us, in both respects, have been struck at) to appear thus
public in the Vindication of Truth; and therefore having long born the
Reproach and Scandal of Scandalous Tongues, hoping that those who have so
persecuted us, and others our Brethren (for whose sakes we also are the more
concerned) would have come to see their Error, and repented, do now think our
selves obliged for the Honor of Truth, and Information of all the Friends
thereof, as well as for the sakes of such as have been betrayed and led from
the Simplicity of the Gospel of Christ, to proceed to manifest, for what Cause
both we and many other our Brethren in the Unchangeable Truth, are accounted
such dark, leavened, rending, dividing and separate Spirits; which being truly
stated, the impartial Reader will easily discover, by what ways and means the
aforesaid Unity came to be broken, and at whose Door that will lie, and which
of those divided Parties do yet stand in and for the unchangable Truth.

That the aforesaid Cause, wherefore we and others are accounted dark,
leavened, rending, dividing, or separate Spirits, may be the more clearly
manifested, it is needful to consider, that some enquiring Reader may be ready
to ask this Question, What do you believe is meant by the words dark, leavened,
rending, dividing, or separate Spirits?

To this we answer, that many signal and outward Demonstrations, both by Words
and Writings (too large here to insert) have been given us to believe, that the
Publishers of such Reflecting Expressions on many ancient and honorable
Brethren (who we believe have approved themselves to this day, Faithful
Laborers in the Gospel of Christ) do intend, that if any one who has been
convinced of the Truth, as preached amongst us in the beginning, does scruple
(though conscientiously) to put in practice the Outward Orders, and
Prescriptions of some Person, or Persons, taking upon him or them, to give
forth the same, such an one may justly be accounted of a dark, leavened,
rending, dividing, or separate Spirit.

And though of our certain knowledge we can declare, that the understandings of
many are so enlightened by the Truth, as clearly to discern a deceivable Spirit,
entering in by this Door; yet we are sensible that there are many Honesthearted
Friends, who being ignorant of many things that are come to our Knowledge, may
have a Dread upon them, lest they Err in taking part either with one or, the other
Party, until they have further enquired and satisfied themselves; and these
peradventure may be ready thus to object and tell us.

Objection, That they are informed, that some of those whom we term some
Persons, taking upon them to give forth outward Orders and Priscriptions, are
such as usually frequent the General Meeting, and have been ancient Laborers
in the Gospel and have been Instruments to gather us from the Lo henes, and the
Lo there is, to follow that Teacher that cannot be removed into a Corner; and
that the General Meeting is an Established Meeting, and that they have Power to
Command, Govern, and Rule over others; and that it is the Duty of others to
Obey, for we find (as they may say) Robert Barclay, in his Book of Government,
which Friends ought not to Judge, because 'twas approved by the Second Days
Meeting in London (which is a Meeting of Ministering Friends) to inform us, Page
27, 28. [ That the Apostles and Primitive Christians, practiced Order and
Government in the Church; that some did appoint and ordain certain things,
condemn and approve certain Practices, as well as Doctrines, by the Spirit of
God; that there lay an Obligation in point of Duty upon some others to obey,
and submit; and that such as are in the true Feeling and Sense, will find it
their places to obey, and be one with the Church in such like cases; and that
its such that have lost their sense and feeling of the Life of the Body, that
descent, and are disobedient under the false pretense of Liberty.

To this we answer: First, that General Meeting does usually consist only of
such Persons, as pretend a Freedom in their Spirits to go thither, or have
Outward Business calling them to the place where it is usually held: and though
it has been accounted a Meeting of Ministering Friends, yet of late Years we
are very certain, it has consisted (and so for the future may) of some other
Persons, professing the Truth, that will take upon them to assemble amongst
them; and to be very plain, we cannot but appeal to the Consciences of all such
Honorable Friends, who are both intelligent and impartial, whether some, who
have usually there assembled, or may pretend right to be Members thereof, have
not been false Accusers, and Man-pleasers, and many of them a sort of Persons
who being Lovers of Pre-eminence, and Time-servers, take that as an Opportunity
to appear unto others, that which they are not in themselves?

On the whole matter it is evident to us, that some Persons uncertain in number,
as well as to Persons, and Qualifications, do take upon them to call themselves
a General Meeting, and though such when met, may on that foot take upon them to
ordain and appoint certain things; condemn some Friends, as Rending Separate
Spirits; and approve of others, as Faithful Brethren, and that (as they may
say) in the Name of the Lord; yet it is not likely to have any more place with
us, on that account, than if they spoke in their Own Name, since 'twas never
evidenced to our Consciences, that they had any Call from God to act, and give
forth all those things which they have taken upon them.

Objection, But suppose some Persons in their respective Countries, should
undertake to Meet together Quarterly, and at such Quarterly Meetins choose two
Persons to go to the said General Meeting, as was endeavored the last Year.

To this we answer, We deny, that it can be agreeable to the Truth for such to
assert, that from thence they are invested with Power to Ordain and Appoint
certain things, unto which others (as Members of Christ's Body) ought therefore
to yield Obedience, whilst not persuaded by Christ's Light in their Consciences
of their Duty therein.

First, Because though such Quarterly Meetings (as men) may be capable to
choose Persons; yet they are not capable to invest them with a suitable Power,
since it is taken for granted, that the Authority of all those Meetings ought to
be the Power of God, which man is not capable to confer, neither have those
Meetings affirmed they are.

Secondly, Because no Outward Order, Counsel, or Advice, is sufficient Ground
for any man to Practice this, or the other thing, so as thereby to find
Acceptance with the Lord, until the Conscience of such an one, by the Light of
Christ Jesus, be convinced thereof: For every Action in relation to the things
of God, that springs not from an enlightened convinced Conscience, is but the
fruit of a liseless Form without the Power, and seems not to square with this
Doctrine, draw water out of your own Wells; let it be your own, and not
another: nor yet with that Doctrine which has often been sounded in our Ears,
to gather us from the Lo here is, and the Lo there is.

But yet we are sensible that this further Objection may be raised, viz. Obj.
Note in the manuscriptfirst made mention of in the Preface, the Ground of this
Objection, from the Words and Writings of diverse Persons, is cited out of the
second part of the said Manuscript, but their Names for the reasons in the
Presace are omitted here.
It Is true, Friends in the Beginning were turned to the Light in their own
Consciences, as their Guide; but when it pleased the Lord to gather so great a
Number into the Knowledge and Belief of the Truth, as were in few Years
gathered, then the Heavenly Motion came upon G. F. as the Lords Anointed, and
Chosen; having the Care of the Churches, as being the great Apostle of Christ
Jesus (and as one whom the Lord had ordained to be in that place amongst the
Children of Light in this our Day, as Moses was amongst the Children of Israel
in his Day) to set forth Methods, and Forms of Church Government, and to
establish Monthly, and Quarterly Meetings of Men, and of Women distinct from
Men; and these Meetings since are called the Church, whose Counsel, Advice, and
Judgment (as Occasion should offer) is to be submitted unto by every one who
professes himself a Member of the Church of Christ; and that we ought to
believe, as the Church believes; else why should an Eminent Friend in the
sixteenth Page of his Bookthus say, " I affirm, that the true Church is in the
true Faith that is in God, and we must either believe thus, as the true Church
believes, or else it were but both a Folly, and Hypocrisy to profess our
selves Members thereof. [And so in the same Page proceeds to manifest] that he
who seems to own the Church of Christ, as a Member of her, and yet tells the
World, that it is a most dangerous position, that we are to believe as the
Church believes, is a treacherous Enemy to the Church of Christ.

From this Objection these three Positions seem to be deducible.

First, That the Lord has ordained G. F. to be in that Place amongst the
Children of Light in this our Day, as Moses was amongst the Children of Israel
in his Day.

Secondly, That monthly and quarterly Meetings are called the Church, and ought
to be submitted to.

Thirdly, That it is Folly and Hypocrisy, to profess our selves Members of the
true Church, and yet not believe thus as the true Church believes.

SECT. II. An Answer to the First Position (deducible from an Objection raised
toward the conclusion of the first Section) to wit, That the Lord has ordained
G. F. to be in that place amongst the Children of Light in this our Day, as
Moses was among the Children of Israel in his Day.
THe Lord under the First Covenant promised, To raise up a Prophet like unto
Moses, whom the People were to hear in all things, Deuteronomy. 18.15. This Prophet
spoken of, was Christ Jesus, who in the fullness of Time appeared upon the
Earth, and then 'twas the Duty of the Sons and Daughters of Men to hearken unto
his Voice; since he ascended on high, the Father, according to the Testimony of
his Son Christ, has sent unto us the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, who is to
lead and guide us into all Truth; this Spirit we witness to be in us, according
to the Testimony of the Scriptures, It shall be in you.

Our Testimony now is, that it is not agreeable to the Second Covenant, to
expect that any one should be ordained of God to be amongst the Children of
Light, like unto Moses save Christ Jesus our Lord and Master, who by his
Spiritual Appearance in us, is become our Leader, and Lawgiver; and therefore
we have no Ground to believe, that any one Mortal Man, ought to assume that
place amongst the Children of Light at this Day, as Moses, by the Appointment
of God, did amongst the Children of Israel in his Day; especially if we do but
consider, that the Promise of the Lord through his Prophet Jeremiah, Jer.
31.33, 34. (with relation to that Time and dispensation of the New Covenant,
under which we are) was on this wise, I will put my Law in their Inward Parts,
and write it in their Hearts, and they shall teach no more every man his
Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all
know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord.

SECT. III. An Answer to the Second Position ( deducible from an Objection
raised toward the Conclusion of the first Section) viz. That Monthly and
Quarterly Meetings are called the Church, and ought to be submitted to.
It Is well remembered, that that one Man G. F. went some years past into many
parts of this Nation, advising Friends to hold such Meetings, viz. Monthly, and
Quarterly; and in many places his Counsel was readily embraced: but for our
parts, we understood not at that day, that it was designed by him, or any else,
that those Meetings should not only be accounted the Church, but also such as
professed the Truth, ought to believe as this Church believes; had he so
expressed himself, Testimonies would have arisen as a Flood against such
Darkness; for this would have plainly appeared to us, to have opened a Door,
whereby that Babylonish Rubbish, which we had been long testifying against,
might have been exalted in one day. And to be very plain, we cannot but now
declare, that we are fully satisfied in our Consciences, that by this very
Door, a Body of Strife, Contention, Emulation, Malice, and Envy, together with
a Rending, Dividing Separate Spirit from the Truth, is entered amongst many
hundreds, who before walked together with us in an Heavenly Union and
Fellowship, in the Life of Righteousness; which doubtless may (if it has not
already) occasion many Honest Simple-hearted Friends thus in their Hearts to
say; [Where are the People whom we shall now follow?] But if such retire into
the Sanctuary of the Lord, there in stilness to wait what God will say, they
will undoubtedly have this Answer; [You have a Teacher within you, which cannot
be removed into a Corner; follow that Teacher, lest peradventer your Feet do
slip, by going from your Inward Guide, and following the Footsteps and Dictates
of Man.]

But to return, It Is now our Concern, as to the second Position thus further to
declare, That whosoever has or shall testify, that all those Meetings (as
usually held) were the Church of God, has and will appear to be such, as know
not whereof they affirm: for such a Testimony carries with it neither inward,
nor outward Evidence (though we dare not conclude, that none in those Meetings
were Members of the Church) for the Church of God consists properly of such as
are by one Spirit baptized into one Body; 1 Cor. 12.13.
and so are in the Possession as well as Profession of Truth: But yet whoever
they were, that did but so much as profess the Truth, were admitted to be
Members of such Meetings, whilst they appeared in the outward Form thereof,
and were not then of Scandalous Conversations: All which might appear in such
as were far remote from witnessing the Circumcision of the Heart, and the
Answer of a good Conscience toward God, which must be witnessed as the proper
Product of the Baptism of the Spirit, before a Possession of the Truth be
known: And whether Men's Meetings have not often consisted of such Members, and
are like so to do, whilst the Door is open for any under the aforesaid
Qualifications to sit there (as it yet is) we recommend to the Serious
Consideration of the Impartial Readers; and if so, we desire them further to
weigh and Consider:

First, Whether it can be agreeable to the Truth, to account every thing acted
and done by every such Meeting, to be the Product of the Church of Christ, and
accordingly to be submitted to.

Secondly, Whether the Judging of some (conscientiously refusing to submit) to
be dark, leavened, rending dividing or separate Spirits, because they refuse,
be not the fruit of that Spirit that would remove us from that Teacher that
cannot be removed into a Corner, to follow the Dictates of Fallible Men.

Thirdly, Whether a Plea for Obedience to the Orders of such Meetings, from
Persons Conscientiously Refusing to Obey, has not a tendency to Justify
Usurpation; since they have never evidenced to the Consciences of those, from
whom they have seemed to expect Obedience, any other Call to that Service, than
their own.

Fourthly, Whether a Plea for such Meetings, to Govern in matters relating to
Conscience, has not a tendency to Justify Confusion; since according to the
reputed Order of such Meetings, None that are to be Ruled, are excluded from
being Rulers?

Let those who cannot believe this our last Assertion, peruse Robert Barclay's
Book of Government, approved by such as have been accounted Ministering Friends,
at the second Days Meeting in London, wherein it is said, Page. 33. "We are not
so foolish, as to concern our selves with those who are not of us: None of
which are (according to the Import of the said Book of Government, as we take
it) excluded from such Meetings, nor yet to give Judgment therein (witness Page
79, and 82. of the said book) and since we are now treating of those Meetings,
we are not without a sense, but that some may be ready thus to query, viz.

What Order is either prescribed or used, whereby the sense of such Meetings is
collected.?
To this we say;

An eminent Person professing Truth being at Bristol, did take occasion to
signify, at a Mens-Meeting held in that City, to this effect; That in London,
and other parts of this Nation, where such Meetings were usually held, the
sense of the generallity has been taken for the sense of such Meetings;
Comparing this with this Doctrine frequently of late published amongst us, That
the Apostasy shall never enter the generality more, does give us Just occasion
to be Jealous, that our opposers, for the carrying on of their designs against
us, have contrived this method of carrying all things by the generality, or
major number of voices; which Limitation, we know has been heretofore (and by
the faithful to this day) utterly disowned, as contrary to the Truth; and also
by the approvers of R. B's. Book of Government, as in Page 81. and though the
counsel of that one man, who first advised to the aforesaid Meetings in some
parts, was on this wise, Choose from amongst you the faithful; yet such a
limitation we have cause to believe, will not now be born by some; it is well if
the ground thereof in our opposers be not to bring in the multitude, if they
can, and that under a pretense, that all Friends in Truth may have free access,
that so the Generality may be on their side: for of late Men's Meetings are
known to consist of many such, who, if any ought to be Governed, are much
fitter to be Governed, then appear as Governors, and who (we are well
satisfied in our Consciences) would of themselves be more modest than to appear
in such Meetings, as Governors, were they not prompted to be there; The secret
end thereof (as we have cause to doubt) is for the carrying on that which we
believe Truth will never own.

And as to the Apostasy never entering the generality more, we say; may the
Lord preserve us all so stayed in his Unchangable Truth, as that we may never
apostatise from it, nor be drawn away from the hope of the Gospel, by false
Prophets and seducing Spirits; for we do firmly believe that as many of those,
who formerly were in the Truth, and do now account us Dark Spirits, because we
cannot be at Unity with them, in such actions as we account Persecution against
ancient Brethern, are already Apostatized: and doubtless they with their
adherents account themselves the generality; yet we hope better things than so.

We now come to say something to these foregoing words, viz. That in London and
other part of this Nation, where such Meetings where usually held, the sense of
the Generallity has been taken for the sense of such Meetings. To this we
answer, if thereby is intended, that the generality may claim power to declare,
that their sense is the sense of the Meeting, it opens a Door whereby the
Reputation and Honor of Truth, as Professed, owned and practiced amongst the
Friends thereof, may fall in one day; For when these Meetings were assented
unto (we cannot say established by any man) we looked upon our selves all
Servants one unto another, and not Masters and Rulersover one another; and so
had then no occasion given us to discourse of Authority, but when there was, we
well Remember, that we, ascribed all Authority unto the appearance of the
invisible Power of God; and so no encouragment was given by us, that any one
Man or Men should take upon him or them, to Rule and Govern in such Meetings;
but our expectations were, that every Member should there appear in subjection
to Christ, the Head and higher Power, unto which as Members of his Body we owe
Obedience: In this sense we readily embraced the Counsel, to Meet together to
Serve, but not to Bear Rule over one another's Consciences: and the matters
intended by us to be transacted in those Meetings, and by others also (as far
as we understood) were chiefly, To take care of the poor, the fatherless and
the widow. And that if any professed the Truth, and dishonored the same by
profane and evil Conversation, we might by such ways and means, as the Lord
on every occasion might direct, (not then thinking that the day would ever
come, wherein an Outward Directory should be placed as a Judge over our
Consciences) Endeavor to reclaim such from the Evil of their Ways; and for
these Services we are sensible, that Meetings are proper, and therefore do
continue in the services thereof: yet never thought that we should have seen
the Day, wherein any professing the truth would have attempted to treat on such
a Subject as this, viz. [How far does this Government extend in matters
Spiritual, and purely conscientious?] and not only so but be approved (as the
aforesaid Book of Government, wherein the said sentence is written, has been)
by a Meeting that takes upon them to take Care (as they pretend) that nothing
be Printed whereby the Truth may be dishonored.

Alas! Friends, can such appear to us as men staid in the Unchangable Truth,
who have suffered and highly contended for Liberty of Conscience, and that
Christ alone is Lord over it, and is its only Lawgiver; and yet now reckon that
Mens-Meetings (which we, or at least several of us, do know, having been much
conversant therein, even from the beginning, to this day, have most usually
consisted of Men Uncertain in Numbers as well as to Qualifications and Persons)
may assume a Power over Conscience, under the Notion of the Church of Christ.
Truly Friends, we cannot but testify, that our Souls have no Unity with such
things; and cannot but look upon the Promoters thereof, as Lovers of
Preheminency, more than Lovers of God; having let in a dark, separate, rending,
dividing Spirit from the Truth, and opened a Door, whereby as great Darkness
may be brought over the People, As ever was in any Age under the profession of
Christian Religion.

Objection, But perhaps some persons may thus Object, We cannot but have more
Charity for some, at least, of those who are concerned in these things you
strike at, and cannot believe they intend an imposition on any of our
Consciences; for when we have been in Meetings with them, we have been
Witnesses that the Life has been raised, and our Souls have been refreshed
through their Ministry; and in their Epistles they tell us, how eminently the
Lord appears amongst them, unto which we cannot but give Credit, because when
they are with us, the Life in us answers to the Life in them, as Face answers
Face in a Glass; but when those whom they oppose, do speak, then Deadness,
Dryness, and Barrenness appears: besides, many of the Ministering Friends have
exhorted us (and as they say) in the Name of the Lord, that we ought to shut
out Jealousies, the Reasoning, and the Wisdom; telling us (as before is hinted)
That the Apostasy shall never enter the generality more, and that we ought to
have an eye to the Brethren.

Answ. This Objection may seem very weighty with some, especially such who may
conclude, that if they are of the true Brotherhood, the Lord will give them an
inward sense, when they wait upon him, whereby a Testimony according to the
Truth may arise from them in every Case, wherein they may Concern their
thoughts; but alas! it is either the fruit of Weakness or Presumption so to
conclude, with respect to every Brother, in what estate soever, which has been
sufficiently evidenced to us by the Fruits of those, who have taken upon them
to Judge the Merit of a Cause, without hearing of both Parties, (of which more
anon) Besides, if we do but consider, that the Scriptures of Truth do testify,
there are diversities of Gifts, diversities of Administrations, and Operations,
and yet by the same Spirit, it were sufficient to prompt us to be so Serious,
and weighty in this day of Trial, as to be found waiting every one in his own
Gift, that so all may be preserved, and not meddle with things that are too
high for them.

He that is not sensible of the Danger in running beyond his Gift, and is so
puffed up with Spiritual Pride, as to conclude himself more Faithful, more Holy,
more Circumspect, more Discerning than his Brother, thinking of himself not
only better than of his Brother, but in other things above what is meet,
contrary to the Counsel of the Apostle, who exhorted, Not to think of our
selves more highly than we ought; may easily run himself on this Rock of
Judging those, whom the Lord Judges not; especially if such an one give
himself liberty to Judge from an apprehended Inward Sense, grounded on no
Outward Knowledge, or Evidence.

That now which is with us farther to signify in relation to this matter, is
this, we have great cause to doubt that this kind of Weakness, or Presumption
has been, and is yet like to be one means, by which the variance amongst such
as have been formerly at Unity may continue; because it is well known that when
Testimonies have arisen against some persons in public, as dark, separate, and
dividing Spirits, and that some such as have been dissatisfied, have desired to
know what is the Matter, and what is the Fruit whereby it may be evidenced? The
Answer commonly is, Let the Testimonies of Friends arise: this Word when it
Springs from such, who have been Instruments to beget into this Faith, that we
ought to shut out the Reasoning, the Wisdom and Jealousy (and that without
distinction) and that the Apostasy shall never enter the Generality more; and
that we ought to have an eye to the We would not be understood, that it is not
fit to have an Eye to faithful Brethren in any thing; but yet we cannot but
take notice, that it sounds not very comely out of the mouths of those, with
respect to themselves, who have in public frequently thus Testified, [We
Preach not our selves, look not unto us, but unto the Lord, and the measure of
his Grace in your selves, that is given to you to profit withal.]
Brethren, easily raises the like Testimony, that such an one is of a dark,
separate Spirit; and then this comes to be spread abroad, as a Seal to that
which cannot be evidenced either by Doctrine or Conversation; as if the Tree
were not now to be known by its Fruit, as in days past; and so whilst they
have been in the Exercise of one part of the Counsel, viz. Excluding the Reason
and the Wisdom (by which means some have been betrayed to act contrary to all
Reason, and all Wisdom) they have acted contrary to the other part of the
counsel which was to shut out the Jealousy: For had they not entertained
Unrighteous Jealousy, we are persuaded, that they would not have testified
against such, as have approved themselves unto us no other, then Faithful
Ministers of Christ, Sound in Doctrine, and as Blamless in Conversation (so far
as ever we knew) as any Friends.

And thus the Variance, we fear, is but too likely to continue. Now we appeal
to the Witness of God, Whether this kind of proceeding be not the Fruit of a
Dark, Rending Spirit, that seperates from the Truth.

But to come a little nearer to answer other parts of the Objection, viz. When
we have been in Meetings with them, we have been Witnesses, that the Life has
been raised, and our souls have been refreshed; and that When those whom they
oppose do speak, nothing but Dryness, Deadness, and Barrenness appears.

We desire every one who may thus affirm, seriously to weigh and consider:

First, Whether, if contrary to thine own Principle, thou have let in Jealousy,
this Jealousy may not darken thee, so as to take Light for Darkness, and
Darkness for Light; and that to be True Refreshment, which is no other, but a
rejoicing in those imaginary sparks, which thou by a false fire have kindled:
for when the eye is not single to God, and fixed upon that Teacher that cannot
be removed into a Corner, but instead thereof, have an eye unto man, and to
things that are without, weighing not the matters wherein thy mind is concerned
in the equal Balance of the Sanctuary) it may be Just with the Lord to suffer
thee to be overshadowed with a Vail of Darkness, and to become ignorant of the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, as they who are without are, lest thou see
with thine eye, and understand with thy heart, and be converted and saved, even
as it was said by Christ himself concerning them who are without, Mark, 4.11,
12.

For we know, that when Truth was Preached amongst us in the beginning, and the
Light of Christ Jesus shining in our Consciences magnified as our only Guide
(the Gift of the Father) and Appearance of Christ Jesus, the great Ordinance
and Power of God unto Salvation) our souls were wonderfully reached, and
affected with the sound thereof; believing, that the day was then come unto us,
wherein the Promise of the Father, according to the Words of Christ, was
fulfilled unto us, viz. But the Comforter, which is the Spirit of Truth, which
the Father will send in my Name, he shall Teach you all things, and Guide you
into all Truth: And thus the Eyes of our Understandings came to be opened, that
we saw most of the Professors (then in being) to be but in the Gentile nature,
and come no further than the Outward Court, which the Angel (as John Testified)
was not to measure: for was not their Preacher Outward, their Rule Outward,
their Order Outward, their Ordinances Outward, and the Tokens, and Marks of
Membership in their Church Outward? And when those Outward Things were
magnified, and the Preaching of the Light of Christ Jesus, as the Guide to the
Father, degraded by our Opposers, we were even ready to fear (on their behalf)
that they were of that number, who saw, but did not perceive; did hear, but not
understand. Our breathing now unto the Lord is, That none of those, who have
formerly received the Truth in the Love thereof, may continue so hardened, as
to see and not Perceive; to hear and not Understand; and so (in a dark and
veiled Estate) conclude, that [as Note, This Sentence [viz. as Heirs of the
Gospel, Life and Salvation take your possessions] has been of late years
srequently expressed by G. F. when speaking to friends by way of encouragement to
continue Men's and Women's Meetings, distinct from the public Meetings for
Worship; by which means it is much, doubted, that some ignorant People have
concluded, that their frequenting those meetings is an evidence, that they are
Heirs of Life and Salvation.
Heirs of the Gospel, Life and Salvation, they are entered into an Heavenly
Possession] (whenas the Possessions they are entered into, are but some outward
Observations, which may more properly be accounted to relate to the Outward
Court, than to the New Jerusalem, and Heirs of the Kingdom of God) but rather
that they may so perceive, and understand the things of God, as to bow to the
appearance of Christ Jesus in themselves, as the only Lawgiver, Spiritual Guide
and Teacher, which is infailible, and cannot be removed into a Corner: with
confidence then may we conclude, that none such will ever more boast of the
possession which they have taken (as Heirs of the Gospel) with respect to
things that are without.

Secondly, As to this part of the aforesaid Objection, viz. that nothing but
Dryness, Deadness and Barrenness appears in those, who are opposed by such with
whom thou art at Unity; we say.

This seems not strange unto us; for the Apostle thus Testifies, We are unto
God a sweet Savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish;
to the one we are the Savor of Death unto Death, and to the other the Savor
of Life unto Life: This give us occasion to put every one that has or may Judge
the sound form of words to be Deadness, Dryness and Barrenness (especially when
Springing from such whom thou have known to be in the Life) upon this search;
is not the reason thereof, because I am watching for evil, and have let in a
Spirit of Prejudice, believing an evil Report, when perhaps it may not be
Truth? If this be thy State we must plainly tell thee, they are the very Tokens
of a Perishing Condition, and then, though it be the Word of Life that is
Preached, yet it can be no other (according to the Testimony of the Apostle)
but the Savor of Death unto thee.

Besides, we have this further Observation to make, that some [at least] of
those, thus Testified against, as Dead, Dry and Barren, are chiefly such unto
whom God has given a Portion of Understanding above many of their Brethren,
and have, and yet do (as far as ever we know) appear Sound in Doctrine, and as
blameless in Life and Conversation as any friends, we have ever known; and so
cannot run with the Current of the Times: we desire therefore that every one of
the Opposers of, or Judges over such, will yet more thoroughly search their own
Consciences, and in a Godly Jealousy over themselves put these queries unto
their own hearts, and try things in the equal balance.

Have not I many times heard Unsound Doctrines, and beheld Disorder and
Confusion brought forth even in Public Meetings for worship by those, who cry
against Dark, Separate Spirits; and yet not been a Reproof thereto, Concluding
notwithstanding that there did a Freshness and Life appear?

Have not I been often affected with an Outward Tone, and strength of Lungs,
when there has been little to the Information and Building up one another in
the most Holy Faith?

Have not I been better Contented to hear a Thundering kind of Voice Crying out
against a Separate Spirit, (though without Distinction) when not a word was
spoken to show the Way to the Kingdom, than to hear the Way of Eternal Life
Plainly Demonstrated by a soft, and moderate Voice?

We know there is great cause for many to put these questions to their
Consciences, and to be cool in Spirit that so they may have an Answer from the
Lord, whose appearance is not in the strong winds, but in the still Voice.

SECT. IV. An Answer to the Third Position (deducible from an Objection raised,
toward the Conclusion of the first Section) viz. That it is Folly and Hipocrisy
to profess our selves Members of the True Church, and yet not Believe thus, as
the True Church Believes.
TO this we say, we are altogether dissatisfied (especially when we consider
what a Body of darkness has entered under the Belief of this Position [we must
believe as the Church believes] amongst the Professors of Christianity in Ages
past, as well as at this present Day) that such Language can become the mouth,
or pen of any one, that professes not only Faith in Christ, but also that such
his Faith is grounded upon the Inward Manifestation and Revelation of Gods
Spirit in himself [mark] we say in himself.

Those who are accounted Apostate Christians, have from such Assemblies, which
they call their Church, set forth their Creeds, by which it may be known, what
the Members of their Church do and ought to Believe; and since it is so, that no
Person is able to make out, that ever any Assembly under the Notion of the true
Church, amongst the People called Quakers, have published their Creed, by which
we mean a certain number of Articles of Faith, recommending them as those
things which every Member of the true Church ought to believe, or else not be
accounted a Member of the true Church, we cannot account it unreasonable, if
any one that likes not the Language touching Believing as the true Church
Believes, should ask the Publisher thereof this Question, Have thou not spoken
this with respect to the People called Quakers, as those whom thou accountest
the True Church? And if so, is it not folly to talk of believing as this Church
believes, when no assembly under the notion of this Church have to this day
declared, and published their Creed, for the ends aforesaid? Nay, may it not
further be said, we know how Papists and Protestants describe their Church, but
at the day wherein that which occasions this present discourse was given forth,
it was not discovered by any reputed Quakers, publicly in Print (that we know
of) who or were the true Church is, with respect to visible persons, more than
what is to this effect given forth by the Author, occasioning this present
discourse, viz. That the People called Quakers are the Church. Wherein we do
not take his meaning to be, that all called Quakers were the Church of God, but
the Elect amongst them; for he also says, The Church signifies the Elect; and
so the Reader is left without any certain Description who or where this Church
is, with respect to visible Persons; since the Elect amongst them are not
outwardly described.

For the clearing of the Truth, and the opening of the Understandings of such,
as may be muddled about this matter, it is with us thus to Testify:

It Is well known, that it pleased the Lord, to reach unto many of our
Consciences at the beginning of this latter Day, that has dawned amongst us;
whereby we came to Believe in the Everlasting Light of the Lord; and as others
held forth the Visible Orders, and Written Faiths of a Visible Church to be as
a Lanthorn to their Paths, and as a Ground of their Faith, so this Light of
Christ was preached up as a Lanthorn to our Paths, and as the Ground of our
Faith, and then (as our Understandings came to be more and more opened) we
clearly saw, that as other Churches had outward Marks and Tokens, whereby a man
might manifest himself to be a Member of their Church, when received into
Society with their Church, so we (who had Believed in the Light of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and had the Evidence in our selves, that we were of the true
Brotherhood, and Members of Christ's Body) were at a loss infallibly to
manifest unto others, by any Outward Marks or Tokens, that we were in Reality
Members of the true Church: Because this Light (in which we had Believed) did
reveal unto us, that those who were but in the Gentile Nature, and had come no
further than the Outward Court (that was given to the Gentiles) might have all
the Outward Marks and signs of a Member of their Churches, and yet know very
little of the washing by the Water of Regeneration, and Sanctification through
the Spirit, which every Member of the true Church, that is Built on the Rock
Christ, comes to be Witness of.

And therefore, when our Opposers (who professed not the Truth) would reflect
upon us on this wise; You are a confused People; you gather not into
Church-fellowships; you have no certain Way to know one another to be Members
of the Church, as we have. And why do you not put forth your Creed, that so we
may know what and how many the Articles of your Faith are, and what you stand
for, and what you stand against? The best Answer, that ever (as we could
understand) we were capable to give in Truth unto such, was this:

The True Church is in God, who is the Author and Finisher of our Faith; we
have believed in the Sufficiency of his Grace, unto which, if we are obedient
(according to the respective measures thereof given of God, and Received by us)
we then have the Witness of God in our Consciences, giving Evidence, that we
are of the True Brotherhood, and of the Church of the First Born, whose Names
are written in Heaven, though we do not allege any outward Marks and Signs,
whereby our Bodies (being Temples wherein the Holy Ghost does dwell) ought to
be accounted within the pale of the true Church. And albeit no Outward Society
of Men amongst us, calling themselves the Church, have put forth any certain
number of Articles of Faith, with this Testimony, that every one that
professes himself a Member of the Church of Christ ought so to Believe, or
else not be accounted of the True Church; yet many of our Friends, unto whom
the Lord has given Divine Understanding, have written diverse Books (according
as the Spirit of the Lord has moved upon their Hearts) out of which the sound
Doctrines we hold, and stand for, may be collected; though others, so reputed
may (thorough Weakness) have erred. To conclude as to this particular we
further thus testify.

In the Church of Christ, there are Babes, Young Men, and Fathers; there are
the Weak, and the Strong: Suppose a Weak Brothers Faith Differs from his
Brethren, must he be accounted a Fool, or an Hipocrite? Nay; Nay, Charity
measures not so.

We find this very Case happening amongst the Romans; and what said Paul in
that Case? Read Romans 14.3, 4, 22, 23. and there Paul thus advises; Let not him
that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him that eats not,
Judge him which eats; for God has received him. Who art thou, that
condemnest another Man's Servant? To his own Master he stands or falls:
Have thou Faith? Have it to thy self. He that doubts, is condemned if he eat,
because he eats not of Faith; and whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin.

Hence it is evident, the Members of the Church differed in their Faith; he that
did eat, was not to be Judged, because he was Received of God; he that did not
eat, was so far from being Judged, that the Apostle condemns the very eating,
whilst there was a Doubt: though the abstaining from eating, was the Fruit of
Weakness.

We now leave it to the Conscience of every Impartial Reader, in the Light of
Christ Jesus to weigh and consider, whether it can be Service to the Truth, and
agreeable to the meaning of the Spirit at this day, for any person under the
name of Quaker, to give forth this Doctrine, it is folly and hipocrisy to
profess our selves Members of the True Church, and yet not believe thus, as the
True Church believes, though the giver forth thereof may to this purpose also
declare (as to give the publisher thereof his due, he has) That they never did
preach up such a Position as a great Argument to enforce People into their
Faith.

SECT. V. What we stand for, viz. Truth and Righteousness, and that Christ's
Government may be exalted in every Heart, under which we are instructed not to
depend on Man, but on the sufficiency of God's Grace. A Testimony against
Tithes, and for Meeting together in time of Persecution, the neglect whereof
may be the Fruit of Weakness, or disobedience. The Government of Christ, and
the Laws thereof are inward. Some part of the Fruits brought forth, under the
said Government are discribed. An Objection relating to the Securing any part
of a man's Estate on a foresight of a Praemunire, or Fines for meeting answered.
HAving thus far eased our selves, it is with us in short to inform the Reader,
what we stand for, and what we stand against; that so the understanding
impartial Reader (who cannot be principled to shut out all Reason, and all
Wisdom, notwithstanding public Exhortations to the contrary, as if Wisdom and
Reason of all kinds were condemnable) may perceive more clearly what we are,
and what we are not.

That then which chiefly we stand for, is Truth and Righteousness, and that
Christ's Government may be exalted in every Heart; which might be branched
forth into many particular Doctrines, and Practices: but forasmuch as that has
largely been treated on by many ancient and honorable Friends to Truth and
Righteousness (who were Instruments in Gods Hand to gather us into the Belief
of his Light, and Sufficiency of his Grace, though since fallen asleep) and
that we intend more particularly to treat thereon in the second part of this
Treatise; we shall not much enlarge thereon in this part; yet think it
necessary for the sakes of some, here to signify: That Truth and Righteousness
(for which we stand under the Government of Christ) has Instructed us, not to
depend on Man for teaching; but on the Sufficiency of Gods Grace; nor yet to
put into the mouths of false Prophets, or Hireling Shepherds; and on this foot
we have had a Testimony against paying of Tithes, as being that
Antichristian-Yoak, which in the dark Night of Apostasy has been spread over
Nations; and as we came to believe in the Light of Christ Jesus, and to depend
upon the Sufficiency of his Grace, and to know the benefit of our assembling
our selves together, to wait upon the Lord, for the arising of his pure
immortal Life, to the refreshing and consolating our immortal Souls, we have
been made willing (Praises be to our God) to continue the assembling of our
Selves together, waiting upon the Lord in the day of Persecution, and Hour of
Trial, though Sufferings might therefore attend; believing, that whatsoever
society of People had been in the Life of Christianity, and yet should for Fear
of Man, or the Laws of Men, forsake the assembling of themselves together (as
the manner of some has been in days past) when the will of the Lord was they
should not forbear, might thereby come to lose their strength in the Lord: for
that we believe, it is the duty of every Christian, to think nothing too dear to
offer up for the Lord, when he commands, or calls for it; [Mark, We do not say,
at every time that any Informer, that thirsts after our ruin and Estates,
thorough Malice (especially when not prompted thereto by such as are Ministers
of the Law) calls for it, but we say when the Lord Commands or Calls for it.]
And if peradventure any should be so overcome, as through Disobedience, Fear or
Weakness, not to stand steadfast to the Testimony of Truth in the day of Trial,
even in that manner that the Lord wills, it is then the Duty of those that
are strong, to deal gently with such, and in that Charity (spoken of by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.) That bears all things, that endures all things,
endeavor to convince them of such their weakness, that so their Faith and
Strength in the Truth, may come to increase; and not be so remote from bearing
the Infirmities of the Weak (which was the Apostles Counsel to those who were
Strong) as instead thereof to publish such their Weakness, by way of
Recrimination through the Nation, especially whilst such Weakness might truly
be termed, want of Sight, or clear Conviction.

We also do believe, that the Government of Christ is an Inward Government,
that the Laws thereof are Inward, and that the only place wherein they are to
be exalted is in the Heart of Man; for that Christ's Appearance is there to be
waited for; and that this Government cannot be established by Man, because it is
already on Christ's Shoulders; and he that sits on the Throne of David is to
establish it. Notwithstanding it is well known, that some called Quakers, by
writing under their hands, have declared themselves to be the Establishers of
the Churches in the Holy Order of Truth.

We also do believe, that those, who have lived under this Government of
Christ, bring forth the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, strive not for
Pre-eminence, nor yet, like the Gentiles, exercise Lordship over one another:
but are meek, gentle, humble, and easy to be entreated; ready to pass by and
forgive Offenses, even as God, for Christ's sake has forgiven us: and so show
forth the Fruit of that Love, whereof Christ our Lord and Master did declare,
when he said, By this shall all men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye Love
one another. But on the contrary, we cannot but testify, that those who are so
far from following Peace with all men (which was the Apostles Counsel) as to
raise Contention amongst their Brethren, endeavoring to make them Offenders
for those things, which (in the Sight of the All-seeing God) are no Offense, do
not appear to be Subject unto Christ's Government, though they may style
themselves Establishers of the Churches in the Holy Order of Truth.

Object. But perhaps some may here Object. How come you and those your Opposers
(who run against you as dark, leavened, superate Spirits) thus to disagree? for
certain we are, that we have heard them testify to the sufficiency of Gods
Grace, in Opposition to the Teachings of Man; magnify the Light of Christ
Jesus (as the Guide to the Father) and bear witness against Tyth-payers and
Fleers in time of Persecution?

Answ. Yes verily, we believe so too; but yet we are not of those, who can hold
an Unity with such, who sometimes tell us, We must walk according to the
Measure of Gods Grace in our selves, and that magnify the sufficiency thereof
(as the only unerring Rule) and yet be Judging their Brethren, because they
cannot have an Eye to some Outward Rules and Orders (given forth by such who
have said, Look not unto us, but unto the Lord) when at the same time, such as
may be so Judged, shall solemuly affirm, it reaches not to their Consciences,
unto which all Papers, Outward Rules and Prescriptions, are to be brought; that
so by the Light of Christ Jesus therein, they may be tried; and not our
Consciences brought unto Papers, or any thing Outward, to be a Bond thereon,
before an Inward Conviction from the Measure of the Grace of God received:
neither can we be at Unity with the Appearance of that Spirit in any one, that
villifies others for Fleers in time of Persecution, Backbiting (instead of
endeavoring to restore in the Spirit of Meekness) such, when such an one has
appeared a Fleer at such like times himself; neither can we be at Unity with
the Appearance of that Spirit (be it in whomsoever it will) that can
recriminate men as Tyth-payers, who have been Faithful in their Testimony
relating to Tithes, and yet advise a Friend to Purchase Tithes, which is G. F's
Case, with relation to his Advice unto Nathaniel Crips, and Robert Arch,
according as is treated on, and proved by Certificates under their hands,
recorded in the 21th. Section of the Manuscript first mentioned in the Preface,
ready to be seen.

We are now sensible, that some of our Opposers may take occasion from a part
of our fore going words, thus to Object.

Obj. This your Language of Offering up all, seems not (according to the sense
of some) to square with the practice of securing any part of your Estates, when
you foresee a probability of incurring a Praemunire, or being fined for Meeting,
which (as report says) has been the Case of some of you; and not only so, but
that you have Justified the same, notwithstanding some (whom we account
faithful) have in Public Meetings for Worship declared against it, instancing
the words of Christ when he said unto Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art
an Offense to me; for thou savourest not the things that be of God: which was
so spoken by Christ, because Peter said unto him, Be it far from thee, Lord;
this shall not be unto thee: meaning, as the Context shows, that he would not
have Jesus go to Jerusalem, there to sufer; though 'twas manifested to him,
that he must go thither and suffer, etc. Read, Mat. 16.21, 22, 23. and so by
consequence it appears, that Christ reproved that Spirit which exhorted to save
Self. Besides, it is well known, that on this occasion the rebellions and
condemned Action of Saul in saving Agag, and he best of the Sheep and Oxen
alive (being a part of what by the Commandment of the Lord he took of the
Amalakites) has frequently been brought (as an instance against some of you)
to show that all ought to be offered up. Read, 1 Samuel 15.

Answ. Forasmuch as this very Objection has been made use of, as a prevailing
Argument to affect some ignorant People against the Friends of Truth, it is
needful it should receive a particular Answer, and Observation, which now
follows.

Peter's words had a tendency to divert Christ from what he knew to be his Duty;
Saul's Action was known and confessed Rebellion, in saving that which was no part
of his own proper Substance, but a Prey obtained by Commission from God, and
that with a severe Command to Destroy all; and therefore we readily Confess,
that if any amongst us have endeavored to divert another from what he knew to
be his Duty, or has (in saving any part of that Substance which God Commanded
to be Destroyed) acted contrary to his known Duty, it is justly to be condemned;
and the Scriptures before-cited may in that Case be termed a proper Allusion
thereto. But, alas! this is far remote from the Cases reflected on; because
some Persons therein concerned have received no Command from God to the
contrary, nor yet have saved any thing which the Lord commanded to destroy: And
therefore such may justly thus say; How dare thou to Judge the Friends of
Truth, and Servants of the Lord, for that wherein they are not Judged of the
Lord? Besides, it is worthy Observation, that if any should go beyond their
proper Gift, and Line of right Understanding, and in that state offer up their
ALL, when the Lord calls not for it, but instead thereof a Company of
Informers, and that also by Illegal Ways, to devour it on their Lusts, this
Offering might have no more acceptance with the Lord, under this Dispensation
of the New Covenant, than the Offering of the Blind and the Lame under the
First Covenant had. And indeed, it may not be unnecessary, farther to confide,
the End wherefore the Lord has made us Stewards of Worldly Estates; doubtless
'twas and is, that therewith we might Maintain our Families, and have a due
regard to the Poor, the Fatherless and the Widow, that are or might be Objects
of Charity: and therefore it may well be deemed not contrary to the Truth,
Lawfully to preserve the same, for the Ends for which 'twas given, and to
endeavor by all Lawful Ways and Means to prevent the Spoylers Design of
possessing our Estates to consume it on their Lusts. And indeed, Charity
obliges us to suppose, that these very Considerations occasioned G. F. to
advice Mary Penington to secure Worldly Estate, from the hands of such, who
were Supposed in a Persecuting Spirit to Thirst after it, though of her self,
if what G. F. has Written in relation to this matter be to be credited, she
had no inclination to remove her moveable goods, in order to secure it. And if
any should question the Truth of this, relating to G. F. and Mary Penington, we
thereto say, that Sufficient Witness to Prove Mary Peningtons Confession
thereof can be now Produced, besides G. F. Being charged therewith, did not in
his Answer written, deny it.

This our Answer may in probability occasion from some another Objection on
this wise.

Obj. This is but a subtle Evasion of that which is the Duty of all Friends,
for the Testimony of faithful Friends and the Words of Christ in Answer to
Peter, and of Samuel to Saul, will stand over the Heads of Such Dark Spirits as
you are.

Answ. This Objection containing such Language, wherewith we are well
acquainted from the Mouths of our Opposers, may thus in Truth be Answered.

That it can no more stand over our Heads, than the words of some Priests,
urging Abraham's payment of Tithes, out of spoils he obtained in War ( Genesis
14.20.) can stand over the Heads of Friends, refusing to pay Tithes of those
Lands which are their Inheritance, or proper purchase, and no part of Spoils
obtained in War. Those who will not receive this as a full Answer to evidence
the Weakness of the last Objection, but tenaciously persist in asserting that
the said Objection is reasonable, and that from the words of Christ and Saul,
will undoubtedly give Just occasion to confirm the sense of our common Enemies,
viz. That there are amongst the People called Quakers, who make of the
Scriptures a mere Nose of Wax; for though the Scriptures mention not any
Command from God to Abraham, to pay unto Melchisedeck the Tenths of his
Spoils, yet doubtless he therein did according to the Mind of God, even as
Saul would have done had he destroyed all, according to the Command of God; and
if what was practiced by Abraham, might be taken to be an incumbent Duty on
Christians at this day, even as our Opposers would have what Saul ought to have
practiced (according to the command of God) to be Exemplary at this day, yet
it is apparent, that both one and 'tother had a real relation to what was
obtained in War, and so no proper Presidents either to pay a Tenth part, or to
offer up the nine parts with the tenth, of that Estate which is our Inheritance
or proper Purchase.

This we are farther sensible may also occasion another Objection to this
purpose, viz.

Obj. Your Discourse seems to encourage the avoiding all Suffering, and then,
how in this our day shall that Testimony of the Apostle be fullfilled, viz. All
that will live Godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution? 2 Timothy 3.12.

Answ. To this we answer; Our former discourse encourages the assembling our
selves together, though not to put into the Mouths of Informers at their Wills
and Pleasures; and doubtless Few so Weak, but do know that Sufferings of diverse
kinds may therefore attend; so that unless we were Discouragers of Assembling
together to wait upon the Lord, we cannot reasonably be understood to encourage
the avoiding all sufferings. And though Paul's Words seem so positive and
general, yet the meaning of the Spirit through Paul, might be more particular,
viz. in relation to Times, Seasons, and Persons, wherein the Lord might suffer
the Adversary to exercise some of his People, for the Trial of their Faith and
Patience; and not strictly meant, that if a man had not suffered Persecution,
therefore he had not lived Godly in Christ Jesus. For who dares to be so
uncharitable as to conclude, That none who are fallen asleep, that tastes not
of Persecution in their day, nor had occasion offered for the spoiling of their
goods for the Gospels Sake, Dyed in the Faith of Gods Elect, and of the number
of those who lived Godly in Christ Jesus; especially since we know it has been
the practice of some (who have been apt to reflect as aforesaid) to use diverse
ways and means (according to the best of their Skill and Understandings) to
prevent the Stroke of Persecution in their day?

Moreover, it is Observable that Paul's Words to Felix, etc. Acts, 26.29. I
would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me this Day, were both
almost and altogether such as I am, Except these Bonds: did clearly show, that
Persecution is not such an absolute Companion to a true Christian, as that
without it, it is not possible to live Godly in Christ Jesus; because, no doubt
but Paul was then in that state of Godliness, and so also would those, on whose
behalf he so spoke, have been, had Paul's Desires been Answered,
notwithstanding he Excepted the Bonds he then was in, by reason of Persecution.

And forasmuch as we know some of our Opposers seems to Glory in suffering
their goods to be taken away, and (to speak in their Language) account it the
Fruit of a Dark Spirit to endeavor to save any, though but from the thirst of
Informers, occasioning Persecution merely to enrich themselves, we cannot but
Query, Whether it be not more Christian like so to act according to ones plain
Persuasion, than to contend so much for offering upall, and yet after taken
away, to use diverse means to get it again; sometimes by Law open-faced, as in
the case of Appeals, and sometimes by private and Secret Solicitations, wherein
not only Time and Breath is Spent, but (as is credibly reported) the Purse
opened too, as some of our Opposers have done?

We shall now return and consider what in probability may be Objected touching
the sufficiency of Gods Grace, etc. as in the next following Section.

SECT. VI. On the occasion of an Objection, raised touching the sufficiency of
Gods Grace, Unity is treated on, from the words of Paul to the Corinths, that
they should all speak one thing. Touching the Word Independency, occasioned by
a Public Preacher. That leaving Friends to the Grace, Light and Spirit of God,
is not the way to lead into Rantism.
Objection.
It Is true (may some say) this Doctrine of exalting the sufficiency of Gods
Grace, squares with the Principle of Truth as Preached amongst us in the
Beginning, and it had then, and still has an Answer in our Consciences; but
now several of those, who have been Instruments to gather us, increase in the
Knowledge of the Mind of God, and they now tell us, that they doubt if there be
no care taken to preserve an Unity amongst the Professors of Truth, Friends may
be scattered and broken, and run into a Separation, etc. for did not Paul
exhort the Corinthians, that they should all speak one thing? 1 Cor. 1. 10.

Answ. To this we answer, that when Paul came to understand, that the Church at
Corinth were some for Paul, and some for Apollo, and some for Cephas, and some
for Christ, there was great need for him on that Occasion to exhort them to
speak one thing, lest their Faith and Hope in the Gospel might come utterly to
be destroyed; did those who cry against such (whom we account Faithful Friends)
as dark Spirits, and plead so much for Unity, and to speak one thing, exhort
those who were apt to pin their Faiths on an Apollo, a Paul, or a Cephas, to be
for Christ, we should think it good Exhortation therein to speak one thing; and
that which would cast a great Line of Reflection on those Ignorant Zealots, who
of late Days have much exhorted us to have an Eye to the Brethren, in which
it is evident to us, their meaning is to some particular Brethren, whilst
others, ancient and honorable, are despised by them.

Besides, we cannot on this occasion but observe, that the same Paul does
sufficiently evidence his dislike of any Plea for Unity, save that of the
Spirit in the Bond of Peace: And though he exhorts to Unity, Ephesians. 4.3. yet
Verse. 7. he says, But unto every one of us is given Grace, according to the
measure of the Gift of Christ; which clearly evidences to our Consciences, that
Paul never intended to magnify any 1 Cor. 12.7. 1 Cor. 15.10.
Unity amongst Brethren, but that which might be the natural product of this
gift of Grace, or manifestation of the Spirit, as given to every one according
to measure, to profit withal, and whereby they might (in the language, and
according to the example of the Apostle Paul) say each unto other, By the Grace
of God I am what I am.

We are yet sensible that another Objection may still arise:

Obj. What then are you for an Independency? Yes verily, we are for an
Independency, that is to say, Some may wonder, why we raise this Objection; but
doubtless 'twill come to the view of one (and not a mean one too) who
manifested his doubt, that some of us intended an Independency.
not to depend on the Counsel of one man, nor yet to depend on the counsel of
General, Quarterly or Monthly Meetings, but as there is sufficiency in the
Grace of God, that is given unto us to profit withal, so to have a Dependency
on that Grace, to teach, didirect, and instruct in all things, relating to the
In ward man of the heart; knowing that its against the nature of that Principle
in which we have believed, to have a dependency on any thing that is Outward,
lest it prove unto us like the Reed of Egypt, and Arm of Flesh, that cannot
save: but yet we are not against appointed Meetings for the Outward services of
Truth, for that has been and is our practice; knowing that there may be a
service therein, as occasion offers; provided all in such Meetings may be kept
in humility, as servants each to other, and the Truth; not exercising Lordship
over the Conscience, which is Gods Prerogative; nor yet exalting themselves, as
if thereby they were entered into that Possession, which can never be taken from
them.

Object. We are now sensible that some may be ready thus to say, we can
scarsely believe that any man of weight (and under the name of one that may be
accounted by any a faithful Quaker) would give occasion for such a discourse
as this, occasioned on the word [Independency] for that many may be apt to say
it is the Language of an Hypocrite that has outward Power to uphold it, because
some who are accounted separate from it, are called Independents.

Ans. This occasions us to signify, that Note, his Name is omitted for the
reason in the Preface.
an eminent Person writing to Friends in Wiltshire, by way of Reply to an
Answer they gave to the Paper from Ellis Hooks his Chamber, signed by Charles
Marshall and sixty five more, against two ancient and honorable Friends in
truth, viz. John Story and John Wilkinson, etc. thus repeats part of the words
of the Friends of Wiltshire.

"And what if we in this County (or any Friends elsewhere) should say to any of
you of London; or other Cities, or Countries, as to our Public Concerns, in
the managment of our Affairs, Note, Though it is recited, meddle not with us,
yet the very following words are thus, "unless concerned, but if the Word of
the Lord be really with any of you, we are ready to hear it, which being left
out by the replyer we appeal to the righteous Judge, whether he has not
therein acted notoriously unjust, since there could not have been the least
Pretense for him to have written as he has on that Subject had the whole
Sentence been repeated.
Meddle not with us; if we should so say unto you we cannot think that this is
of the nature of Imposition, having no Penalty annexed thereunto, neither do we
understand theirs to be any otherwise.

These words being thus repeated, the Replyer proceeds and gives this Answer,

"To this I Answer, ye are out of the Wisdom and Fellowship of the Gospel
herein; for wherever Truth is concerned, the Friends of Truth may be
concerned by counsel, advice, or other aid or assistance; and to talk of
Cities, Places, or Countries, by way of Limitation, is narrow, weak, and
unsound; it is a plain restrain, which is of the nature of Imposition, it
arises from the same Ground, and tends to the same Center; and the end of this
very Spirit (how small soever its appearances are thought now to be) is
downright Independencyes, Parishes and Schisms: suffer but the Universal Cord
to be cut, and these things must follow; hereby one Place will be ignorant of
the Actions of another and each be as distinct. Governments; and by things
happening between Persons of differing Meetings, a Foundation is laid for
Emulation, Strife and Division: but where Truth only Rules and Reigns, and that
all Friends of Truth have Free access in it, Truth, and not Man nor Men rules
and reigns: for they that would have a Meeting rule, are as far from Truth, as
they that would have a Man rule: for it is neither Man, nor Men, but Truth in
all that must, and will preside amongst us; and the Faithful are of one mind,
because they have but one Head.

Here the Reader may take notice, that the Replyer (who is not a mean One)
uses the Word Independencyes, and seems to speak against Separate and
Independent Privileges, and distinct Governments; and yet also imports by his
words, that neither Man, Men nor Meetings ought to Rule; but that Truth must,
and will preside amongst us: and that the Faithful are all of one Mind, because
they have but one Head.

Hence some may be apt to enquire; What may be the meaning of these his words,
and the End of this very Spirit is downright. Independencyes, Parishes, and
Schisms?

To this we Answer, That we take him to mean, that there are some who in his
sense either are, or in the end may become Schismatics, because they are not
principled to depend on the Assemblies of Men, though under a Form of
Government (but on the Sufficiency of Gods Grace) which seems to be evident
from this his Expressions, " suffer the universal Cord [by which we cannot take
him to mean the Power of God, but some outward thing] to be cut, and these
things must follow, viz. hereby one Place will be ignorant of the Actions of
another, and each will plead Separate and Independent Privileges; in fine,
they will be as distinct Governments: and by things happening between Persons
of different Meetings, a foundation is laid for Emulation, Strife and Division:
but had he not so said, we have sufficient Evidence satisfying us, that what we
take to be his Meaning may reasonably be taken to be his very Meaning: since
it is not rational to take him to mean an Independency on the Light of Christ,
and Sufficiency of Gods Grace, because it is used by way of Reflection on those,
whose great Concern at this day (as we believe) is to contend and plead for
this undoubted Christian-Freedom and Privilege; that as under the Profession
of Christianity, the Sons and Daughters of Men, have (by the True Ministers of
Christ) been committed to Gods Grace; so they ought to be left free to the
Sufficiency of his Grace, as that Teacher of Righteousness, on which they ought
to depend: notwithstanding many False and Hireling Ministers have usually thus
said, We commit you to the Word of Gods Grace, and yet be found Persecutors of
those, who giving heed to the Word of Grace, could not adhere to their words.
He that has an ear to hear, let him hear.

We appeal now to Gods Witness in every impartial Reader, whether the Replyers
Language in his afore-cited Reply, favors of the Truth; and in the mean while
shall leave this our Testimony on record, that Truth may appear amongst a Few
Country Friends in a small Village; and that they, from the Appearance
thereof, may act by way of Counsel, Exhortation, Aid, or Assistance (charging
troublesome, turbulent Disquieters of Gods People not to meddle with them,
unless concerned) and yet may not Justly be reflected on as such, as would cut
the Universal Cord, which is the Power of God (and cannot be cut) whereby we
were gathered: nor yet, that the end of their Spirits are Independencies,
Parishes, Schisms; and that they are Pleaders for such Separate Independent
Privileges, as have not a dependency on Gods leading Grace.

Oh, Friends! away with all such discourse, that tells you in one Line, that no
Man, Men, nor Meetings, but Truth must Rule and Preside; and yet reflect on
others, as claiming and pleading for Separate Privileges, and distinct
Governments, when in Reallity they plead for nothing, but to be left (according
as the ancient Laborers, who were Instruments in Gods hand to gather us, did
leave us, commit us, and commend us) to the Grace of God, and the Teachings
thereof, as manifest in every ones Inward Parts; making no mentition of having
their Dependencies on General, Quarterly Monthly, or any other Meetings of Men
whatsoever; and therefore we cannot but give forth this as a warning to all, to
take heed, that ye be not deceived by the cunning Sleights and Devices of Man,
to leave your Teacher, that cannot be removed into a Corner; and instead
thereof be found depending on the Dicttates, and Prescriptions of fallible Man.
He that has an ear to hear, let him hear.

But to come yet more close to the matter in hand; we cannot but further
declare, that though the Replier thus has said, To talk of Cities, Places or
Countries by way of limitation, is narrow weak and unsound; it is a plain
restraint; it is of the nature of Imposition; yet we must take Liberty to tell
him, that we are not so void of sense, but to perceive, that the General
Meeting is that unto which, in the sense of some, all Friends ought to have an
Eye, above any other Meeting of Friends whatsoever; and that the meaning of
this Exhortation, frequently uttered, viz. Have any Eye to the Brethren, is
chiefly meant with respect to that Meeting; this we take to be both
Limitation, and a Design of Imposition.

And whereas the Replier has said, Hereby one Place will be ignorant of the
Actions of another; as if that were matter of ill consequence; we think meet to
add, that we do know, those who have busied themselves, first to bring the
Actions at one Place unto another, have occasioned Emulation, Strife, and
Division amongst Friends at Unity. So that instead of approving themselves
Keepers of other Men's Vineyards, they have been Destroyers both of other men's
and their own Vineyards too, as by sad Examples is too too evidently
manifested, in the Countries and Places where we Live, or have been Conversant.

If report be True, it has been Jealoused by some, who cry much against some
others, under the term of Dark Spirits (though Honest Friends) That this kind
of arguing, to leave Friends to the Grace, Light and Spirit of God, may lead
into Rantism; and therefore it is the Care of Faithful Brethren to appear as
watchmen over the Flock, that so none under pretense of being left to the
Light, may run into Looseness, Lightness and Vanity; saying, The Light in my
Conscience Condemns me not.

To this we say the Lord rebuke that Spirit, that does so much as Jealous, that
leaving People to the Light, may lead into Rantism: such a Sugestion is
notoriously wicked, since the Testimony of Truth has been (unto which we this
day bear record) that the Light is a Reprover of all Sin. And as to the latter
part of the Objection we say, That those who are true Watchmen, will as much as
in them lies use their Endeavors to bring the Flock to the Light, to prove
their Deeds, whether they are wrought in God (and not to Papers, rather than to
the Light) as knowing this, that every Work and Word brought forth by Man, is
but the Effect of what is first wrought in the Heart, which nothing outward can
be a Bond upon to alter, and change: and if we do but consider how Fruitless in
days and years that are past, as well as in this present Age, all Man's Outward
endeavors under the notion of Church Government has been, to preserve in a
real, true, Heavenly Society, it appears to us as a mere Badge of Apostasy, for
any to have a Dependency on any such means of Preservation. And whereas it is
Jealous'd, Some may run into looseness, and say, the Light in my Conscience
condemns me not; and therefore it is the care of Faithful Brethren to appear, as
Watchmen over the Flock: We say so too; and those who approve themselves
Watchmen, will endeavor to convince such, who in very deed run into Looseness,
etc. that though they may pretend the Light condemns them not, yet that their
deeds are Evil, and that the Light does condemn that same, though they may be
hardened, and see it not; and so endeavor to awaken the Conscience, that Gods
Witness may be heard; for that nothing that is outward can be a Bond on such an
one, to forsake his Sin; and embrace the Truth.

SECT. VII. Touching Church Government, and the meaning of the word
Church Government, in the sense of our Opposers, as we (on sufficient ground)
take it laid down. Our denial of that meaning. Several Scriptures from whence a
Proof for Church Government has been pretended, are treated on, showing that
from thence no Pretense can be to claim a Power over Conscience, or Outward
Property. The Doctrine touching Power over Conscience, and outward things
relating to Meum and Tuum (as the Authors Terms are) which we therefore call
Outward Property, Examined, and testified against, as contrary to the Principle
of Truth, and Liberty we have in Christ Jesus. Our sense what ought to be done
for the Decision of Controversy, with relation to Property between Brother and
Brother. An Objection raised to this purpose, That what is given forth by the
Spirit, through the Brethren, ought to be obeyed, and not accounted the
Dictates of fallible Man; and that, if thou see it not thy Duty to obey, the
Reason is, thy Want of Diligence, and not waiting in thy Measure, and so no
Plea for thy Disobedience is Good. The said Objection answered. An Examination
from the Scriptures, Whether Christ gave any Encouragement to his Disciples, to
become Rulers over one another.
THis kind of Discourse we are ready to suppose may at length occasion from
some, such an Objection as this:

Object. What, are you not for Church Government?

Answ. To this we say, We are for the Government of Christ, knowing it is his
Right to Govern his Church.

Obj. This (may some say) is an evasive Answer to the Question, and therefore
may again reply; Be plain, and tell us, Are you for Church Government?

Answ. For Answer then we say; We ought to ask, what is meant by the word
Church Government? Since we find not the word in the Scriptures of Truth; and
it being a word, mostly used under the profession of Christianity, by such who
have become Persecutors; we are the more Jealous that Corruption, Usurpation,
and Injustice may creep in by such, who contend so much for Church Government,
with respect to Outward Forms of Government; since the Form some take to
Govern is in some respect worse than the Forms of Diverse Apostate Christians;
take this for one instance amongst many more, that might be given, viz. Judging
the Merit of a Cause, without hearing both parties, as may be sufficiently
evidenced by the giving forth that Paper from Ellis Hooks his Chamber, London,
the Twelfth of the Fourth Month 1677. and Subscribed by Charles Marshal and
Sixty Five Persons more, against two Ancient and Honorable Brethren viz. John
Wilkinson and John Story, though not then present to speak for themselves, nor
yet ever spoken to by many of the said Sixty Six touching, any Evil laid to
their Charge.

Besides, we do know, that many of our Opposers, who appear to us highly
affected with Church Government (as in their account is established amongst us)
and that with respect to Outward Forms, do in an high decree manifest a Spirit
of Persecution, by endeavoring to take away the good name of honest men, by
Lies, Slanders, and False Accusations (wherein our Opposers have been to our
certain knowledge, so industrious, as that we have scarcily known their Peers
in that evil Work) which in many Sections of the Second Part of the first
Manuscript, made mention of in the Preface (Particularly the 13th, 18th, 12th,
22th.) is laregly evidenced, and ready for the view of any Friend that may
desire the perusal thereof, though for the reasons mentioned in the Preface,
not herewith published.

And, now as to the meaning of the word Church Government (in the sense of our
Opposers) we take it to be thus, viz. That some who account themselves Members
of the Body of Christ, claim a Power to Rule over other some, if not all the
rest, and to give forth Sentences, Directions or Orders, which they ought to
own, receive or obey, though they may pretend they see it not their Duty.

If this be the meaning of the word Church Government, in the sense of our
Opposers, as we have cause to believe it is, not only from R. B's Book of
Government; but also from what has been said or propagated by others, which we
are Persuaded will appear to all impartial Readers, who shall diligently, and
in an unprejudiced Spirit, weigh the Second part of the said first Manuscript;
mentioned in the Preface (which as we said before is ready for the perusal of
any Friend desiring so to do, though for the reason, mentioned in the Preface
not herewith published) we then directly answer, we are not for such a
Church Government.

This Subject, whereof we are now treating, being as some may (comparatively)
say, the very Hinge on which the present Controversy seems to depend, we think
it necessary to quote those Scriptures from whence (so far as ever we
understood) the most pertinent Arguments might be produced to prove
Church Government, or a Government in some Member or Members over the rest.

Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. We find Christ thus saying, Moreover, if thy Brother shall
trespass against thee, go tell him his Fault; if he will not hear thee, take
with thee one or two; and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the
Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church let him be unto thee as an heathen
man. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind in Earth, shall be bound
in Heaven. Comparing this Scripture touching the Trespass of one Brother
against another, with what Paul Writes, 1 Cor. 2.4. Dare any of you, having a
matter against another go to Law before the unjust, do ye not know that the
Saints shall Judge the World? if then ye have Judgment of things pertaining to
this Life, set them to Judge who are least esteemed in the Church; we
reasonably conclude, that the words of Christ, and of the Apostle only hinted
at, either Personal Offenses, or Differences touching Worldly Matters; and that
therein the Duty of the Church was only to exhort to submit to their Counsel;
which If they did not, they might Justly be esteemed as Heathen Men: but this
is nothing to the purpose of those who have approved a Plea for such a
Church Government, as Claims a Power of Deciding Matters relating to
Conscience, and outward things also, on the occasion of Differences raised
touching Worldly Estate: and that others ought to obey such Decisions, which in
its natural Consequence has (as we take it) no Less Tendency, than to claim
Power over our Properties, as well as Consciences.

We are now sensible that many Friends who have not been acquainted with the
secret Cause of all the Differences amongst Friends, will be even startled at
this, and be ready to query, Are there any such amongst the People called
Quakers?

We Answer; Yes Verily; and that those, who may be accounted Christians too,
viz. those who approved in the Second Days Meeting at London the before-cited
Book of R. B. relating to Government in the Church.

We shall begin first with the Matter of Conscience, the Title of the sixth
Section thereof runs thus, " How far this Government does extend in matters
Spiritual, and purely Conscientious [and then treating thereon the Author thus
saith] in which the great Question is, How far in such Cases the Church may
give Positive Orders, or Rules; [and so proceeds to ask this question, viz.] "
Whether the Church of Christ have Power in any Cases, that are Matters of
Conscience, to give a Positive sentence, or Decision, which may be Obligatory
upon Believers? [and then goes on thus answering, viz.] " I answer
affirmatively; She has; [which being compared with what he writes Page 68. of
his said Book on this wise, viz.] " that their De facto, giving a Positive
Sentence in such Cases, will not import Tyranny, and Usurpation; neither will
the pretenses of any contradicting them, or refusing to submit on the account
they see it not, excuse them of being guilty of Disobeying God; clearly shows
to us his meaning to be That in some Cases the Consciences of Believers ought
to be bound by the Positive Sentence of Others, without leaving any Liberty for
a Believer to refuse to submit, on account of not seeing it his Duty to submit.

This Meaning and Government over the Consciences of Believers, we take to be
contrary to the Principle of Truth, and Liberty we have in Christ Jesus; for
that no Outward Sentence or Matter whatsoever can obliege the Conscience to be
approving this or that Exercise or Practice; or to be in the Belief of this or
that Judgment, Sentence or Decree, until such time that the Conscience
(thorough the inshining of Christ's Light therein) comes to be satisfied, and
thereby to be bound and obleiged; and though we find the Author to the
Hebrews, Chap. 13. Verse. 7. saying on this wise, Remember them which have the
Rule over you; yet he does not say, Such who had the Rule, were the Church; but
discribes them in the next following words to be such, who had Spoken unto them
the Word of God; so that if any Authority be given to any to Rule, as Members
of Christ's Body, it appears from the Scriptures of Truth to be unto such, who
had Spoken the Word of God unto them, over whom they had the Rule; and
therefore can be no President or Proof that mixed, and uncertain Assemblies, as
to Number and Qualification may call themselves the Church, and under that
Notion give forth Orders, Rules and Sentences; telling the rest of those, whom
they may account their Fellow Members, It Is your Duty to Obey, though you
pretend YOU SEE IT NOT.

Besides, it does not appear, that those who spoke the Word of God, did give
forth any Sentence by virtue of their Authority, that might become a Bond on
the Conscience, before Conviction by the Grace of God; and Why? Because it is
by that Grace that the heart comes to be Established, according as the Author
to the Hebrews writes, Verse. 9. of the same Chapter. For it is a good thing that
the Heart be established with Grace.

But Perhaps some may quote Paul, 2 These. 3.6. Who thus says, Now we Command
you, Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your
selves from every Brother, that walks disorderly, and not after the Tradition
which he received of us.

To this we say; Paul in the following Verse gives the Reaon for the Urging
Obedience to his Precept, viz. For ye your selves know how ye ought to follow
us; hence we may conclude, that their Hearts were so established in the Grace
of God, as that the Knowledge of their Duty became a greater Obligation upon
them, then Paul's Command.

Verse the 14th. of the same Chap. Paul says, If any Man obey not our Word by
this Epistle, note that Man, and have no Company with him, that he may be
ashamed.

This (may some say) seems very positive to imply, that God has given
Authority to some to Rule in the Church.

Our Answer to this is; Paul's words related to such, of whom ( Verse. 11, 12,
13. of the same Chapter) he says; We heard that there were some amongst you
that walked Inordinately, and work not at all; but are Busy-Bodyes: therefore
them that are such, we Command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that they
work with quietness, and eat their own bread, and ye Brethren, be not weary in
well-doing; and then he exhorts Verse. 14th, If any man obey not our Word by
this Epistle, note that Man, and have no company with him. This clearly shows
what the Apostle had relation unto, viz. to that necessary and commandable Duty
mentioned in Verse. the 11th. that such who were Busybodies, walking
inordinately, might not (in their busy, inordinate Spirit) eat the Bread of
others, but work, that they might eat their own Bread: were this Command of the
Apostle obeyed by many of those, who run to and fro, having little other
Business or Matter, than to cry against some Friends, under the term of Dark,
Separate Spirits (though such as are Faithful) we should not have so many False
Accusers as we have, troubling the Countries, raising public Contentions in
Meetings for worship amongst us, to the open Scandal of Truth and Observation
of our common Enemies, whereby they rejoice and cry, ha! Several instances of
this nature are recorded in the Second part of the said first Manuscript
mentioned in the Preface ready for the View of Friends, as aforesaid. And
though they give the first onset by Public Testimonies against particular
Persons (Ancient and Honorable in the Truth) yet a sober Request from any of
us, desiring to know the Matter that is Evil whereof such are guilty, is with
them sufficient ground to lay the Contention at our Doors; saying, Why cannot
you bear? all things would have been well, if you could have born; But alas! we
are not of those who can so suffer Truth to fall in our Streets; and so they go
on where they have Credit, proseliting simple People against honest Friends, by
their Lies and Slanders. But to return, let us consider, Whether the last
recited Quotation speaks any thing to encourage one Brother to claim Authorty
over the Conscience of another; or that some Members of the Church of Christ,
may meet together, and give forth Sentences and Decrees in Matters relating to
Conscience against others, oblieging all to submit thereto. Nay verily, that
Construction cannot stand in Truth and Righteousness, though it should come
from an Assembly called a General Assembly: For albeit the Author to the
Hebrews tells them, They were come to the General Assembly and Church of the
Firstborn, which are written in Heaven; Yet he speaks nothing of their
Authority, as Judges (much less that their Sentences, or Judgments should
obliege the Consciences of others, without relation to a Conviction from the
Appearance of the Spirit of Truth, or Grace of God in themselves) but tells
them, that God is the Judge of all.

The next thing we are to manifest is, that some there are amongst the People
called Quakers (who may be accounted Chieftains too) that approve of a Plea for
Government amongst themselves, which in its natural consequence has (as we
take it) no less tendency than to claim a Power over our Properties, as well as
Consciences.

For Proof whereof we say, the Second Days Meeting of Ministering Friends in
London took upon them the Approbation of the aforesaid Book, relating to
Government, whereby they are Entitled to the Matter therein contained.

The Reader may peruse the Fifth Section of the aforesaid Book of Government,
beginning Page 37. the Title of which Section is, " In what Cases, and how far
this Government extends; and first as to Outward and Temporals; [the Author
treating thereon Page 39, says thus] " In the second place, this Order
reaches the Taking-up, and Composing of Differences, as to Outward Things,
[and so proceeding on that Subject the Author comes thus to affirm] " We do
boldly Aver, that as a People gathered together by the Lord unto the same
Faith, and distinguished from all others by our Joint Testimony and Sufferings,
that we have Power and Authority to decide and remove these things.

This we Testify is repugnant to the Light of Christ Jesus within us, and
Testimony of the Scriptures of Truth without us; for as Christ's Kingdom is not
of this World, so it is not likely that his Members should by his Authority,
claim a Jurisdiction in the Matters relating to this World: and if Christ
himself, when he was desired by a certain man, Luke 12.13, 14.
to bid his Brother divide the Inheritance with him, refused to be a Judge in
that Matter, relating to Property, when desired by one Party, saying, Who made
me a Judge over you? how much more unreasonable is it, for his Members to
assume a Jurisdiction, when desired by neither Party, we leave it to the
Consciences of impartial and understanding Readers to weigh and consider, and
in the Light of Christ to Judge; saying in our Hearts, Blessed be the Lord,
that neither the Second Days Meeting, nor those who are at Unity with them, as
Approvers of the said Book, have any Jurisdiction over our Properties; for if
they had, and should appear so unjust in their Sentences toward us, as some
have been Scandalous in their Tongues, the Prophesies of our Outwardly
Withering in Basket and Store might quickly come to pass; but Blessed be God,
the Lord has hitherto been a Blessing to us, so that at this time (in a Sense
of his Mercy, and of that Charity, which obliegeth us to love our Enemies) we
do heartily desire, that the False Prophesies and Plagues against others (whom
the Lord has and does Bless) may not be fulfilled on the Heads of such
Prophesiers.

Object. But perhaps some may query of us, What ought to be done in Cases of
Difference, between Brother and Brother?

Answ. To this we say, The Parties differing ought to choose Honest Men skilled
in the matters wherein they differ, to end the same, and not go to Law; and if
any shall refuse so to do, the Church of Christ have only Power to Admonish
them to their Duty; and if they refuse to take their wholesome Counsel, may then
declare such unworthy of their Society; but for any Members under the notion of
the Church, to say, We have Power to decide and remove these things, without
the assent of the Parties differing, is an Usurpation; and that the assent of
Parties, was not intended by the Approvers of the said Book of Government, it
is evident to us; for that there is not in any part of the said Book one Tittle
to that purpose; neither could such Assent be so expressed, and yet the Case
whereunto unto it related be pertinent to the matter of Power treated on in
that Section (which was, In what Cases, and how far this Government extends)
whenas any Heathen Man might claim the like Power, when given by assent of
Parties: And to us it is evident, that the Purport of Paul's Counsel to the
Corinths, (1 Cor. 6.) at variance, was, That they who were at Variance should
choose some of the least in the Church; and not the rest of the Church choose,
or set apart any for them to decide their Differences. For that, when he said,
I speak to your shame, is it so, that there is not a Wise Man amongst you? He
could not in Truth intend shame to those in the Church, who were not at
Variance, but in Peace, Love, and Unity in the Truth, each toward other; for
no question but they were ready to choose Wise Men to judge the matter, if they
had had Power, or the differing Parties would have assented; but doubtless the
shame intended by the Apostle related to the Parties differing, who had Power
to choose Persons to decide their Differences, and yet would not but go to Law.

On the whole matter we have this further to Add.

If Paul looked on himself, as one having Power to command, to rule and govern
over the Church of Christ, and that 'twas their Duty to Obey him, whether they
saw it so or no, what is the meaning that the same Paul testifies for himself,
and other his Brethren, 2 Cor. 4.2. That they had not handled the Word of God
deceitfully, but by Manifestation of the Truth, commending themselves to every
Man's Conscience in the Sight of God: comparing this with what Paul writes in
the same Epistle, 2 Cor. 10.15. Having Hope, when your Faith is increased, that
we shall be enlarged by you, according to our Rule abundantly; it appears
evidently to us, that preaching up Obedience to that wherein the Conscience
through Faith is not satisfied, is a handling the Word of God deceitfully: and
therefore, though we have been Informed, that we are dark and blind, even by
such who tell us they do see; publicly; Preaching on this wise, If you do not
see your selves, you must then follow us that do see; yet we cannot on that
foot embrace such Doctrine, lest like blind men we fall all together into the
Ditch, and embrace that for the light of the Sun which is no other than the
dark Body of the -- MOON.

We are now sensible another Objection may thus arise.

Object. The Spirit of God (which is but one in all) has moved in our Brethren
to give forth certain Orders, Commands and Prescriptions, and therefore we
ought accordingly to Obey; and this cannot be called the Dictates of Fallible
Man, but of the Spirit given forth through Man; and wast thou (that pretendest
thou see it not thy Duty to Obey) but Obedient to thy own Measure, thou
would then see it so, and be one with the Brethren; and therefore we cannot
but tell thee, it is thy Duty to Obey, since the Reason thou see it not thy
Duty, is thy want of Diligence, and not waiting on thy own Measure: besides, we
find that that very Person who has traveled much for the settling of Men's
Meetings, has lately given forth a Paper, the import whereof is to Justify
Prescriptions.

Answ. To this we say, That if the Spirit of God moves in any Member of the
Body of Christ, to give forth certain Orders, and Prescriptions, with respect
to the rest of the Members, as that which (though relating to their
Consciences) they ought to perform and practice, whether they see it their Duty
or no, or whether they are free so to do or no; then (no doubt but) they ought
so to act, and do, because the Spirit of Truth has so moved: but this is to
suppose, that which under the Dispensation of the Second Covenant, we have not
the least ground from the Scriptures of Truth, or Light of Christ to suppose:
For if the Blind was not to be accepted of for a sacrifice under the First
Covenant, much less can it be acceptable under the Second: And therefore we do
not believe, that we ought to expect that any such motion from the Spirit of
God should appear through any one, or more Members of the Body of Christ, with
respect to other Members of the same Body: and our Faith is, that all those who
are Heirs of that Kingdom which is everlasting, are entitled to a like
Freedom, not to be Imposed upon each by other, contrary to the Divine sense and
Heavenly Understanding, which as Co-heires and Co-workers together they are
made Partakers of: And this in the ensuing discourse will evincingly be
manifested from the Scriptures of Truth; however we must confess, he that is
not diligent to wait upon God in the Exercise of his own Measure of Grace
received, is by the Light of Christ condemnable; not for refusing to perform
that which he sees not to be his Duty, with respect to other men's Lines made
ready to his hand, wherein he is not satisfied; but for his neglecting to wait
upon God, because it is manifest in every one, that has been convinced of the
Truth, that it is our Duty to wait upon God. And this our sense and reason
answers to the Testimony of the Scriptures of Truth, where it is said, Romans
1.18, 19. The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Ungodlyness and
Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, because that
which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God has showed it unto
them: So it is clear to us from the Scriptures of Truth without us, as well as
from the Light of Christ within us, that the Wrath and Condemnation of God goes
forth against such, as Live not Answerable to what God has manifested in them;
but it is neither agreeable to the Scriptures of Truth, or Light within; for any
to pour forth Judgments, against any, for not following or giving heed unto
this, or 'tother Prescription, or Outward Observation, wherein the Conscience
is concerned, when such are not convinced thereof to be their Duty, from the
manifestation of Gods Spirit in them.

The next thing to be considered is this, that in all the last mentioned
Objection, there is no Plea for Obedience unto, or following any thing but the
Spirit in its Appearance, whether through the Brethren, or thy self. From
whence we observe.

First, That there is no certain Description, who are meant by the word
Brethren.

Secondly, That it is the Appearance of the Spirit that we ought to follow.

Now should this Question be ask't of such, who may so Object, as aforesaid,
Would you have us follow we know not what? we are ready to Believe, that they
would say, Nay, if they answered any thing to the Question; and if so, then the
Force of the Objection falls; for that we account it our Duty to follow the
Appearance of the Spirit of God, through the meanest Member, when our
Consciences are convinced that it is the Appearance of that Spirit. But before
we cannot say in Truth, though we should do as such an one would have us, that
we are Followers of, and led by the Spirit of God, no more than Jesus can in
Truth be called Lord, 1 Cor. 12.13.
and not by the Holy Ghost.

Besides, we cannot on this occasion but testify, that as that Obedience which
is of Faith in Christ finds Acceptance with the Lord; Romans 14.23.
so that Obedience which is not of Faith, being Sin, is but a dead Performance,
and not the Fruit of a living Member, who through the Obedience of Faith unto
Righteousness is made alive unto God. And therefore it cannot be the Duty of
any Member of Christ's Body, to run before his Inward Guide, but to wait upon
the Lord, that all his Actions may be regulated according to the Manifestation
and Revelation of the Spirit of God in himself; which seems clearly agreeable
to the Testimony of the Apostle, where he thus says, Phil. 3.15, 16. If in any
thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you;
nevertheless, whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule.

He that savours the things of God, may easily perceive, that the meaning of
the Spirit through Paul unto those Philippians was, that those who were come to
a state of Perfection, should walk by that Rule, whereunto they had attained;
but those, who had not attained so far, and were otherwise-minded, were to wait
for the Revelation of the Son

And now to conclude, as to this Objection, we have this further to add; that
we do know many of our Opposers, or at least such, who are not at Unity with
us, have very confidently made use of such Discourse as is contained in the
last recited Objection, to induce us to follow outward Prescriptions and
Orders, though not convinced of its service: which occasions us to be Jealous,
that in process of time, the enemy may so enter in at this Door, as that
Darkness may more generally overshadow again, than it yet does; though our Hope
in God is, that he will lay such a constraint on many of those, whose Eyes are
open, beholding the approached Apostasy, as that they may be raised in a sense
of Gods Indignation, and appear as Lions on the behalf of the Lion of the Tribe
of Juda; to oppose every appearance of that Spirit which would be exalting
Self, or any Form, Observation, Prescription, or Order, to be as a Bond on the
Members of Christ's Body, when by the Light of Christ (their alone Lawgiver)
they are not fully persuaded thereof in their own Consciences, which
(undoubtedly) was the meaning of the Spirit through Paul, when he writ unto the
Romans, Chap. 14. Verse. 5, 23. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind; For whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin.

And to come a little closer to the matter in hand, it is too too evident, that
Nonconformity to Outward Prescriptions is taken as a mark of Apostasy, even
amongst those who have Been under the profession of Truth, of which many
instances, too too Large here to insert, might be produced, which is now
forborne, because we suppose there are very few amongst the People called
Quakers (for whose sakes this is chiefly written) who are ignorant of the Truth
hereof.

Besides, it has been an Observation of late, that these Questions, or
Questions, to the like import, have been frequently asked, by such with whom we
cannot be at Unity in all things, viz.

Are you for Women's Meetings? Meaning distinct Women's Meetings from Men,
amongst whom Under Pretense of taking care of the Poor, another thing seems to
be more chiefly aimed at, as anon will be made appear.

Are you for Recording Condemnations? Meaning thereby, whether the Parties, who
have Condemned their Failings (and through the Mercies of the Lord have been
restored, and their Officence blotted out and forgiven by him) assent thereto
or no.

Are you for settled Monthly and Quarterly Meetings touching Outward Business,
since those who would have Meetings as occasion offers are accounted Designers
to through down all Meetings for Outward Business, relating to the Affairs of
Truth?

And when these, or such like Questions have been a skt of Friends in Truth,
that could not Answer thereto [Yea] we are sensible that it has been taken by
many as a sufficient token of a Dark, Leavened, Rending, Dividing Spirit; and
merely (as we take it) form an apprehension that the Form they stand for, is
thereby struck at (though the Services would be effectually performed in
another method, as experience in the Counties of Westmoreland, and Wilts has
of late testified) for were it not so, that great stress is laid upon the
Outward Form of things prescribed to be practiced, how comes it to pass, that
J. S. was articled against by Robert Barrow and twenty six Persons more in the
north on this wise, viz. " J. S. speaking amongst many Friends of the Danger of
Forms, because of the Consequences that might follow, said, that amongst the
Christians of Old the Differences that did arise was about Forms; which could
not be seasonable words, when we were establishing the Churches in the Holy
Order of Truth.

Much more might be collected from the Articles (being forty four in number)
exhibited by Robert Barrow and twenty six Persons as aforesaid, to show how
earnestly and zealously the very Outward Form of things are contended for;
which occasions us (in all seriousness of Spirit) thus to say, May the Lord God
of Heaven and Earth so preserve his People, that they may not be ensnared by
those who have raised so great Contention about the Outward Forms of things
prescribed to be practiced amongst the Professors of Truth, lest they with them
prove to be Boasters, proud Blasphemers, false Accusers, Despisers of those
that are Good; which are the very Marks and Tokens of those who had a Form of
Godliness, but denied the Power thereof, from whom the Apostle Exhorts to turn
away; and how far these Marks rest upon many of those, who so earnestly contend
for their Outward Forms, we leave to the Impartial Reader with the Light of
Christ to Judge, when he has thoroughly informed himself of their Fruits.

Oh Friends! the serious Consideration of these things bows us before the Lord,
and in a Sense of his Mercies to us we can no longer keep silent, but in his
Fear declare that our Consciences are concerned for the Cause of God, and his
Truth: and since it is so, that an ill use is made of that Spirit of
Forbearance and Condescension, which we are sensible has been used by many of
our Brethren, it is now become our Portion to unburthen our selves, of that
which has been our Burden; believing that the Lord is not only arisen, but
will yet more and more arise, against that Spirit that would exalt it self,
over the Heritage of God, endeavoring to rule over their Consciences, whenas
Christ alone is Lord thereof.

It may now be worthy our Observation to consider, whether any Encouragement
was given by our Lord, and Master Christ Jesus (whilst on Earth) unto his
Disciples to become Rulers one over another.

We find that he Exhorts his Disciples, Judge not, that ye be not Judged: be
not ye called Rabbi, for, one is your Master, even Christ. And all ye are
Brethren: but he that is greatest amongst you, shall be your Servant; and
whosoever shall exalthimself, shall be abased; and he that shall humble
himself, shall be exalted.

Here is no ground to believe that Christ Intended, that when he was departed,
his Disciples should be exalting themselves one over another, as Governors,
and Rulers: and if we consult the Scriptures of Truth, we shall find; that
though his Disciples had a Dependency upon him, whilst in his Bodily
Appearance to be their Leader; yet he tells them ( John 16.7.13.) It is
expedient for you, that I go away, for if I go not away, the Comforter will not
come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you, and he will guide you
into all Truth, for he shall not speak of himself.

Had it been so, that Christ Jesus intended the Exaltation of one of his
Disciples as an Head, or Supreme (unto whom the rest ought to have had an Eye,
in a more peculier manner than ordinary) he would have undoubtedly signified so
much; but doubtless he saw that their Eye and Dependency was too much on his
Outward and Bodily Appearance: and therefore signified, It Is Expedient I go
hence, that the comforter come; agreeable to which are the meaning of the
Apostles Words, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth
know we him no more, that is to say, after the flesh no more.

All which does clearly demonstrate unto us, its not according to the Will of
God, that under this Administration, we should have our Eyes out unto Man; but
that our great Dependency should be on that Comforter, the Spirit of Truth,
which Christ Testified the Father would send in his Name, to teach us all
things, and that this Comforter should be in us. And therefore on this occasion
it is with us to give this further Testimony, that every Member of the Body of
Christ, is thorough the Death of Christ, made dead unto any other Law, save the
Law of the Spirit of Life, manifested thorough the arising of Christ, by his
appearance in every such Member; and so as particular Members are become married
unto him, and having all Fellowship each with other in the Spirit, those who
are such, ought to demean themselves each toward other full of Love, Charity
Bowels of Compassion, Longsuffering, forbearance, Meekness, Humility, Patience,
Gentleness, and of all other virtues, that are the Fruit of the Spirit of God;
but as to Obedience, every Member owes that unto Christ, his Head, unto whom
every thought (according to the Testimony of the Apostle Paul) ought to be
brought into obedience.

SECT. VIII. A manifestation that the Variance has originally risen from a
Different Sense touching G. F. the General Meeting, or Womens-Meetings, etc.
The End for which Womens-Meetings were assented to.
ON the whole Matter, the great Variance amongst some, once at Unity, we have
cause to know has risen from a different sense touching one, some, or all of
these three particulers following.

The first relates to George Fox, that has taken upon him to give forth
Directions and Instructions to others; and his Proceedings.

The Second to the General Meeting; and their Proceedings.

The Third, To Women's Meetings; and their Proceedings.

As to the First, we say, many there are amongst us, who Affirm, that they have
more than ordinary cause to believe, that many Professing the Truth do look
upon G. F. as one whom the Lord in these latter days has raised up, and set
in the like Place amongst the Children of Light, as Moses was amongst the
Children of Israel; and that whosoever shall Oppose him, shall never prosper;
which (we are persuaded) has so overawed many, that they become Sacrificers
of their own Sense and Understandings to the Will of Man; and doubtless on this
Foot, many may think, those who told him his Book about Womens-Meetings is
Notoriously Erroneous, will never prosper, though they have evidenced it to be
so to his Face, and that in the view of several Hundreds of Friends at a
Meeting assented to by himself, and those of Party with him, when at Bristol,
in the 12th. Month, 1677. As one instance of the Errors of the said Book take
this, Page 43. he thus says, And was not Micah's Mother a Virtuous Woman? Read
Judges 17. and see what she said to her Son; and a few Lines after he says, So
these and such Women are recorded for their Wisdom, and their Virtue, and their
Faith. For our parts, we cannot understand, that any thing of Wisdom, Virtue or
Faith is recorded touching Michah's Mother, unless Blessing or Cursing out of
one Mouth from an Idolatrous Woman may be accounted the Fruit thereof. Many
other things might be quoted out of his said Book notoriously Erroneous, and
therefore will certainly remain on Record to his shame, until he repent. And
it is not his proselited Parties saying, None shall Prosper that Oppose him; nor
yet his saying, That he knew what he did, and saw it would be a Stumbling Block
(for so William Rogers positively affirms he did say to him) will excuse him in
the Day of the Lord: for we firmly believe that unless he repent, he will
become Despised and Vile before the People, even as the Lord made those Priests
in the time of the Law, who (as the Prophet said) Mal. 2.8, 9. caused many to
stumble, to be therefore despised, and vile before all the People, we know he
has been an Instrument to cause many to Condemn their Failings, we desire that
he may be so Ingenious as once to Confess his own.

Secondly, We are persuaded, some others have looked upon the General Meeting as
that unto which they ought to have an Eye, being principled to receive, own and
stand by whatsoever comes from thence, as the Oracles of God; without bringing
the Matter they appear at Unity with, to the Test of Christ's Light in their
own Consciences: and no marvel if such as are principled to shut out Reason,
Wisdom and Jealousy without Distinction, thus do.

And when any Papers are given forth by that Meeting or G. F. such as are at
Unity with them bring them to the Men's Meetings for Outward Business, which often
times occasions Strife and Contention; the one party accounting themselves
obliged (as we take it) to receive and stand by what comes from them; the
other Party do the same also, when it reaches to the Witness of God in their
Consciences, as Matter proper to be brought to such Meetings, but if not, they
cannot receive it, though an Angel from Heaven bring it; then the other Party
accounts this the Fruit of a Jealous, Dark, Leavened Spirit, and thus
Contention and Debate has arisen, even amongst those, who formerly (before the
Outward Form of Government was so much pleaded for) walked together in Peace
and Concord.

Thirdly, There is amongst many Friends, a Difference touching the Meetings of
Women separate from the Men, which though not hitherto treated on, yet it may
not be improper to be spoken to on this Occasion.

But first, we think it necessary to answer this Question, which naturally
seems to arise for the Information of the Reader, viz. How came those Meetings
first to be held, and for what end?

To this we answer, that G. F. so far as we understood, exhorted thereto, and
the End thereof (in sum) was to take care of the poor in some cases, the
Meeters themselves according to their Freedom, Note, This Method of raising
Moneys for that Service, was though very unreasonable, because it reached not
all, by whom the Charge of the outwardly poor Members of the Church of Christ,
ought to be born.
raising Money, which caused the Charge to light much on some, who were most
constant in Meeting, whilst others, for want of another Method to collect
Moneys, were very little concerned in the Charge of the Poor. But in process of
time, some Friends thought it necessary, that Marriages might be proposed to
the Women's Meetings; but yet several Friends in diverse Countries would not
assent, that the Distinct Meetings of Women should be concerned in Marriages;
at length several of those, who had appeared for those Distinct Meetings to be
concerned, said Note, It appears in a reply Written against John Story's and
John Wilkinson's Answers to the 44 Articles.
this is that which G. F. Exhorted to in the Beginning, and Blessed be the Lord
the Faithful see a Necessity, and Cause to propose the Marraiges to the
Faithful Men and Women's Meetings; and whether their sight is not Dark, that see
not the Necessity of proposing their Marriages to the Faithful Men and Women in
their Distinct Meetings. This being uttered by those of party which G. F. (as
we take them) was thought very strange, for that as diverse Friends of Bristol
have testify G. F. proposed not his Marraiges to the Women's Distinct Meeting
in Bristol (where his Marriage was accomplished) though such a Meeting was held
there many years before. Besides, in a Paper of Direction given forth by Gorege
Fox, he Directs, that the men's Meeting may be acquainted with Marraiges, and
says nothing of proposing them to the Women's Distinct Meetings; which clearly
shows, that those who writ the aforesaid Answer and G. F. seem not at Unity
therein.

But this (as we suppose) not being known to many, some were very urgent to
impose that Practice on Friends, or else to render such as Opposed Dark
Spirits, which occasioned many Friends to be Jealous that a Submision was not
only intended to Meetings of Men, but Women's Meetings also, and therefore
Friends, who in simplicity assented to the latter Meetings, as supposing Women
insome Cases fitter to pry into the Necessities of the Poor, than Men
(considering also what weak People have frequented Men's Meetings) did at length
begin to be Jealous, that the words of the Prophet Isaiah 3.12. were again
fulfilled in our Age, As for my People, Children are their Oppressors, and
Women rule over them. Oh my Poeple! they which lead thee, cause thee to Err.

This Jealousy increasing, many of those, who were contented, that Women
should hold their Meetings apart from the Men, to take care of the Poor in some
Cases, became less affected to such Meetings, lest instead of being Servants to
the Poor for the Truths Sake, and taking the weight and Burden of that Care
from the Men, they should become Rulers over both Men and Women; and that which
seemed to confirm the Reasonableness of the said Jealousy was this:

It has been observed, that though Women's Meetings were assented to, to take
care of the Poor in some Cases. as the chief, if not the only end thereof, yet
there is so little said concerning that End in a Book relating to Women's
Meetings, given forth by G. F. that it is now a Question with many, whether that
be not one of the least Services intended at this day thereby; because we do
not find, but that all spoken in Relation thereto in the whole Book, consisting
of ninety six Pages in Octavo, might be comprehended in less than half a side
of the said Book; and the drift and scope of the Book seems to be chiefly for
Proof of Women's Offering Sacrifices, Preaching, Teaching, Instructing,
Exhorting, Admonishing, Prophesying, Governing, Judging, Singing Dancing,
Playing upon Music, and that Micahs Mother, an Idolotrous Woman, spoken of
Judges 17. was a virtuous one; and that the Assemblies of Women did continue
among the Jews, til they went into Transgression, but for Proof quotes only 2
Kings 23. where we find nothing spoken of any Assemblies of Women, save only of
those Women who in the Houses of the Sodomites (which good King Josiah broke
down) wove Hangings for the Groves, which the same King caused to be burnt.

To conclude, as to this third Particular, we have this further to say; so it
is, that many Jarrs and Jangles have arisen touching Meetings of Women, and the
End and Service thereof: some think them useful in Cities, where many Poor are,
and the Women Meeters near together; but yet diverse of the same Persons think
them useless in the Countries, where few Poor are, and the Women live Far
assunder: and for ought we know, some observing the ill consequence, that has
attended them in diverse Places, may think it had been better they had never
been held amongst us. For our parts, on the whole matter, we say, it is a Shame
for a Man to become an Instrument that Women's Meetings should be held, (Chiefly
if not only) under pretense of serving, and relieving the Poor in some cases,
more effectual then before, and yet Publish a Book under pretense of
encouraging the said Meetings, whence it is thereby apparent, that some other
End is now at least, if not from the Beginning, aimed at, than was manifested
plainly in the Beginning.

This, in short, seems not like plain dealing, and the Fruit thereof is
manifest to be Evil: for many who have been as Pillars in those Meetings to
this Day, have been reflected upon as Discouragers of the said Meetings, not
because their Persons and Purses are wanting therein; but rather because they
cannot be at Unity with such airy Imaginations, which some (who (as they may
take it) seem Affectors of Government and Lovers of Pre-eminence) do bring
forth; concluding, they are entered into the Possession of the Power of God,
because they take upon them to be Members of a Woman's Meeting, distinct from
the Men: those who on that foot so conclude, we cannot but take to be Ignorant
of the Power of God, notwithstanding they may quote G. F. for Proof of such
their Reason, who writing to Thomas Goldney, signifies, that he was moved to
set up Women's Meetings, that all might be in the Possession of the Power of the
Lord.

That now which is upon our Spirits to recommend unto all in the Love of our
God, as the only Expedient for the healing of these Breaches, in a few words,
is this, Let every one lay down their Crowns at the Feet of Jesus our Lord, and
those who have striven for Outward Rules, Government, and Pre-eminence over
their Brethren, when the Lord has not called them thereto, say in their
Hearts, Let the time past be sufficient, and for time to come let us study
Peace, as Servants to one Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, the Righteous one, who
by his inshining Light is become our Lawgiver; that so the ancient Love toward
all our Brethren in the Truth, may be Witnessed, and renewed each toward
other, to the Consolation of one another Souls in the Lord.

Having thus far proceeded, to manifest a part of those things touching which
the Faithful were at Unity, and the ways and Means whereby that Unity was
Broken; we think meet now to cite an Epistle perfixt to the Historical
Manuscript, made mention of in the Preface to this Treatise, being a Proper
Testimony on this occasion, for and on the behalf of the Truth; for that
therein is plainly demonstrated the Qualifications of such, as Satan has made
use of, to rend and divide the Church of Christ.

SECT. IX. An Epistle, evidencing the Qualications of such whom Satan makes
use of, to Rend and Divide the Church of Christ. A Paper given forth by Edward
Buroughs, Anno 1661. Touching the Scattered in Israel, wherein by a Parable is
lively described a part of what has happened amongst the Flock of God in these
latter days. The Conclusion, manifesting Several Passages, very material and
worthy observation, as a further discovery of the Fruit and Cause of Division.
An Epistle prefixed to the Historical Manuscript, mentioned in the Preface to
this Treatise; Evidencing the Qualifications of such, whom Satan has made use
of, to rend and divide the Church of Christ.
THe great Evidence of pure and undefiled Religion, is a Conscience void of
Offense toward God; but the contrary is attended with Anxiety and Trouble. He
that in the Light of Christ Jesus inclines to preserve such a Conscience, must
not so value his Repute and Name amongst men, as thereby to loose his Peace
with the Lord. The consideration whereof has abundantly satisfied us, to
encourage the preparing of this Treatise, knowing, that the Long-suffering,
Patience and Warnings of many Faithful Friends have had little place with many
such persecuting Opposers of the Friends of Truth, as are under the Profession
thereof. And therefore it may be Just with the Lord to suffer their
longsuffering to have an End.

We also know, that the Unsavory Testimonies and Unchristian-like Discourses
of many such in our Meetings for the Worship of God, have been so frequently
(as well as publicly) manifested, as that it is thereby known both to
Professors and Profane, that the People called Quakers are now Divided: by
which it is to be doubted, that some may really conclude, that though their Name
is not extinguish't, yet that the Nature, Doctrine and Life, which accompanied
them at their first coming forth, has of late suffered Shipwreck. This having
been seriously pondered by us, has increased the concern of our Consciences
thus to appear, that so as the Door has thereby been so far shut in some parts
of this Nation, as that there has been of late but few gathered into a Belief
of the Everlasting Light, so it may again in the Lords time be more opened, by
a clear Discovery that there is yet remaining a Remnant of that Ancient Stock,
who have been (and our Faith in God is, that they will be) preserved in his
Fear, to persevere in his unchangable Way, Light, and Life of Truth, unto the
End.

That now the Reader may have some short Account of what the Lord has
manifested unto us on this Occasion, we further thus Declare:

The Original Cause of Division and Separation between the Members of any
Society, once at Unity in the Truth, touching Religious Matters, has sprung
from Satan. The Persons in whom he has chiefly appeared to accomplish the
same, have been such as usually appear more public than other their Brethren,
and that under various Qualifications: some have had Zeal without Knowledge,
and some have had Knowledge without Zeal, and others have abounded in
Confidence without either Knowledge or Zeal: and none of these, whilst
exercised under these Qualifications, have found Acceptance with the Lord

And as Satan has made use of Persons thus variously Qualified, for the
Preservation of his Kingdom; so Christ Jesus (whose Appearance has been and is
to destroy the Works of the Devil) has and does make use of such Instruments
in his Hand, whom he has furnished with true Zeal, and that according to
Knowledge: for though all have not the like Degree of Knowledge, yet that Zeal,
which is exercised according to the Measure of Knowledge given by God, and
received by Man, finds Acceptance with the Lord of Life.

Now forasmuch as in this Treatise variety of Matters is Discourst, wherein
Diverse Persons have been concerned (many of whom were once at Unity (which we
are persuaded consisted in the Everlasting Truth) and that every one of them
might reasonably have been taken to be under one of the aforesaid
Qualifications, it is with us at this time (considering that the Tree is to be
known by its Fruit) to note a few things attending such respective
Qualifications, and that Chiefly for the sakes of such, as have Zeal without
Knowledge: and so, if the Lord make us Instruments in his Hand to open the
understanding of any, whereby they may come to have a true Savor of (and Unity
with) those who have so received the Spirit, as to be exercising themselves in
true Zeal, and that according to Knowledge, we then shall have our End.

We now begin to speak of those who have Zeal without Knowledge. Charity
obliegeth us not to conclude, that they design any thing more than to Live
well, that so they may dye well, or any thing less, than to appear what they
know they are: not but yet this we certainly know, that albeit these have
professed Christ Jesus to be their Foundation; yet many of them (for want of
Knowledge) have been building thereon the Wood, the Hay and the Stubble of
other Men's Inventions, whereby they have suffered loss, having exalted their
own Righteousness, thorough a Zealous Submission to other Men's Lines made ready
to their Hands; as if therein the Righteousness of Faith consisted, or that it
were lawful (contrary to the Counsel of the Apostle) to Glory in Men: The
Apostle Paul, Rom, 10.2. thus says I bear them record, they have a Zeal of
God, but not according to Knowledge: and from the next Verse we learn, that
they were such as being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and going about to
Establish their Own Righteousness, have not Submitted themselves to the
Righteousness of God. This was spoken of Israel for their Information, that
they might not have a dependency on the Righteousness of the Law (as if
thorough the Strict Performance and Observations of Outward Things, Established
under the Law, they should come to know the Salvation of God thorough Christ)
but rather that their Dependency should be upon the Righteousness which is of
Faith, which (according to the Apostles Doctrine, Verse. the 8th. of the same
Chapter) informs us thus, The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in thy
Heart, that is the Word of Faith which we Preach. So that by this Doctrine (and
what Elsewhere is written in other of his Epistles) it appears, that the
Apostles care for Israel was, that they might be brought off those Outward and
carnal Ordinances, which were Established for a season, until the time of
reformation, unto the Word nigh in the Heart, which (undoubtedly) was and is no
other than that Law, which (according to the word of the Lord by the mouth of
the Prophet Jeremiah, ( Jer. 31.33) Was to be put in their Inward Parts, and
written in their Hearts. All which leads us to make this Observation, that
whosoever they are (though under ever so specious Pretenses) that have
endeavored to Establish Outward indispensible Rules, and Orders in matters
relating to Conscience, for the Church of Christ (in this Gospel Day) to Walk
by, (neglecting to commit and Commend every one unto the Word nigh in the
heart, that thereby they may be preserved from subjection to any thing
outwardly ordained, which they may either scruple in Conscience, or are not led
by the Word nigh in the Heart to Practice) are such as in the best and most
Fovourable Construction, act from Zeal without Knowledge, in which kind of
Zeal Paul himself ( Phil. 3.6.) though as to the Righteousness of the Law
blameless, yet) Persecuted the Church.

This kind of Zeal is accompanied with that Ignorance which the chief amongst
Apostatized Churches have accounted the Mother of Devotion, by which Thousands
in Ages past (in the Dark Night of Apostasy) have been led into the Observation
of many Unsavory Dictates, Erroneous Decrees, Unwarrantable Traditions, and
Superstitious Examples, either of one Man, or assemblies of men, not knowing
what they have either believed, or Practiced, to be an incumbent duty upon
them, through an inward evidence from Gods Witness in their Consciences) or
Trial thereof by the Light of Christ. May not the same Cloud of Darkness
overshadow any of the Children of Light in this our day, says our Souls.

Moreover, it is observable, that (if Report be true) this doctrine has of late
been exalted, NO UNITY BUT IN CONFORMITY; which if applied to the Outward
Prescriptions of one Man, or Assemblies of men, assuming to themselves
authority to act and determine in matters appertaining to the Gospel, and its
Order, thereby to become a Bond upon the Consciences of those, who have
Believed in the Everlasting Light of Christ Jesus (as the great Order and
Ordinance of God in this Gospel Day) may occasion the Continuation of Discord
Distraction and Division, contrary to the Gospel and Doctrine of Truth, which
has been published, received, and believed amongst the Children of Light in
these latter days, who neither have nor can receive any Doctrine, contrary to
this Testimony of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.6. The Letter Kills, but the Spirit
gives Life.

We now appeal unto every understanding, ingenious and impartial Reader,
whether since the Labor of the Apostles of Christ in the primitive days, was
to draw the Outward Jew off from the observation of these ordinances, which
were realy established by the appointment of God himself, having exalted
instead thereof the word nigh in the heart, and Law written therein, as a
fulfilling of that which (according to the Word of the Lord by the mouth of his
Prophet) was to come to pass under the new Covenant, which was not to be like
unto the Old, can consist with the tenor of the new Covenant for any to
attempt the establishment, or giving forth of Outward Orders, Prescriptions,
Sentences or Decrees to be (on that foot) a Bond upon the Consciences of those,
who have believed in the Everlasting Light? Especially if they are of the
Gentile Stock, according to the Flesh (unto whom the Law appertained not) for
so the People of England are; and if not, whether those who are otherwise
persuaded, and according to such a persuasion may be found acting, may not
(though under the Outward Profession of Truth it self) justly be numbered
amongst those, of whom (in the best sense) it may be said, They have Zeal
without Knowledge, and Ignorance is the Mother of their Devotion.

And now, as to those who have Knowledge without Zeal, Charity does not Oblige
us to conclude, that such in that state chiefly design to live well, that so
they may dye well: for (as Christ said, so may we) Luke 12.48. Unto whomsoever
Much is given, of him shall be Much required: the want of Zeal in a known Good
Cause is (as we take it) the neglect of a Known Incumbent Duty, wherein God
has given Power, else, how could it have been said to the Lukewarm, Church of
Laodicea (after an understanding was given unto her, how she might come to see,
viz. by anointing her eyes with Eye Salve, Lev. 3.19 (be Zealous and amend? for
doubtless Power was given of God into her to amend as well as direction how to
see; but of the want of Knowledge, it cannot be so said, as of the want of
Zeal; Because it is not equally in our Powers to attain unto Knowledge (when we
want it) as it is Zealously to Practice what we know to be our duty; we may
therefore conclude, that where Knowledge is not accompanied with Zeal, (though
requisite) it is in the best sense a token of a Lukewarm Spirit, and in some,
where it has predominated, we have clearly discerned, that first they have
been overawed by the Frowns of man or men; and then (under the Pretense of
bearing all things) neglect to give their Testimony for the Truth without
respect to any Person whatsoever, more than the Truth might require; and by
this means some have (undoubtedly) been the occasion whereby many have been
caught in the Snare of the Evil one (not Knowing, through a Neglect of their
Inward Teacher, which way to turn) and that Loads and Burdens have been the
Portions of others, who (whilst they have kept Steadfast unto the ancient
Doctrine, Exalting the appearance of Christ by his Light to be our Law, Rule
and Guide) have beheld some of their Brethren not only captivated with a kind
of a slavish Fear, but also in their Practices receeded from what their first
Principle would have led them to; having used politic Contrivances to retain
the Favor and Affections of some (who perhaps in their View have appeared to
be like unto the rising Sun) and so have given more way to a Temporizing
Spirit, than to acquit themselves as Good Christians in the sight of God; by
which the Conscience comes to be kept void of offense toward God and Man; and
all this (as with respect to some, it is doubted) for fear lest they should be
termed Sect-masters, by such as in this Gospel-day, have assumed a Pretended
Authority, to establish Outward Orders, to be a Rule for, and Bond upon the
Children of Light to walk by, without any exception thereby to avoid oppressing
a tender Conscience.

But this is far wide of that Zeal, which accompanied the Apostle Paul in his
Converted State, who was termed a Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazerenes by
the Unbelieving Jews, that would have Judged him according to their Law (which
undoubtedly would then have inflicted Severe Punishment on him) which being
duly considered, we may well say, it is far wide of Paul's Zeal to fear (under
this Gospelday) the Title of a Sect-Master, on the score of refusing Outward
Conformity to Outward Rules and Orders, relating to the Conscience, under the
Notion of Gospel-Orders, established amongst the People called Quakers; not only
Because they have no Law whereby corporally to Punish, but also because we have
no Ground either from the Word of the Lord by the Mouths of his Prophets, or
from the Appearance of Christ by his Light in us, or from the Scriptures of
Truth, given forth by inspiration, since the appearance of Christ in the flesh,
to Expect, that any should be Invested with Power from on high, to Establish
such things relating to the Conscience; much less to Expect, that the Children
of Light (under the New Covenant) should be led by the Eternal Spirit and Word
nigh in the Heart unto such a conformity.

Moreover, it is Observable, Paul's Plain confession thus was, After the Way
which they call Heresy, so Worship I the God of my Fathers, Believing all
things which are Written in the Law, and the Prophets, etc. And herein do I
Exercise my self, to have always a Conscience Void of offense toward God and
toward Men.

If all those, unto whom God has given the Knowledge of his Truth in this
Gospel-day, had had so much Zeal, as to have walked according to this example,
they might have all become Honorable in their day, and have kept a Conscience
Void of offense toward God and toward men: and then none of them would have
been afraid of being Stigmatized as Sect-Masters, by such, who (Like the
Outward Jew) have Gloryed in things Outwardly Pretended to be Established (in
this Gospel-day) and have made such things to be as a Rule, whereby they have
endeavored to try their Brethren (who at this day have approved themselves
Jews in Spirit, Zealously exercising themselves in the Word nigh in the Heart,
according to Knowledge) even as the outward Jews would have done by Paul. For
such a Reflection would never have hurt them in the Breasts of those, that had
continued truly Faithful; and this many are given to Understand, from that
Honorable esteem that some ancient and faithful Brethren have in the Hearts
of such, as have not in a Temporizing Spirit changed their Way, notwithstanding
they are Stigmatized with the name of Sect-Masters, even by those, who Like the
Gentiles, appear to Exercise Lordship over their Brethren.

In the Next Place, we come to take a little notice of those, who abound in
Confidence, without either Knowledge or Zeal; this sort may be well compared
unto those Beasts, with whom ('it is reputed) Paul Fought at Ephesus, which (if
it were so) was (doubtless) a contest had with Unreasonable Men. The bait by
which this sort are enticed to appear Somebody in probability is this, The
Door is open for any under the Profession of Truth (whose Lives are not
Outwardly Scandalous) to appear (amongst some of the Society of the People
called Quakers) as Governors; and though it is hard for us to suppose, who
amongst such are the Persons that are to be Governed, when Liberty is taken and
admitted, as aforesaid (whereby none of the society is excluded) to appear as
Governors, yet so it is; and of this have our Eyes, and Ears been Witnesses:
A Part of the Doctrine of this sort we have understood to be on this wise, If
you do not see your selves, you must follow us that do see: Alas! it is easily
to be savoured where all may then run, if such an Exhortation (from any one
thus qualified, and that with respect to follow the Exhorter) should take
place; he then that leads, and those who might be led, would quickly fall into
the Ditch together; and so the Kingdom of Satan come to be advanced; instead
of being Destroyed.

But Blessed be the Name of the Everlasting God, that Sun, which has arisen
amongst us, that Glorious Appearance if the everlasting Light, which has
shined in many Hearts, is not yet set in Obscurity; and our Faith is, that it
will not. The Lord has had a regard to his own Name, and to the Glory of his
Eternal Power, so that though many ancient and honorable Brethren, whom the
Lord Commissioned in these latter Days, to publish his Everlasting Gospel
(Exhorting all, to yield Obedience unto the Appearance of Christ by his Light
in them) are fallen asleep; yet there are many of the same Stock yet remaining,
upon whom he has not only poured forth of his Spirit, and Anointed them to
publish his Everlasting Gospel, but also has kept them in Integrity, and their
Garments undefiled from the Spots and Polutions of this World; and not only so,
but has given unto them True Zeal, according to Knowledge, thorough which the
Way unto the Kingdom of God (in the Demonstration of his Spirit) has been
declared, and has continued them in the Service whereunto they have been
called; and these have not, in a Temporizing Spirit (for fear of the Threats
and Frowns of Men) changed their Way, nor yet followed any for the Loaves: and
though some of these have of late been accounted dark Spirits, leavened
Spirits, Troublers of Israel, Sect-masters, Leaders into a Separation, and into
downright Independencies, Parishes and Schisms; yet this Testimony lives with
us, that the Power of the Eternal God (on which alone we are persuaded their
Dependencies have been, and are) has accompanied such, when thus Judged,
Despised and Reviled, by that Generation, who (unto us appear) as if their
Dependencies were upon Men, that labor and travel to gather unto themselves.

To conclude; this further Testimony lives with us, that the Righteous God
bears us this Day Record, that the very Reason wherefore this Treatise is now
prepared, is because our very Consciences on the behalf of God's Truth and
People are concerned, and therefore we cannot but encourage this so necessary a
Work, having amongst many other our Brethren long waited, and born in Patience
to see if peradventure the Lord might change the Hearts of those, who have
occasioned Contention, Strife and Division to arise amongst the Families of the
Lords People: for whatever Measures others may take of us, yet this Evidence
we have in our selves, that our Souls Desires are, That the bright Appearance
of the Everlasting Day might not set in Obscurity in any Heart, where it has
been both manifested and received; nor yet that any of the Lords People might
be ensnared, to build again the things which in the Light of Christ, our Lord
they have destroyed.

William Rogers, William Forde.


Here now follows that Paper, made mention of in the Title Page, touching the
Scattered of Israel, given forth in the Year 1661. by Edward Buroughs,
Minister of the Everlasting Gospel.
"ON the 22th. of the 8th. Month 1661. I was grieved in my Spirit for the
Scattered of Israel, and my Thoughts troubled me very much for the Afflicted in
Jerusalem: for I also was greatly afflicted with them; and I prayed unto God,
that he would show me his Purpose concerning them; and these words came unto
me, Abide thou in me, thou helpless Lamb, and I will show thee great things,
only stir not from me, for thou have no Helper but me; and if thou go never
so little from me, behold a Wild Beast seeks to devour thee; therefore, I
say, Abide: and then I weeped greatly, because I saw what great danger I was
in; for I had not seen the like before, neither can I write it as I saw it; for
I was in great Fear: but on a sudden there came a Voice to me, saying; Be
still, and Fear not; and I was so; for he made me so, as if I had not been in
the Body: and presently I saw a great Field or Common, where many Beasts were
Feeding, amongst which were a great Flock of Sheep feeding also, and I beheld
them, and that there were very many goodly Sheep, and so me also were very weak
and Scabby; but they did all feed together, and did not hurt one the other,
neither did they despise one the other at all; at last the Night was near, and
I saw the Shepherd come to gather the Flock into a Fold (which I saw there by)
and staid by the Fold himself, and sent his Dogs, and he had many pretty little
Dogs, which did eat of his own Morsels, and did lie at his Feet; for he loved
them very well, and took great Delight in them, and he did make them gather his
Flock, and they did go round the Flock: but some of the Sheep were feeding
about, and some did feed by the way, and did not go so fast as the rest; and
when the Dogs saw that, Some of them, that were young, and not well Acquainted
with the Masters Manner, and Custom, did run from the Flock with Fierceness
after the Sheep, that stayed behind, and did affrighten the Sheep further away;
for the Sheep did not understand that the Dogs would have had them to the rest
of the Flock, but were afraid of the Dogs: and still the Dogs did pursue them
Sheep, and did bite some of them; and when they were weary with running after
them, then they returned again to the Flock, and did in their Minds greatly
blame the Sheep: but I saw some of the Dogs, that were well acquainted with
their Masters Manner of gathering his Flock, did wisely go behind the Sheep,
and such did drive them gently along, without hunting of them, or wearying of
themselves: so when they had gathered the Flock together, the Shepherd put them
into the Fold; but there were many Goats amongst them, which did push with
their Horns against the Sheep, and did put many of them by the Door, so that
they did run by the side of the Fold; but the Shepherd did gather them together
again, and when he had gathered them all together into the Fold, he made fast
the Door, and went to seek the Sheep, which did not come with the Flock; but
while he was looking for them, the Goats were very troublesome in the Fold, and
hurt the Sheep very much; but he would not separate them until he had the other
also; and when he had found them, some of them were lying very lame, for the
Dogs had hurt and wearied them, and some of them were feeding under green
Hedges, but the Shepherd took the Sheep that were lame, and carried them on his
Back, and did drive the other before him, and did bring them to the rest of the
Flock; but the Sheep that were lame, he put into a little place alone, and did
dress their Wounds, and Anointed their Feet with an oil, that he had, that did
perfectly cure all their Diseases; for he spared no pains, but was willing to
hurt himself, rather than them: for his Ointment was mixed with his own Blood,
and did by sympathy Cure all their Diseases, and when he had cured them, he put
them all together, and did put the Goats from amongst them, and then did they
rest in perfect Peace; for there was nothing to make them afraid amongst them;
but they did all feed Innocently together, and his care was over them all
alike, according as they had need: And he took their Fleeces as every one had,
for some had much better than other some; but those which had the great white
soft Fleeces, did not despise them which had little course ones: for they were
both profitable to him; and I saw some of the Sheep which had almost no Wool at
all on them, and them neither did he despise, for the Briars and Thorns had
pulled it from them, when the unlearned Dogs did drive them away from the Fold;
but when the Winter came, he took of the wool of the other, and put it on them,
and the other Sheep were not at all displeased at it, neither was there any
Envy in their Hearts: and I saw the Shepherd himself take some of his own
Garments, and covered them, that were very naked, so that they were all
preserved from the cold of the Winter, and the Frost had no Power over them.
But I looked when the Shepherd would have beaten the Dogs, or have killed them,
but he did not hurt them at all, only put them in a String, and led them with
him; for he purposed to instruct them better; but some of them would not be
led, for they were very foolish, and did not understand his Mind; but them he
took home, and would have kept them at home, but they would not stay, but would
always be going abroad, and barking at the Lambs to affrighten them out of
their Pastures: and some of the Dogs were ready to devour them, for there was
something of the Nature of the Wolf in them; and them he bound up in Chains to
sulfil his purpose on them. And when I beheld these things I greatly wondered at
the Care of the Shepherd over his Sheep, and also at his Mercy toward his
unruly Dogs; and he said unto me, This will I do, and much more for my Sheep,
and my Lambs; and I know they have none to help them but my self, and therefore
will I not forsake them, though they be driven from Mountain to Hill for a
moment; yet as I live (says the Lord) I will not separate the Flock from the
Goats; until I have brought Note, Meaning those Sheep that were hunted from the
Fold, and wounded by the unlearned Dogs.
them also, and have cured their Wounds, for they are of my chosen Flock, I
will not send any more after them, but I will go my self, and carry them on my
Shoulders, and put them into my place, which I have prepared for them, until
they be healed; for my Blood will sufficiently heal them, and my Garment cover
them, that none of their Nakedness shall appear, neither shall Shame or Fear
rest on them any more.

"Then was I greatly troubled and grieved in my Spirit, because of my
unworthiness; for I would fain have praised him, and I did acknowledge my self
unworthy to speak to him, but I prayed unto him, that he would form his own
Praise in my Mouth, and receive of his own from me; for I was nothing before
him, who is all Praise, all Love, all Life, all Beauty, all Holiness, and of
his Compassion there is no end, what shall I say of him! if I had the Tongue of
Men and Angels, it could not sufficiently speak forth his Praise; and when I
saw how exceedingly all Men were to praise him, or to speak of his Wonders (for
they were altogether past finding out) then I wept greatly, and desired only,
that he would permit me to sit at his Feet, and he swore unto me by himself,
That he would deliver me from all my Troubles within and without; and truly, it
was his own free Promise, for I durst not ask it of him, but was contented to
have waited still in my Sorrowful Condition all the Days of my Life, that I
had to spend amongst Men. But what shall I say! I am contented with his Will,
and rest at his Feet.

"Friends, I am constrained by the Spirit of Endless Love to warn you all, that
you may forbear Judging of any Man any more, upon any Pretense whatsoever, but
commit all Judgment to the Son; for he cries in me, that he will shortly
appear with righteous Judgment upon the Earth, and Woe was upon him that has
took upon him to sit upon my seat of Judgment, and has not Judged Righteously;
for the same Measure that he meets, shall be met to him again, for whosoever
I find upon my seat of Judgment when I come, if he be not as I am (Holy, Just
and Merciful, without any mixture) him will I destroy with the Breath of my
Mouth, for he is as unclean Smoke before me.

"Therefore, Dear Friends, let all Unrighteousness be far from you; for thus
says the Voice in me, Whosoever I find in Envy, the same Envy shall be his
Torment, and whosoever in Covetousness, or in Pride, or any unclean Mind, that
same shall be their Clothing, and they shall stand behind me, and all that is
with me, having no other Garment but their own Filthyness. For the Envious
shall have their Envy for their Reward, and the Covetous shall have his
Covetousness, and whatsoever his work shall be here, that shall be his covering
when I appear.

"Therefore all People, mind your own Souls, and let nothing but what is like
the same Holiness, Righteousness, Mercy, and Love, without respect of Persons,
in anywise appear, and let Covetousness be far from you, and be you as he was
in this World, that you may be like him in his Glory: for verily you cannot be
like him in his Glory, further than you are in his Nature of Holiness.

"Therefore all Friends, look into your Hearts, and let no spark abide there of
the old nature; for if there be, it will drive you to look out at others, and
in that time 'twill gather Strength, and kindle a great Fire in you, which is
not easily put out, which many at this day may know.

Edward Buroughs.


Though many things are very worthy notice from the above cited lines, given
forth through the Servant of the Lord Edward Buroughs, and obvious enough to
many; yet for the sakes of some, it is thought meet to take notice of two
particular Matters, which seem very pertinent on this Occasion.

First, That some of the young unlearned Dogs, not well acquainted with the
Masters Manner in gathering the Sheep, did run from the Flock with fierceness
after the Sheep that staid behind, and did affrighten them, and bite some of
them; neither would they be led, nor yet stay at home, but would always be
going abroad, and barking at the Lambs to affrighten them, being ready to
devour them; for there was something of the Nature of the Wolf in them; and
them the Shepherd bound up in Chains to fulfill his purpose on them.

Secondly, That some of the Dogs, well acquainted with the Masters Manner, did
wisely go behind the Sheep, and such did drive them gently along, without
hunting of them, or wearying themselves.

From these two Citations out of the aforesaid Paper we may learn, that the
Spirit of the Lord, thorough his Servant, has in a Parable very lively
described a part of what has happened amongst the Flock of God in these latter
Days; for of certain knowledge we can say, that there are such as are learned
in the School of Christ, who (being well acquainted with Christ Jesus their
Lord and Masters Manner of gathering the Sheep) do not over-drive the Flock,
nor yet weary themselves for mere Vanity; and there are also the Unlearned, who
are not acquainted with the great Masters Manner in gathering the Sheep, and
these in a great Measure have occasioned the Increase and Continuation of
Division amongst the People called Quakers, by their fierce contending for an
outward Unity and Conformity, with respect to Forms of Government in the
Church; so that they seem not only ready to bite, but also to devour others,
that see not clearness in themselves to practice according as they, in their
hunting Spirit would (as much as in them lies) constrain and enforce. Nay,
there are some, not only unacquainted with Christ Jesus's Manner of gathering
the Flock (like a Shepherd that gathers his Lambs in his Arms, and gently
leads them that are with Young) but also have laid blame on such as have
exactly Walked in his Footsteps. And indeed, so Foolish and Confident have some
been, that the masters manner of gathering the Flock has become as a Byword
or a Mock, and not only, so but Matter of Evil Fact in the sense of some,
Witness the Forty Four Articles Relating to Church Government, drawn up against
J. S. and J. W. two Ancient and Honorable Friends in the Truth, a part whereof
is for that they should say, THEY WOULD NOT HAVE FRIENDS OVER-DRIVEN.

To Conclude; We also know, that some of these have been by the Spirit of Truth
Reproved, as not fit to say they, speak in the Name of the Lord, When the Lord
has not spoken by them; nor yet to appear as if they were sent of God, to
gather the Flock, or to Proclaim themselves Keepers of other Folks, Vineyards,
when they have not kept their own Vineyard: by which it appears, that the will
of the Lord, touching such, has been, that they should Hearken unto the Word
of Reproof, and be led by his Spirit; which if they had, they would have stayed
at home, until they had been Instructed and Learned in the School of Christ;
but yet notwithstanding, some have, contrary hereunto, gone abroad, and their
great Work has been, to cry out against Honest Friends, under the notion of
Dark Spirits, levened Spirits, Troublers of Israel, Corah's, Judases, etc. just
like unto those Young Unlearned Dogs signified in the Parable, that would not
be led; but would be going abroad, and Barking at the Lambs, to affrighten
them, being ready to devour them; for as in the Parable it is said, there has
been something of the Nature of the Wolf in them; But Blessed be the Lord, many
are Witnesses, that of late some of them have been as in Chains and Fetters of
Iron, so that they are not able to Prey upon those who are upon the Rock
Christ, who doubtless, in his own time, will fulfill his Purpose on them. Oh!
that all Concerned herein at this Day would seriously Consider, and Proceed no
farther in their Hunting, Biting, Devouring Spirit, nor yet Weary themselves
for mere Vanity, lest the Eternal Decree of God should be sealed against them,
to their Destruction for ever more.

To conclude this first part, we have yet to add, that since it is signified,
that the forty four Articles, before cited, relate to Church Government, and
that we say, they were drawn up against two Ancient and Honorable Friends in
the Truth, viz. John Story and John Wilkinson, we think it proper to cite one
Passage as an evidence thereof, out of the 4th. Section of the Second part of
the Historical Manuscript, Mentioned in the Preface to the Reader, with the
omission only of the Names of Persons, for the Reasons already given in the
said Preface.

The Passage is as Follows.

Before we shall make any Observation on the aforesaid Articles or Preamble
thereto, it is needful to Inform the Reader, that nine Persons, Concerned in
Exhibiting the said Forty Four Articles against the two Friends, spoken of
before, thus Declare concerning them, in a Letter to nine others Chosen by the
Accusers to be Judges over them, viz.

" And Friends, it is not any Personal Trespass against any of us, that we
Charge them with, nor any Particular Concern of our own, as Men, that we are in
the Defense, but the Cause of Almighty God, and in the sense of the Wrong they
have done to him; [but yet notwithstanding, in the same Letter they say] " that
they have born a dear Love, and Honorable respect unto them in the Holy Truth:
[comparing his with what is Written in the third Article of the 44 Articles
before cited, viz.] " Slighting the Heavenly Motion on George Fox, his Spirit
in that Case, in the Unity Pretiously felt, and closed with (meaning the Rule
or Form of Church Government, set forth by George Fox, pretending the motion of
the Spirit, as by the said Article appears) it is evident to us, that in their
sense, a slighting of George Fox Rules, Methods and Orders, with Respect to
Church Government; is a slighting of the Cause of God. And though it is said, in
the Unity Preciously felt and closed with; yet that is Notoriously Erroneous,
if thereby is meant in the Unity of all Friends, for that some of his Papers
and Prescriptions, in many Parts of the Nation, amongst Friends, have been
little taken notice of, as is well Known to us, and credibly reported by many.

Moreover, it is evident to us, that some have had so great esteem for the
Prescriptions or Papers given forth by him, as that they have concluded it to
be no less than the Fruit of Confusion and Darkness to Believe, that what he
has given forth, was not intended by him to be urged with Severity, which is
no other than an enforcing, and this does thus appear.

John Story (One of those two Brethren) Articled against as aforesaid, in their
Answer to the said Forty Four Articles, took occasion to give his sense
touching such things, which George Fox had given forth on this wise, viz. "
That he did not Believe that George Fox intended any such thing, that they
(Meaning his Papers Directed to the Churches) should with Severity be urged
upon any of Gods Faithful People, but as Instructions or Directions, Commended
them to the Churches, Leaving the Effect thereof to God, and his Leading Grace
in his People, to make use thereof as he should manifest a need of such
Direction, Counsel or Advice.

To this sense Robert Barrow and eight Persons (Part of those, who were
Concerned in Exhibiting the said Forty Four Articles) Replied, a part whereof
was on this wise: " Truly thy Darkness and Blindness is easy to be felt, and
they must be very dim of Sight that see thee not: oh! the confusion thy Dark
Spirit is in.

To this we say, This Answer seems so very Dark, as if Blindness were the Lot
of their Inheritance, who so writ: forwe well remember, that the Testimonies of
our ancient brethren who were skilled in gathering, and careful not to scatter
the Flock) did not encourage any to follow any Outward Directions whatsoever,
without an inward Conviction (from the Leadings of Gods All-sufficient Grace,
Freely given to Profit withal) of the needfulness of the Direction, Counsel or
Advice contained therein: and Why? But Because an Observance (not grounded on
their Sufficiency of Gods Leading Grace in our selves) of Outward Instructions
or Directions, in this Gospel Day, may find no more Acceptance with the Lord of
Life (who is now to be worshipped, obeyed, and reverenced, not otherwise than in
and by the Spirit and Light, thorough which he does appear in Man) than an
offering of the Halt and the Blind (which was forbidden in the time of the Law)
for a Sacrifice, might: and this our sense may well be vindicated from such
like Testimonies as these, frequently uttered by our ancient Brethren; [We
Preach not our selves; Let not your dependency be on us; we are not (neither
desire to be) Lords over your Consciences; you ought to Be lieve for your
selves and see for your selves; and therefore we Counsel you to draw Water out
of your own wells; let it be your own, and not another We now appeal to Gods
Witness in all Consciences, how this Kind of Language and Discourse can agree
with such as render it the Fruit of Confusion and Darkness not to believe that
the Outward Instructions or Directions of G. F. amongst the People called
Quakers, were Intended to be Urged with severity upon Gods Faithful People?
Besides, that which seems to aggravate the Darkness is this; That the Faithful
must have Outward Precepts, Directions, or Instructions Imposed upon them. Had
the sense of those, whose sense we cannot own, been only with relation to the
Unfaithful, it might have seemed a little better.

The Consideration of these things is great cause of lamentation and mourning;
especially when we Consider, that we have no Ground to believe, either from the
Scriptures of Truth given forth by Inspiration, or from the Light of Christ in
our Consciences, that any man (according to the motion of Gods Spirit in this
Gospel-Day) ought to take upon him the giving forth any Outward Rules, or
Prescriptions relating to Faith or Discipline in the Church, with an intent
that they should become a Bond upon others to submit thereto, further than from
a recommendation unto the Conscience a service may be seen therein, according
to the measure of Light given from him, who is the fullness: but whether this
our sense is not by many others (besides the aforesaid nine Persons) amongst
the People called Quakers slightly esteemed, and a combined sort of Submission
(contrived, as we suppose, by a few, though) entered into by many at this Day,
we shall leave it to the unprejudiced understanding Reader to Judge, on mature
Consideration of what yet Follows.

Some few years past many Friends in the County of Westmoreland having been a
long time burdened in monthly and quarterly Meetings by such as endeavored
to introduce the practice of some things (under the Notion of
Church Government) which they could not (as they have declared) in Conscience
consent unto, did at length forbear to join with such on the Days of monthly
and quarterly Meetings, which were understood by us to be first assented to (we
cannot say, unalterably established) to relieve the Poor and take care of any
other outward concern relating to the affairs of Friends, as a Society
gathered into the Everlasting Truth, Abhorring Lord-ship over one another
Faiths or Consciences. But yet the Persons so refusing to join with others, as
aforefaid, did (as we have been credibly informed) on convenient Times and
Days, appoint by themselves, to meet together, to take care (in that method
wherein they found Freedom in the Truth) of the same services for which
Monthly and Quarterly Meetings were first Understood to be appointed.

This by the other Party was called a Separate Meeting, and the Meeters
accounted Dark, Leavened, Rending, Dividing, Separate Spirits; so that at
length a Paper was given forth, and subscribed by Robert Barrow and Sixteen
Persons more, Belonging to Nine Meetings for Worship of God, wherein they thus
declare. " And we being sensible of the great trouble and dissatisfaction in
the Church of Christ throughout this Nation, concerning this said Separation,
we do therefore with one consent, and at our several Meetings respectively
signify our Absolute dislike thereof; and we do hereby, in the fear of the
Lord, discharge all those concerned in the said Separate Meetings in our
Affairs, as they stand in the Separation; and we do declare, that as such a
Meeting, they have no Right to act in the Church Affairs, in the Capacity they
are in; but we do hereby signify, our Absolute Refusal to Submit any of our
Affairs either relating to the Poor, or otherwise, to the Ordering of the said
Separate Meetings; but do submit them to our Established Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings aforesaid, for Westmore-Land, so far as our affairs are concerned
therein, to be Ordered as in the Wisdom of God and Unity of his Spirit they
shall see meet.

From these foregoing Lines we observe, That though the Giver-forth thereof do
not positively say, that the submission of ones Affairs (without restriction to
Temporal or Spiritual Affairs) to the Established Monthly or Quarterly
Meetings, shall for the future be an Outward Mark to know a Member of the
Church by, or at least to distinguish such as are not Members of the Church;
yet who can but reasonably suppose, that such a Meaning is their Meaning, or at
least the Meaning of him or them chiefly concerned in drawing up the said
Paper, and promoting Subscriptions thereto, since it is Plain (from the very
Words cited) that others concerned in the Separate Meetings (who have declared
that for Conscience sake they cannot Submit to them) have no Right to act in
the Churches Affairs; and not only so, but that they take themselves to be
invested with Authority (as to us appears) by using the Word [Discharge] for
no one can Discharge another in any case, without Power so to do. And if we do
but consider that the taking care of the Poor is one part of the Churches
Affairs, from which those of the Separate Meeting are Discharged, or declared
to have no right to act in it, seems to us extremely Unchristian-like; for if
it were so, that they had been overtaken in a fault, that can be no sufficient
ground to declare, that they have no right to administer their Charity to the
Poor Members of the Church, because the taking care of such is Commendable in
any Society of People whatsoever. Many other things might be observed from the
said Paper, subscribed by One Hundred Sixty six Persons, which at present we
here omit, being largly treated on in the 19th Section of the Manuscript first
made mention of in the Preface; which is ready for the View of any Friend, that
may be Desirous to peruse the same.

However, the Remembrance of the Paper subscribed by Charles Marshall and Sixty
Five more, at Ellis Hooks his Chamber, already cited, together with this last
mentioned, subscribed by Robert Barrow and One Hundred sixty five more,
Occasions this farther Addition:

That it seems to be the Fruit of some Design to exalt one Man above measure,
and not only so, but unjustly to defame others, as by Answers thereto have at
large been manifested, according as in several Sections of the aforesaid
Manuscript appears; and we may truly say, that what is already cited, does
manifest but little less than such a Design: for if a Conscientious slighting
of George Fox's Pretended motions, with respect to Forms of Church Government
(imposed contrary to Faith) and a Charitable Belief, that he intended not to
urge his Papers relating thereto, on any of Gods Faithful People, with
severity (which is no less than an Inforceing) but as Instructions or
Directions, commended them to the Churches, leaving the Effect thereof to God,
and his leading Grace in his People, to make use thereof, as he should manifest
a need of such Directions, Counsel or Advice (as before is cited) be by a part
of the said Subscribers reputed such matter of Evil Fact, as that the Person
concerned must be severely Testified against, under the term of a Dark Spirit
in Confusion, it clearly shows a Design of unjust Defamation; unless a
Blina-offering under the Gospel may be accepted, though condemnable under the
Law. And as to the seeming design of exalting one man, it is to us very evident,
and past all manner of Question: as one evidence amongst many others that might
be given, we shall, from what is already cited, thus observe, that a Submission
is signified to some certain Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, pretended to be
established. But if the Reader enquire of whom they consist, the Answer in Truth
is, of those (and of such like-minded with them) as drew up the Forty Four
Articles against John Wilkinson and John Story, whose Declared Judgment is
(from the import of that Article already cited against John Story) that what
Gorge Fox has given forth as a Rule or Form of Church Government, was so given
Forth by him from an Heavenly Motion; that such his Motion was pretiously felt
and closed with in the Unity, and ought not to be slighted: and for as much as
Matters in those Meeetings are managed according to those Rules and Forms of
Church Government [Witness expressions frequently urged to this purpose (when
Friends being met about Outward Concerns of Truth, have not agreed) see what
George Fox's paper says.
it does thence follow, that the Submission, spoken of clearly, centereth in a
Submission to G. F. and the name of Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, we
therefore reasonably take to be, but as a Conduit to convey it to him: and well
would it be for him, if he were clear of a Persecuting Spirit against some,
that cannot submit unto him, in the Form and Method which others have.

The sense of these things has occasioned (in much seriousness of Spirit
before the Lord) this Enquiry, What is that bait, which the enemy of the Soul
of Man has spread before him (since his first coming forth to Preach the
Light, etc.) to concern himself so much as he has against some, that cannot
own an urging with severity his Directions, or Prescriptions, on Gods Faithful
People; and in Particular to appear a Persecutor of such, which can certainly
be proved against him, if endeavoring unjustly to take away a man's Good Name
and Reputation can be termed such?

To this the Answer is; As the Serpent beguiled Eve, so Eve beguiled Adam, in
prevailing upon him to eat of the Forbidden Fruit which she had eaten; and the
Argument used by the Serpent to tempt Eve was this, Ye shall be as Gods. Even
so are we persuaded, that there has not been wanting unto him (to speak
comparitively) a tempting Eve, which has been too aspiring after such a State,
which (with respect to humble self-denying Persecuted Members of Christ's
Church) is neither fit nor presidented; and yet it is to be doubted, that this
aspiring Mind has had so much place with him, as that he has taken too much
upon him (which has occasioned Rents and Divisions amongst the flock) and
sometimes to pretend, that he has seen things in the Vision of the Almighty,
which has been no other than the Imagination of his own Heart; and having
given way thereto, and finding a fear upon Friends (thorough a tender respect
unto him) to Judge or dislike what he might bring forth, under pretense of the
Motion of the Spirit, it in Probability encreast his Confidence, especially
when he considered, what had been written unto him by some Friends in the Day
of their Infancy, which being in such Language as was suitable to an aspiring
mind, might tend to his hurt. At length his fame grew so great as that amongst
some Weak Friends, it became even as a Proverb, that none would prosper, who
should oppose him. This by others has clearly been seen to be a subtle way, to
obliege all such as should so believe, to be Servants to his Will; and for
ought we know this Persuasion has the more easily obtained him the repute
(with some) of being set by the Lord in the like place amongst the Children of
Light at this Dayas Moses had amongst the Children of Israel in his Day: and
this we doubt is the Occasion, that the Rebellion of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram
is much treated on, to affrighten Simple People, in our Public Meetings for
Worship of God, (since the Divisions amongst Friends) especially in those
Places where G. F's Papers (relating to Church Government) have little place.
But alas! those who are sound in the Faith, cannot be affrighted with such
things, no more than they can be convinced with the sight of such False
Certificates Note, The Reader may peruse the Fifth Part of the Christian
Quaker, and therein the said Certificates are more largely treated on.
recorded in the 21st Section of the Manuscript, first mentioned in the
Preface, and ready for perusal of any Friend desiring the sight thereof) as of
late have been spread abroad in his Favor, to render him an Innocent Man, and
to acquit him from the Guilt of some Matters of Fact laid to his charge, when
the Certifiers knew nothing at all thereof; and of this he himself could not be
Ignorant, though the Occasion of spreading such Certificates abroad (if he knew
what was contained therein) which would have been proved to his Face, had he
been but so Just to the cause of Truth, as to have submitted to a hearing
(according as was desired, and in the Preface signified) before Friends, of
things Reproachful to the Truth, whereof he is guilty.

But notwithstanding all this, we dare not say, that his Preaching the Light in
the beginning of his Travels abroad, as well as the Preaching the Light by
others his Fellow Servants in the Beginning with him) was not the Ministration
given them of God; for at the sound thereof many Faces gathered Paleness;
Horror and Amazement seized many, who then became sensible of their Lost State
and Condition, whilst they were admiring their Teachers, and busied in Outward
Ordinances, more than in the Cross of Christ: And that Day (wherein many were
not only so stricken with Amazement, but through Faith received the Testimony
given, touching the Light of Christ) might truly be termed The Day of their
Infancy in the Truth, and so the more likely to be prevailed upon by the Enemy,
who in that Day (as in Ages past) sought how he might destroy that Tenderness
to the Truth, which was so begotten: for it is certainly known, that many (whose
Eyes ought to have been unto the Creator, Admiring and giving Glory unto him,
for his Gifts of Grace, and Ministration of Light then revealed) did on a
sudden admire the Creature in such an abundant manner, as if not only the
planting and watering were by him, but the Increase also: and in that Day some
(whom the Lord has made as Watchmen in the House of Israel) were concerned
thereat, and Jealous with a Godly Jealousy; and though at present it is not
with us to declare what that Jealousy was, yet, (if the Tree may be known by
its Fruit) we may with Boldness affirm, that the then admiring the Creature
might be truly paraleld with that State out of which the Lord through the
Ministration of Light or Spirit of Life had led many at that Day, who had so
learned the Truth, as (according to the Testimony thereof) to have their Eye to
the Light within ( viz. the Light of Christ) and not instead thereof to any
Outward Person, through whom amongst other Brethren the Ministration of Light
was revealed: But yet notwithstanding, some there were (as before is signified)
that admired the Creature, which not only became unto them a snare, (but it is
much to be doubted) unto the Creature also, that was admired: for the
Acceptance of more respect than was meet, stands in the same ground with the
Offering thereof; and it is too much to be feared that the imprudent Acceptance
of what was unduely offered, has begot a Spirit of Pride and Exaltation in G.
F. which the Lord is determined (for his Namesake) to bring into the Dust; and
if he did but seriously mind his State and Condition, and was but more ready to
appear little in his own eyes, than to be accounted Great in the Eyes of
others; and not give way to such a false Imagination that true Judgment was
committed to him in all things (which can now be Testified was spoken by him,
and that at that time, wherein his Judgment was known to be false) and that he
may take a Liberty knowingly to put Stumbling Blocks in the way of Gods People,
and yet be justified therein; Note, When William Rogers discoursed with him
touching this particular Passage in his Book of Women's Meetings: And was not
Micahs Mother a virtuous Woman? Read Judges 17, and then a few Lines after
(though she was an Idolotrous Woman) says, these and such like Women were
recorded for their Wisdom and their Virtue, etc. he answered William Rogers
thus, I knew what I did, I saw 'twould be a Stumbling Block; but there is
something in it.
We cannot otherwise be persuaded, but that he would then see, that he is
fallen from the Truth; and that the words reported to be spoken by J. Naylor
(when he said in Relation to his own falen state) I am but the figure of
another, are now fulfilled in him. Oh! that the Lord would change his Heart,
and bring him to a true Sight of, and sorrow for his sin, as he did J. N. after
his Fall; and then, we hope, as he has been an Offense unto the Church of God,
so the Lord will lay a Constraint upon him (as he did upon James Naylor to
travel amongst Friends, whom he has offended, to clear the truth of that
Scandal and Reproach which thorough him has been brought upon it.

For it is an Abomination before the Lord (and at this day seasonably testified
against by the Children of Light) that G. F. should be an Occasion of so much
Division, Strife and Contention, as has been made in the Nation touching his
Papers, under a pretense, That he has been moved of God to give them forth,
that Friends might be supplied with Directions to keep all things clean and
sweet amongst Friends; meaning thereby amongst other things (and that according
to the Express words of his Papers) That there should be no Backbiting,
Talebearing, Judging one another, and that evil reports should not be
concealed, but be followed, until the Authors thereof be found, etc. and yet be
the very Person, that is notoriously guilty in all those things himself, which
would have been proved against him, had he submitted to a Hearing, as
aforesaid: But for as much as he has refused to submit to such a Hearing
(though several Letters from Friends in Truth have been written unto him, to
entreat him thereto, and in particular has been treated withal by Daniel
Smith, of Malborrough, to whom he gave this Answer, he Judged 'twould be a
jangle, as 'twas at Bristol; and so refused, as by a Letter from the said
Daniel Smith does appear) therefore we do at present refer for Proof of the
Matters (whereof we assert in this Paragraph, that he is guilty) to the last
mentioned Manuscript, and in particular to the 21st. Section thereof, which is
ready for the perusal of Friends desiring to view the same.

William Rogers, on behalf of himself and other Friends in truth concerned.

The SECOND PART OF THE Christian-Quaker, Distinguished from the APOSTATE and
INNOVATOR. WHEREIN, DOCTRINES of TRUTH (cleared from Objections) are laid down,
agreeable to the Scripture of Truth, given forth by Inspiration, and according
as they have been received and owned by the Children of Light, or such amongst
the People termed in Derision Quakers, who have received from God Divine
Understanding, and kept their Place and Habitation in the Unchangeable Truth.

Also, An APPENDIX, detecting Charles Marshal and sixty five more, as
Unrighteous Judges, in a Case pretended to relate to John Story, and John
Wilkinson, two ancient and honorable Laborers in the Gospel of Christ.

By WILLIAM ROGERS, on behalf of himself and other Friends in Truth concerned.

1 Cor. 3.11. For other Foundation can no Man lay, than that which is already
laid, which is Christ Jesus.

2 Timothy 4.3. For the time will come when they will not endure sound Doctrine;
but after their own Lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having
itching ears.

LONDON, PRINTED in the Year, 1680.

The Contents.
The INTRODUCTION: WHerein is manifested, that there is but one way, whereby
the Things appertaining to the Kingdom of God and Salvation of Mankind, comes
to be revealed; though the Manifestation thereof may seem various. Page 1.
Chap. II. Touching the Light of Christ within, and Exhortation to Obedience
thereof. Page 5. Chap. III. Touching Infallibility, and Perfection. Page 11.
Chap. IV. Touching Wisdom, and Knowledge. Page 21. Chap. V. Touching
Magistracy, and Obedience thereunto. Page 30. Chap. VI. Touching Respect of
Persons, plain Language, disuse of the word [Master] unless by a Servant to his
Master, of Customs and Fashions of this World, and of the Cross of Christ.
Page 33. Chap. VII. Touching Swearing. Page 37. Chap. VIII. Touching Tithes.
Page 40. Chap. IX. Touching Baptism. Page 45. Chap. X. Touching the Supper of
the Lord with his Disciples the Night before he was betrayed. Page 51. Chap.
XI. Touching Justification and Salvation through Faith in Christ. Page 61. An
Appendix: Containing an Answer given forth by some Friends of Bristol to a
Paper Dated from Eilis Hooks his Chamber, London the 12th. of the 4th. Month
1677. against John Story and John Wilkinson, etc. and subscribed by Charles
Marshal of the County of Wilts and Sixty Five more, together with some few
Observations on part of a Reply thereto, by Jasper Bat of the County of
Sommerset, and three others. Page 72.
The SECOND PART OF THE Christian-Quaker, Distinguished from the APOSTATE and
INNOVATOR, etc.
CHAP I. The Introduction, Wherein is manifested, That there is but One Way,
whereby the things appertaining to the Kingdom of God, and Salvation of Mankind
come to be revealed, though the Manifestation thereof may seem various.
IN the first part of the Christian-Quaker, distinguished from the Apostate and
Innovator; Several Subjects are treated on relative to the Matter intended:
Viz. To manifest a part of those things, touching which the Faithful were at
Unity, and by what Ways and Means that Unity came to be broken, etc.

And now that every Reader, who is desirous to be informed, in these Dividing
Times, what those Children of Light (unto whom the Lord has revealed of the
Mysteries of his Kingdom) own, with respect to the other Doctrines, and
Practices, whereon little or no occasion is taken to treat in the First Part,
it is at this time upon us to add a farther Testimony to the Ancient Truth,
according as the Lord in his tender Mercy has, through the Appearance of his
Son Christ, by his Light (or Manifestation of his Grace) and Testimony of his
Faithful Servants in the Scriptures of truth, opened; wherein our intent is not
to treat largely on every Subject, because the ensuing Discourse is chiefly to
manifest, What a remnant stand for, who (being faithful unto their first
principle) cannot in a temporizing spirit change their way.

The Desires and Breathings of our Souls unto God are, that every Reader may be
serious and unprejudiced in the perusal of this our Testimony, and then we do
not doubt but 'twill be reaching unto the Consciences of such, as that which is
not inconsisting with the Testimonies given forth by Inspiration (recorded in
the Scriptures of Truth) and spirit of God, or Appearance of Christ by his
Light (which is that by which the Lord does see, and is seen in the Conscience)
wherewith every man coming into the world is lighted; for that the Lord by his
spirit has opened, that there is not any other way, by which all things
relating unto the Kingdom of God, and Salvation of mankind comes to be
revealed, and this appears agrecable to the Scriptures of truth, John 14.26. 2
Cor. 4.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.

We are now sensible, that some, who may peruse the foregoing Scriptures, may
be ready thus to say, You seem to propound two ways by which the things
appertaining to the Kingdom of God, and Salvation of Mankind have been, and are
revealed, viz. the Spirit of Truth, or Appearance of Christ by his Light, as
One Way; and the Scriptures of Truth as Another Way.

To this we answer, The Way we propose is but One, (though the Manifestation
thereof may seem various to Man;) viz. sometimes through Instruments, and
sometimes through Himself: For though Paul wrote unto Timothy (unto whom he was
made an Instrument, and therefore called him his Son) telling him, 2 Timothy 3.15,
16.
That the holy Scriptures were able to make him wise unto Salvation; and that
they were profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction
in righteousness; yet it is spoken with respect to those Scriptures, that are
given forth by inspiration of God, and with this limitation, viz. through the
says that is in Christ Jesus.

Whereon we observe, that the Scriptures given forth by inspiration, are but as
an Instrument made serviceable to the Reader through the Spirit, whereby faith
in Christ comes to be raised; even as a Man endued with the Spirit of God, may
in the hand of the Lord be an Instrument through sound Doctrine, and wholesome
exhortation, to open the inward Eye of the Mind (which has been darkened) and
to awaken the Conscience (which has been defiled;) that so man may come to be
renewed in the spirit of his Mind unto God, through faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Conscience purified from Dead Works through the blood of the
Covenant, to serve the Lord in Truth, and Righteousness; and therefore we
reasonably conclude. That there is but One way (though various in Operation and
Manifestation) through which the Things appertaining to the Kingdom of God, and
Salvation of Mankind comes to be revealed, which is by the powerful appearance
of Christ by his spirit and light, convicting the Conscience, converting and
renewing the Mind unto God; sometimes through Scriptures given forth by
inspiration, sometimes through Man as an Instrument, and sometimes by the
appearance of the Spirit and Light in Man, without the Assistance of such
Instruments: but yet the end of all is, that faith in Christ may be raised;
wherein (as the Evidence of things not seen by the Carnal Eye) the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, is beheld, which is
that Treasure, whereof the Apostle spoke, that is hid in our Earthen Vessels,
that the excellency of that Power might be of God, and not of man.

These things being duly considered, this Testimony does naturally arise, that
neither the Scriptures of Truth, nor any other writings whatsoever (though
given forth by the Spirit of God itself) can properly be termed so profitable a
Rule unto us, as the Light and Spirit from which they were given forth; and
therefore the Eye of our Mind ought chiefly to be unto the Spiritual Appearance
of Christ by his Light, and Spirit in us, as that Unerring Guide, which never
can be removed into a corner.

Besides, we find the Scripture itself testifying, That no Prophecy of the
Scripture is of any Private interpretation; 2 Pet. 1.20.
that is, it ought not to be interpreted but by the Holy Ghost, through whose
Motions 'twas given forth, for all other Interpretations may truly be termed
Private.

From whence we observe, that if the Prophecies in the Scriptures of Truth
should be read unto us from Morning to Evening, and from Evening to Morning
again, we might receive little Benefit or Profit thereby, unless the Eye of our
Mind come to be stayed in the Unchangeable Light, and Spirit of God, whereby
the meaning of the spirit through them (out of all Private Interpretations)
has been, and is signified unto Man.

CHAP. II. Touching the Light of Christ within, and Exhortation to Obedience
thereof.
THose Faithful Messengers of the Gospel of Christ, whom the Lord in these
latter days sent forth for the gathering of the Nations unto the Faith and
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ (who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life,)
that their souls might be saved in the Day of the Lord, frequently sounded in
our ears on this wise: Turn in your minds unto the Light within (meaning
thereby the Light of Christ within) which shows you that a Tie is not of the
Truth; and as through Faith you come to be Obedient unto the Light Within, and
that measure of Grace given by God, and received by you, so will you come to be
made Partalters of that great Salvation.

This Doctrine was acceptable to many, who in the Love of Truth received the
joyful Sound thereof; but unto others mean and despised, who notwithstanding
that Testimony, accounted the Scriptures of Truth, a More Sure Rule and Guide
unto the Father.

The consideration whereof at this time, has been as an obligation to examine,
whether the aforesaid Doctrine (so acceptable to some, and despised by others)
be consonant to the Scriptures of Truth; which task is the more freely
undertaken, because the aforesaid Doctrine has become so great a stumbling
block unto many, as that they have thought it a sufficient evidence, that the
professors thereof have been out of the path of truth, readily objecting on
this wise.

Objection. Do you not think, that those Jews who crucified Christ, acted not
from the Light Within, Since some of them, at least, verily thought they did
God good service therein?

Having thus premised, it is now needful to examine, what may be spoken from the
Scriptures of Truth for the Light within, and to turn in the Mind unto the
same, to obey it, etc. In order thereunto we find John the Evangelist thus
testifying, Joh. 1.4.9.
In him, (meaning the Word, which was God) was Life, and the Life was the Light
of men. That was the true Light, which lights every man that comes into the
world. I am the Light of the World, John 8.12.
he that follows me, shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of
Life. Joh. 12.46.
I am come a Light into the World, that whosoever believes in me should not
abide in Darkness.

These Scriptures plainly show, that we are to believe in, and follow Christ,
who is that Light, that lights every man that comes into the world.

Objection. However some objecting may say, What Is this to a Light Within? it is
very plain that John the Evangelist meant nothing of a Light Within, in your
sense, but of the Personal Appearance of Christ Without, as that Word which was
made Flesh; and, as Evidence, produce what the same Evangelist says Chap. 9th,
and 5th. As long as I am in the World, I am the Light of the World. And Chap.
12.35. Yet a little while is the Light with you; walk while you have the Light.
And ver. the 36. While ye have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be
the Children of the Light.

To this may be answered, That these last recited Scriptures do in the most
favorable construction, on the objectors part, intimate, that Christ the Son
of God, while he was in the World, was the Light of the World; but does not say
that he is, or would be no longer the light of the world: Such a saying, or
sense, would limit the Appearance of Light to that Body only, and dispensation
of time, wherein the said Body appeared on Earth, which is contradictory to the
very words of the Evangelist, before quoted, viz. That was the true Light that
lights every man that comes into the World. Which Scripture sentence,
relating to every man, is so universal, that it cannot but extend to those, who
never beheld the face of Jesus in his fleshly and Bodily Appearance; nor yet
came to be informed by any outward Instrument of his Doctrine, though Partakers
of his Light; which therefore may properly be termed by such, his Light within;
that is, the Appearance of Christ by his Light shining in their hearts;
agreeable whereunto in effect we take the Testimonies of the Apostle to be,
viz. That which may be known of God, Romans 1.19.
is manifest in them: For God has showed it unto them. Seeing you seek a proof
of Christ, speaking in me, 2 Cor. 13.3.
which Riches is Christ in you, Col. 1.27.
the hope of Glory. Who shall descend into the deep, that is, Romans 10.7, 8.
to bring Christ again from the dead? but what says it? the Word is near thee,
even in thy mouth and in thy heart, this is the word of faith which we preach.
And all this appears agreeable unto what the Prophet Isaiah hinted at, who
speaking of what should be in the last days, signified, Isa. 1.2, 3, 5.
That the God of Jacob will teach us of his Ways; and therefore said, Oh house
of Jacob, come ye, let us walk in the Light of the Lord! which being compared
with what the same Prophet said in relation to a people, Isa. 5^.^.
In whose hearts was the law of the Lord, and with what the Prophet Jeremiah
says, I will put my law in their Inward Parts, Jer. 31.33 34.
and write it in their Hearts, and they shall teach no more every man his
Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all
know me, from the least of them to the greatest; It Is evident to us, that this
written Law in the Heart, is that Light Within, whereof the faithful Messengers
of the Lord in our day, have born witness unto, and whereof the same Prophet
gave testimony, when he said, as before, O house of Jacob, come ye, let us walk
in the Light of the Lord.

Besides, such a limitation, as aforesaid, would have a tendency to make void
the virtue and efficacy of the blood of Christ, who was offered up a sacrifice
to take away the sins of many; and on this score does the author to the Hebrews
testify, Heb. 9.28.
that unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time, without Sin
unto Salvation, which is a clear Evidence unto us, that the benefit of the
blood of Christ is not witnessed effectually in this our day, but by those, who
having looked for his second appearance, have received him in his Appearance;
this Appearance we take to be his Appearance by his light and spirit in the
hearts of those, who through faith in his blood have known their Consciences
purified from Dead Works, and so come to serve the living God in Truth and
righteousness,

It Is now to be considered, Whether these words [Turn in your Minds] be
agreeable to truth, for that this kind of objection may be raised:

Objection. Does not this put the Creature upon Action in his own Self-will,
when as the Will of Man cannot bring forth that Birth unto which power is given
to become the Sons of God?

For answer hereto, it is necessary to consider, that the faithful Laborers in
the Gospel of Christ commended their Exhortations and testimonies to the
Consciences of the Hearers in the Sight of God; and the reason doubtless was,
because there is a Capacity in Man, which (through the assistance of the Grace
of God) renders Man capable to do the will of God in righteousness unto life;
and those who are so acted, cannot be said to be acted in the Self-will of Man.
And on the contrary, the same Capacity (letting in Tempration, and joining
thereto) renders Man a servant of Sin unto Death, and being once so dead in
Sin, no redemption comes to be obtained, but through Christ, as the Apostle
testifies, Ephesians. 2.1.
You has he quickened that were dead in Trespasses and Sins.

These things considered, it is evident, that through the Appearance of Christ,
those who have cast off the Old Man, are become renewed in the Spirit of their
Minds unto God, and so have put on the New Man, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true holiness: and therefore since there is such a capacity
in man, as aforesaid, it is agreeable to Truth to exhort the sons of men, to
turn in their Minds unto the appearance of Christ by his Light, that through
the Assistance thereof, the will of God may be done in their earthen vessels.

The next thing to be considered is, whether there is any weight in this
objection, Do you not think that the Jews, who crucified Christ, acted not from
the light within; since some of them, at least, thought they did God good
service therein?

To this may be answered, That the friends of Truth never preached up the Light
Within, but with respect to the Appearance of Christ by his Spirit, as that
Light Within intended by them: and since Christ cannot be divided, to act
against himself; therefore the Jews did not therein act from that Light Within,
unto which we have been directed. From what then (may the objector say) did
those of them act, who verily thought they did God good service therein?

Ans. Phil. 3.6.
From Zeal without knowledge (not having their Minds staid and ordered
according to that universal Principle of Truth, Acts 26.9, 11.
which if hearkened unto, would teach all men to do as they would be done by) in
which zeal Paul verily thought in himself, that he ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus; and in that Self-thought (being exceeding mad)
persecuted the Church of God, consented to the death of the Saints, and
compelled them to Blaspheme; but when the Lord was pleased to appear unto him,
and to make him a Minister of his everlasting Gospel, he was sent unto the
Gentiles, to open their eyes, that they might turn from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God. Acts 26.16, 17, 18.


This eye that was to be opened, was not the Carnal Eye, that so thereby they
might be turned from outward darkness to outward Light: for though Paul beheld
the Light that shone from Heaven (which we take to be a Light visible to his
Carnal Eyes) yet he after continued three days blind, through the Glory of that
Light; and then afterward the Lord appointed him to be his witness, and sent
him to the Gentiles to open their eyes, that they might turn from Darkness unto
Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God.

This Eye, that he was sent to open, was the inward eye of the mind; and the
Darkness spoken of, was that wherewith their Hearts (and not their Outward
Eyes) were overshadowed, so that they could not behold the Light of the Glory
of God shining in their Hearts, to give unto them the knowledge of the Truth.

CHAP. III. Touching Infallibility and Perfection.
THe Doctrine of Infallibility, held by the People called Quakers, has been
accounted ridiculous: because either Occasion has been given through Weakness
amongst them, or else taken by their Opponents (whether given or no) to assert,
that the People called Quakers are infallible.

Be it as it is, such a bare Assertion, without Distinction or Explication,
must be either the Fruit of Weakness, if proceeding from any really of that
People called Quakers, or else Slander and envy, if proceeding from their
opposers, without occasion given them so to say.

That therefore the enquiring Reader may be truly informed, what Doctrine in
relation to Infallibility is held forth, owned and received by such amongst
them, unto whom God has revealed of the mysteries of his Kingdom, it is not
remote from the present purpose on this occasion to give this ensuing Testimony.

There is an outward man, and an inward man, according to the Apostle's
Testimony: 2 Cor. 4.16.
and therefore the word Infallible, or Infallibility, may have relation to
External and Internal things.

Touching External things, the outward man with his outward senses is
excreised; but as to things internal, the inward man with his inward senses.

Acts 1.3. it is thus said. To whom also he presented himself alive, after that
he had suffered, by many Infallible tokens, being seen of them by the space of
forty days, and speaking of those things which appertain to the Kingdom of God.

Obj. This shows there is an Infallibility; but then it may be said, This seems
to respect the outward senses of the Apostles, in seeing Christ their Lord and
Master, and in hearing the things he spoke, which appertained to the Kingdom of
God; and this Infallibility is readily confessed unto: but how can it be proved
that there is an Infallibility accompanying the inward senses of the inward
Man, seeing many have pretended to give true Infallible Judgment, from their
inward Sense, which has proved notoriously wrong, and detectable by our
outward Senses?

Answer. It must be confessed (if any should so object) it is very true; but yet
it may in truth be asserted, that there is an Infallibility, viz. the Spirit of
God accompanying the inward Senses of the inward Man, whereof the Faithful have
an Assurance from the Evidence of the Light of Christ, and Spirit of God in
their own Hearts; and if any pretend to any other Infallibility accompanying
them, we understand it not.

Obj. How then comes it to pass, that men endued with the Spirit of God, are
deceived and fallible?

Ans. We ought to distinguish betwixt Man, and the Spirit, by which he came to
be renewed in the Spirit of his Mind unto God.

That by which man comes to be renewed, and circumcised in Heart, (which is the
Spirit of God) is infallible; but that which is so renewed may be deceived, if
not exercised in and by that Spirit in which preservation is; for there is no
Estate on this side the Grave, wherein it is not needful to watch; and
therefore did Christ our Lord thus say, What I say unto you, I say unto all,
watch.

It has been a common Assertion, That the Church of Christ is infallible, and
cannot err; and therefore have many assemblies of men (assuming the title of
the Church of Christ) declared their Sentences, Judgments and Decrees
infallible,

To this may be said, That since the Apostasieentred, it is not unknown what
Visible and Outwardly Glorious Church has published this Doctrine, with
Application to her self; by which Door, a Body of Darkness, Usurpation and
persecution has entered, and on this score, thousands have been deceived, and
led from the Gift of God in themselves, to follow the Dictates of fallible men.

But yet as it has been, so it is the Faith of many, that the Lord never will
raise any people, whom by his Spirit he will lead to publish such a Doctrine
(with respect to outward and visible Societies of Men on Earth, that may be
outwardly describable) as needful to be believed in order to the building up
one another in the most holy Faith; this Faith being not inconsistent with the
Testimonies of the Scriptures of Truth, is grounded on the Evidence of the
Light of Christ within; for that the contrary would have a plain tendency to
draw the Sons and Daughters of men from the Anointing in themselves, to the Lo
here is, and the Lo there is again: For what religious assembly in Unity, and
professing themselves Christians, will scruple to say, We are the Church of
Christ?

And albeit we must acknowledge, that that Church which is built on the rock
Christ, cannot (whilst abiding on the rock) be prevailed against; yet no
Argument from hence, may rationally be brought to prove any one Member of this
Church (whilst on this side the grave) not liable (through temptation) to Err,
and depart from the Rock, whilst there is an enemy ready to enter all, if they
watch not.

And now as to Perfection we have this to say:

Though we do believe, that all the Gifts of God, and Works of Righteousness,
brought forth through the Operation of his Spirit, are perfect; and that in
that sense it may be said, we are Partakers of a Measure of that which is
Perfect; even as the Apostle testifies, Jam. 1.17.
Every perfect gift is from above; if any man offend not in word, Jam. 3.2.
the same is a perfect man: Yet we do not believe, that there is any such
perfect estate attainable on this side the Grave, wherein it is not needful for
man to watch and wait in the Light of Christ, that so he may not only be
preserved in that perfect state, whereunto in measure he has already attained,
but also come to know a Growth and Increase in the Increases of God: For though
Paul had attained unto such a state, as appears by these his words, Let us
therefore, Phil. 3.15.
as many as be perfect, be thus minded. Phil. 3.14.
Yet we find, that that very exhortation had relation unto a pressing toward
the Mark for the Price of the High calling of God in Christ Jesus. Which
denotes that there was a state attainable beyond that state of Perfection
whereunto he had then attained. Moreover, that the Scriptures in other parts
thereof, denote a State of perfection, is plain from these following
testimonies (amongst many others) recorded therein. Luke 6.40.
But every one that is perfect shall be as his Master. Mat. 5.48.
Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

Obj. This perfect State which you speak of, we readily confess unto, so far as
the mind of the Spirit is signified unto us therein, because it is the very
Language of the holy Scriptures. But yet we are dissatisfied, that the Meaning
of the Spirit by this perfect estate, is such a state as therein to cease from
Sin.

Answer. To this we answer, that such a Construction cannot hold in truth,
unless truth should lead to impeach our heavenly Father, as guilty of sin,
(which cannot be) for the very words are, Be ye perfect, as your Father which
is in Heaven is perfect. Besides, it is an undoubted truth, that a Cessation
from Actions, manifested to be sinful, is the duty of all professing
Christianity, and we cannot but have so much Charity for all so professing, as
that none such will deny this; but if any should, they would therein deny the
End for which Christ was manifested in the Flesh, which was to destroy the
Works of the Devil, which is sin, 1 John 3.8.
according to this testimony of the Apostle, He that commits sin, is of the
Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning: For this purpose, the Son of
God was manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil.

Obj. This also we cannot deny, being the express testimony of the Apostle; but
yet, since Scripture ought to be compared with Scripture, when there is a
seeming Contradiction (as on this occasion we suppose there is) we therefore
say, that we do not believe that the meaning of the Spirit is according to what
the express words seem to hold forth in this Case. 1. Because we do not
understand from the Scriptures, but that the Saints were subject to fail, and
that many of them did fail. 2. 1 John 1.7.
Though the Apostle testifies, That the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin;
yet this has been interpreted to be only from the Guilt and not from the Act
of all sin, so as to cease therefrom, whilst on this side the grave; which
doubtless was the reason wherefore we find these testimonies recorded in the
holy Scriptures, Ephesians. 2.8, 9.
By Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
Gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast (thereby implying as if
Salvation through Faith might be obtained, though Good Works were wanting, and
so consequently Sin committed instead thereof, since it is irrational to
conclude, that whilst Man is in the Body he can cease from working both Good
and Evil.) In many things we offend all. Jam. 3.2.
If we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. 1 John 1.8.


Ans. As to the first reason contained in the objection, That the Saints were
subject to fail, and that many of them did fail; we say, That this does not
contradict any thing asserted by us; for we have declared that we do not
believe, that there is any such perfect state attainable on this side the
Grave, wherein it is not needful for man to watch, etc. That he may be
preserved, etc. But if through Unwatchfulness (which is a plain Neglect of what
is the Duty of all true Christians, according to the words of Christ (what I
say unto you, I say unto all, watch) any one comes either to fall away from
that good State whereunto he has attained, or else not to attain unto that
State which is attainable; this cannot be a sound argument to prove the matter
against us intended by the Objection, viz. That man cannot cease from sin; no
more than the not going of some Travelers to a certain Land, when 'twas their
duty to go, or the returning of others from the same Land, after (according to
their duty) through travel arrived there, is an argument, that it is impossble
to go thither, and there remain to the end of our days.

To the 2d reason contained in the aforesaid Objection, we say, It Is needful to
distinguish what sort of Works were excluded, as unnecessary to accompany that
Faith, through which Salvation is, and what sort of Works were necessary: for
though the Language of Paul excludes Works, yet James tells us, Jam. 2.20, 26.
That Faith without Works is dead: And no doubt but the Testimonies of these
two Apostles have been understood to be repugnant and contradictory each to
other; and on this Foot different means to the Salvation of Mankind have been
held forth; whenas, if the mind of the Spirit through them both were but
rightly understood, there would then be no seeming Occasion to declare their
Testimonies contradictory each to other: For the clearing therefore of this
matter. we shall distinguish touching Works treated on by Paul and James. There
are two sorts of works treated on by Paul; the one is Works of the Law, that by
the one offering of Christ (as an eternal Sacrifice unto God, whereby the law
of Commandments was abolished) is excluded, as unnecessary to accompany that
Faith, which is unto Salvation; for otherwise, (though the Salvation of God
through Christ was extended, as well to the believing Gentile, as the believing
Jew; yet) the Jew might have whereof to glory, contrary to the Apostle's
testimony, Gal. 6.14, 15. God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision avails
any thing, but a New Creature. And therefore did the Apostle Paul testify,
That by the Works of the Law, no Flesh shall be justified: And so no doubt but
the works of the law were that sort of works which the Spirit of God, through
that wise Apostle Paul signified, when he said (and that in relation to such as
were once dead in Trespasses and Sins, but then quickened and become New
Creatures) By Grace are ye saved, through faith, Ephesians. 2.8, 9.
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man
should boast. The other sort of works is of the Gospel, and may properly be
termed the Fruit of the obedience of Faith, which indeed was the very end
wherefore Paul testified, That he had received his Apostleship, and that the
mystery kept secret since the World began, was revealed: Read Romans chap. 1.5.
and chap. 16.25, 26. and no doubt but that those very works, which are the
Fruit of the Obedience of Faith, were the works intended by the Spirit through
Paul, so as that without them it might be just cause to question, whether they
were in Christ Jesus? and if not, then certainly not attained unto the New
Creatures State, which is a state of Salvation, because the Testimony of the
Apostle is on this wise, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature; and not only so, but that the very works of the obedience of faith
were spoken also with relation to those (spoken of, Ephesians. 8.9.) Who by Grace
were saved through Faith, and not by works; For Paul (in the very next
following verse) thus says, For we are his workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained, that we should walk in
them. Besides it is apparent, that this our sense is true from Paul's very
express words to the Philipians, Chap. 2. ver. 12, 13. Wherefore my beloved, as
ye have always obeyed, not as in my Presence only, but now much more in my
Absence; work out your Salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God that
works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. This positively
shows, that though there was an exclusion of one sort of works, yet there was
another sort necessary to Salvation, else he would not have said, Work out your
Salvation, etc. All which being seriously considered, it is evident that the
meaning of the Spirit through Paul, was the same with the Mind of the Spirit
through James; for that Paul's words plainly signify that God has ordained,
that those who are saved by Grace through Faith, should walk in Good Works; and
that 'twas needful to work out Salvation: which doubtless related to the same
sort of Works spoken of by the Apostle James when he said, That Faith without
works is dead. Jam. 2.20, 26.
Because it is clear from the context, that James speaks of works in no other
sense, than to be as an evidence of True Faith; and that 'twas as impossble
that True Faith could be, and yet not accompanied with Works; as that a Brother
or Sister naked and destitute of food, would be relieved by a bare saying, Be
warm and filled; and so we may reasonably conclude, that though the Apostle's
Doctrine touching Salvation through Faith, and not of Works be true (not only
with respect to the exclusion of Works which were legal, but others also acted
in the will of man) yet from thence it cannot justly be employed, as in the
Objection, that good works may be wanting to such as are saved, and sin
committed instead thereof.

We now come to take notice of this Scripture mentioned in the Objection, viz.
Jam. 3.2
That in many things we offend all. This was spoken by the Apostle in relation
to a state which was not free from sin; but yet it cannot be inferred from
thence, that such a state is not attainable; nay, the Apostle's following words
are in some measure an evidence against such a Construction: for he thereby
says, If any man offend not in Word, the same is a Perfect Man; which was
needlessly spoken by him, if that inoffensive State was Not attainable; and if a
Cessation from sin in that case was attainable, why not in all others also?

And as to these words cited, 1 John 1.8. If we say we have no Sin, we deceive
our selves, and the Truth is not in us; we say as before to the words of the
Apostle James, that this also was spoken in relation to a State which was not
free from sin; but yet it cannot be inferred from thence, that such a State of
Freedom is not attainable; and this sense is proveable to us, from the very
following words in the next verse, If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. But if
this satisfy not, and that any should yet object, that the Apostle's meaning
touching the word Cleansing, was but a cleansing from the Guilt (and not from
the Fact) of unrighteousness. To that this may in truth be answered, that those
who are cleansed from all unrighteousness, are so cleansed by the Blood of
Christ, and such are born of God, 1 John 3.9.
and of these the same Apostle says, Whosoever is born of God, does not commit
sin; For his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of
God: Which positive expression, in relation to such a state, as being born of
God, cannot admit of any other meaning, (though compared with other Scriptures
in relation to the same state, spoken of under other terms) and therefore we
conclude, that these latter words, cited out of John, is a clear Evidence to
prove the Interpretation (signified in the Objection) on the Apostle's words,
unsound, viz. That the Blood of Christ cleanses only from the Guilt, and Not
from the Act of sin, so as to cease therefrom whilst on this side the Grave:
Especially if we consider that one of the Qualifications that the Apostle Peter
expressly assigns to such whom he declares of to be cursed Children, 2 Pet. 2.14.
was this, viz. that cannot cease from Sin; and that also the condition spoken
of by John, on which a cleansing from all sin through the Blood of Christ comes
to be witnessed, was, a walking in the Light, even as Christ is in the light,
(Read 1 John 1.7.) Which cannot be witnessed but through a Cessation from Sin.

CHAP. IV. Touching Wisdom and Knowledge.
THe Apostle James tells us, Jam. 3.17.
There is a Wisdom from above (this Wisdom may be taken to be that Wisdom,
Ephesians. 3.10.
which Paul describes to be the Wisdom of God,) Jam. 3.15.
and that there is a Wisdom which is not from above, 2 Cor. 1.12.
(which may be taken to be the same wisdom which the Apostle Paul describes to
be Fleshly, and of this World.) 1 Cor. 3.19.


The Apostle Paul also says, 1 Cor. 8.1. Knowledge puffs up, and yet 1 Timothy
2.4. Speaks of the Knowledge of the Truth.

As to the Wisdom that is not from above, Jam. 3.14, 15, 16.
James thus describes it, If ye have Bitter Envying, and Strife in your hearts,
Glory not, and lie not against the Truth. This Wisdom descends not from
above, but is Earthly, Sensual, Devilish. For where Envying and Strife is,
there is confusion, and every Evil Work. But the Wisdom that is from above,
Jam. 3.17.
he thus describes, viz. It Is first Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle, and Easy to
be entreated, full of Mercy, and Good Fruits; without Partiality, without
Hypocracy.

But notwithstanding the Apostle has so plainly described the Difference; yet
Experience tells us, that Wisdom without Distinction is so much preached
against, that many ignorant people are even set on float, uttering their folly
and confusion, in a boasting self conceited spirit, as if it were sufficient
evidence, that they are Good Christians, and in the Feeling of the Power of
God, and Life of Christianity, because they have confidence enough to cry
against Wisdom, and have so much memory, as from the mouths of others to use
the words of that wise Apostle Paul, when he said, 1 Cor. 3.19.
The Wisdom of this World is Foolishness with God; as if thereby, they had
brought some Excellent Proof to Justify all those Rude Actions, and
Impertinent Expressions, which (as the fruit of their Ignorance, and Folly) in
a boisterous unruly Spirit they have brought up.

Were such but sober, girding up the Loins of their Minds, they would
undoubtedly come to see, that such their Words and Actions are but the Fruits
of that Ignorance, that lusts to Envy, which is to be silenced; and doubtless
of this sort were these whom the Apostle Peter hinted at, 1 Pet. 13, 14.
when he said, Wherefore gird up the Loins of your Minds, be sober, as obedient
Children, not fashioning your selves according to your former Lusts, in your
ignorance.

But if such had less folly and confidence, and were but as ready to ask Wisdom
of God (according to the Counsel of the Apostle James) as they are to condemn
that Gift of Wisdom and Understanding which God has given unto others, Jam.
1.5.
they would not be ready to run at the Beck, Nod, or Call of such, as in a
boasting imperious Spirit glory (exalting them as Judges over God's faithful
Servants) and that have brought forth See the 5th Part of the Christian-Quaker.
Lies in a bitter, envious Spirit, which things being earthly, sensual and
devilish, are the very marks of that Wisdom that descends not from above.

As a farther illustration of what is aimed at in this discourse, we now come
to signify, that some have a far greater portion of Wisdom, Knowledge and
Understanding than others; and that it is given them of God, as they are
Creatures, distinct from what they are, when acted by a good Spirit or a bad,
and in this respect is Man (as a Creature) the most excellent Creature that God
has made.

But yet such is the Ignorance of this Age, as to account this Portion of
Wisdom, Knowledge, or Understanding (as we are creatures) to be that Wisdom
which the Apostle termed Earthly, Sensual, and Devilish, or the Wisdom of this
World, or the Wisdom of the Wise, 1 Cor. 1.19.
which the Lord by the Apostle Paul has said, he will destroy.

But herein such do manifest themselves not knowing whereof they affirm; for
that Wisdom, Knowledge or Understanding which we have as Creatures, is the
proper Gift of God, and a part of his own Creation, and is honorable in its
place: and it is against the nature of the Divine Being to destroy this Wisdom,
because it is his own Gift, even as it is against his Nature to destroy the
Lives of Men, which is his Creation; Luke 7.5.
for the Evangelist says, The Son of man came not to destroy men's lives.

Obj. What then did the Apostle hint at, when he spoke of the Wisdom of the
World, the Wisdom of the Wise, and the Wisdom of Words?

To this it may be said, Act. 22.3.
That as Paul was brought up at the Feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to
the perfect manner of the Law of the Fathers; so doubtless many there were, who
through Education attained unto that, which Paul in his converted state terms
to be the Wisdom of this World, etc. From whence it may be concluded, that he
hinted at those things, which in that day were given forth by the Scribes and
Pharisees, and other Disputers against that divine Appearance, whereby Paul was
made a Minister of the Everlasting Gospel; which things, so given forth, we do
not take to be the natural Effects of that Wisdom, Knowledge or Understanding,
given unto them as creatures; but rather (being in the state of Degeneration)
as the Fruits of their Education and Acquired Parts, wherewith being not
subject unto the Appearance of Christ, they then became Opposers of the Truth.
Besides, as the word Flesh in Scripture is sometimes used not with relation to
a Carnal Body, but in a Metaphorical and Mystical sense, by way of opposition
to the Spirit of God; so are these words fleshly wisdom used, not with respect
to man as a creature, but by way of opposition to the Wisdom of God, that is
from above; and therefore is another thing, than that which man is endued
withal, as he is a part of God's Creation.

To conclude, Solomon in his day magnified Wisdom at a high rate (as the
Scripture testifies, too large here to be inserted) who in his day, did
undoubtedly account it the sign of a just man, Pro. 10.30.
and therefore said. The mouth of the Just brings forth Wisdom. The Apostle
in his day did magnify Wisdom, exhorting the Saints to walk in Wisdom. Col.
4.5.
Christ the Son of God testified, Mat. 11.19.
Wisdom is justified of her Children.

These things considered, our desires are, that those who have true Wisdom may
prize it; that those who lack it may embrace the Counsel of the Apostle James,
Jam. 1.5.
and ask it of God, who gives liberally; and that those Fools, who despise
Wisdom, may come to have a sense of what Solomon spoke, when he thus said, How
long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity, and fools hate knowledge? turn
ye at my Reproof.

Sure we are, the Apostle's Writings encourages none to cry down Wisdom at the
rate it is of late, without distinction, exclaimed against by some; but rather
the contrary: for we find the Apostle Paul writing to the Colossians, thus to
say, Col. 1.9, 28.
We do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that you might be filled with
the Knowledge of his Will, in all Wisdom and spiritual Understanding: and
again thus, Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all
Wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

But this ignorance we doubt has happened unto many, not only from a Principle
of having their Eyes out unto man; 2 Timothy 3.15.
but also from a neglect to read the Scriptures of Truth, given forth by
inspiration, which (the Apostle says) are able to make thee Wise unto
Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus.

As to the word [Knowledge] this may be added, That in the want thereof in days
past, those who are escaped of the Nations set up their Graven-images,
according as Isaiah the Prophet testified, They have no knowledge, Isa. 45.20.
that set up the Wood of their Graven Images, and pray unto a God that cannot
save; Oh! that at this day there were no cause to take up a Lamentation, that
the want of Knowledge is the cause that many have appeared ready to exalt man,
to have an eye to men, and (in neglect of that heavenly Gift which is given
unto Mankind) to bow in their Hearts unto Men, as having a dependency on the
Dictates, Prescriptions, Orders, and Outward Rules of Man: this under the
Dispensation of the Gospel of Christ, we take to be as great a falling away
from the Truth, as the setting up of a graven image (through the want of
Knowledge) was under the Law; and that at this day the words of the Prophet are
again fulfilling, Hos. 4.6.
My People are destroyed for lack of Knowledge; because thou have rejected
Knowledge, I will also reject thee.

It Is now needful to signify the occasion on which the Apostle Paul says,
that Knowledge puffs up.

1 Cor. 8.1. Now as touching things offered unto Idols, we know, that we have
all Knowledge; Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth. And further in the
same chap. ver. 10, 11. If any man see thee, which have Knowledge, sit at meat
in the Idols Temple, shall not the Conscience of him which is weak be emboldned
to eat those things which are offered unto Idols? and through thy knowledge
shall the weak Brother perish.

In this Chapter the Apostle Paul was a Reproof to such as (abounding in
Knowledge, and clearly seeing, that to put a difference between Meat offered
unto Idols, and that which was not, was but the fruit of weakness) had not a
regard unto the weak Consciences of their Brethren, and so he tells such,
Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth: From whence we cannot conclude,
that Paul meant strictly according as his words may be construed, no more than
he intended by his saying, Let your Women keep silence in the Church, that none
of them, though Members of the Church should prophecy when moved of God;
whenas in a few verses before, he tells the Church (which consisted of Women as
well as Men) They might all prophecy one by one; and the reason seems evident,
because the Knowledge which the Apostle seems to hint at, was a Knowledge
sprung from a growth in the Truth, that the weak had not attained unto; which
may be taken to be signified in these words of the said Chapter, We know that
we all have knowledge; howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge; for
some with Conscience of the Idol unto this hour eat it, as a thing offered unto
an Idol, and their conscience being weak, is defiled.

All which being considered, the Mind of the Apostle writing those words, viz.
Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth, may be taken to be this, that
though they had Knowledge, yet they should not have their Eye so much to that,
as to exercise their Liberty to the offense of any that were weak, lest the
Enemy to true Knowledge should interpose, and puff them up, so as not to
condescend through Charity, for the sake of a weak Brother.

It Is the work of the Enemy of man's Soul to puff up; but the Word of Knowledge
is one of the Gifts, 1 Cor. 12.7, 8.
which through the manifestation of the Spirit, are given unto every man to
profit withal; and therefore I conclude, that the Apostle writing unto the
Philippians, thus expressed himself, Phil. 1.9, 10.
I pray that your love may abound yet more and more in Knowledge, and in all
Judgment; that ye may approve things that are excellent; that ye may be
sincere, and without offense. From whence it may reasonably be concluded, that
the contrary Fruits, viz. things that are contemptible, and vile, insincere and
offensive, spring through the Want of that Love which abounds in Knowledge.

Obj. By this discourse you seem to exalt Knowledge as an excellent thing; See
an Epistle evidencing the Qualifications of such whom Satan makes use of to
rend and divide the Church of Christ, being contained in the first Part of the
Christian-Quaker.
How comes it then to pass, that diverse amongst you (called Quakers) have
preached reflectingly on such as are endued with knowledge above many of their
Brethren, as if their Religion were in their Heads, and not in their hearts;
telling us, That the Tree of Knowledge was not good for Food; and not only so,
but have appeared in such an invective Spirit against Reason also, without
distinction, that in your public Meeting, this imperative Expression has been
uttered, Away with all Reasoning.

Ans. It Is very true: However, that does not prove, that all such Expressions
are according to the Truth: Peoples tongues are their own, and we cannot use
Violence to prevent any from delivering that which they may pretend they have
to say; and therefore for the clearing of the Truth, in relation to the
aforesaid objection, we further add:

Pure Religion and undefiled is, to visit the Fatherless and the Widows, and to
keep unspotted of the World; wherein if our heads be not exercised, our hearts
will not bring forth the Fruit thereof.

As to to the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, though the Scriptures do not
positively declare, whether it was good for Food or no (as in itself,) yet it
does clearly import, that Adam's Sin (in eating of the Tree of Knowledge) was
the Sin of Rebellion, for that he was commanded not to eat thereof: A Father
may command his Child not to eat an Apple, and yet give him leave to eat of
other food, fitter at that season for him; if the Child should therein disobey
his Father, his rebellious eating would be no Argument to prove the Apple in
itself not good for food. These things being considered, it may reasonably be
concluded, that there is no Ground to assert, that the Tree of Knowledge of
Good and Evil was not good for Food, as in itself.

Besides, it has been much observed, that when the aforesaid doctrine has
been by some declared, it has been by way of Reflection on the Wisdom and
Knowledge, which some of the Publishers thereof account sensual and devilish
(though others have not thereby so intended) but therein they have manifested
their own Weakness, because that which is a Discoverer of Good and Evil (being
in it self good, as the Tree of Knowledge is) cannot be a proper Comparison or
Allusion to represent the thing that is devilish.

John the Evangelist testifies, This is life eternal, that they might know thee
the only true God, John 17.3.
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. And yet many of those who cry up Life,
are apt to cry down Knowledge without distinction, though it is evident that
Knowledge is the way to life.

These things being duly considered, we know not on what foot of Truth any one
can assert, that the Tree of Knowledge is not good for food, as in itself; and
that it can be a proper similitude, to represent any thing that is in
opposition to that Knowledge which is from above: But yet I would not be
understood to reflect on all that have used that expression, viz. The Tree of
Knowledge is not good for Food; because I question not but many have so expressed
themselves, not thereby to represent that Wisdom which is accounted Sensual,
and Devilish, but rather to show forth, that if we should feed upon, or admire
any excellent Qualification, or Endowment whatsoever, and not have the Eye of
our Mind chiefly unto the Giver, we might then come to a loss, even as Adam
did, through his Rebellion, in eating of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge.

CHAP. V. Touching Magistracy, and Obedience thereto.
ON this Subject it is necessary to treat, as it relates to the Magistracy and
People of England, whereof the people called Quakers are a part.

1. We acknowledge that we owe Obedience either Active or Passive unto this
Magistracy; and that such obedience is as well grounded on the Light of Christ
within, as warrantable from the Scriptures of Truth without; for when the
Magistrate does command Obedience unto any Law, which is agreeable to the Law
of God (as indeed no Laws of England according to the Constitution of its
Government, and those maxims which are declared for Law, ought to be contrary
thereto) then we ought to yield Active Obedience; and whilst the Magistrates
are in Execution of such Laws, they are (as occasion requires) Punishers of
those that do Evil, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
and a Praise unto them that do well; which is agreeable unto the testimony of
the Apostle's touching Magistracy, unto whom in such cases Active Obedience is
to be given for the Lord's sake.

Obj. You speak very well so far as you have limited your Obedience to Good
Laws; but what if those in power should make such Laws, which you account bad,
and not grounded on the Law of God, but directly against those whom you term
God's People; dare you then say that it is agreeable unto the Light of Christ
within, and Scriptures of Truth without, to yield Obedience in such Cases?

To this we answer, it is agreeable to the Light within, and Scriptures of Truth
without, that a Christian yield Passive Obedience, since for Conscience sake (
choosing rather to obey God than man, Act. 5.28, 29.
which was the Apostle's Case) he cannot yield Active Obedience: For we find
the Counsel of Christ to be on this wise; Resist not evil; Mat. 5.39.
but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other;
which clearly shows it is against the Doctrine of Christ to resist; and so
consequently we ought to be Passive; and therefore, since we have not at any
time pleaded for any other Light within, save the Light of Christ; it is as
well agreeable unto the Light of Christ within, as with the Counsel of Christ
in the Scriptures of truth without, that men, under the profession of
Christianity, put in practice that wholesome Counsel, which was given by Christ
the Son of God, whose ways are unchangeable, viz. Resist not evil.

Obj. This shows you principled against outward Wars, and Fightings, to work
your own deliverance from under oppressive Magistrates.

Ans. Yes verily; for so we (the People of God, and Children of Light) are
desiring to walk in the Light of the Lord, according as the Prophet said, Isa.
2.5.
O house of Jacob, come ye, let us walk in the Light of the Lord, when he spoke
of the last days, touching which the same Prophet thus prophesies, Isa. 2.4.
He shall judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke many people, and they shall
beat their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into pruning hooks: Nation
shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more.
This being spoken Prophetically of Christ, and his reign in the hearts of men,
shows that all outward Force and Wars is to be denied by the Members of his
Body (which is his Church,) to work their own Deliverance. A farther proof
whereof is manifested unto us by Christ himself, when he said unto Peter, Put
up thy sword into thy sheath; and therefore, in a sense of the Mercies of God
unto us, whom as his peculiar People he has chosen, to follow his Precepts and
Example: We can say, blessed be the Lord, many there are in this our day, who
by the peaceable Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, (that was led like a Lamb
dumb before the shearer) are retired in their Spirits unto the Lord, out of all
outward Warrings, and Fightings, resigned up unto him, in whom preservation is:
Knowing this, that the same occasion may be given in this our day to testify
as Paul did in his day, 2 Timothy 3.12.
viz. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution; and
so on this score are led by the Light of Christ, not to resist evil, lest they
should be found Opposers of that, which the Lord has thought good to suffer to
come upon his Heritage, for the Trial of their Faith and Patience, which is
much more precious than Gold. That now also our persuasion touching Government
in general might be fully known, we refer to the 3d part of the
Christian-Quaker, being a Treatise on that Subject.

CHAP. VI. Touching Respect of Persons, Plain Language, disuse of the word
Master, unless by a Servant to his Master; of Customs and Fashions of this
World; and of the Cross of Christ.
IT is not unknown, that the Outward Deportment of Friends in Truth, has
become as a Stumbling Block to many, concluding that our manner of Habit,
Gesture and Language, distinct from others, was either the Fruit of Pride, or
Ignorance, or else of both: and therefore on this occasion it was thought
needful to add something in relation to this Subject, wherein our intent is,
not to make an Apology for any Action, that in itself is really Rude,
Whimsical, or Imaginary; but rather to give in our testimony on behalf of our
selves, and all those who through Obedience unto the In-shinings of Christ's
Light in their Consciences, are made or making Partakers of the Virtue, and
Efficacy of the Blood of Christ, by which those whose Consciences are purified
from dead works, come to serve the living God in Newness of Life, and therein
to have their Conversations ordered aright, so as not to give any just Occasion
of Offense, either to Jew or Gentile, or to the Church of God, but that keeping
themselves unspotted of the world, nor yet fashioning themselves according to
their former lusts, they might not have whereof to glory, save in the Cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the World is crucified to them, and they unto
the World.

On the behalf of our selves, and all such, our Testimony now is, that when the
everlasting Light of our Lord Jesus (shining in every Conscience) was exalted
as that Spiritual appearance of the Son of God, which was to lead and guide
into all truth; we are witnesses, that it became a Discoverer, that man in his
fallen estate was puffed up in Pride, using many Unnecessary Attires, and
Complemental Expressions, to please and affect that mind, which was alienated
from God, and estranged from the Cross of Christ; neither did this Light only
make such a Discovery, but also prompted to bear a Testimony against the same,
by Example and Conversation; and therefore we did not dare to go after the vain
Fashions and Customs of this World; but rather had our eye unto that which was
incorruptible, viz. The ornament of a Meek and Quiet Spirit.

Neither did we dare to give any other than Plain Language to any single
Person, not only because it was according to the Propriety of Speech, but
because we were sensible, that there was a Will in Man, which was ready to hold
the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of Persons; and that this Will
is to be crossed, that so a Spirit of Pride, and Partiality might not be
nourished in any.

And on the same ground that we have been led into the use of Plain Language,
and Plain Habit, have we also been led not to use the word Master, unless unto
such as are really Masters, and unto whom (as Masters) Obedience was, or is due
from such as have or may use that Title; though some may have ignorantly
thought, that the words of Christ unto his Disciples (viz. neither be ye called
Masters) was our only ground.

Obj. Do you place Religion in Thee and Thou, and Not putting off your Hat, and
calling men by their proper Names, without adjoining the word Master, and going
plainer in your Apparel than some others may?

Ans. To this we answer, We place Religion in keeping our Consciences void of
Offense toward God; and if thy Conscience be convinced by the Light of Christ,
that the words Thee or Thou to a single person, is not only more proper than
You, but that which on the aforesaid consideration thou ought to use; and
that thou ought not to use the word Master, according to the custom of the
world, unto such an one as is not thy Master, then it becomes thee to bridle
thy Tongue, and express thy self according to such a Conviction, else thou
may only seem to be religious, when thy Religion is vain; and so likewise
may we say, that if thou have the like conviction with relation to the Putting
off thy Not, and going in Plain Apparel, thou ought so to do, lest the
contrary become Sin unto thee; since thou can not pretend, after such a
Conviction, that Freedom therein, which may stand with the Faith that is in our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Obj. We have observed, that your Friends, have in many particular respects,
behaved themselves so cross unto the Customs and Fashions of all others, as
that they have appeared not only Rude, but as if their Ignorance were so great,
as to conclude, that the taking up the Cross of Christ does consist in acting a
Cross unto all other Societies of People whatsoever.

To this we answer, If any have given just Occasion for this Objection, it is to
be lamented, because the great sign of taking up the Cross is, to deny Self,
according to the words of Christ, If any man will come after me, Mat 16.24.
let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me.

Besides, we do testify, the principle of Truth leads none to be Rude, either
in Word or Action; nor yet to cross the Customs and Fashions of other
Societies, which in themselves are Comely, Decent, and of Good Report.

The Apostle tells us, That the Preaching of the Cross is to them that perish,
1 Cor. 1.18.
foolishness; but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God.

An Earthly-Spirited man may become singular, and cross unto all others, and
yet not denying himself through the Operation of the Power of God, may therein
be an enemy to the Cross of Christ.

Another man may be made Partaker of the Power of God unto Salvation, and yet
not led by his Spirit to act cross unto all others, though through the denial
of Self, he may be truly exercised in the Cross of Christ; and therein acting
many things, which some (through Envy or want of right Understanding) may term
the Fruit of Rudeness and Ignorance, when not so in itself.

To conclude, therefore we say, it is Good for every one in all things to mind
the inward, divine and spiritual Teacher, that so none may run before that
Guide, and then doubtless such will be led to take up the Cross in denial of
Self, and not be active in any thing that may justly be termed Rude or
Ignorant, but in those things that are Comely, Decent and of Good Report.

CHP. VII. Touching Swearing.
THose unto whom the Lord has given a divine understanding, have declared,
that under the Dispensation of the Gospel of Christ, it is not agreeable to the
truth to Swear in any Case whatsoever.

This position is justifiable according to the Scriptures of Truth, and is not
disagreeable to the light within.

Matthew. 5.33, 34, 35, 36, 37. It Is thus said by Christ, Again, ye have heard
that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self,
but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths. But I say unto you, Swear not at
all; neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne; nor by the Earth, for it is his
Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King; Neither
shall thou swear by thy head, because thou caust not make one Hair white or
black; But let your Communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is more
than these, comes of evil.

These words of Christ are in themselves a positive prohibition, not only of
vain Oaths, but of all other whatsoever, which were accounted lawful; and
though some have objected, that vain Oaths were only forbidden by Christ, Heb.
6.16.
because the Author to the Hebrews thus writes, For men verily Swear by the
Greater, and an Oath for Confirmation is to them an End of all Strife; thence
inferring, that under the Gospel Dispensation, Oaths by way of testimony for
ending of Controversy were lawful; yet these words will not bear any such
inserence; for the words in themselves do only signify what was practiced by
men, but nothing is said in justification of that Practice, and if we peruse
the 13th and 17th verses of the same Chapter, 'twill thence appear, that the
Occasion whereon these words are written, was by way of Illustration or
Comparison, in relation to the promise which God made unto Abraham, and
confirmed by an Oath. Moreover, it is evident that Christ intended the
Prohibition of something, which was lawful; which could not be, if nothing be
prohibited save Vain Oaths, because such the Law allowed not.

Obj. On this Subject some may readily thus object. Do you believe that the
Light Within would have directed you to have denied the taking of an Oath,
before a Magistrate on any Occasion whatsoever, had the Scriptures been silent
in this case?

Ans. The Matter of Swearing (especially the Form thereof) as it relates to the
practice of the People of England, is but an Humane, Political Institution, not
justifiable by any Testimony given in the Scriptures of Truth, either under the
first or second Covenant, and introduced on this score, as supposing a greater
Dread might lie on the Consciences of Mankind, to Speak the Truth and Perform a
Covenant, when sworn so to do, than when not: But those who are guided by the
light of Christ Jesus, do know, that by this Light (which speaks Condemnation
and Judgment unto all False Witnesses, and Covenant-Breakers, when in truth
they have covenanted) their Consciences are bound to speak the Truth, and to
keep their Covenant, beyond what is possible by Thousands of Oaths; and
therefore from the Light of Christ within, they have a Testimony against such
Formal Proceedings, whereby the Credit of their Yea and Nay, seems to be called
in question; having this sense, that Oaths were originally introduced, not to
be a bond on the Children of Light (who being restored out of the fall, do keep
their Place and Habitation in the Unchangeable Truth and Light of
Righteousness) but rather for those, who being defiled, have or may make
Shipwreck of Faith and of a good Conscience; which seems clearly agreeing with
the Testimony of Chrysostom; "Juramentum intravit, cum malum accresceret, cum
homines frauds suas exercerent, cum omnia fundamenta aversa essent; Juramentum
originem suam accepit ex defectu Veritatis. An Oath entered when Evil increased,
when men uttered their deceits, when all foundations were overturned; An Oath
took its beginning from the Failing of Truth.

And though it is clearly manifested, that a Denial to swear in any case, is
agreeable unto the Manifestation of Christ's Light within, as other Truths held
forth are; yet I cannot but testify, that those whose Understandings have been
so enlightened, have always had a regard unto every Instrument, through which
the Conscience has been awakened, to close with that Appearance in themselves.

And doubtless, the Scriptures of Truth have been in this case so instrumental
unto many, as that a diligent enquiry at God's Witness, or Light Within, has
(through waiting upon the Lord) been made in this matter; and so the answer
from Christ's Light in the Conscience, has been agreeable to the express
Doctrine of Christ, which is so strictly laid down, as that no room is left for
the least Objection as is evident in these very words, Swear not at all; which
doctrine by the Apostle James is thus testified unto, But above all things, my
Brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any
other Oath; Jam. 5.12.
but let your Yea, be Yea; and your Nay, Nay; lest ye fall into Condemnation.

CHAP. VIII. Touching Tithes.
THe payment of Tithes, as a maintenance to that Priesthood, which we were led
to testify against at our first Convincement of the Truth, was generally
denied, as that which in Truth could not be owned, though the Claimers thereof
have pretended thereto, sometimes by Divine Right, and sometimes by Humane
Institution, and sometimes by both.

As to a claim by Divine Right, though they were so due under the first
Covenant, yet that cannot be convincingly urged from the Scriptures of Truth
under a Gospel Dispensation; for the Author to the Hebrews thus informs us,
They that are of the Sons of Levi, who receive the Office of the Priesthood,
have a Commandment to take Tithes of the People, according to the Law, Heb.
7.5. But verse 12. he thus says, The Priesthood being changed, there is made
of necessity a Change also of the Law. And verse the 18th of the same Chapter,
he thus says, There is verily a disannulling of the Commandment going before.
Which clearly evidences, that since the Law is changed, and the Commandment
disannulled (by which Tithes were paid) the payment thereof by virtue of that
Law cease, and so all claim thereto by Divine Right (since no
Gospel-institution can be quoted) cease also.

Moreover we find that Tertullian, who lived about two hundred years after
Christ, does thus write, (1 Apologetic. cap. 39.) Neque pretio ulla res Dei
constat: etiam siquod arcae genus est, non de oneraria summa quasi redemptae
religionis congregatur: modicum unusquisque stipem menstrua die, vel cum velit,
and si modo velit, and si modo possit, opponit; nam nemo compellitur, sed
sponte confert, haec quasi deposita pietatis sunt, That is, Neither is any
thing of God purchased with a Price; Also, if there be any kind of Treasury, it
is not gathered by a collection that is chargeable [or that may be imposed,] as
if it were the Price of a Ransomed Religion: every one lays by a moderate
stipend Monthly, or when he will, and if so be it please him, and if so be he
can; for no body is compelled, but bestows of his own accord, these are as it
were things committed in trust for Pious Uses.

Seldom, that great Antiquary of his time, also informs us in these words, "In
the mean time, further to justify what I affirm, take this of Epiphanius,
Bishop of Constance in Cyprus, that about the year CCCLXXX wrote against the
Heresies of the Primitive Times, when he tells us of the Tessaresdecatitae or
those which thought the holy Easter must be kept on the fourteenth Moon,
according to the Law given to the Jews for their Passcover, and that because
they apprehended, that the keeping it otherwise was subject to the Curse of the
Law, he says that (...) That is, They do all things, or agree generally with
the Church, saving that they were too much herein addicted to the Jewish
Custom; and in his Argument against them, he shows, that the Curse has not
reference only to the Passover, but also to Circumcision, to Tithes ((...)) to
Offerings, wherefore (as he goes on) if they escape one Curse by keeping their
Easter according to their Law of the Passover, they thrust them into many
other; for (says he) they shall find them also cursed that are not
Circumcised, and them cursed that pay not Tithes, and them cursed that offer
not at Jerusalem.

"Let any man now consider if this Bishop, that was least unacquainted with the
Customs of the Christian Church, understood not clearly that no Necessity or
known use of payment was amongst Christians in that time of Tithes, no more
than of Circumcision or Offering at Jerusalem: Does he not plainly reckon it as
a thing not only not in Christian use, but even equals it with what was
certainly abrogated? Is not his Objection shortly thus, Why do you not observe
Circumcision, and Tything, and Offerings also at Jerusalem, which are all
subject to the like curse? And because some kind of Offerings indeed were in
use among Christians, therefore in the Objection he providently ties them to
Jerusalem; but of Tything he speaks as general as of Circumcision, observe his
own Context, which I here give, that the able Reader's judgment may be free.
(...) that is, So that if they avoid one Curse, they shall fall under many
other; for such shall be also found Accursed as are Uncircumcised; such
Accursed as Tithe not, and they are also Accursed (in the Old Law) that offer
not at Jerusalem.

I now come to examine, Whether a Claim by Humane Institution be warrantable as
a reward to a Gospel-Minister.

To run through the many Institutions, and varieties of Charters, by which a
pretended Claim has been made thereto, would fill a large Volumn, and is not
much to the purpose on this Occasion; that therefore is passed over, and the
inquisitive Reader referred to Selden's History on that Subject, and the
statutes made on behalf of Tithes in the Reigns of Henry 8, Edward 6, Queen
Elizabeth, etc. and so proceed to manifest, whether there be any just Pretense
from the Scriptures of Truth to claim Tithes under a Gospel Dispensation, as a
proper Maintenance for a Gospel Ministry, by virtue of any humane institution.

The most pertinent part of Scripture that at present we remember to prove a
maintenance for a Gospel Ministry, is what Paul writes, 1. Cor. 9, from verse
3. to verse 16. on which this observation may be made.

That Paul pretended not to have any Power to claim carnal things by any Humane
Institution, neither is there any one word intimating that he had either Power
or Liberty to make use of Carnal things, unless from those unto whom he had
sown Spiritual; moreover, it is evident that Paul was so far from using that
Gospel-Power, which he had, that he accounted it a Reward unto him, that when
he preached the Gospel, he might make the Gospel of Christ without Charge.

Obj. But what if it please the supreme Powers to bestow on the National
Ministry Tithes? how prove you from the Scriptures, that those who freely pay
it, do ill, or that it is not lawful for them to receive it from such, and sue
for it by the law from others, who are not free to pay it?

Ans. We are so far from condemning all those who freely pay them, and not as
by constraint, that we look upon it to be the duty of all professing
Christianity to contribute toward the outward maintenance of such whom they
usually hear, and account to be the true Ministers of Christ, (though not
obliged thereto by Law) in case they have need; and if the Charity of any
should be such, as to bestow upon them one fifth part instead of a tenth, far
be it from us to condemn it; but the Testimony of Truth is against all those,
who under pretense of being Gospel Ministers, have received carnal things, from
any who give them not freely, but by virtue of humane institution.

And as to the other part of the Objection, viz. to prove it lawful to sue for
Tithes, when given by Law to a Gospel Ministry; it is time enough so to do,
when any one shall undertake to prove that it is agreeable to the Law of God to
make outward Laws to enforce a Contribution in any form or method whatsoever
for Maintenance of a Gospel Ministry.

Hitherto we have not understood, that any Pen has undertaken such a Proof,
and therefore no necessity to enlarge for disproof of that, which is neither
proved or pretended to be proveable, as we know.

However, lest any should think this premise a kind of a Shift, we shall add
thus much, that as the work of the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ is a
Spiritual Work, so a temporal Constitution is unsuitable for the Maintenance
thereof. 1 Cor. 9.14.
Paul testified, The Lord ordained that they which preached the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel.

We now desire the impartial Reader seriously to weigh and consider, whether
since God has ordained, that those who preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel, it can be justifiable in a Minister of the Gospel, instead of cleaving
to what God has ordained, to cleave to a humane Law, thereby to sue for Tithes
from those, who are so far from being Partakers of that Gospel, pretended to be
ministered, as that they disown the same.

To every enlightened eye it cannot but be plain, that a Maintenance so
obtained, is not a living of the Gospel, because as the ministry of the Gospel
is freely received, so it is freely given, and he that is exercised therein
reapeth no man's carual things, unless they be freely offered.

CAAP. IX. Touching Baptism.
It Is evident from the Scriptures of Truth, Mat. 1.12.
that the Baptism of water was the Ministration of John, who was sent a
Messenger, to prepare the way of Christ before him; and that though he was sent
to baptize with Water unto Repentance, yet he thus testified, in relation to
Christ; Mat. 3.11.
He that comes after me is mightier than I, whose Shoes I am not worthy to
bear; he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with Fire.

Now forasmuch as Christ himself was baptized by John, and after his
Resurrection exhorted his Disciples on this wise, Go ye therefore, and teach
all Nations, Mat. 28.19.
baptising them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you; and lo I
am with you unto the End of the World. It is concluded by many, that the
Baptism of Water ought also to continue unto the End of the World, as a
Gospel Ordinance, to be administered by those who are called into the Work of
the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ.

Ans. 1st. It does not appear from the recited Scripture, that the Disciples
were hereby commissionated to Baptize with Water; and though it may be urged,
that the Practice of Act. 8.38. Act. 10.47.
Philip to the Eunuch, and the words of Peter showed, that Christ intended the
Baptism of Water, and that that Baptism was to be administered by Gospel
Ministers for ever; yet that is no more an infallible Proof thereof, 1 Cor. 1.17.
than Paul saying, He was not sent to Baptize, is a proof that he was either no
Aposide, or that Christ gave no such Commission, Go teach all Nations,
baptising them, etc. because, if every one that was sent to teach, was also
sent to baptize, then Paul could not in truth have said, I was not sent to
baptize, if in reality he was commissioned to teach and preach; which none
under Christian-profession (as we know of at this day) questions.

Moreover we put this query to every enlightened impartial Reader, Whether there
be not cause to doubt, that the very Disciples themselves might not be as
remote from having a true Savor of the Meaning of Christ in these words,
[baptising them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost,] as some of Christ's Disciples Joh. 6.53. were in these his words,
[Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood, ye have no
life in you?] For Christ's meaning thereby was not, that the flesh did profit,
Joh. 6.61.
as is plain by these his words, It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh
profits nothing; the Words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they
are Life: Yet for want of true discerning what Christ meant by eating of his
Flesh, until he explained himself, many of his Disciples said, This is an hard
saying, who can hear it? Read John 6. from verse 47. to verse 64. But
notwithstanding we would not be understood positively to affirm, that Christ
intended not a Baptism of Water, Joh. 4.2.
as needful to be administered by some (by reason of the Weakness of the People)
for a season; because it is evident, that not only Christ's disciples before he
was Crucified (when it appears not that they had any Power to baptize with the
Spirit) did baptize; but also, that some after that time of his being
Crucified, Act. 8.16, 29, 36, 37.
were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; and yet they had not received the
holy Ghost: which being compared with what is written touching the Eunuch and
Philip, Act. 38.39.
who by the Spirit was bid to Go near and Join himself to the Eunuch's Chariot,
does clearly import, that Water baptism was used, as well after the Crucifying
of Christ, as before. But whether by virtue of any command from Christ so to
do, is yet the question, and uncertain from any positive Scripture. However,
suppose that the Baptism of Water was the Baptism intended by Christ in the
words, Go teach all Nations, baptising them, etc. it then seems naturally to
follow, that this was but a Confirmation of John's Ministry, and that (being a
Legal Administration) but for a season, and not to the End of the World: and
was not that baptism wherewith John testified, Luke 25.49. Act. 1.4. Act. 2.4.
Christ should baptize, which was with the holy Ghost and with Fire; especially
if we do but consider, that Christ was not yet ascended, after which the
promise of the Father was to be fulfilled, viz. the pouering forth of the holy
Ghost, which undoubtedly was the Baptism of the Spirit; and that every Baptism
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ was not that Baptism of the Spirit, as is
clearly signified, Act. 8.15, 16. Who when they were come down, prayed for
them, that they might receive the holy Ghost; for as yet he was fallen on one of
them, only they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus.

All which being duly weighed, it is rational to conclude, that the Baptism of
Water ought to end in time; and that these words, And lo I am with you unto the
End of the World, are no sufficient ground to believe, that the Baptism of
Water was thereby intended to continue as an Ordinance of God, unto the
dissolution of all things.

But could nor so much be said, as already is, to evidence that the continuance
thereof to the End of the World was not the meaning of Christ unto his
disciples, yet it may be affirmed, that the words themselves in the Greek
Tongue, if we compare Scripture with Scripture, will not hold forth such an
interpretation.

For the sentence, And lo I am with you always unto the End of the World is in
Greek thus expressed. (...) which may properly be rendered thus, And lo I am
with you every day, unto the Consummation of the Age. This interpretation being
compared with the words of Christ unto John, when he (being forbad by John to
be baptized by him) said, Suffer it to be so now; for thus it becomes us to
fulfill all Righteousness; clearly shows, that Christ did not by that Commission
intend a Continuation of that Administration unto the End of the World: but
rather, that as other Shadows, Types, Figures and Patterns of Heavenly Things
under the Law, were to have an End in Time; So the Baptism of Water (being a
Type of the Baptism by his Spirit) was also to have an End in Time; and this
interpretation is clearly evidenced from the Scripture itself to be according
to truth; for we find the Author to the Hebrews thus testifying, Heb. 9.24, 25,
26. Christ is not entered into the Holy Places made with Hands, which are the
Figures of the true; but into Heaven itself, now to appear in the Presence of
God for us; nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the High Priest
enters into the Holy Place every year with Blood of others; for then must he
often have suffered since the Foundation of the World; but now once in the end
of the world has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. On
this Scripture it is thus observed, that the time of Christ's appearing to put
away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself, is termed in the End of the World, and
so translated from the Greek words, (...), which may properly be translated in
the consummation of Ages; experience tells us, as well as the signification of
words, that these words are not so intelligibly translated, as they might,
since it now relates to time above sixteen hundred years past.

Now forasmuch as we find, that in this sentence, And lo, I am with you always,
unto the End of the World; the same greek words are rendered to signify the End
of the World, as is in the aforesaid quotation to the Hebrews, which related to
a time above sixteen hundred years past (saving only that the word [(...)] in
Matthew is the singular number, and [(...)] to the Hebrews the plural) there is
no reason to conclude, that Christ's Commission to Baptize, was intended to
continue as an Ordinance under the Gospel Dispensation, until the Consummation
of all things. And as a further Evidence that this interpretation is the very
Truth, it is to be observed, that the word [World] in this sentence, before
cited, viz. Since the Foundation of the World, is rendered in Greek not by the
same words as the word [World] in the two other sentences are, viz. [(...)]
(which may be truly rendered an Age, or the time of a man's life) but by the
word [(...)] (which properly signifies the world) viz. (...).

Could no more be said to render Christ's words in Matthew not sufficient
ground to practice Water Baptism at this day, as a Gospel-Ordinance, it were
sufficient to every impartial Reader, unto whom God has given Divine
Understanding in relation to this matter: But since we find, that after
Christ's Ascension it was used for a season, we think it necessary to add, that
our faith is, That the practice thereof was chiefly by way of Condescension to
those, who were VVeak, and not easily brought off from the Observation of
Outward Ordinances, to have their Eye unto Christ Jesus, the great Ordinance of
God unto Salvation; and this spirit of condescension seemed to be in Paul, when
he said, 1 Cor. 9.20, 21, 22.
Unto the Jews; I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are
under the Law, as under the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law;
to them that are without Law, as without Law (being not without Law to God, but
under the Law to Christ) that I might gain them that are without Law; to the
Weak I became as VVeak, that I might gain the Weak; I am made all things to all
men, that I might by all means save some; and this I do for the Gospel sake.
But to return:

It Is evident, that John testified concerning Christ and himself on this wise,
Joh. 3.30.
He must increase, but I must decrease; which (if the whole scope of the
Scriptures relating to Baptism be considered) seems clearly to hint, that
therein John spoke not with respect to his Person, but that administration of
Water Baptism, whereof he was a Minister. Moreover, we find the Apostle Paul
testifying, 1 Cor. 1.14, 15, 17.
I thank God, I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius, lest any should
say, I have baptized in my own Name; and I baptized also the house of
Stephanus; Besides I know not whether I baptized any other; for Christ sent me
not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. Which being compared with what he
writes unto the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
There is one Body, one Spirit, even as ye are called in one Hope of your
Calling; one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all; And with
what he writes to the Colossians, where Circumcision is equallised with
Baptism, Col. 2.11, 12.
its clear to every enlightened eye, that Paul was by the Spirit led to Exalt
One Only Baptism, which doubtless was the Baptism of the Spirit, unto which he
gave Testimony when he writ to the Corinthians on this wise; 1 Cor. 12.13.
For by one spirit are we all baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be Bond or Free; and have been all made to drink into one
Spirit. More might be written on this Subject from the Scriptures of Truth, to
evidence the matter intended, but at present we shall forbear further to
enlarge thereon,

CHAP. X. Touching the Supper of the Lord, with his Disciples the night before
he was betrayed.
FOrasmuch as the Children of Light amongst those called Quakers, have been
reputed Apostutised from the true Faith, and Disowners of Gospel Ordinances,
not only because (since they have believed in the sufficiency of God's Grace,
given by God, and inwardly received by them) they have not been found in the
Outward Practices of Water Baptism (of which in the last Chapter we have
already treated) but also for that they (as the Church of Christ) are not
principled to meet together at some certain appointed times and seasons, to
break Bread and drink Wine, as that which (according to the reputed institution
of Christ) they ought to do, in a more solemn manner, than at other times; and
then term such their eating and drinking the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, or
Communion and Participation of the Body and Blood of Christ. It is therefore
thought meet at this time to treat somewhat on this Subject, evidencing, that
the Doctrine published by Christ at his Last Supper is owned by us; and in
order thereunto it is thus observed, when the Disciples of Christ the Night
before he was betrayed, were eating the Passover with him, the Evangelist thus
declares: Luke 22.19, 20.
And he took Bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying,
This is my Body, which is given for you; this do in remembrance of me; Likewise
also the Cup after Supper, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood,
which is shed for you.

The aforesaid words, This do in remembrance of me; is the only sentence spoken
by Christ, whereof the Scripture makes mention, whereby the institution of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper (so called) may be pretended to be proved; from
which words it naturally follows, that Christ's Disciples were to do something,
which he then did, which undoubtedly was to give Thanks and break Bread (in
remembrance of him) and according to this Command, we believe, it is the duty of
every Christian, both in Eating and Drinking, to receive the same with thankful
hearts, and to be not only at such times and seasons, but at other times also,
in the remembrance of the Benefits, whereof the faithful are Partakers through
the death of Christ; and those who thus believe, and thus practice (which the
faithful People of God amongst those called Quakers do) own the Doctrine of
Christ at his Last Supper; and if we said no more, we have said enough to
evidence what we have undertaken to do, viz. That the Doctrine published by
Christ at his last Supper, is owned by us.

But since it is so, that diverse places of Scriptures have been taken by many
professing Christianity to signify, that the primitive Christians were found
in the practice of administering and receiving the Sacrament of the Supper (so
called,) it is further signified, what may be pretended to be said in favor
thereof after Christ ascended.

Acts 2. it appears, that after the pouring forth of the Holy Ghost, Peter
stood up, and preached unto the Jews, at which Sermon there were added unto the
Church about three thousand, touching whom verse the 42. it is thus said, And
they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in
Breaking of Bread, and in Prayers: No doubt but this is taken for a manifest
Proof of the use of the Sacrament of the Supper (so called) as practiced by the
Professors of Christianity at this day; but whether on sufficient ground is now
the question: for our parts we testify, it appears groundless to us; for verse
the 44th it is said, All that believed were together, and had all things common;
and verse the 46th thus, And they continuing daily with one accord in the
Temple, and breaking Bread from house to house, did eat their own meat with
gladness and singleness of heart, praising God. These Scriptures being duly
weighed clearly manifest, that as often as they did cat, they had all things
common, and praised God, and that here is no ground to believe, that the daily
Breaking of Bread, there spoken of, had a relation to daily, solemn, appointed
Meetings, wherein the Apostles did take bread, bless, break it, and distribute
it, under the notion of a Sign unto them, that they were made Partakers of the
Body of Christ, whereby the Soul is nourished; but rather that at those
Opportunities, their outward Bodies and Hunger were refreshed and satisfied;
which in the Apostle Paul's sense was not eating of the Lord's Supper, as is
manifest, 1 Cor. 11.20, 21, 22, 33, 34. Moreover, if we do but compare the
aforesaid Scriptures Acts 2.42, 46. with what is written Acts 6. from the
beginning to the 7th verse, it is rational to conclude, that in their daily
breaking bread from house to house, no other Institution, Ordinance, or
Sacrament was hinted at, than what was neglected toward the Grecian widows,
mentioned Acts 6.1. which Neglect occasioned a choice of seven Deacons, because
'twas not judged reasonable, that the Apostles should leave the Word of God,
and serve Tables; which service there hinted at, was doubtless a Ministration
of Outward Food, for the nourishment of the Outward Man, and not the
nourishment of the soul.

Acts 20.7. It Is thus said, And upon the first day of the week, when the
Disciples came together to break Bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to
depart on the morrow, and continued his speech until midnight; and in the
following verses it is signified, that when Paul came up again (from taking up a
young man, who, as Paul was long preaching, sunk down with sleep, and fell down
from the third loft, and was taken up dead) and had broken bread and eaten, and
talked a long time, even until break of day, he departed.

On this Scripture it may be observed, that no mention is made, that the
aforesaid Breaking of Bread was done in pursuance of any Institution made by
Christ at his Last Supper; nor yet that the end thereof was, that they might be
on that occasion, in a more solemn Commemoration of the Death of Christ, than
at other times, wherein they might refresh their outward man with Carnal food;
and therefore though I cannot but have so much Charity for the Disciples of
Christ, as to believe, that when they did so eat (as aforesaid) they were in
the remembrance of the Benefits through Christ's Death (as every true Christian
ought to be, and more especially whilst participating of his Mercies) yet the
Scriptures already named, seem no rational Proof of any such solemn Institution
made by Christ, which many under the Profession of Christianity pretend to have
practiced.

1 Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of
the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the
Body of Christ?

Considering the mind of the spirit through the Apostle in the very same
Epistle, we appeal unto such who are knowing in the Mysteries of God's Kingdom,
whether it is not unreasonable to take the Meaning of the Spirit to be, that
this had a Tendency to Encourage Outward Meetings, wherein Outward Bread ought
to be broken and communicated, as a Sign of being Partakers of Christ's Body,
or to prove any solemn Institution made by Christ, more than what may as well
be alleged from the words of John to be then instituted by Christ, when he
said, John 6.51, 56. I am the living Bread which comes down from heaven, if
any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; he that eats my Flesh, and
drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him. For we find the Apostle Paul
in the very next verse, thus signifying; For we being many, are one Bread and
one Body; for we are Partakers of that one Bread. This one bread whereof the
Apostle speaks, is not outward Bread, but Christ and his Church, dwelling each
in other, according to the aforesaid Testimony of Christ, He that eats my
Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him.

1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25, 26. Paul thus said, For I have received of the Lord that
which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night in which he
was betrayed, took Bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said,
Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of
me. After the same manner also he took the Cup, when he had supped, saying,
this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood; this do ye as often as ye drink it,
in remembrance of me; for as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye
do show the Lord's Death till he come.

This Scripture is taken as a pertinent Proof for the Administration of the
Sacrament of the Supper (so called) as a Gospel Ordinance.

The first thing needful to be considered, in order to the having a right
understanding of the mind of the Spirit through Paul in this matter is, the
occasion whereon 'twas written, which is signified from ver. 17. to 23. of the
same Chapter, from whence it appears, That the Corinthians came not together
for the better, but for the worse; for that when they came together, Paul heard
there were divisions amongst them, and that in eating, every one took before
the other his own supper, and that one was hungry, and another drunken, and
that this was not to eat the Lord's Supper; and then proceeds to relate, what
he had delivered unto them, as an evidence that their Practice was not to be
justified, or owned from any thing delivered unto them by him.

It Is now necessary to consider, what may, and what may not be inferred, as
pertinent to the matter in hand, from what Paul delivered to the Corinths.

It cannot be inferred that those who worthily did eat of that Bread, and drink
of that Cup, mentioned verses 24, 25. (which we will not deny to be outward)
were after the receiving thereof made Partakers of Christ's Body; for though
ver. 27. the Apostle thus says, Whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this
Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord;
yet he does not on this occasion say, that the Worthy Receiver is Partaker of
the Body of Christ; and why? but because that was not the declared end, what
then was the declared end? the end from Paul's words seems to be, to show the
Lord's death till he come, for verse 26. he thus says, For as often as ye eat
this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's death till he come; in
remembrance whereof man may be, and yet no Partaker of his Body: and as to
these words [till he come] they may reasonably be taken to relate to his coming
to man in Spirit; and if so, there is no pretense from Paul's words, that such
ought to continue in the aforesaid Practice, for the remembrance of Christ's
Death, who are witnesses of his coming in the spirit, by which (as living
members of his spiritual Body) they are attained unto the End, wherefore a
remembrance of his Death was accounted needful.

And as to these words, Whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of
the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord; it may
be said, that no command is herein contained to prove, that the Sacrament of
the Supper (so called) ought to be, or to have been practiced; but yet we
confess, that from these words it is Rational to conclude, That Paul had a
Sense, that some might take occasion to meet together to break Bread, and to
Drink; and forasmuch as the use thereof was abused, it might be a necessary
Caution in Paul, to signify, that the Unworthy Eaters were guilty of the Body
and Blood of Christ; because if they made Conscience thereof, (as doubtless
those who so practiced, would profess they did, even as some others made
Conscience of Observing a Day) the Abuse thereof could not but become Sin unto
them, by which the Just is Crucified: And therefore, Such might as Justly be
accounted Guilty of the Body, and Blood of Christ, as those; who having tasted
of the Good Word of God, were by their Falling away accounted Crucifyers of the
Son of God afresh, and Putters of him to open Shame; read Heb. 6.5, 6. And
though we have repeated the 23, 24, 25. Verses; yet they being chiefly a
Repetition of the Words of Christ already spoken to in this Chapter, we shall
say the less thereto; and at present, take notice only of these words therein
contained, viz. This do in Remembrance of me: Had these Words been omitted by
Luke, as they are by Matthew and Mark, on the same Occasion, there would be no
Pretense from the Scriptures of Truth, to call Christ's Breaking of Bread at
his Last Supper, an Ordinance of Christ, to continue for-ever.

Moreover, it is worthy our Observation, That John the Evangelist wholly omits
that Narration, given by Matthew, Mark, and Luke, John 13.
from whence the Sacrament of the Supper, (so called) is contended for; more
than to say, He rises from Supper: and yet does expressly unto his Disciples,
after Supper was ended, thus say; 4.13, 14, 15.
Ye call Me Master and Lord; and ye do well; for so I am: if I then, your Lord
and Master, have washed your Feet, ye ought also to wash one another Feet; for
I have given you an Example, that you should do as I have done to you.

These Things being the Things of God, ought to be weighed, John 5.
and pondered by his Spirit; and those who so do, will clearly discern, that
Christ by that Outward Action of washing the Disciples Feet, did not only show
unto his Disciples a Pattern of Humility, and an Example of Readiness to serve
one another in Love; but also, to figure forth unto them, the Necessity of
being Washed, Cleansed, and Purifyed in the Inward Man; and that, Otherwise
there is no having a Part in Christ: and this is clearly signified in the Words
of Christ unto Peter; Then comes he to Simon Peter; John 13.6, 7.
and Peter says unto him, Lord, Do thou wash my Feet? Jesus answered and
said, What I do, thou know not now; but thou shall know hereafter: Which
clearly shows, that there was a Spiritual Signification hinted at by Christ's
Outward Washing, for that Peter did know his Outward Washing; and therefore
said, Verse 8.
Thou shall never wash my Feet: Whereupon Jesus answered him thus; If I wash
thee not, Thou have no Part in me.

All which being duly weighed, it appears, that there is as much Ground at this
Day from the Scripture of Truth, to practice the Washing of one another Feet,
and call such a Practice, a Sacrament, to figure forth the Blood of Christ, in
which the Sins of those, who are quickened unto God, are washed away; as the
Eating of Bread, and Drinking of Wine, in Imitation of what was Practiced or
Commanded by Christ, the Night before he was Betrayed, may.

And now, on the Behalf of our Selves, and all the Children of Light, amongst
those called Quakers; may it at this Day be said, That though we are not found
in that Outward Practice of Washing one another Feet, as a Religious Exercise,
after that Outward Example, which was given by Christ unto his Disciples, the
Night before he was Betrayed, and enjoined as their Duty; nor yet are found in
the Practice of Appointing certain Times and Seasons, on purpose to eat Bread,
and drink Wine, as that which we ought (Religiously) to do in a more solemn
Manner, than at other times: Yet we can boldly say, Christ our Lord and Master,
speaks no more Condemnation unto us, as Persons, in that respect, neglecting
any thing that he has instituted for us to practice, than he does to many
Elders of the Church at this Day; who, Visiting the Sick, neglect to anoint
with Oil in the Name of the Lord: and to others, who being of the
Gentile-Stock, according to the Flesh, Do not abstain from eating Blood; and
yet in neither of these respects, Condemned; though expressly Exhorted to by the
Apostle; read Acts 15.20. James 5.14.

Moreover, it is to be considered, that though the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, (so called) is by some reputed to be Instituted by Christ, Exodus 12.13.
in the Room of the Passover, and to continue as an Ordinance forever; Heb.
9.10, 14.
even as Water Baptism is taken to be Instituted in the room of Circumcision;
yet both are groundless: For, though the Scripture Testifies, That the Feast of
the Passover was to be kept by an Ordinance forever; yet when the Time of
Reformation came, it ended, even as all those Outward Services and Ordinances,
which stood only in Meats, and Drinks, and diverse Washings, and Carnal
Ordinances, imposed until the Time of Reformation, did. Now, forasmuch as the
Time of Reformation, was the Time wherein Christ through the Eternal Spirit
offered himself without Spot unto God; we query, Whether after this Time of
Reformation, it can be consisting with the Spirit of Truth, for any one to
impose upon the People of the Lord, (or for the People of the Lord, though not
imposed upon) to practice such Ordinances, as consist in Outward Meats, Drinks,
and Washings, (as the Ordinances of Baptism, and Sacrament of the Supper, so
called, do) as needful, in order to the Salvation of Mankind? Since not only
the Author to the Hebrews testifies. That the like Ordinances under the First
Covenant had an End, when the Law was changed; but that Paul likewise exhorts
against the Use of Ordinances after the Commandment and Doctrines of Men, as
is largely declared to the Colossians, Chapt. 2.8, 14, 16. to the End? And,
Whether the Introducing thereof at this Day, is not a Building again the Things
that have been (according to the Doctrine of Truth) rejected?

To conclude; This is the Testimony of Truth, that is with us to give on this
Occasion; That we are not at this Day convinced in our Consciences, That there
is any better Ground for the Practice of Water Baptism, and Breaking of Outward
Bread, (as Ordinances under the Dispensation of the Gospel, in this our Day)
than the Commandments and Doctrines of Men; but yet are Witnesses, that Christ
is come in Spirit unto the Children of Light; and that, at the Hearing of his
Voice, they have opened the Door of their Hearts, Col. 3.1.
whereby they have Supped with him, and he with them, according to this
Testimony, Revel. 3.20. If any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will
come in to him, and will Sup with him, and he with me: and so, these being
Risen with Christ, seek those Things which are above; Romans 14.17.
knowing, that the Kingdom of God consists not in Meats, and in Drinks; but in
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost: And therefore, having received
an Earnest of that Life, which is Eternal, (through Faith in the Blood of
Christ, who was offered up a Sacrifice unto God, for the Redemption of Mankind)
do inwardly feel the Benefit of that Offering; and so, (being sensible, Heb. 9,
10. Chapters.
that the Flesh profits nothing) are made Partakers of that Quickening Spirit,
which was signified by Christ, John 6.53.
when he said; Except ye eat of the Flesh of the Son of Man, and Drink his
Blood, you have no Life in you: For though Christ so said, yet he did not
intend, that there could be a Profiting (as to the Growth of the Inward Man) by
Eating outward Flesh, no more than the Children of Light do at this Day
believe, that the Eating of the Outward Bread can nourish the Immortal Soul:
Joh. 6.63.
And therefore, Christ said; It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh
profits nothing.

CHAP. XI. Touching Justification and Salvation through Faith in Christ.
WHat the Scripture says, touching Justification and Salvation, we own; viz.
Romans 8.30.
That the Called of God are Justified; and that This Justification is freely by
his Grace, through the Redemption, Romans 3.24, 25.
that is in Jesus Christ, by Faith in his Blood, for the Remission of Sins that
are past; and that, Tit. 2.11.
Salvation is brought through the Grace of God, that has appeared unto all Men.

Object. This Sense of yours cannot be denied, because your Language agrees
with the Holy Scriptures: But the Question is, Whether your Meaning thereby is,
that you own a Justification of Persons, or a State of Salvation, attainable
through the Blood of Christ; not only without an Infusion of Righteousness, but
also by a Pardon of Sins, and accepting of Persons, as perfectly Righteous, at
the Tribunal of God; not for any Works wrought in them, or done by them; but
for Christ's sake: not by imputing the Act of Faith, or any pretended Light or
Principle within them, or any of their Evangelical Obedience to him, as their
Righteousness before God; but by Accepting and Imputing the Obedience and
Satisfaction of Christ for them, and to them? And, Whether or no, you do not
account, that Justification and Sanctification are all one, and the same thing,
because Sanctification is inseparably joined with Justification, (1 Cor. 6.11?)
which if you should, we cannot but take you therein to Err; because in
Justification God imputes the Righteousness of Christ to us, Romans 4.6, 8. But
in Sanctification the Spirit of God infuseth Grace into us, and enableth to the
Exercise thereof, Ezekiel. 36.27.

Answ. The Objection seems to be raised by such, as have put their Meanings on
the Scriptures of Truth; when in truth they cannot say, That by the Revelation
of the Spirit of God they have been led thereto: And therefore, such Meanings
may well be taken to be no other, than mere Private Interpretations, and not
that which is signified by the Holy Ghost. However, that our Sense, relating to
the Material Parts of the Objection, may be known, we thus say:

First, That Justification unto Life Eternal, (or a State of Salvation) is not
attainable, but through Faith in the Blood of Christ, or the Leadings of God's
Grace, that has appeared unto all Men; and that nothing, which we of our
selves are capable to perform, can in any wise be so Meritorious, as thereby to
render us worthy of that Justification, which all the Saints in Light are
attained unto, as absolutely necessary to the being made a Partaker of the
great Salvation of God. By these our words, Nothing which we of our selves are
capable to perform, our Meaning is not only, an Exclusion of all legal
Performances, which the Apostles, in their Epistles, plentifully hinted at; but
also, of all other Outward Duties and Performances, of what Nature and Kind
soever, that our Outward Man is of ability (without the Assistance of the
Spirit of God) to act, and bring forth.

And if any from these words in the Objection (viz. Wrought in them, Act of
Faith, Evangelical Obedience, etc.) shall conclude, that the very Works and
Actions, which by the Spirit of God we are enabled to bring forth, are of no
Advantage toward Eternal Salvation, but that it is through Faith alone
attainable: We then thus Answer, That the word Faith in the Scripture, may be
taken in a twofold sense; the one is a Faith that is not (without a further
growth) accompanied with the Salvation of God; and therefore cannot be the
Faith intended in the Objection: The other is Faith in the Blood of Christ, for
Remission of Sins; and this Faith is unto Salvation; and so must be that
intended in the Objection.

But then this inconsistency with Truth plainly appears in the Objection, viz.
A reliance on Faith, excluding Works wrought by the Spirit. The inconsistency
lies here: Wheresoever a lively Faith unto Salvation is manifested, it is
accompanied with Fruits of the Spirit, and Evangelical Obedience, which are as
inseparable each from other, as Sanctification and Justification in the
Objection are confessed to be. We shall now prove to evince against all Opposers,
the truth of what we have Asserted.

First, That there is a Faith, which, without a further growth, is not
accompanied with the Salvation of God, is evident from the words of Paul, Romans
13.11. For now is our Salvation nearer than when we believed: Which clearly
shows, that the Scripture informs us, of a Belief or Faith attained by such as
were not arrived unto (nor yet Witnesses of) the Salvation of God: They were
only come nearer unto it, than when they first believed, but not come at it.

And no doubt, but this Belief, or Faith, spoken of by the Apostle, was a Faith
on Christ; that is to say, That He was the Son of God, etc. For so to believe,
was the Work encouraged in the beginning, according as appears by the words of
Christ unto the multitude, John 6.29. This is the Work of God, that ye believe
on him whom he has sent. And this was said by Christ in Answer to this
Question, proposed to him by the Multitude, What shall we do, that we might
work the Works of God? Phil. 1.15, 16, 17, 18.
Besides, we find the Apostle rejoicing, That Christ was Preached, though by
some 'twas of Envy and Strife, and in Pretense: And no doubt his End was, that
the Sons of Men might come to believe, That Christ was the Son of God, and That
the Messiah, that was waited for, was come: Of whom there was an Expectation,
John 4.25.
That he should tell us all things. And so, when the Sons of Men, whether Jews
or Gentiles, were come so far, as to believe, That Christ was that Messiah,
that was to come; there was Ground of Hope, that they might in due time come to
Witness the Obedience of Faith unto Righteousness.

The Author to the Hebrews tells us, Heb. 12.2.
That Jesus is the Author and Finisher of our Faith. No doubt this was not a
Work done in a Moment, or Twinkling of an Eye: for though he is the Author and
Object of every true Christians Faith; yet we learn from the Holy Scriptures,
that such as believed, That Jesus was the Lord, stood in need of many Romans
13.13, 14. Heb. 10.23, 24.
Exhortations, Reproofs and Instructions; and that God made use of Instruments
to build them up in the most Holy Faith: And all this may be attributed unto
Christ, the Author thereof: And to what End? but that, as they had believed on
him, to be the Son of God, so they might come to grow from Strength to
Strength, from Grace to Grace, until they might be living Witnesses, not only
that he was the Author, and Object of their Faith; but also the Finisher
thereof unto Eternal Salvation.

Secondly, As before is signified, there is a Faith in the Blood of Christ for
Remission of Sins; and this Faith is unto Salvation; and wheresoever it is
manifested, it is accompanied with Fruits of the Spirit, and Evangelical
Obedience, which are as inseparable each from other, as Sanctification and
Justification in the Objection are confessed to be.

The Author to the Hebrews tells us, That Christ, the Son of God, became the
Author of Eternal Salvation, Heb. 5.9.
unto all them that Obey him. This shows, that Obedience unto Christ (which
undoubtedly is no other but Obedience of Faith) was a Qualification
accompanying such as were made Partakers of the Salvation of God. Who then dare
say, Such Obedience is of no Advantage unto those, who by the Spirit of our
Lord Jesus Christ are led thereunto?

Besides, we find that the same Author writes on this wise, But Beloved, Heb.
6.9, 10.
we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation,
though we thus speak; for God is not Unrighteous, to forget your Work, and
Labor of Love, which ye have showed toward his Name, in that ye have
Ministered to the Saints, and do Minister. This does not only show, that Good
Works accompany Salvation, but that there is a Recompense for the same, employed
in these words, For God is not Unrighteous, to forget your Work and Labor. Who
then dare say, That it is no advantage unto Salvation to those who are found
Exercising themselves by the Spirit of God, in things accompanying Salvation?
Especially since we sind the Apostle Paul, not only to Exhort us, To work out
our Salvation with Fear and Trembling; but expressly signifying, That Godly
Sorrow works Repentance to 2 Cor. 7.10.
Salvation, not to be Repented of.

Moreover, it is observable, that though the Author to the Hebrews tells us,
That without Faith it is impossible to please God; Heb. 11.6.
For (says he) he that comes to God, must believe that he is; yet he does not
rest here, as if that Faith were sufficient, but proceeding in the very same
Verse says, That he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. By which
it appears, that there is something, as an Act of Faith to be brought forth
through Man, besides resting in a bare Faith, that God is, and that for such
Act there is a Reward; which, if duly weighed, together with these
Scripture-citations [ Mat. 5.12, 6.1.10.41, 42.16.27. Luke 23.4. 1 Cor.
3.14.9.17. Col. 2.18. Heb. 10.35. John 2.8.] Nothing can then be more plain,
than that, those through whom Works (which are the Fruit of the Spirit of God,
or Acts springing through the Obedience of Faith) are brought forth, shall
receive a Reward for such Works.

And as to these words in the Objection, Not by Infusion of Righteousness, but
by Imputing the Obedience of Christ, Romans 5.19.
which we take to be grounded on the Apostles words, viz. As by one man's
Disobedience, many were made Sinners; so by the Obedience of One, shall many be
made Righteous. 2 Cor. 19.21.
And God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not Imputing their
Trespasses unto them; for he has made him to be Sin for us, who knew no Sin,
that we might be made the Righteousness of God in Him. We thus Answer:

That these words of the Apostle, viz. By the Obedience of one shall many be
made Righteous, do not show that any one of the Sons and Daughters of Men shall
be made Partakers of the Righteousness of God, whilst Sin is reigning in their
Mortal Bodies; the words will bear no such Consequence. And forasmuch as such,
who are ready to Object as aforesaid, have highly commended the Practice of
comparing Scripture with Scripture, that so the Truth may the more clearly
shine forth in its Beauty, we shall manifest thereby, that no such Meaning was
the Meaning of the Spirit: For in the 21th. Verse of the same Chapter it is thus
said, That as Sin has reigned unto Death, even so might Grace reign through
Righteousness unto Eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. This Reign of Sin
was in the Mortal Bodies of those, that through a breach of the Righteous Law
of God, became subject to Condemnation: But when Grace came to Reign, through
Righteousness unto Eternal Life, then the Virtue of the Blood of Christ was
witnessed, and The Mystery of Faith revealed, 1 Timothy 3.9.
that was held in a pure Conscience; which doubtless was not then a Defiled
Conscience: And therefore we may properly term the Blood of Christ (in which by
Faith Salvation is known) the Mystery through which man arrives unto Godliness;
notwithstanding the Mystery of Iniquity has wrought in some, to pretend
Salvation thereby, whilst (being in a State of Degeneration) their Consciences
are poluted, and Sin reigning in their Mortal Bodies. Then we may also say,
that the man of Sin was Dethroned. Then the Old Man with his Deeds was put off,
and the New Man (which as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.24.
After God is created in Righteousness, and True Holiness) was put on.

Again, it is observable, that the words, Not Imputing their Trespasses unto
them, do only argue, that their Trespasses were forgiven, as necessary to a
state of Reconciliation with their Maker; but does not at all hold forth, that
they could be in such a state, whilst either their former Sins were not
Forgiven, or whilst they were actually committing Sins and Trespasses anew,
after that they had been, through the Mercies of God, made Partakers of such
Forgiveness.

And as to these words of the Apostle, That we might be made the Righteousness
of God in him; we also say, it will not from thence follow, that Man can become
a Partaker of the Righteousness of God, whilst Sin is in Dominion in him: For
the State spoken of, is a State in Christ. Now the Testimony of the Apostle in
the very same Chapter, Verse the 17th. is on this wise, If any man be in
Christ, he is a new Creature, old things are past away, all things are become
new. And though this New State, was a State wherein Man was Freely Justified by
Grace, and brought into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, and was
Redeemed from under the Law, which consisted in Carnal Ordinances, that made
not the Comers thereunto Perfect, Heb. 7.19.
as pertaining unto the Conscience, though the bringing in of a better Hope
did; yet notwithstanding, we do not find any ground to believe, that the
Liberty and Freedom, man was thereby brought into, was such a State, wherein he
was not to be subject to a Law: Romans 3.26.
For the free Justification of Christ, was to extend unto these, who believed
in him. And in that State the Works of the Law were excluded; so that there was
no room for any to boast therein.

But then the Manner of that Exclusion (so that no man should boast) was by the
Law of Faith. Romans 3.27.
Now, where a Law is, it must necessarily follow, that Obedience is due: and
whenso ever that Debt cease, the Law then becomes void.

But who so Impious, to declare a Principle so Unrighteous, as has a tendency
to make this Law of Faith void? Charity obliges us to suppose, that no
Christian-professor, would wittingly thus do: But yet we cannot but say, that
so great Darkness has seemed to over-shadow some, as that under the Notion of
Christ's Righteousness imputed to Sinners, it is to be feared, that many have
indulged such a Liberty, as little to regard the Counsel of the postle, when he
said, Work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling; as if Salvation were to
be obtained by an Historical Faith, excluding all sorts of Works as unnecessary
thereto, and that a little Religion in the Head, might stead a man more, than a
great deal in the Heart; for where an Application of Christ's Righteousness is
made by any person whatsoever, in order to the Healing of that Wound, which
(through the Temptations of the grand Enemy of the Soul) man has received (if
there be not according to the counsel of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 7.10.
A Sorrow unto Repentance never to be repented of) there it is undoubtedly
falsely applied; the aforesaid Sorrow cannot rightly attend the Creature, in his
lost estate and condition; but, First, Through a sense of the prevalency of
Satan by his Temptation: Secondly, Through bearing the Righteous Condemnation
of the Lord, upon the Transgressing nature, that so through Judgment the Mercy
of the Lord may be Witnessed; and then, when the Creature comes to be made
Partaker of the Mercy of the Lord, through a sense of his Failing, a real
Sorrow for the same, and bearing in Patience the Righteous Condemnation of God,
than the Burden of Sin may be removed, and the Creature witness a State of
Restoration.

These things lead us to consider, How it comes to pass, that people professing
Christianity, and owning the Scriptures of Truth (and agreeing in Principles,
termed Fundamental, whilst they keep to the Language thereof) should thus
Disagree?

To this we say, That to the enlightened Eye it is plain, especially in the
Matters whereof we are now treating: and that it may be so to others, we
desire, that the following Notations may be considered.

First, The Apostle Peter tells us, That no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any
private Interpretation; 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
that is, it ought not to be interpreted, but by the Holy Ghost, through whose
Motion it was given forth; and yet so great is the Curiosity of Men, that they
will be concerning themselves, to put Meanings on the Scriptures of Truth,
though the words themselves will not warrant the same, nor the Interpreters in
truth Affirm, That such their Meanings are through the Revelation of the Spirit.

Secondly, There is a Proneness in Man, to avoid the Cross of Christ, and
instead of Entering in at a narrow Gate, to make their Passage into the Kingdom
of Heaven, as broad as their sensual Wisdom will admit.

Thirdly, Though the Language of the Apostle Paul and the Apostle James be in
substance one, yet the Manner of Expressing themselves seems Contradictory to
such, whom the Lord has not endued with the Knowledge of the Mysteries of his
Kingdom; and such a spirit of discerning, as to see the Occasions on which they
Writ.

The occasion of these differing Apprehensions being thus Discovered, it is now
needful to sum up the whole matter, and from thence to take occasion to remove
(so far as in us lies) the Misunderstanding of the Words of the aforesaid
Apostles; and in order thereto we thus say, This Discourse, touching
Justification and Salvation, may be Reduced to this. First, That some
professing Christianity, are at least doubtful, that others under the like
Profession pretend to a State of Justification, and Salvation, through the
Imputation of Chri'sts Righteousness, whilst they are continuing in their
Sins; and not only so, but that No Works wrought in us (though by the Spirit of
Christ it self) are of any Advantage to the Arriving unto the State of
Justification and Salvation. Secondly, That others under the same Profession of
Christianity, are Jealous, That the Principles which some hold forth, have a
tendency to Introduce a Righteousness of our own, as Meritorious to Eternal
Salvation; which occasions us to Refer the Reader to a part of an Objection,
raised in the Third Chapter of this Treatise, pages 15. and 16. and to the
Answer thereto, pages 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. for that we account it, a very proper
Conclusion to this Chapter, in Order to the further clearing of the Truth, and
dividing the Word aright, though written on another Occasion.

That part of the Objection aforesaid signified of, to be proper on this
Occasion, is as follows.

" Though the Appostle Testifies, That the Blood of Christ Cleanses from all
Sin, yet this has been Interpreted to be only from the Guilt, and not from the
Act of all Sin, so as to cease therefrom, whilst on this side the Grave; which
doubtless was the Reason, wherefore we sind these Testimonies Recorded in the
Holy Scriptures, Ephesians. 2.8, 9.
By Grace ye are saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
Gift of God; not of Works, lest any Man should boast; (thereby Implying, as if
Salvation through Faith might be Obtained, though Good Works were wanting: And
so consequently Sin committed instead thereof, since it is irrational to
conclude, that whilst Man is in the Body, he can cease from working both Good
and Evil) In many things we offend all. If we say, James 3.2. John 1.8.
we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us.

To conclude this Chapter, as we have already referred the Reader to view over
the Answer (contained in pages 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.) to the above cited Part of
an Objection, so we now entreat him so to do; and if it may be instrumental to
open the Understandings of any, so as rightly to distinguish Truth from Error,
we then shall therein have our End.

AN Appendix, manifesting some Fruits of Apostasy or Innovation.
FOrasmuch as the Title Page of this Second Part, may beget in the Reader an
Expectation, of some further Discovery of Apostasy and Innovation, since in
this Part hitherto, little thereof has been Manifested; We therefore thought
meet, to Add the Substance of an Answer, given by some Friends of Bristol to
the Paper mentioned in other Parts of the Christian Quaker, to be given forth
by sixty six Persons, that is to say, by Charles Marshal, and sixty five more,
from Ellis Hookes's Chamber in London, the Twelfth of the 4th. Month, 1677.
which now follows.

We whose Names are here unto Subscribed, do Testify, that on the Sixteenth day
of the Fifth Month 1677. we were present in a Meeting (usually held in the City
of Bristol, for the taking Care of the Poor, and promoting of other Christian
Duties) when a Paper Subscribed by Sixty Six Persons, and Dated from a Metting,
held at Ellis Hooks his Chamber in London, the Twelfth of the Fourth Month,
1677. was there Read, and therein John Story and John Wilkinson are Reproved,
and Judged in these Words, viz. We do hereby Reprove and Judge, that Jealous,
Rending, and Separating Spirit, and them (meaning John Story and John
Wilkinson) and their Separate Company, as being in that Spirit of Separation,
and that by the Power and Spirit of our God: and we warn all to whom this
Comes, to beware of the said John Story, and John Wilkinson, whose way at
present is not the way of Peace, etc.

The aforesaid Judgment we do now Declare, that we do not own to be Righteous;
nor yet dare we deny the said John Story and John Wilkinson, lest we sin
against God, and despise those unto whom a Dispensation of the Gospel of Christ
is committed, especially since that the aforementioned Paper does sufficiently
manifest to our Consciences, That the Spirit of God did not move in the hearts
of the sixty six Subscribers, to give forth the same, though the Name of the
Lord, his Power and Spirit is frequently made mention of in the said Paper, and
that this is so, we thus manifest.

First, The great Crime against John Story and John Wilkinson, is for that (as
report says) They have been instruments to set up, or at least encourage a
Separate Mens-Meeting in the North, wherein the outward affairs of the Church
are managed, and so consequently is esteemed, besides that Form of Government
which is contended for.

Now it does not appear to us, from the said Paper, that the Meeting, from
which the aforesaid Paper was given forth, was a Meeting held according to the
Form of Government contended for; and so we are dissatisfied, that the Actions
of that Meeting are Justifiable, by the Rule of those who oppose John Story and
John Wilkinson on the foot of the Separate-Meeting so called.

For it does not appear, that the aforementioned Meeting was the General
Meeting, by any thing therein contained; not being so much as Dated from
thence, nor yet within the time wherein it was appointed to be held; besides,
if the Paper did not prove that, yet by a Postscript thereto it appears, that
there were several Brethren, that had left the City before the said Meeting,
wherein the said Paper was Subscribed, and so (had it been within the appointed
time of the General-Meeting) it could (in the best sense) be but from a part of
the said Meeting.

The aforementioned Meeting, by the said Paper Appears not to be the second
day's weekly Meeting, for its Date is on the Third Day; and when any thing is
given forth, from that Meeting, it is usually Dated from the said Meeting.
Besides, we find that the Hands of many Ancient Laborers in the Gospel, and
the greatest part (by many) of the Body of the Elders and Ministering Friends,
dwelling in, and about the City of London, are not thereto Subscribed; and not
only so, but we are Credibly Informed, that though 'twas discoursed in the
Second Days Weekly Meeting, yet 'twas not unanimously Assented to therein: And
if so, it follows by natural Consequence, that it could not be the action of
the said Meeting, had it been Dated on that Day; and that this Expression in
the aforesaid Paper, viz. And blessed and sweet and very precious to our Souls,
is the Heavenly Unity of Life amongst us, wherein at this Meeting, the Lord our
God has Crowned us with Glory, Dominion, and Peace, cannot in Truth be spoken,
with respect to the aforesaid Second Days Weekly Meetings Unity, as to the
matter contained in the aforesaid Paper.

The aforementioned Meeting, cannot be reasonably supposed to be from the
Mens-Meeting of the City of London, for that the generality of the Members
thereof, have not their Hands thereto; neither is it said, Signed on behalf of
that Meeting, or any other settled Meeting in England, nor yet from it, or any
other such Meeting.

All which Considerations confirm us in this Persuasion, that the aforesaid
Paper was given forth from a Meeting held out of the Form of Government
contended for; and so, by their own Rule, ought to be disowned, by the Meetings
to whom it is directed.

Secondly, It appears, that the Sixty Six Subscribers in their Paper, have
given forth these Sentences, viz.

At this Meeting, the Lord our God has Crowned us with Glory, Dominion and
Peace; at this time (as on the like Occasions has been frequent with us) the
Care of the Peace and Welfare of the Churches of Christ came upon us. And are
your Servants for his (meaning Christ's) sake? By that Salt that we have in our
selves from the Lord, are we enabled to savor, between the Transformation of
the Enemy, and the Scruples of the Innocent: And as to be tender of one, so to
give Judgment against the other.

And truly, that which has encouraged us in this Epistle, is that good success
God has blessed our like endeavors in his power with.

We are Unanimously your Dear and Faithful Brethren, in the labor, travel,
tribulation, patience, hope and rejoicing in the Kingdom of Jesus our Lord.

On these last Six Sentences we thus Observe, that where they have Credit, it is
but too probable, that it may gain a Persuasion, or Belief, that the Sixty Six
Subscribers are Apostles, and so may become a means to obtain the better Credit
to their Paper: Should any thus be Persuaded, they therein would be Mistaken;
for three or four from the City of Bristol, who are well known to us, are not
Exercised in the work of the Ministry, besides others from other Countries and
Places.

Thirdly, We find in the said Paper these two following Sentences.

And forasmuch as it appears to us, that they will not come to us, nor near us
in the peaceable Truth, which we have frequently truly desired for their good;
but that they will go on in their Opposition, refusing to dissolve their
Separate-Company in the North, etc.

And because we are sensible that they have made an ill use of our Forbearance,
even to strengthen themselves in their Separation, etc.

On which, we thus Observe, That these two Sentences are assigned as a part of
those considerations; wherefore the Sixty Six Subscribers were (as they say)
constrained, after continued Waiting and Exhortation, slighted by them (meaning
John Wilkinson and John Story) more publicly to Reprove and Judge them in
these things, as by their Paper does plainly appear; which being duly
considered, it naturally follows, that if every one of the Sixty Six
Subscribers, have not frequently desired John Story and John Wilkinson to come
to them, they are then found in a manifest Untruth; but we are satisfied in our
Consciences, on good grounds, that several persons, who have Subscribed the
said Paper, have not so done.

But were it so, that the Sixty Six Subscribers had desired them to come to
them, and that those Sixty Six were such qualified Members in the Church of
Christ, as that none, on the score of Apostleship or Eldership, might have a
greater pretense of Power, to call John Wilkinson, and John Story before them;
yet we Affirm, that neither the Sixty Six Subscribers, nor any other Assembly
on Earth, have Power to give Judgment in such a case, other then for Contempt
of Authority, if they had any over them, and not a Judgment on the merit of the
Cause, though it were on the hearing of one part; and so much Justice does the
common practice both of Temporal and Spiritual Courts (so called) in England
show forth: But that which to us seems to Aggravate the Offense of the Sixty
Six Subscribers is this, John Story (being now with us) does positively Affirm,
That a great part of the Subscribers never spoke or sent to him about the
matter, for which he is now Judged; nor yet to John Wilkinson, as John Story
says, so far as he knows: And so, when we consider all Circumstances, we have
great cause to doubt, that not a few, but many of the Subscribers (if not all)
have given Judgment without a hearing of either Party, for that their Paper
does not Import, that the Judgment given is on the Hearing either of one or
both Parties convened before them. And as to the Meeting at Drawell (the Fame
whereof has come to our Ears) several accounts have been given of that
already, and a Judgment already past by some of the Sixty Six Subscribers, with
a Caution in the said Judgment, in these words:

And now Friends, in Gods Love, We desire you to Suppress all Papers of
Controversy, relating to this Difference, that the Minds of Friends be not
further Troubled and Defiled, nor this Controversy kept any longer Alive. And
we do warn all to have a care, that they be not lifted up, by reason of the
hurt that is come upon these men, nor yet Insult over them; for that spirit is
not of God.

And therefore we cannot reasonably suppose, that the Cause of the present
Judgment springs from any thing acted by them, before the said Meeting; but
rather from something since. And whereas it may be said, That John Wilkinson
and John Story, gave forth a Paper at Drawell, which since they Disown: This as
John Story says, is Wrong; and as Evidence thereto, says to this purpose,
That he owns the Paper as given forth: Yet that where any Sentence may admit of
more Constructions than one, the Giver Forth thereof ought to Interpret for
himself; and so says, That he still owns the same with that Interpretation, He
and John Wilkinson Give: And if the Paper will not bear that Interpretation
given by them, then let them be Judged.

Secondly, That it is not in the Power of any two or more Friends in England, to
Dissolve a meeting of other Friends, and therefore great Weakness to Assign
John Story's, and John Wilkinson's refusing to Dissolve a Meeting, as a
Consideration for so severe a Reproof and Judgment.

Thirdly, As to the word Forbearance, it seems unbecoming such Young Men in
Truth (if peradventure they are now in the Truth) as well as in Years (as some
of the sixty six Subscribers are known to be) to Write at the rate they have
done, touching such Ancient Brethren, Laborers in the Gospel; especially when
we consider, how credibly it has been reported to us, That John Story and John
Wilkinson as to their Doctrine and Conversation, have been even by some of
their Opposers, Accounted both Sound and Blameless.

We find that the said Paper is Directed to Men's Meetings, whom the Subscribers
Exhort, that if, notwithstanding their Christian Dealing, such Persons
persevere and go on in their separate Spirits, let Gods Truth be clear of them,
and Truth set over their Heads, according to that Blessed Order of the Gospel
of Christ settled among you.

To this we say, that we have not yet been Informed by any, that either John
Story, or John Wilkinson have been or are found in Opposition to any Order that
is settled amongst us in our Men's Meeting.

We have Discoursed John Story in our last Mens-Meeting, about the
Separate-Meeting, so called, in the North, and have had the view of that Paper,
which is accounted the Foundation of the said Meeting.

The words (as to us Appears) that their Opposers may most take notice of, in
the said Paper, to justify their Sense of John Story and John Wilkinson
therein, are these, viz. And if this be not amended for time to come, we do
Resolve, That neither they so Chosen by Us, nor we do trouble our selves no
further, with such that strive and contend, in taking upon them our Work, whom
we do not Employ about our Affairs, and Concerns; and if this must continue, we
hope to do our own Business in our several Respective Meetings in quietness,
and in the Order of Truth, according to the Gospel of Lise.

On this we Observe, that there is a Resolve not to Meet with them that Strive,
and Contend, and are not employed, etc. and in other parts of the Paper there
are Proposals for a Reuniting, which were not (as we are Informed) accepted;
but this does not amount to set up a Separate Meeting. We also Observe, that
Their Hope was to do their own business in their several, and respective
Meetings; this was not a Resolve so to do, or a setting up Another Meeting; but
a Hope, etc. yet so it is, that to this Day, there is no such Meeting, as was
then in their Eye or Hope, that we are Informed of: For (as we understand) they
meet not in their several respective Meetings to do business; but Friends from
their several and respective Meetings do meet (as we have been informed) at
their Ancient Monthly Meeting Place in Kendal, and so the aforesaid Paper
cannot, in our Apprehension, be construed according to Reason, to be the
Foundation of the Meeting, called a Separate Meeting: and so consequently John
Story being asked in our last Mens-Meeting whether he would disown it, Answered
to this Effect, That 'twould be unjust for him to Disown it, until he heard
Both Parties: For that would be no less than a Giving Judgment on the hearing
of one part only, which is Unrighteous; And further said, That he never
intended by the Subscription of his Name to the said Paper, to lay a Foundation
for a Separate Meeting; but rather looked upon the Paper, as a fit Means to
Reunite them: And that if any can offer more Christian Proposals for their
Re-uniting, he doubts not but he shall close therewith: And further said, that
he remembers not, That he ever was at any, or either of those Meetings
accounted a Separate Meeting; but positively says, He never advised to the
Erecting the same.

The Sixty Six Subscribers in their Paper, are found Accusing John Wilkinson,
and John Story to this Effect, viz.

That they have Evil Designs, and persevere in them by Word, Writing, and
Practice.

That they despise Heavenly Dignities.

That they set up, continue, and promote False and Pernicious Iealousies,
Murmurings, and Secret Smitings, and that thereby they are Darkened in their
Vnderfrandings.

That through the Power of the Enemy of the King of Righteousness His Peace,
they set up a kind of Standard of Separation, from that blessed Fellowship and
Communion, that the Churches of Christ sweetly possessed together; to the
Dishonor of God, His Truth, and People.

That they go on in Opposition, and Evil Smiting against the Faithful Brethren,
and Practice of the Church of Christ.

That the offering of their Gifts is not a Peace, but a Division-Offering.

That they are Obstinate, and Obdurate, and gone into Self-wil.

That they cast Tender Love behind their Backs.

Amongst the said Sixty Six Subscribers, we Read the Names of four Persons,
Inhabiting the City of Bristol, by which they became Accusers, since John
Story, and John Wilkinson were not before them, at any time as Judges in their
Cause; and so having been Persons, who at some times have Assembled with us in
the aforesaid Meetings, held for Relief of the Poor, etc. within the said City
of Bristol, where John Story, and John Wilkinson, have often published the
Gospel of Christ, for above twenty Years (to our knowledge,) they have been
desired, to appoint a Meeting to make forth their Accusations to John Story's
Face, that so, if the Accused be Guilty, it may be sufficient Proof of Matter
of Fact be manifest to us, who in that Case shall then account it our Duty, To
Disown the Accused also: But if they cannot prove Matter of Fact to render them
so Guilty, we may then justly expect the said Persons to own the Wrong they
have done them, by their False Accusation, and give Satisfaction for the same:
But they will not as yet Admit a Meeting for that end, before such Friends of
Truth, whereof one half may be Chosen by Us, and others Dissatisfied; though
they have liberty to Choose the other half themselves. Neither will they as yet
Admit a Hearing, before any Meeting, wherein the Witnesses to these Accusations
shall be Excluded from being Judges with other Friends: And so what Issue this
Matter may Admit amongst us, is at present uncertain, and whether this be
Christian-like, We Appeal to Gods Witness in all Consciences?

We Observe, that in the said Paper, the Subscribers Exhort Friends, To be
Zealous for the Lord, and to stand up in his Spirit and Power, for the Peace of
his Church; which Exhortation in it self is sound, and wholesome: But we are
very Jealous, that the said Paper has notwithstanding, given Life to a
Contentious Spirit. For on the Fifteenth Instant (being the first Day of the
Week) John Story came to our Meeting, and almost immediately after he had sat
down, there was one stood up (who, as we can prove, declared Unity with the
said Paper, given forth against John Wilkinson and John Story) and testified to
this Effect, The Trumpet of the Lord is sounded to Battle, and the War is
begun; and so Exhorted on this Wise, Come up to Battle, and help the Lord
against the Mighty; using also these Scripture Words, Curse ye Meroz.

And in the afternoon of the same day, in our public Assembly, Francis Lea
(whilst John Story was declaring the Word of Truth) stood up, and thus began:
If any thing he Revealed to another that sits by, let the First hold his
Peace, which was a clear Demonstration of his Hypocrisy; for that it is
publicly known, he Judges John Story out of Unity with the Church, and so
'twas altogether wrong in Fr. Lea to introduce his Discourse by a Scripture,
which if proper to be spoken in Order to the silencing of one declaring; yet it
ought to have been with Respect to one in Unity with the Church: But (as we
said) he ownes not John Story so to be; and so it may reasonably be concluded,
that his Hipocrisy was not only thereby made Manifest, but also (his Discourse
being Considered) that he had no Revelation to Declare from God, on that
Occasion to the People: But yet John Story (observing how he introduced his
Discourse, not as an open Opposer of his Words) did for the People's sakes,
and that he might Administer no occasion of Discord, give way, and in a few
words after, drew to a Conclusion; but Francis Lea's Discourse was such, both
Morning and Afternoon, as gave occasion both to Professors and Profane,
publicly to Manifest, that we are now Divided. Now whether this be a standing
up in the Power and Spirit of God, for the Peace of the Church of Christ, or a
Peace Offering, Let those who are Wise in Heart, Judge. But that which further
Manifested Francis Lea's Rudeness is this: After Francis Lea in the
Morning-Meeting, had ended his Declaration (wherein he laid down seeming
contradictory Assertions, viz. That Two Hundred and Fifty Princes and Renowned
Men in Israel were Revels and wicked Men, and yet also said to this Effect, as
if they were Blameless and Harmless) William Rogers stood up, and took up his
Words, and spoke thereon in the Words of Truth, and Sound Doctrine, that so the
People might not go away with a Misunderstanding, and not as an Opposer of any
Truth that Day Delivered, nor yet as an Opposer of Francis Lea, further than
Francis Lea's own words Opposed himself: And yet after William Rogers had
ended, Francis Lea (in a Rude manner) poured out Judgments against William
Rogers, calling him Rebel, and using that very Language, as was used to Elimas
the Sorcerer; and this is become a Common talk, amongst Professors and
Profane, in Country as well as City, which we and many Friends more do Account
the Fruit of great Malice, and Un-Christian-like Dealing: for we know not any
thing, wherein William Rogers has forfeited his Reputation as a Man or a
Christian.

These things Considered, and that also it is not made Appear to our
Consciences, that John Story and John Wilkinson are guilty of such Crimes, and
Offenses, as are laid to their Charge, (which if they were, we also should
disown them) we dare not (as we said before) own the said judgment to be
Righteous, nor yet deny the said John Wilkinson and John Story, lest we sin
against God, and despise those unto whom a Dispensation of the Gospel of Christ
is committed.

And now, our Counsel to the sixty six Subscribers is, that they mind the Peace
of the Churches of Christ, by Calling in their Paper; for we are well
satisfied, that their Paper is not given forth from the Motion of Gods Spirit;
and if any of the sixty six Subscribers, as men leaning upon others, have
asserted in the Name of the Lord (when the Lord has not spoken by them) and
that to Defame the Brethren, their Sin will Cry aloud in the Ears of the Lord
of Hosts.

Dated this 20th. of the 3d. Month, 1677. Thomas Gouldney, William Ford,
William Rogers.

POSTSCRIPT.
WE whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, do thus Testify, that though all
things are not so, within the compass of our Knowledge, or Remembrance, as to
Subscribe all that is in the above-written Paper; yet being also present in our
Mens-Meeting, where the first above Recited Paper against John Story and John
Wilkinson was Read, it is with us to give this Testimony, that we do not own
the Judgment against John Story and John Wilkinson, contained in the said
Recited Paper, neither are we in our Consciences convinced, that the said John
Story and John Wilkinson, have so behaved themselves in the Church of God, or
elsewhere, as in the aforesaid Recited Paper (as Consideration for the Judgment
against them) is Rehearsed.

To Friends Assembled at Ellis Hooks his Chamber, the 12th. of the 4th. Month,
1677. London. Cornelius Serjant, William Dawson, Thomas Watkins, And diverse
other Friends.



According to the aforesaid Direction, the Answer of the Friends of Bristol was
sent to London to be Communicated to the sixty six Subscribers, that met at
Ellis Hooks his Chamber, whereof Charles Marshal was one: and though several
General Meetings have since been, yet no general Reply thereto, is come to any
of their Hands, concerned in the aforesaid Answer; nor yet any Excommunication
for their so doing: But yet we must confess, that the Four Subscribers thereof
living in Bristol, took upon them to say something to one part thereof, to
which a Reply was made, manifesting at least their notorious Weakness, if so be
Charity may excuse them from willful Wickedness, for their replying in the
manner they did, and occasioning others to affirm whereof they knew not: And
forasmuch as no Rejoinder is come from them to the said Reply, we hope that the
Reason thereof is from a Convincement of their Error, in concerning themselves
as they have done. We also must confess, that Jasper Batt of Somersetshire, and
three other Subscribers to the said Paper from Ellis Hooks his Chamber, did
concern themselves to give Answer unto some other part thereof, and by their
Answer it Appears, that they cannot own the sense of Bristol Friends, in
Denying, that it came from the general Meeting: But were it so, that in reality
it came from them, no Doubt but the said Jasper Batt and his three Companions,
would have obtained from the next General Meeting, a Testimony to that purpose:
but no such Testimony or Approbation of the said Paper from Ellis Hooks his
Chamber Subscribed by Charles Marshal aad sixty five more, has to this Day
been given forth, as ever we could understand. We also Confess, that one other
Subscriber of the said Paper, writ something in Vindication thereof, by way of
Reply to diverse Friends in Wiltshire, who had given their Testimony against it
likewise: But further Testimony in Writing, in Vindication thereof against such
as have opposed it, we understand not. But yet ye must further Confess, that
Charles Marshal, by his late keeping on his Hat, when John Story has been in
Prayer, is no Token of his Repentance.

The Consideration of what is thus Observed, is some ground of reasonable Hope,
that Fifty six of the said sixty six Subscribers, are come to a Sense of their
Weakness, and that their Understandings are opened to behold their Error.

That now the Reader may have a little taste of that Spirit, in which Jasper
Batt and his three Companions Writ their Reply, we think meet to Note a part
thereof.

The said Jasper and his three Companions take notice of this Position,
contained in the Answer of Bristol Friends, to the said Paper Subscribed by
Charles Marshal and Sixty Five more.

Position of Bristol Friends, viz. Were it so that these Sixty Six were such
qualified Members in the Church of Christ, as that none on the Score of
Apostleship, or Eldership, might have a greater pretense of Power, to call John
Story and John Wilkinson before them; yet we Affirm, that neither the said
Sixty Six, nor any other Assembly on Earth, have Power to give Judgment in such
a Case, other than for Contempt of Authority, and not a judgment on the Merit
of the Cause, though it were on the Hearing of One Party.

Answered by Jasper Batt and his three Companions, viz. "Do you not show your
selves ignorant of the Scriptures, and of the Power and judgment given to the
Saints of the most High, and of the Anointing, by which the Saints did know,
and were to try the Spirits? And was this Trial to be without Judgment? Or,
were not the Saints to Judge? or was that Judgment, which they were to give,
only in Contempt? or whether did not they judge the Merits of the Cause, as
well as Contempt of Authority? Though we grant they did Judge Contempt of
Authority, which also is for Judgment, as you may Read both in Peter and Jude;
for we see there were such in those Days, as is now, Who did despise
Government, Presumptuous, Self-willed, they are not afraid to speak Evil of
Dignities, which have forsaken the right way, and gone astray, and so Wells
without Water, and Clouds that are carried with a Tempest, etc. Jude says,
These be they who separate themselves: Read Peter and Jude through, and let
those Scriptures be rightly applied, and see to whom they belong. And further,
did not Paul judge the Merits of the Cause, when he Wrote to them at Galatia,
and told them of being removed to another Gospel, and to be bewitched, for not
obeying the Truth? Did not he judge them for a Persuasion, that did not come
from him, that called them? And was not this a Judgment on the Merits of the
Cause? Did not he say, He that troubles you shall bear his Judgment, whosoever
he be? Did not he Judge Dissimulation, and some for not walking according to
the Truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.13, 14.? Did not Paul Judge Hymeneus and
Alexander, for putting away Faith and good Conscience, and Delivered them unto
Satan? Was not here a Judgment on the Merit of the Cause? And we further Query,
Have not they put away Faith and good Conscience, who Flee in time of
Persecution, Pay Tithes, and Countenance them that do? Which through Faith, and
for a good Conscience, Friends in the beginning were led to bear Testimony
against?

Our Observation on the aforesaid Position written by the Friends of Bristol;
and the Reply thereto, is this:

First, It Is impossible, that Queries can be a Positive Answer, to a Positive
Position.

Secondly, That whosoever peruses the Answer of Bristol-Friends, shall find,
that the words, Judgment in such a Case, relates to a Judgment given without a
Hearing; for that 'twas impossible John Story and John Wilkinson could be heard
in their Case, by those before whom they appeared not to state their Case: And
therefore, if Queries might be a proper Answer, yet those proposed as Answer,
are wholly Impertinent in this Case; because, though they seem grounded on the
Scriptures, to evidence a Judgment on the merit of a Cause, yet there is
nothing said in all those Queries intimating, that such a Judgment on the Merit
of the Cause, was without a Hearing: And as to the latter part of the Queries,
we cannot say, That Fleeing in time of Persecution, or Countenancing
Tythe-Payers, is a putting away Faith, and a Good Conscience in all that may so
do; for that may be the Fruit of Weakness, and Ignorance in some, at which God
may wink; and of Unfaithfulness in other-some: but whether it has been the
Fruit of Weakness, or Unfaithfulness in G. F. to be so great an Incourager in
these two Practices (touching which, peruse the 5th. Part of the
Christian-Quaker) we will not determine. However, we may conclude, that it must
be one of them, if such Practices are contrary (as they say) to the Testimony
in the beginning. For our Consciences are satisfied from sufficient Evidence,
that he has been largely Guilty in these Two Cases: And since we have cause to
believe, he is a Countenancer of this kind of Work. It Is admired by some, that
his Party are not more careful, than to bring forth such things, as so
evidently do cast a Line of Reflection on him, and them the Espousers of that
Cause, which we may take to be his (and that on sufficient ground, as from the
Fourth Part of the Christian-Quaker may appear) and not the Cause of Truth,
Especially when to reflect on such, as are not guilty thereof, as we take John
Story, and John Wilkinson to be; not only for that no proof has appeared to
the contrary, but also from their frequent Testimonies of their Innocence
therein.

We now come to say something in relation to the aforesaid Position, as it
relates to Judging the Merit of the Cause without a Hearing.

The reasonableness of the said Position, plainly appears from the Evidence of
the Light within, which teaches us to do to others, as we would be done by.
And doubtless, should any man accuse Jasper Batt, (one of these that Judged
John Story and John Wilkinson, without Hearing them speak for themselves) that
he went abroad Preaching; thereby occasioning sometimes Twenty Pound Fines,
sometimes Forty Pound Fines, to be imposed on the Hearers; and encouraging them
to be Valiant for the Truth, and to offer up all (whilst His Estate was well
secured out of the Persecutors Reach, or at least nothing to be found of his
own, to pay such his Fines) he would think John Story very ill employed, to
have a hand in giving forth a Public Testimony against him, to be Read in all
the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in England, before he had either Spoken or
Written to him, to know what he could Say for himself, that he might have
Opportunity to hush it up, by writing a Paper of Condemnation, if so be, he
were Guilty.

We cannot believe, that Jasper Batt has not done as bad as this, in Signing
with the Sixty Six, at Ellis Hooks his Chamber: And if the Case stated in his
Name, be not groundless, it is then notoriously wicked; but of that, Friends in
Sommerset-shire are able to speak more certainly, than we; for we are not
willing to Accuse on Report.

We now are sensible, that the said Jasper Batt, and his Three Companions
(having assumed the place of Judges) will not think our Argument deducible from
the Light within, sufficient to evidence their Ignorance and Weakness; no more,
than if they were Four Blind Priests, who neglecting the Heavenly Gift in
themselves, may seek a Justification of their Priestly Jurisdiction, from the
Scriptures without: And therefore, we think it needful to observe, somewhat
from the Scriptures of Truth, in relation to the Matter in hand. John 5.22.
it is said: For the Father judges no Man, but commits all Judgment to the
Son. Now, let us consider what the Son says, Verse the 30th. of the same
Chapter, Christ the Son says: I can of my Self do nothing; as I Hear, I Judge;
and my Judgment is Just, because I seek not mine own Will. We may now query,
Whether God has given unto Jasper Batt, and the Rest, who have Judged without
a Hearing, a greater and larger Commission as Judges, than to Christ, who
informs us, That as he Heard, he Judged? And, Whether amongst the Jews, more
Justice was not offered to Christ, when in his Favor 'twas said by Nicodemus,
John 7.31. Does our Law Judge any Man, before it hear him? Besides, we find
Christ exhorting his Disciples, Math. 7.1. Judge not, that ye be not Judged.
Romans 14.10. But, Why do thou Judge thy Brother? Why do thou set at Naught
thy Brother? Had these Scriptures been rightly applied, we firmly believe,
Jasper Batt and others would not have been found Judging, and setting at Naught
two such Ancient and Honorable Laborers in the Gospel, as John Wilkinson and
John Story have approved themselves to be.

But perhaps, Jasper Batt may tell us, That we are Unlearned, and do wrest the
Scriptures; and that Christ, and his Apostles did not mean, but that such Men
as he, might Judge such Men as John Story and John Wilkinson are, without a
Hearing: And perhaps, as a Reason, may thus say; Though the Lord was pleased to
send them forth, Commissionating them to Publish the Gospel of Christ,, and
that in that Service they have been made Instruments, to gather many into the
Knowledge, and Life of Christianity: Yet they are not now subject to George Fox
his Orders, and what he has given forth in the Motion of the Spirit of God.

If this Objection contains the Sense of Jasper Batt, with relation to a
Submission to G. F. then if Jasper Batt can be proved one, that is Disobedient
unto what G. F. has given forth, we hope Jasper Batt will honestly own his
Condemnation, and give forth a Paper thereof against himself, to go as far as
his Offense has been known, which doubtless is through the whole Nation; for
that the Judgment against, or Excommunication of John Story and John Wilkinson,
has been directed to be read in Monthly, Quarterly, and other Mens-Meetings.

That now which we have to offer, as convincing, to Jasper Batt in this Case;
and not only him, but to as many of the rest of the Sixty-Six Subscribers, as
are at Unity with G. F. is what G. F. has given forth in a Paper, directed to
Friends; which is on this wise:

Friends,
TO you All, this is the Word of the Lord; take heed of Judging one another,
and, Judge not one another, I command you in the Presence of the Lord. This is
the Word of the Lord to you, neither lay open one another Weakness, and
Nakedness, behind one another backs; for thou that do so, art one of Ham's
Family, which is under the Curse, but every one of you with the Light of
Christ, with which you are to see your selves, with it every one to Judge Self.
And in another place of the said paper, [So the Light is Judge] Besides, it is
to be observed, that in the said Paper, being but half a sheet, he often
speaks against Backbiting, and about thirty times makes mention of the Light;
though in a Paper lately given forth in Vindication of Prescriptions, (being
about a Sheet) he speaks almost as much to Justify Prescriptions. He that runs
may read the action of Jasper Batt, Charles Marshall, and others concerned in
giving forth the said Paper from Ellis Hooks his Chamber, cannot be Justified
without making G. F's. aforesaid Counsel void.

We now come to take notice of these Words in the before recited Answer, given
forth by Jasper Batt and his three companions; viz. We see there was such in
those days as is now, who did despise Government, Presumptions, self-willed,
they are not afraid to speak Evil of Dignities, which have forsaken the right
Way, and gone astray, and so Wells without Water, and Clouds that are carried
without a Tempest, etc. Jude says, These be they who separate themselves. Read
Peter and Jude through, and let these Scriptures be rightly applied, and see to
whom they belong.

To this we say, They would have manifested more plainness, and simplicity, if
they had informed those unto whom they writ, How to apply these Scriptures,
instead of bidding them, Read the Scriptures, and then rightly apply them. For
the great Question is, what is meant by words, Government and Dignities: but
since they are silent therein, it is rational for us to suppose on the whole
matter, that they mean the Sixty Six Subscribes whereof they are a part, since
the paper subscribed by them, in the original matter, occasioning this
discourse, and according to its Merit sufficiently despised.

And therefore, we think it needful to inform the Reader, That we cannot take
such Men, as Jasper Batt, and his Three Brethren are, (nor yet Charles
Marshall, Subscriber also amongst the Sixty-Six) to be the Dignities hinted at
by Peter and Jude. For all these, and the rest of the Sixty-Six Subscribers,
are by their Paper manifest, to have run in the very Way of Cain, by
persecuting the Brethren; and have appeared, as Raging Waves of the Sea,
foaming out their own Shame, by their hard Speeches, which are the very Marks,
and Fruits of those, who despise Government, according to the Scriptures, which
Jasper Batt, and his Three Brethren have directed us to peruse.

Besides, We doubt not but many of the said Sixty-Six Subscribers, speak Evil
of the things they know not, having Men's Persons in Admiration, because of
Advantage; which are some other Marks of such as Despised Government, and speak
Evil of Dignities.

Those things we leave to the Consideration of the impartial Reader; hoping,
that for the future, Jasper Batt will learn more modesty, than to account
himself a Governor, and Dignity, and that on that foot, he may think to rule
over such ancient and honorable Laborers in the Gospel of Christ, as John
Story and John Wilkinson have manifested themselves to be; whereof this Nation
yields many Living witnesses.

To conclude; Our earnest Desires are, that all Friends may continually abide
upon their Watch; that so for the future, none may be ensnared, through the
subtle Devices of Satan, to put their hands to the Unrighteous Testimonies of
others, against such Ancient and Faithful Laborers in the Gospel of Christ, as
keep their Place and Habitation in the Unchangeable Truth; nor yet slightly to
esteem of such, lest the Indignation of the Almighty break forth, and a Famine
of the Word of the Lord come upon them, that may so do; whilst those who are
Unskilful to divide the Word aright, ministering Death unto the Hearers, are
exalted: Which, though the Lord may permit for a season, as an Exercise upon
his Heritage; yet our Persuasion is, That he will have a Regard to those, who
in Faithfulness (sitting under their own Vine) wait upon him; so that, they
shall be able to distinguish, between the Precious, and the Vile, and through
the Word of God's Patience, be made Partakers of the Joy of his Salvation.

William Rogers, on Behalf of himself, and other Friends in Truth concerned.


The THIRD PART OF THE Christian-Quaker, Distinguished from the APOSTATE and
INNOVATOR.

MANIFESTING, That there is but two sorts of Government owned by the Children
of Light, or Christian-Quaker. One is, The Outward Government, under which we
Live, unto the Laws whereof we owe either Active or Passive Obedience, and
ought not by Outward Force to endeavor Deliverance from under such Laws as we
have or may term Oppressive.

The other is, the Inward Government of Christ (who alone is LORD, over the
Conscience) which is not represented by persons (visible by carnal eyes)
invested with Power from him to execute outward Laws, Prescriptions, Orders,
Edicts, or Decrees in an outward Form of Government, visible, as aforesaid.

And for the better Illustration of our Meaning, an Answer to a part of Robert
Barclay's Book of Government is Cited. To which is added, A Testimony given
forth in Print, in the Year 1660. by Isaac Penington the younger; being part of
a Discourse, Entitled, The Authority and Government which Christ excluded out
of his Church. Also, an Epistle written by Robert Barclay, as an Explanatory
Postscript to his Book of Government; together with some Observations
adjoined; manifesting the Shortness thereof to answer the End expected.

To which is added a Letter Written (as is pretended) by W. R. but Published by
R. B. together with a Paper termed, The Judgment of the Brethren, in a
Discourse had between R. B. and W. R. with Observations and Answer thereto.

By WILLIAM ROGERS, on behalf of himself and other Friends in Truth concerned.

Isa. 9.6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be upon his Shoulders; and his Name shall be called Wonderful
Counselor.

Isa. 2.4. And he shall Judge amongst the Nations, and shall rebuke many
People; and they shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears
into Pruning Hooks; Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither
shall they learn War any more.

Printed in the Year, 1680.

The THIRD PART OF THE Christian-Quaker Distinguished from the Apostate and
Innovator, etc.
THere are but two sorts of Government which become every Christian to own; The
one is Outward, the other Inward.

The Outward Government is represented by Visible Persons, invested with Power
to execute Outward Laws, visible by our carnal Eyes, and is suffered by
Almighty God, to be executed under variety of Forms, and diversity of Laws,
and for diverse ends, which we do not now pretend to be revealed to us; but yet
we believe it to be our duty either actively or passively to submit unto the
Outward Government, under which we live, without designing to work our own
deliverance (from under such Laws which we have or may account oppressive) by
outward Force or Violence, which is as much as is with us to say on this
occasion, with respect to Outward Government.

The Inward Government chiefly designed to be treated upon is, the Government
of Christ, which we do not believe to be represented by visible persons,
certainly known by outward Names, distinguished by outward marks and tokens,
and invested with Power from him to execute Outward Laws, in an Outward Form of
Government, visible by our Carnal Eyes, as aforesaid.

That the Government of Christ is an Inward Government, is evident from the
words of the Prophet Jeremiah; Jer. 31.31, 32, 33. I will make a New Covenant
with the house of Israel, etc. not according to the Covenant that I made with
your Fathers; but this shall be the Covenant that I will make, etc. After those
days, I will put my Law in their Inward Parts, and write it in their Hearts,
and will be their God, and they shall be my People; and they shall teach no
more every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, know the Lord;
for they shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest of them,
says the Lord. This we believe was spoken with respect to the Reign of Christ,
by his Spirit in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of Men, and clearly
shows, that the Laws of Christ's Government, under the new Covenant, are
written in the Hearts of his People, and therefore an Inward Government.

Objection, But if any shall object, That the words of the Prophet relate not
to those, who are of the Gentile Stock, of which Stock, according to the Flesh,
it may be said, that we are.

We thereto say, That the words of Paul do effectually answer that Objection,
Romans 10.12. There is no difference between the Jew and the Gentile; for the
same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him, Col. 3.9, 10, 11. Lie
not one to another, seeing that you have put off the Old Man with his deeds,
and have put on the New Man, which is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of
him that created him, where there is neither Gentile nor Jew, Circumcision nor
Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free; but Christ is all, and in
all. Many other Scriptures, both out of the Prophets and Apostles Writings,
might be quoted to evidence the matter intended.

We are yet sensible that this further Objection may be raised, Viz.

Objection, That neither the words of the Prophet, nor of the Apostle, cited by
us, make mention of Government over Jew or Gentile, but does show (as from the
scope of the Scripture appears) that the Apostle so writ to convince the Jews
of the difference between the Righteousness of the Law, and that of Faith, and
to show unto Believers ( whether Jews or Gentiles) that though some might
appear in a Voluntary Humility Worship Angels, intrude into those things they
had not seen, and be vainly puffed up in their fleshly minds, and not give all
Obedience unto the Head Christ, through whom alone there is an increase in the
increases of God; yet they were therein reproveable, as not being risen with
Christ; and further also to show that those who were dead with Christ from the
Rudiments of the world, ought not to be subject to (nor yet to touch, taste or
handle) such Ordinances, as were after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men.

To this Objection we answer, That though the word Government, is not expressly
mentioned; yet there are words in what is cited out of the Prophet Jeremiah,
importing the three material Objects of Government, viz. A Lawgiver, the Place
where the Law is to be found written, and the People for whom it is given.
Besides, from these words of Paul, viz. The same Lord over all, a Governor is
implied, viz. Christ Jesus our Lord, and so consequently, a Government over
that All. And from what hereafter follows, it will appear, that the End of this
Government is to lead into all Truth.

Moreover, it leads us to observe, That there are diverse true Marks, whereby
the Opposers of Christ's Government may be distinguished.

First, They are such as are in a Voluntary Humility.

Secondly, Such as Worship Angels, which may reasonably be taken to be a
Worshipping of some Messengers, whom God has sent, because the signification
of the word Angel, is a Messenger.

Thirdly, Such as intrude into those things they have not seen.

Fourthly, Such as are puffed up in their fleshly minds.

Fifthly, Such as give not all obedience unto the head Christ.

And lastly, Such as are Subject to Ordinances after the Commandments and
Doctrines of Men. And to be very plain for the clearing the Truth, we must give
this our Testimony; that we are really persuaded from what our Eyes and Ears
have been witnesses, that many of those amongst the People called Quakers, who
have Zealously contended for the Observation of Outward Rules and Orders, given
forth by One Man, bear all the aforesaid Marks: for whosoever they are that
pretend Zeal to promote, submit unto, and exercise themselves in other men's
lines made ready to their hands, and that on a pretended religious score, when
through the word of true Faith, they see it not their duty, or if they shall
pretend they do, and thereupon strive to enforce others to submit thereto
(there being no ground from the Scripture of Truth, or Light of Christ so to
strive) it naturaly follows, that the aforesaid Marks accompany such: and this
we confidently aver, that thorough the whole Scriptures of Truth there is not
one word from whence we may rationally expect, (and that according to the
meaning of the Spirit) that Christ has or will Commissionate any One Man, or
Men, to prescribe Outward Rules and Orders, relating to Faith or Discipline in
the Church, to be binding on the Consciences of the Subjects, of his Kingdom;
whether they should see it to be their duty, from the Law written in their
hearts, or no.

Besides, if we consider the nature of Christ's Kingdom and Government, it will
appear to be such unto which outward written Laws, visible by our carnal eyes,
and to be executed by perishing objects, according to an outward Magistratical;
or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, are wholly unsuitable; because Christ's Kingdom is
not of this world, but is an Everlasting Kingdom; and therefore it is said, That
of the increase of his Government there shall be no end, and though John in the
Revelations, Chap. 11. V. 15. gives this Testimony, That there were great
voices in heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms
of our Lord, and of his Christ. And he shall Reign forever and ever ( Isa.
61.11.) yet there is nothing said to signify that the manner of his Reign was
or should be otherwise then as before is described.

Moreover, if any Man or Men have or may pretend him, or themselves to be such
on Earth, on whom the weight of Christ's Government (which is Spiritual) is
laid, it is not like to have any Evidence in our Consciences.

First, Not only because we find no such Prophecy, or Promise in the Scriptures
of Truth; but also for that we rather find the contrary; for in Isa. 9.6. it is
thus said, And the Government shall be upon his shoulders, and his Name shall
be called wonderful Councellor, etc.

Secondly, Because it is wholly repugnant to the Light of Christ in our
Consciences, that the weight of a Government that is Spiritual and Everlasting
(the Laws whereof are written in the Heart) and wherein nothing but true
Judgment and Justice has been, is, and shall be executed for evermore, should
rest upon any Man or Men, as a Governor or Governors over others; since there
is no Man, nor Men but are subject through Temptation to Err, if they watch
not; and therefore we may well say, much less on any such one man (though
termed by some the great Apostle of Christ) whose Actions toward his Brethren
have been found injurious to them undeservedly, and reproachful to the Truth:
nor yet upon any such Assemblies, as the usual General Meeting (so termed
though improperly) of the People called Quakers is, because the Meeters have
usually consisted of Uncertain Numbers, of Uncertain Qualifyed Persons, that
take upon them so to assemble, whilst others beholding the Ill Consequences of
their Meeting, conscientiously forbear to join with them.

Thirdly, Because it is evident that the Disciples of Christ had their Eye so
much on his outward and bodily appearance as that Christ their Lord and Master
saw it meet to tell them in these words; Joh. 16.7. It is expedient for you,
that I go away; and when he so said, he did not then tell them (nor yet at any
time before or after) I will commissionate some Man, or Assembly of Men in my
Stead, that so you may have your Eye unto (and expect Written Orders from) him,
or them to walk by, and to lead you into all Truth; but John gives them a
Reason for his so saying (in these words; Joh. 16.7.) For if I go not away, the
Comforter will not come; but if I depart, I will send him unto you (meaning the
Spirit of Truth) which (as he promised) should abide with them for ever, and
should be in them; which undoubtedly was in order to the Exaltation of his
Government in the Heart, and that they might have their whole Dependency on the
Spirit of Truth, which (as before is signified) Christ promised should abide
with them forever. And so this may truly be termed that Everlasting, Unerring,
Unchangable Governor, unto which the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom owe
Obedience; And, why so? but because under it the Promise of Christ was, That
they should be guided into all Truth, according as is plainly signified from
these following words spoken by Christ himself; Joh. 16.13. I have yet many
things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now; Howbeit when the Spirit
of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth; for he shall not speak of
himself: But whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak. Here is no room
left for the Church of Christ to contend about Forms of Government, or who
shall be Governors, under Christ's Government; for if the Spirit that is in
us, and that is to remain with us forever, shall guide us into all Truth, then
our Dependency ought to be thereon; that so thereby we may be led into all
Truth, or else we cannot manifest our selves to be obedient Subjects unto
Christ, under his Government, that he is exalting in the Hearts of the Sons and
Daughters of Men. The consideration of these things leads us to give this
Testimony; That there is no ground either from the Scriptures of Truth without
us, or Light of Christ within us, to believe that any Christian Professor can
in Truth affirm; That there are Outward Prescriptions and Orders given forth by
the Spirit of God, through any one or more Mortal Men in this our Day, which
others ought to obey, and follow (of which more anon in answer to R.B's Book of
Government) whether they see it their Duty or no; and if they do not, may
therefore come under the Curse, and partake of the same Judgments from God,
which happened to Corah, Dathan and Abiram, for their Rebellion against Moses;
and though the sin of Corah, etc. has frequently in our Public Meetings for
Worship, been spoken of and intended (as we have taken it) to be as a proper
Citation to describe the state of such as on a Conscientious score cannot
submit unto the outward Orders of one man, yet we testify, that such sort of
insinuating and thretning language seems much more agreeable to the first
Covenant then the second, under which we are; and when countenanced, or spoken
by any, expecting such a submission, it then seems to savor of a spirit that
speaks of himself, and not what he has heard from the great Lord and Master
Jesus Christ: and so consequently from another spirit than that which Christ
promised he would send, for Christ's own words signify, He shall not speak of
himself.

Moreover, it is evident that Corah and his Company rebelled against Moses, who
was King in Jesuran and a Leader of Israel, and thorough whom the Lord gave
forth his Law to the People; but we know that none can according to truth, at
this Day, pretend that any other Governor is raised up amongst the Children of
Light, to be like unto Moses, whom we ought to hear in all things, save Christ
Jesus, who by his Spirit manifested in every Subject of his Kingdom, is thereby
become their Lawgiver, and whilst they are obedient thereunto, they may in
truth be reckoned to be of the number of those, that are in Christ Jesus;
because they may then truly be termed such as walk not after the flesh, but the
spirit, and to such (according to the Apostles Doctrine) there is no
Condemnation.

Objection. This Discourse touching Government, may occasion some to raise this
Objection; We understand that many called Quakers, do hold Monthly and
Quarterly-Meetings of Men, and also of Women, distinct from Men, about their
Church Affairs; and that these Meetings are reputed to be Established (on
certain days that ought not to be altered) by one man amongst them, that has
pretended, he was moved of God so to do; and that the same person has by his
Paper spread abroad in diverse parts of the Nation signified, that none but
loose spirits, and such as tend to looseness, pretend to set up a better way,
or to alter them to another day, for fear of Corruption in Observing a Day; and
that it is but from a corrupt spirit of darkness, which God will blast; and
that some call these Meetings the Government of Christ set up amongst them, and
established by the power of God, to take care of the Churches affairs; and that
true Judgment and Justice, which are the fruits of Christ's Government, may be
executed.

To this we answer, we confess there have been and yet may be, such Meetings;
but if any think they have been, or are established by any one man, or that
therein the Government of Christ is set up, any otherwise than as any Member or
Members of the Church may be Witnesses thereof in their Own Hearts, we are
sorry for such weakness.

However it gives us occasion to add this Testimony, That if we consult the
Scriptures of Truth, and Light of Christ, we have no Ground to believe, that
under the dispensation of the second Covenant, God has, or ever will move by
his Spirit in any Mortal Man or Men, to take upon him or them, so to appoint
certain days, for others to meet upon, to manage the outward Affairs of a
Christian Society, as that if any of that Society assent not thereto, or
endeavor to alter them to another day, then such may be Justly censured as men
of loose Spirits, or led by a corrupt Spirit of Darkness; for every Member of
such a Society, ought first to be fully persuaded in their own minds, in all
things relating to Faith or Discipline; and not to be Judging one another about
any thing wherein they may differ, when the matter it self springs from a
Conscientious Scruple, and not Obstinacy contrary to Knowledge; for from the
Holy Scriptures we learn, that that which is not of faith is sin; and that
there was the Day of Ignorance accompanied some, at which the Lord Winked. And
yet (to our Grief) we may say, that such a Day of gloominess and thick
Darkness, has overtaken some amongst the People called Quakers, who appear
zealous for some Outward Forms of Discipline, which they (as we take it)
foollishly imagine are established as by a Decree from Heaven, that they seem to
make void the Law of Charity and humane Society; and as if their Religion were
most Effectually demonstrated, by appearing in such a kind of Spirit, that
Christ reproved in his Disciples, when they asked him on this wise, Will thou
that we Command Fire to come down from Heaven and consume them, meaning the
Samaritans, that did not receive Christ, because his Face was, as though he
would go to Jerusalem.

To return again, we farther say, That whoever has given Occasion for such an
Objection to be raised, as aforesaid, it is to be doubted it sprange from one
that aspires to give Rules to others, whilst he will not be subject to the
same himself; for if it were not so, its very probable we might have escaped
the severe judgment of being guilty of Corahs sin, and that only because we
have endeavored to convince some, that that Namely, G. F.
one Person intended in the Objection, See the fourth and fifth Parts of the
Christian-Quaker.
has acted contrary to the outward Rules and Orders that he himself has
prescribed for others to walk by.

As to the word Established, we further add, That the word (as used in the
Objection) is disowned by us; for though the Children of God may be Instruments
in the hand of the Lord, to establish one another in the Faith of God's Elect,
yet it is not in their power, or of any one of them, positively and without
exception, to establish what ought to be believed and practiced, whether it
respect Doctrine, or Discipline: and if any one or more have atempted so to do,
it may Justly be said of such, that he or they have endeavored to invade
Christ's Prerogative.

Besides, we observe, That the Objection is made with respect to one man, which
to us seems as if in the Objectors sense, that one man amongst the People
called Quakers, had Power given him of God to establish an Outward Form,
wherein all God's People ought to walk (or else severely to be censured for
Rebellion) whether they see it their Christian Duty or not: but this we deny,
as that which may Justly be termed an Abomination, either so to endeavor, or
so to submit. Secondly, If we enquire, what is established? we know, if any
Answer be given to what by the Question we intend, it will be on this wise,
Certain Meetings to be held by the People called Quakers, or at least some of
them, on certain prefixed days. But if we ask, Who are the Meeters, that are to
make up the established Meetings? none can give such a certain Description, as,
that the Meeters may be certainly known; and therefore the use of the word
Established, applicable to outward Societies of People, so uncertain to be
known, or outwardly describable, seems to us vain and ridiculous.

By this discourse the Reader may gather, that we are remote from owning those
Meetings (mentioned in the last Objection, to be established) as a part of
Christ's Government, and as to their having any share as a Church in Church
Government, 'twill be time enough for us to answer when any shall pretend, that
they have manifested, that those uncertain qualifyed Persons, usually Assembled
in such Meetings, were then Members of the Church of Christ, and that as
Members thereof, they had right to style themselves, Church Governors.
However, we think it needful to signify, That the chief Ends (as we understood)
wherefore the said Meetings were assented to by many Friends, were to relieve
the Poor, and to perform other necessary Services relating to the Truth, and
Friends concerned therein, in which we thought our selves (and doubtless all
the Faithful with us) Servants one unto another, and not Masters, Governors,
or Rulers over one another; for that did not so much as enter into our Hearts:
But when we perceived that some Upstarts (that to us seemed to love
Pre-eminence, as Diotrephes did) looked upon themselves, as Somebody, from their
appearing (and being encouraged to appear) Members in such Meetings, and to lay
a stress on the prefixed Days for Meeting; affirming, that they were
Established by the Power of God, that Friends who were Heirs of the Power,
might come and take their Possessions therein; (a sort of Language not well
understood by such as are Endued with Wisdom from above) then many Friends
began to startle thereat, fearing that some (through Weakness and Blind Zeal)
would Idolize the same, and run into an indispensable Form, and endeavor to
bite and devour one another about Outward Things; and so at length some Friends
in Truth, moved to alter the Days of Meeting in some places, but others not
assenting thereto, Contention arose, and a Fire has been kindled about
Church Government, at so high a rate, as that Public Meeting Places, for the
Worship of God, have sometimes become mere Stages of Contention; and other
times the keeping on of Hats in Prayer by some, whilst others have been
uncovered, has become as an Ensign of divisions; the knowledge whereof being
no longer to be hid, has more vigorously occasioned the bringing forth of our
Treatise, Entitled the Christian-Quaker, distinguished from the Apostate and
Innovator, in five Parts (whereof this Treatise touching Government, is one)
that so all may now know, that Darkness is not so overshadowed, but that the
Lord has preserved a Remnant amongst the People called Quakers, that cannot
bow their Knee to any Image or Image-Maker; nor yet to acknowledge, that
Salvation is attainable through Faith in any other Name, than the Name of
Jesus, who is given of the Father to be Salvation to the Ends of the Earth.

I now come to give the Reader a particular Account of some Assertions and
Scripture Quotations, relating to Government, amongst one part of the People
called Quakers, published in Print by Robert Barclay, together with Answers
thereto, contained in a Manuscript given forth by my self, who was concerned in
my Conscience so to do, for the sakes of such, as being weak, are apt to be
precipitated into a Zealous Observation of other men's Lines made ready to their
hands, when not led thereinto by a Measure of Gods Gift and Grace in
themselves; and so may justly be termed like unto those, who render for
Doctrine the Traditions of Men.

The aforesaid Assertions, Quotations, and particular Answers thereto (some
Years past, sent to Steven Crisp and another public Person, as well as the
Author of the said Book) does follow, as proper in relation to this Treatise,
touching Government; and if the Reader shall find any thing therein, which has
been herein already treated upon, or in the first part of the Christian-Quaker,
distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator, I hope he will not be offended
thereat, since the ensuing Lines were written on a Particular Occasion, though
of a General Concern, relating to the People called Quakers; and that also
before it was designed, that the said first part should be prepared, much less
committed to the Press: However, that which may well plead my Excuse for the
Readers Expense of Time on such an Occasion, is this, There is very little
Discourse of which has been mentioned before, and that which is, is very
material to be observed, as a proper Looking-Glass in some respect, to
distinguish the true Christian (termed in Derision, Quaker) from the Apostate
and Innovator.

The Innovations AND Scripture-Misapplications of R. B. Detected.

BEING Part of some Observations on his small Treatise, Entitled The ANARCHY
of the RANTERS, etc. Wherein he says, The Ancient Apostolic Order of the
Church of Christ is Reestablisht amongst them, meaning the People of the Lord,
called in Derision, Quakers. This small Treatise being weighed in the equal
Balance, this ensuing Discourse is become a twofold Defense for those of the
People of God, called Quakers, who have retained their First Love, and
Integrity for the Truth, and Right Understanding of the only Fundamental
Principle thereof, viz. the Light: Wherein they are vindicated from the
Aspersions of those who may accuse them of despising of Christ's Government,
and indulging that Liberty, which Truth condemns, on the one hand; and from
such who may calumniate them for endeavoring to establish the outward Orders,
and Prescriptions of Men (under the Notion of the Orders of the Church of
Christ) to become a Bond on others to obey, though they see it not their Duty,
on the other hand. Showing that the Place where Christ's Government has been,
is and ought to be exalted, is in the Heart, and that it is not in the Power
(and so cannot be the Duty) of man, to establish that Government which is
already on Christ's Shoulders.


Given forth in the Year 1676. By WILLIAM ROGERS.

1 Cor. 3.11.21. For other Foundation can no man lay, than that which is
already laid. -- Let no man Rejoice in Men.

To the READER.
THE aforementioned Treatise of R. B. is the first, that, to my Remembrance or
Knowledge, is under the Name of one called a Quaker, extant in Print, whereby
the Adversaries to that Ancient Truth, whereof they have been Witnesses, may
have Cause to be Jealous.

First, That that People, who have been so great Contenders against that
Spirit, which would have enforced Outward Forms, and Orders of Men, relating to
Conscience, though under the Notion of Assemblies, calling themselves the
Church of Christ, should now be more exercised to encourage their Brethren to
follow the Orders, Traditions, Examples or Commandments of any relating to
Matters of Conscience, and the Things of God (though under the most plausible
Pretenses whatsoever) than that never-erring and infallible Guide, which has
been so often exalted amongst them, viz. Christ's Light in the Conscience.

Secondly, That though the People called Quakers, have pleaded much for the
Exercise of their Consciences, and for the Liberty thereof, which one Eminent
amongst them has described to be a mere Liberty of the Mind, in believing or
dis-believing, etc. Yet there is amongst them, who has endeavored to
insinuate a Belief, that the Church in matters of Conscience may not only give
positive Sentences, which may be Obligatory upon Believers; but also, that the
Pretenses of any refusing to submit on account they see it not, will not excuse
them from being really guilty of disobeying God; and yet does not manifest by
any outward Description, Where, or What Assembly, is the Church of Christ.

Now, though I cannot vindicate the Author of the said Treatise, from giving
occasion of these and such like Jealousies, yet I know there are many of those
People yet in being, whose Integrity to God is so great, whose Steadfastness in
the Unchangable Truth is so sure, and whose Understanddings, in the pure
Principle thereof are so clear, that they give not occasion for such
Jealousies, but have a Testimony in their Hearts against all such that do;
knowing this, that whosoever builds on any other Foundation, than that which
has been already laid, viz. Christ the Lord (to whom all Power is given to
Rule and Reign, and who alone is Lord over the Conscience and the only
Lawgiver) shall be confounded, and brought to naught.

W. R.

The matters occasionally discourst in this ensuing Treatise, are in some
measure described in what follows.
First, I Affirm, that though there has been, and ought to be a Government in
the Church of Christ, unto which every Member of the said Church ought to be
subject, yet it does not appear, that the Outward Form thereof, and all Matters
cognizable thereby, are so exactly described in the Scriptures or else where,
as that the Members thereof by any such outward Description (as a sufficient
means) may so exactly be exercised therein, as to find acceptance with the
Lord of Life: That at this day nothing can be truly called the Exact and
perfect Order of this Government but the Power of God (and so has it often
been testified by the People of the Lord called Quakers) which power is of
Ability to establish Man, but Man not of Ability to establish it; and that the
Power brings forth its own Form in every Member, according to the measure of
God's Grace inwardly given, received and obeyed; and yet I am abundantly
satisfied, that Set and Appointed Meetings on certain Prefixed Days, being with
the joint concurrence of those Members assembling, and from time to time to be
assembled, to take care of the Poor, and discharge other charitable Duties; to
inspect Marriages, that none come together disorderly; and to take care that
Truth may not be Scandlized through the Backslidings of such, who have been in
fellowship with the Children of Light, are not inconsistant with that form that
the Power of God may lead into. For I am a Witness, for many years past, even
to this day, that such Meetings have been serviceable to answer those Righteous
Ends. But if the Members of any such Meetings, shall by their Practices
therein, not only assume (as some there are, who to my Knowledge have too
manifestly so done) but continue to assume another place in the Body, than that
wherein God has placed them, or shall endeavor, so to establish Outward
Indispensible Rules and Orders therein relating to Conscience, as that such of
the Brethren, who submit not thereunto, shall be accounted not of the Body,
though they see it not their Duty; it may be Just with the Lord (as a token of
his Indignation and Displeasure) to withdraw his refreshing Presence from such
Assemblies, and then their Meetings may become as useless, as a Body without a
Spirit, is But yet;

Robert Barclay undertakes to describe the Order of the Government and how far
it extends; and also testifies, the Ancient Apostolic Order of the Church of
Christ is Re-establisht amongst the People of the Lord called Quakers.
Notwithstanding which his saying, I Affirm, they are in the Practice of many
things, with respect to Church Discipline, wherein the Scriptures, treating of
those things, given forth by Christ and his Apostles, are silent; and are not
found in the Practice of some other things, which were either practiced,
exhorted to, or commanded by the Apostle.

Secondly, I Affirm, that as Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, so the
Members of Christ's Church have not Power in Cases of Difference, arising
amongst themselves, touching outward things, to assume Jurisdiction over the
Properties, and Worldly Concerns each of other, when not chosen for that
Service by the Consent of the Members Differing; and yet I do say, it is the
duty of fellow members, that are at variance, to refer by mutual choice their
Cause unto other Brethren. But Yet;

R. B. says, As a People gathered together by the Lord, unto the same Faith,
etc. that we have Power and Authority to decide and remove these things.

Thirdly, I Affirm, That nothing can become a Right and Christian Bond upon
Believers, to be Exercised in any practical duty, relating to the things of
God, and Matters of Conscience, until convinced by the Witness of God in their
Consciences of the service thereof.

Fourthly, That the Belief of Certain Principles and Doctines, (though believed
through the force of Truth on the understanding) and Practices depending
thereon, are not the very Bond by which the People of the Lord, called Quakers,
are become centered into the Fellowship of Christ's Body, nor yet the Cause
that gathered them; but the Spirit is the Bond, and in the best sense such
Principles, etc. are but the Fruit of the Bond, and the Cause that gathered
them was Gods Love.

That the Sentence and Judgment of any man or men whatsoever, relating to
Matters of Conscience, ought not at this day to be given forth, but by way of
Recomendation to every man's conscience in the Sight of God; and that when the
Conscience is sensible, that Gods Witness therein does Answer thereto, then the
Conscience is bound, and not before. But Yet;

R. B. tells us, That Principles and Doctrines believed, thorough the Force of
Truth on the Understanding, and Practices necessarily depending thereon, are
the Terms that have drawn us together, and the very Bond by which we became
centered into one Body and Fellowship, or are linked to the Body, and the Cause
that gathered us; as in his Treatise, Page 48, 49, may appear. And whether in
R. B's. Sense the Centure of a part of Christ's Body, ought not to become a
Bond on all the Members, and that in Cases of Conscience too. I refer the
Reader to peruse his sixth Section.

Fifthly, I Affirm, That the Qualification of a Member of Christ's Body, is
Sanctification through the Spirit, that where any number of such are assembled
together in Christ's name, though but of the lesser Rank in the Body, there is
the Church of Christ; that before such an Assembly, Cases of Differences may be
brought, which may be besides the Gift or Capacity of such to determine and
Judge; and therefore infallible Judgment (which is unalterably seated in the
Spirit) in some cases may be wanting to appear through any one Member in such
Assemblies, as properly may be called the Church of Christ. But yet; R. B.
says in his Treatise, Page 68. That there never will, nor can be wanting in
Case of Controversy, the Spirit of God to give Judgment through some or other in
the Church of Christ, so long as any Assembly can properly, or in any
tolerable supposition be so termed.

Sixthly. Since it is commonly reputed, that none but Papists pretend Tradition
to Justify their Actions, wherein the Scripture is silent, and that we have no
President in the Scriptures, that the Apostles and Elders, under the Notion of
the Church of Christ, did take upon them to determine Controversies, arising
amongst the Apostles and Elders in the Church of Christ, touching Cases of
Conscience, without the assent of the Differing Parties, who (especially if
Equals, and once at Unity, and their Cases Matters of Conscience, arising from
occasional differing Sense, and Judgment) have by the Law of Divine Nature
Equal Right to nominate a part of those who shall have the hearing of such
Cases: Therefore I affirm, if any shall without the assent of such Parties
differing, take upon them to be a bond, that the differing Parties must subject
such their Case to their dicisive sentence, and accordingly submit, and be
subject, though they are not clear in Conscience so to do; such do Justly
subject themselves to the censure of being Imposers and Usurpers.

Seventhly, That submission to the positive sentences of others touching
matters of conscience (though supposing themselves the Church of Christ) before
the conscience is convinced by God's Witness therein, is an abuse to the
Profession of Truth, an ancient mark of Apostasy, and an infallible token that
such who so submit have no inward sense, that they are led thereunto by the
Spirit of the Lord; but notwithstanding these two last particulars are
evidently true, yet whosoever reads what R. B. has asserted, in Page 68. may
find, that according to his Lines, and Assertions, this short ensuing sentence
may be collected, without the least abuse of his words, viz.

That any ones not submitting to the positive Judgment touching Controversy
given by any Assembly, or at least by some or other of them which may in any
tolerable supposition be termed the Church of Christ, is disobedience to God,
though the persons refusing, pretend they refuse on the account they see it
not.

The Innovations and Scripture-Misapplications of R. B. Detected.
I Shall begin with the Title Page, wherein R. B. thus says, So is also the
Ancient Apostolic Order of the Church of Christ Re-established, and settled on
its right Basis and Foundation.

To which I thus say: This kind of Language with respect to diverse Practices in
Discipline amongst the People called Quakers, or any outward Form and Order,
which is, or has been by any called the Order of the Gospel, I do not
understand to be rightly applicable to those amongst the said People, who have
retained their first Love to, and Savor of the Truth, and right Understanding
of the Principle thereof; not that I would hereby be understood, that its not
necessary to be in the Exercise of Outward Order, with respect to that
Gospeldiscipline, which becomes the Church of Christ; but that which I
understand not to be rightly applicable unto them, is manifested in what
follows.

Though the principle of Truth in these latter days has, and may further lead
into the Practice of Outward Order in Discipline, with relation to the Church
of Christ; yet I affirm, that part of that Outward Order in Discipline, wherein
diverse of the People of the Lord called Quakers have been acted, is such, as
that there is not the least Footsteps thereof to be found in the Scriptures, as
exhorted to, or as practiced by the Apostles. I could give many Instances
hereof, but one shall suffice, viz. The Form of Proceedings in Marriages,
wherein the Scriptures are wholly silent, as to the Primitive Christians; and
tho the Papists pretend to Tradition, yet the People of the Lord called
Quakers, do not. Besides, it is evident by the Scriptures of Truth, that the
Apostles were found in the Practice of that, which the People called Quakers,
do not only out of Conscience to God forbear, but have had many Contests with
others touching the same, as esteeming it (though permitted for a season, by
reason of the Weakness of the People) amongst the number of those Outward
Ordinances, out of which the Lord has at this day gathered his People; witness
Water Baptism.

The word [Order] with respect to Outward Government, Established by the Church
of Christ over it self, I remember not in the Scriptures of Truth; yet much of
late is spoken of the Order of the Gospel, and of establishing the same, and
that with respect to Outward Prescriptions and Orders practiced, or endeavored
to be introduced amongst the People of the Lord, called Quakers, and in
particular, R. B. Page 40. speaks of the Truth and Faith we have been, and are
in the Lords Hands building up.

To which I say, The Consideration that Christ is the Truth, and the great
Power of God; and that an Establishing in the Faith, cannot Properly be termed
A building up of Faith, gives me occasion to treat a little touching the words,
establish and build up.

We know from the testimony of truth in our selves, as well as from the
Scriptures of Truth without us, that we may be Instruments in the hands of the
Lord, to build up one another in the most Holy Faith, in Christ the Truth, the
Power of God: but it is neither agreeable to the Testimony of Truth in us, nor
yet the Scriptures of Truth without us, for any to account themselves of
Ability to establish God's Power: for its that by which the World was made. Now
the Order of the Gospel is the Power of God, and nothing else (according to the
declared sense of our ancient Friends) can properly be called the Order of the
Gospel, but the Power of God: for though some outward Form or appearance may be
according to the Order of the Gospel; yet it can no more properly be called the
very Order of the Gospel, than the Fruit of a Tree, can be called the Tree it
self; and therefore those who pretend to establish the Order of the Gospel, may
as well pretend to establish the Power of God it self. It Is true, this Power is
of Ability to establish Man in the Faith of God's Elect; but Man is not of
Ability to establish it: those who understand the Nature and Tenours of the two
Covenants, may easily discern the Truth hereof.

Under the First Covenant, which was outward, the mind of God was manifested to
the People from the Priests Lips, which were to preserve Knowledge; and this
Covenant did consist in diverse Outward Ordinances, etc. established and imposed
upon the People, until the Time of Reformation. Under the Second Covenant
(being the New Covenant or Gospel dispensation) the Mind and Will of God is
manifested in his People through the Revelation of his Spirit: according to
that of Paul, Romans 1.19. That which may be known of God, is manifested in them;
Christ also said, John 14.26. The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things. The Law under this
covenant is written in the heart, Heb. 8.10, 11. I will write my Law in their
Hearts, and they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall Know me, etc. Here Is not the
least ground of encouragement for any man under the New Covenant (which was not
to be like unto the Old) to pretend, that Gods Spirit does or will lead any, to
establish Outward Orders, relating to matters of Conscience, as the Order of
the Gospel: for if that which is to be known of God is manifested in us, then
(though it may be needful to stir up, according as the Lord shall move in his
servants the pure Mind in us, that so we may be in the Exercise of what God
requires (through the maifestation of himself in us) there is no need to
establish any thing without us, to show it. If the Spirit of Truth is to lead
into all truth; those who would be leading us in another way, will prove little
better then Thieves and Robbers, which Climb up another way to enter in, than
by the door. If the Law be written in the heart, and that no Obedience finds
Acceptance with the Lord, but Obedience to his Law, from an inward Impulse and
Drawing of his Spirit thereunto in our selves; there is no need of establishing
Outward Indispensible Rules, which may relate to the Conscience, to walk by;
for were it possible so to do, and any should yield Obedience on no better
ground, then because'tis so established by such a Man, or Assembly of Men; this
sort of Obedience would find no more acceptance with the Lord, than the
offering of Swines flesh (or the Halt and Blind for a Sacrifice) under the
First Covenant did. For though many may be so Weak, as not to know the
difference between the two Covenants in some respects; yet there are Few of the
Lord's People called Quakers, but have this undoubted Truth sealed in their
hearts, That none of their Outward Practices, under the Exercise of Christ's
Government, find's acceptance with the Lord, but as they have an Evidence in
their Consciences, that therein they Answer the measure of Truth in themselves.

Paul writing to the Colossians, thus says, As ye have received Christ Jesus
the Lord, so walk in him, Rooted and built up in him, stablished in the Faith,
Col. 2.6, 7. And then the very next verse says, Beware lest any man spoil you,
through the Traditions of men, according to the Rudimnets of the World, and not
after Christ. If the following outward Decrees, Precepts Sentences, Decisive
Judgment, or Traditions of any sort of the Church, had been in Pauls' Eye, a
real and certain Indication, of being Established in the Faith, or rooted in
Christ, or that 'twas the Practice of the Church to be Establishing Outward
Indispensible Orders, relating to the Consciences of Believers, I leave it to
the Judicious Reader to savor, whether Paul, would have so immediately, and as
it were in one breath, cautioned them to beware, of being spoiled through the
Traditions of Men, etc. without a further Caution to take heed, lest they
should account the Commands, Sentences, Decrees, or Traditions of the Church
such. These things considered, and compared with the Measure of Light in our
selves, I am satisfied it is not agreeable to Truth, for any Man or Assembly of
Men, to atempt an Outward Indispensible Establishment of Outward Orders, Rules,
and Decrees, relating to Matters of Consciences under the New Covenant, as the
Orders, Rules, and Decrees of the Church of Christ.

Moreover, if Christ did stand in need of Assistance to Establish his
Government, how is it possible that Man, whose days are but as a span long,
should be capable to Establish that Government, of whose increase there shall
be no end; but so it is, that he does not stand in need thereof; For the Son
that is given, shall Order his Government, and Establish it with Judgment and
with Justice even from henceforth and forever: read Isa. 9.6, 7. Besides, if we
do but consider, where and after what manner the second appearance of Christ
has been, and yet is to be expected and waited for; those who know the Truth
as preached, received, and believed amongst the People of the Lord called
Quakers in the Beginning, do know, That his Second Appearance has been, and
yet is to be expected, and waited for in the hearts of the Sons and Daughters
of Men, and the manner of his appearance has been and is by his Spirit in us,
this has often been testified, and that in opposition to those, who have been
looking for his Second Coming in some Outward Bodily Appearance, to reign as
Lord and King.

I now appeal to Gods Witness in all Consciences, Whether the Outward
Establishment of Outward Government, under the notion of Christ's Government,
does not seem to square more with the Principles of such, who look for his
Second Coming in some Outward Bodily Appearance, than with the Principles of
those, who conclude his Second Coming to be by his Spiritual Appearance in the
heart? and whether it be not inconsistent with Right Reason and Truth, to
conclude, that Christ Jesus the Lord, will Establish his Government otherwise
than by his Spirit, and in the heart, where his Appearance has been, and is to
be expected and waited for?

And since it is undoubtedly so, that of the increase of Christ's Government
there shall be no End: I cannot understand to what End any Man should concern
himself to consider, how far it may extend; yet R.B. has so done: Witness his
37 Page, where he thus says, It is next to be considered, in what Cases, and
how far it may extend. To which I cannot but thus reply.

Those who are not Puffed up with Spiritual Pride, or Zeal without Knowledge, may
easily discern from such kind of language, a Spirit that would Limit the Holy
One of Israel, by putting Bounds unto that Government of whose increase there
shall be no end; and though I speak of Man's inability to Establish Christ's
Government; yet I would not be understood, as one accusing the aforesaid Author
or any else, to assert Man's Ability so to do. For I know not any Men that will
pretend themselves in that Case, other than Instruments in God's Hands. But yet
this is to be Observed, that since there is no Ground to believe, that God
everwill make use of Man, under the New Covenant to Establish outward
indespensible Orders, Rules or Decrees, to be as a measuring-line, whereby
those who are under Christ's Government shall be known; therefore it is
reasonable to conclude, That the endeavors of such who may exercise themselves
therein may proceed from no better Power than that Ability which is of Man.

And notwithstanding he has considered how far it extends, yet I find not that
he has made any mention of the Business, or at least a part of the business of
one considerable Meeting, which is a part of that Government, or Order which he
pretends to discribe; and that is, a Meeting held every second day of the week,
wherein writings treating of Divine Matters, and which are intended by the
authors for public view, are first viewed in Order to an approbation or the
contrary; Witness the Paper at the latter end of this third part, signed by
Charles Marshal and thirty six more.
at which meeting his Treatise was past, which gives occasion to treat a little
of that Meeting, since those of that Meeting are as well concerned in the said
Treatises, as he that writ it.

The Scriptures of Truth, as far as I Remember, are wholly silent as to any
such Service acted in any Meetings amongst the primitive Christians; and
therefore I do not understand that there can be any real Ground or tolerable
pretense, that this is a part of the ancient Apostolic Order of the Church of
Christ. We find the Apostle, Acts 3. directed, to choose seven men full of the
Holy Ghost, to take Care, that the Widows should not be neglected in the daily
Ministration. If the Holy Ghost in the Apostles days, directed to choose a
certain, select, well qualifyed Number of men, for such a Service (as doubtless
it did) its against right reason to suppose, that the Apostles would in their
day, have left the consideration of such weighty matters, as Treatises of
things relating to the Kingdom of God, and the salvation of mankind, to the
Approbation of an uncertain unselected Assembly; for such I call that Meeting,
wherein many of the Writings of the People of the Lord called Quakers,
(intended for public View) are approved, or disapproved: for that no Certain
Select Number of Persons are chosen for that service; but any Persons who have
Public Testimones for the Truth, though but by way of Exhortation, and are
owned as Friends of Truth, and come where that Meeting is appointed, are the
Persons by whom such Writings (whether given forth by a Paul a Father, or a
Timothy a Son) as are for public service, are approved, or disapproved. I now
appeal to the impartial understanding Reader, whether according to this form of
Government, one that is in the place of Paul a Father (who according to the
aforesaid Author, has right to rule over and command) may not have the
testimony which he has through the motion of Gods Spirit to publish unto the
World for God, be overruled by Timothy a Son (when, according to the aforesaid
Author, he ought to be ruled by Paul the Father) nay, perhaps by one that is of
much lesser rank in the Body; if so be he has a word of Exhortation on the
behalf of Gods Truth, and is usually exercised therein in public? But suppose
no such Obstruction has or may appear, yet I query, Whether it looks like a
part of Christ's Government, for Timothy the Son, to be admitted as a Judge
over the Writings of Paul, who as a Father begot him unto the Truth?

Paul, 1 Cor. 12. Treats of the diversities of Gifts by one and the same
Spirit, mentioning several of them, viz. The Word of Wisdom, the Word of
Knowledge, Faith, Gifts of Healing, Working of Miracles, Prophesy, Discerning
of Spirits, diverse kinds of Tongues, Interpretation of Tongues; and then at
length says, God has set some in the Church. First, Apostles; secondarily,
Prophets; thirdly, teachers; and after that, Miracles, etc. and then says, are
all Prophets, are all Apostles, are all Teachers, etc. And again, Rom 14.6, 7,
8. He thus says, having then gifts differing, according to the Grace that is
given to us, whether Prophesy, let us Prophesy, according to the Proportion of
Faith; or ministry, let us wait on our Ministry; or he that teaches, on
teaching; or he that exhorts, on Exhortation.

From all which it is evident, that God has given diversities of Gifts; and
that those Members, who may be skilful through the Grace of God to Exercise one
Gift, may be unskillfull to exercise another: and so every own ought to wait on
their own Gift, that therein they may be exercised; and that also not beyond,
but according to the Proportion of Faith: for doubtless the Apostle was
sensible, there was a proneness in some, to run beyond their Gift; and
therefore he says, according to the Proportion of Faith.

Now should any number of Persons, amongst whom there should be only such,
whose Gifts are either to Prophesy, Teach, or Exhort; but not to discern
Spirits, sit together, and take upon them to consider, whether that which is
given forth for public Service by any Brother, seriously declaring that God
moved thereunto, ought to come to public View, and be found hindering the
coming forth of the same, when nothing unsound appears; they would therein make
a Breach on that Christian-Liberty which ought to be preserved inviolable in
the Church of God: Nay, if peradventure there should be some amongst them,
whose Gifts are to discern Spirits, and so accordingly gives their
approabation, or disapprobation; it becomes not others, not gifted therein, to
concern themselves; because their Duty is (if Paul's Counsel be good) to wait
on their own Gift; and though such may declare, they have Unity therewith in
the Life; Yet that may be only the Fruit of their Lips, or of a hasty Spirit,
that may have Zeal without Knowledge, when the Matter wherewith they declare
themselves at Unity, is without the Compass of their Gift, Knowledge, or
Capacity to Judge of. But yet, I would not be understood, that it is
unnecessary for the Members of the Church of Christ to take care, that nothing
Scandalous to the Truth come forth in Public, under the name of any who make
profession thereof: and were it so, that I had ought upon me on Truths behalf,
to bring to public View, I should be glad of the Opportunity to lay it before
such Brethren, with whom the Word of Wisdom, Knowledge, and Discerning of
Spirits dwelt: yet am persuaded the Lord would preserve me from suffering the
Counsel of any to lead me, contrary to what I believed the Lord moved; unless
through the Word of Wisdom and Knowledge they could convince me of Error, and
so come to see it my place to forbear. And this I account agreeable to the
Truth, which preferrs Obedience to our own Measures of Grace, before Obedience
to the Measures of others; and to wait on our own Gifts, and not the Gifts of
others; even as I account it contrary to Truth, and as a Branch springing from
that Spirit which would limit the Holy One of Israel, to subject the
Approbation of Coming, or not Coming of all Writings whatsoever given forth on
a Religious Account to public View, unto the Judgment of any, unless such as
are perfectly skilful in all Spiritual Gifts, Mysteries, and Knowledge,
relating to the Matters appertaining to Gods Kingdom, and the Salvation of
Mankind. Had this uncertain unselected Assembly spoken of, been such, at the
time when R. B's small Treatise was approved, doubtless it would never have
past, as that whereby Truth would be promoted, through a Belief of all the
Matters which therein he asserts for Truth.

Moreover, when I consider that all Miscarriages in Writings approved at that
Assembly does not only become the error of a particular person, but of that
Assembly also; and not only so, but peradventure may be reflected (though
unworthily) on the whole Body of the People called Quakers, on a common
Presumption, that having past the Test of that Meeting, the whole Church
approves thereof; I am even ready to query, Whether it were not better to let
every Man stand, or fall to his own Master in this respect, unless some better
Expedient might be found, than such an one, as has admitted of such Erroneous
Assertions as (to the dishonor of Truth) are contained in R. B's Treatise; And
if any one should object and say, What, would not thou submit to the Sentence
of such Apostles, with whom the Word of Wisdom, and Knowledge dwelt? Yes
verily, I should, and ought so to do, if my Faith were such, as certainly to
believe, they are such Apostles to me, but not before; read 2 Cor. 10.13, 14,
15, 16.

From all which I do according to Truth thus conclude, That it is groundlesly
asserted by R. B. (in the Sense I take his Lines to import) viz. with respect
to Outward Orders) that the ancient Apostolic Order of the Church of Christ,
is Re-established amongst the People of God called Quakers: Yet I do testify,
that the Government of Christ ought to be exercised in, and over his Church;
and that though the Order of this Government is not so described, as that by
any Outward Rule, or Written Prescription (as a sufficient Means) Man may
exactly walk therein; Yet I am persuaded, that there are many of Gods People
amongst those who in Derision are called Quakers, that have been so Obedient
unto that Grace, which has been given them according to the Gift of Christ, as
that it may be truly said of them, That they are Established in the Faith of
Gods Elect, and that they are in Subjection, according to their Measures, to
the Government of Christ, which by the Authority of his own Power, and Spirit,
he has Established in their Inward Parts; so that through that Obedience which
is of Faith (other Obedience availing not) they are exercising themselves
according to the Leadings of Christ's Light, and in Subjection unto the Laws
appertaining unto his Government, which are not written in Tables of Stone, but
in the Heart, according to the Tenor of the New Covenant, Heb. 8.9, 10, 11.
And that those who are Invested with Power from on high, may be Instruments in
Gods Hand, according to the Dispensation thereof given them of God, to stir up
the Pure Mind in others, sometimes by way of Admonition, Exhortation and sound
Doctrine, and sometimes, by Charge or Command, according as the Spirit of the
Lord moves, and operates; and yet every one of these Operations, according to
the Dispensation of God, is only to stir up the pure Mind, that so through a
sensible Closing with the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, shining
in the Heart, God's Witness in the Conscience may be raised in Dominion; for
that it is according to Truth to affirm, that the Admonition, Doctrine, and
Exhortation, Charge, or Command of any whatsoever, cannot be rightly received,
and embraced, otherwise than according to the Leadings of Christ's Light, that
so it may appear, that the Excellency of that Power is of God, and not of Men:
read 2 Cor. 4.5, 6, 7, 8.

That the Holy Scriptures give not the least Testimony, that the Apostles, nor
any Persons under the Notion of the Church of Christ, endeavored to Establish
any Outward Orders, and then term them the Order of the Gospel, the Power of
God: much less so to Establish any Outward Order, or Form of Discipline in the
Church, as that not only a Deviation therefrom, but a not Embracing those
Outward Forms, or Orders, by such Believers, who were never in the Practice
thereof, should be a Token, that they were departed from the Faith: but their
Labors were, to Establish the Churches in the Faith, and in the Power (rather
than to build up Forms, or Orders) having them so Established, to be in the
Practice of that Form, which the Power either had, or should lead them into:
and therefore the Apostle might well say, Be ye not unwise, but understand what
the Will of the Lord is, (he does not say what the Will of the Church is, but
what the Will of the Lord is) submitting your selves one to another in the Fear
of God. According to which Submission, I appeal to Gods Witness, Whether it may
not become as well the Duty of the Brethren to submit to one or two, as one or
two to submit to the Brethren? and whether these kinds of Submission have not
been practiced amongst the People of the Lord called Quakers, in these latter
Days? And though I say, as aforesaid [not the Church, but what the Will of the
Lord is] yet hereby I would not be understood to render Christ and his Church
divided: but rather to show, that his Will, who cannot Err, is a surer
Foundation to Build upon, than the Wills of those, who if they depart from
Christ their Rock, may Err. R. B. in his sixth Section, treating how far this
Government extends, Page 39. thus says, " This Order reaches the composing
differences as to outward things. And further says, " We do boldly aver, as a
People gathered together by the Lord unto the same Faith, etc. that we have
Power, and Authority to decide and remove these things amongst our selves.

On which I thus observe, If Differences happen between two Brethren, and not
through the least intention to wrong each other, then the Power of Truth in
themselves will constrain such to choose Faithful Brethren, skilled in the
Matters wherein they differ, to decide the same, and accordingly to submit, and
all this of a willing and ready Mind, through the Power of Truth in themselves,
and not through constraint of others: and so in this case, here is no need for
any to come to their Brethren, and say, We do Boldly aver, we have Power and
Authority to decide, etc.

But suppose this ensuing case should happen, viz, That two Brethren are at
variance, touching their Properties and Outward Concerns, relating to Meum and
Tuum (as R.B's. terms are) and one of them is so departed from Truth in
himself, as that he will not of a ready Mind submit his Cause to the hearing of
Persons to be chosen by themselves indifferently: but being Contentious, will
either go to Law, or else so abound in his own sense as nothing shall serve,
but to be Judge in his own cause. If we now enquire, what Christ the Truth does
in general direct, and wherein this Case may be comprehended, which is so great
an offense to the other Brother (whom Truth constrains to submit his Cause to
the Hearing and Judgment of Persons indifferently chosen, and that of a willing
and ready mind) we shall find, he thus says, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. If thy
brother shall Trespass against thee, go tell him his fault between thee and
him alone; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more;
if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church; if he hear not the
Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man. Christ's words do not here
import, that the Church has Power over any man's Worldly Property, or Outward
Concerns; it only says, If he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee
as an Heathen Man. And when a Brother is, through the declaration of the
Church, become so to the other Brother, against whom he has trespassed, then
the Offended Brother may Justly seek his Remedy, (if the Offense and Trespass
be touching Outward Concerns) according to the Just Laws of men, relating to
Property.

But perhaps some may Object thus. This relates not to Outward Affairs, but to
Offenses that are of a Spiritual Nature.

In Answer it may be said, As to that, the Scripture is wholly silent, and
therefore every Case wherein one Brother may trespass against another, may
according to Right Reason be comprehended in it; and since the Case is stated
between two Brethren, and that on an orderly proceeding, and admonition of the
Church, the sentence for not hearing the Church is, Let him be unto thee as an
Heathen Man; to me it seems to import, that the Trespass intended, was such an
one, as in a particular manner is against one Brother more than another: and so
as probable to be about their outward concerns, as any thing else.

Besides, if we do but consider, that if a Brother be so much departed from the
Truth, as after Admonition by the Church not to Join with his Brother, with
whom he is at Variance in the choice of one or more to decide the matter, it is
a certain Token that he is out of that, which was the bond, by which he became
centered into the Heavenly Fellowship of Christ's Body, the Church; And so
then, if it really were so, that any Assembly under the Notion of the Church of
Christ should assume to themselves Power and Authority to decide, in Cases
relating to Property; yet in this and the like Case there can be no tolerable
Pretense to exercise a Jurisdiction Because it is in relation to one that has
cut himself off from being a member, by departing from the Bond by which he was
centered into the Heavenly Fellowship of Christ's Body.

These two Cases duly weighed and considered, seem to me to be comprehensive
of all Cases of Difference touching Outward Concerns, that may happen amongst
the Members of the Church of Christ.

By the First it plainly appears, there is no need for any to say, We boldly
aver, we have Power and Authority to decide, since in all such Cases there is
no use of any such Authority, when the Power of Truth manifested in themselves,
has been a Bond upon them to submit to the thing that is Just.

And by the Second, it appears, that if any shall assume such a Jurisdiction,
yet all such Cases are without the Cognizance thereof; because it is in the Case
of one that has cut himself off from being a Member (of which sort R. B.
says, Page 33 " We are not so foolish, as to concern our selves with those,
who are not of us as Fellow Members) and therefore I affirm, That, as in other
things, he has deviated from the Line of Truth, so also in this, if his
Meaning be according to his Words, to me plainly Imports, viz. That the Members
of the Church of Christ have Power, and Authority to decide, and Remove Matters
relating to Outward Things amongst themselves, though the consent of the
Parties differing be not had.

As property by the Law of Nature, and according to Right Reason, cannot be
disposed without the assent of such, in whom the Property is Vested, according
to that saying of Act. 5.4.
Peter to Ananias, Whilst it remained, appertained it not unto thee? and after
it was sold, was it not in thy own Power? So Differences arising touching
Property, and outward things, relating to Meum and Tuum; are of right by such
outward Just Laws decideable, as are according to such Fundamental
Constitutions, which were originally agreed upon, and assented to by the
People, or their Representatives: And therefore such Laws have of right, Power
to Compel Obedience, or Imprison, especially, when the Laws, under such
Governments, become (so far as any thing outward can be) Protections to the
Subjects and their Properties.

But neither the Scriptures without us, nor the Light within us, do evidence,
that under the Spiritual Government of Christ, there is any need to Establish
Orders or Laws touching worldly Property, or for the Members of Christ to
assume Jurisdiction therein, without assent of the Parties differing. For,
since his Kingdom is not of this World, Is it not against the nature of his
Government, to exercise by Constraint, a Jurisdiction in Matters relating to
this World?

Besides, it is agreeable to Truth, to affirm, That nothing outward can
Constrain the Subjects under Christ's Government to obey the Laws thereof,
since the only proper place, where his Government is to be exalted, is in the
Heart (the place where his Second Appearance to reign as Lord and King is, and
shall be) and that the Means whereby, under his Government, Acceptable
Obedience comes to be yielded, is by his Spirit. If then nothing Outward can be
of force to Constrain Acceptable Obedience, how can it be agreeable to Truth
and Right Reason, for the true Church of Christ it self (muchless any Assembly
termed so, and that on tolerable Supposition only, of which more anon) to
assume a Jurisdiction in Cases relating to Property, without the Consent of the
Parties concerned, when they have no suitable Power to Compel Obedience, nor
yet to inflict any Corporal Punishment, or Restraint for the Nonperformance of
their Sentences?

And though the Prophet said, which R. B. quotes; I will restore thy Judges as
at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning; Yet this is no Proof
that the Church of Christ ought to assume Jurisdiction in Temporal Worldly
Matters, without Consent of the Parties concerned, muchless any Assemblies so
termed, and that only on tolerable Supposition. For should the aforesaid Author
by the words Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning,
conclude the Prophesy related to such Judges, as were chosen Men over certain
Numbers of the Children of Israel, who Judged the People at all Seasons, but
brought the hard Causes to Moses, Exodus 18.25, 26. Yet this gives not the least
Warrant for uncertain unselected Assemblies, to assume such a Jurisdiction; but
to exclude it wholly: we find Christ himself gives no Countenance to such a
Sense, with relation to Outward Matters, Luke 12.13, 14. where it is thus said.
And one of the Company said, Master, bid my Brother divide the Inheritance with
me; and what said Christ in this Case? He thus said. Verse. 14, Man, who made me
a Judge, or Divider over you? And therefore I conclude, there is not the least
Countenance for any Assemblies of Men under the Notion of the Church of Christ,
to assume such an Authority.

R. B. also quotes Paul's words, 1 Cor. 6. Dare any of you, having a Matter
against another, go to Law before the Unjust, and not before the Saints? This
proves not the Lawfulness of assuming such a Jurisdiction, as aforesaid; it
only shows, that it is Christian like, that Differences arising between Brother
and Brother, should be brought before the Saints to Judge, but does not
encourage any, not chosen, as aforesaid, to assume Authority to Judge.

There is a vast difference between an assuming a Jurisdiction without a Lawful
Authority, as to Outward Things relating to meum and tuum, and a rightful
Consent and Election to Judge.

The First, proceeds altogether from a Spirit of Usurpation, and Imposition;
and is Intolerable.

The Second, is tolerable, and must proceed either from Assent of the Parties
differing, or a Power that has rightful Disposition over the worldly Property
of those concerned; which being outward, I question how any Persons, who are
neither invested with Outward Power, nor chosen for that Service by the Parties
concerned, can at this Day reasonably claim Jurisdiction therein. And therefore
I do conclude, that R. B. (according to that Understanding I have of his Lines)
has opened a wide Gap (should his Judgment take place) for an intolerable
In-road to be made on the Properties of People, even as elsewhere in his
Treatise he has done upon their Consciences, as in this ensuing Discourse is
plainly manifested; for when I seriously consider how in his 68. Page he
affirms, "That there neither can nor will be wanting in Case of Controversy the
Spirit of God to give Judgment, through some or other in the Church of Christ,
so long as any Assembly can properly, or in any tolerable Supposition, be so
termed: and that he would not be contented with these words [properly so
termed] but must also add these words [any tolerable Supposition] and that with
disjunctive [or] I cannot but suppose (since I know he well understands the
Propriety of Sentences, and Signification of words) that his words do declare
the Intent of his Mind, and are not the slip of his Tongue or Pen: But how
unreasonable it is that Matters of Worldly Property, and things relating to
Conscience, should be decided by such Assemblies, without an Election for that
Service by the Parties differing; I shall leave it to the Judicious, Impartial
Reader to savor; having elsewhere in this following Treatise, plainly
evidenced, that there may be such Assemblies, and yet not owned by the Lord for
the Church of Christ, and so may be remote from giving Righteous Judgment;
though R. B. says, Gods Spirit will never bewanting in such Assemblies.

And whereas some may be so charitable as to conclude, R. B. intends not by his
words, that any should assume Authority to decide Differences relating to
Outward Things, without consent of the Parties concerned; to such I say, He
has left no room for a reasonable Man so to think, because he has written
several Pages to prove his Assertion, which in that case is all unnecessary;
for who can be so Ignorant as not to know, that Persons chosen by the differing
Parties, have of Right Power to decide? but if any should, I know that R. B. is
none of them: my Acquaintance with him tells me not only so, but also that he
is a man of better reason than to have written so many Lines on this Subject,
without telling the Reader so, if that had been his meaning. Besides, if the
Assent of Parties was intended and that the Order of this Government reached
not to this Case without such assent, it naturally follows, that the Power and
Authority pretended to in this Case, is none at all.

And now, that the Reader may not have a misunderstanding of my Sense in
relation to Differences touching Outward Things, I have this Testimony on the
behalf of Truth to give on this Occasion. viz. That as on the one hand I do
conclude, it is contrary to the Truth for any number of Men, under the Notion of
the Church of Christ, to assume a Jurisdiction over their Brethrens Properties,
and Worldly Concerns, when not chosen by consent of such over whose outward
Concerns they assume Power to Judge; so on the other hand, if Differences arise
between Brother and Brother, I do conclude, that going to Law before
Unbelievers is an Indication, that one or both are departed from the Truth; and
that it is the Duty of Such, who are at Variance, to request such Brethren as
are Skilled in the Matters touching which they differ, to hear and determine the
Cause, and then of a willing and ready Mind (and not as by Constraint) to
submit unto such Determination; and that it ought to be as an Incombent Duty on
the Members of Christ's Church to be watching over one another, so as that by
wholesome Counsel, Admonition, and Sound Doctrine, all Variance, Strife,
Emulation, Rents and Divisions, both in relation to Temporal, as well as
Spiritual Matters, may as much as in them lies be kept out from amongst the
Members of Christ's Body.

R. B. asserts, Page the 11. "That the Ground of Schisms, Divisions, or Rents
in the Body is, when any Member assumes another Places than is allotted it, or
being gone from the Life, lets in the Eye that watches for Evil.

This Position is Truth, and rightly Stated; but yet notwithstanding, I cannot
but Testify, that if any Member of Christ's Body does recommend that
Administration or Operation, wherein by Gods Spirit he is Exercised, unto his
Brethren, and shall Judge all such Dark Spirits, and out of the Unity of the
Body, who on such a Recommendation become not Exercised as he is, or does not
immediately close with his Experience and Operation, though otherwise Faithful
to the Measure of Grace received, such an one so Judging, may justly be Judged
of the Lord, as a Person not only assuming another Place in the Body than is
allotted him, but also as endeavoring to draw others into the like Snare: for
that it is as probable that a true Member of Christ's Body may be as remote from
having Experience of his Brothers Operation, as the Ear of the natural Body may
be from discerning what the natural Eye does see; and yet the Ear, according to
that of Paul, 1 Cor. 12.16. may as truly be accounted a Member of the Body as
the Eye.

'Twas an Exhortation in the Beginning of the Day which in these latter Years
has Dawned amongst us, Though thou grow but slow, yet grow sure. This sure
growing was Obedience after Convincement, or Obedience to the Measure of Grace
received. All Performances before, with respect to Worship or Services for God,
were accounted but Will-worships, or Will-services: and therefore many, whose
Faces were Sion-ward, did rightly testify on this wise, I must stay until I be
Convinced; and since, I see not this to be wrong, I dare not be in the Practice
of another thing contrary thereto, lest I become a Will-worshipper: And yet
this kind of Language is (according to my Understanding) too reflectingly
spoken of by the aforesaid Author, witness his 13th. Page.

This puts me in mind to signify what the Apostle Paul said, 1 Cor. 12.3. No
man can say, Jesus is Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. It Is the Fame of Truth that
Jesus (as in himself) is Lord; and so we know a wicked man (not acted by the
Spirit) may say these words, Jesus is the Lord: Yet none can in Truth say,
Jesus is Lord in them, but by the Holy Ghost: from whence I observe, That no
Testimony, though ever so true in it self, can become the Testimony of Truth in
any, further than through certain Conviction its known to be so; even as Jesus
cannot in Truth be called Lord by us, until by his Spirit we are convinced, and
experimentally know that he is Lord in us. And therefore I cannot but say, It Is
savoury Language to say, I MVST STAY UNTIL CONVINCED; though R. B. (as his
lines to me import) accounts such Language to be a Reasoning Truth from ones
self, through the deceitfulness of the Serpent, querying, How did they (meaning
the primitive Laborers amongst the People of the Lord, called Quakers) knock
down this manner of Reasoning? But doubtless herein he has abused both himself
and the Truth; not so much for that he knows no other, than by report, whereof
he treats, as to this matter; if his meaning be, That the primitive Laborers
in the Gospel, at the beginning of that Day (which in these latter Ages has
dawned amongst us) did condemn such kind of Language; but for that many of
those who yet remain witnesses of the first gathering, remember no such thing.
Those who at this day say, We were taught to follow the Light in our
Consciences, and not the Orders of Men; and that we will not have Man to rule
over us; utter Language becoming Christians, notwithstanding R. B's. Reflection
on such kind of Language, as this also in his seventeenth Page. For Christ in
this day, as well as in that day, wherein Truth was first published amongst us,
is become our only Teacher and Lawgiver, by the in shining of his Light in our
consciences: and therefore his reflection seems unsavory: But that which to
me renders it the more Unsavory is this, when I consider the whole scope of
his Treatise, it is to be doubted, it is used, so far as in him lies, with
respect to the Advancement of some Outward Government by Man, or Men; else
what is the Meaning that the aforesaid Author has made such a dilligent search
amongst the Apostles Writings after the words [ Order, Rule, Command, Govern,
Government, Traditions, and such like] and whether he does not apply them to
the Authority of any assembly, which in any tolerable suposition may be termed
the Church of Christ, let the impartial Reader dilligently peruse his Treatise,
and then Judge; for so its plainly to be discovered (as to me appears) by every
impartial Eye, that shall seriously observe the scope of his Treatise; and
therefore I do conclude, that his Reflection on such sound and savoury Language
denotes a wrong Spirit, and not the Spirit which appeared amongst those ancient
Laborers, who were Instruments in Gods Hands to gather many, and who in the
Approbation of such Language were accounted Honorable.

This puts me in mind to inform the Reader, that R. B. in his third Section
quotes diverse Testimonies in the Scripture where these sentences are, viz, "
Know them that are over you; hold the Traditions ye have been taught. Though I
should boast somewhat more of our Authority; and we have confidence that ye
will do the things which we command: now we command you Brethren, etc. (and
then the aforesaid Author comments thereon) "what more positive then this? And
yet the Apostle was not here an Imposer. And further, If any obey not our word,
remember them which have the rule over you, and submit your selves. These
filthy Dreamers despise Dominion. And then thus says, "There can nothing be
more plain from these Testimones, than that some did appoint, and ordain
certain things; that there lay an Obligation in point of duty on others to It Is
to be doubted, his meaning is, others ought to obey, whether they see it their
Duty or no; as his 68. Page seems to import.
obey. That this was no Incroachment nor Imposition on their Christian-Liberty,
nor any ways Contradictory to their being inwardly led by the Spirit of God in
their Hearts: And lastly, that such as are in the true Feeling and Sense, will
find it their places to Obey, and be one with the Church of Christ in such like
Cases; and that it is such as have lost their Sense, and Feeling of the Life of
the Body, that Dissent and are Disobedient, under the false Pretense of
Liberty. Thirdly, I Judge there will need no great Argument to prove the People
of God may, and do well to Exercise the like Government upon the very like
Occasion.

Thus much may be collected out of R. B's 26, 27, and 28. Pages. Moreover in
Pages 23. 24. 25. He quotes these Scriptures sayings, viz, " In Christ Jesus I
have begotten you, through the Gospel; wherefore I beseech you, be followers of
me: As absent in Body, but present in Spirit, have Judged already, etc. From
all which I shall observe (says the aforesaid author) "that it seems it was
Judged no Inconsistency nor contradiction, to be Followers of the Grace in our
selves, and also to be Followers of the Apostle Paul, and his ways; because
his Ways and Example was no other than the Spirit of God in themselves would
have led them to, if they had been obedient; and therefore he found it needful
to charge them Positively, to follow him, without adding this Reason.

"Next, the great Argument the Apostle uses to persuade them hereunto, upon
which he mainly insists, because he had begotten them into the Truth. Ye have
not many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you, through the Gospel;
wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me. So he makes that as the cause,
etc. We see then that the Lord has, and does give such, whom he has sent
forth to gather a People unto himself, a certain authority in the Power over
them, and to bring them back to their Duty, when they stray at any time, and to
appoint, yea and command such things as are needful for Peace, Order, and Unity
sake; and that there lies an Obligation on such as are so gathered to
Reverence, Honor, yea, and Obey such as are set over them in the Lord. Thus
far the aforesaid Author.

From all which I Observe.

First, That here is nothing spoken in these Scriptures, of the Commands of the
Church; and that if God has at any time moved an Apostle on some Occasion to
write unto a Peculiar Church (and that perhaps with relation to particular
Members only) by way of Command; yet this, according to right reason, is no
Ground for any Assembly of Persons, under the Notion of the Church of Christ,
to give forth positive Commands, in expectation that all the Members of Christ's
Church must obey the same, whether they have a Sense thereof from the Measure
of Truth in themselves or no.

Secondly, R. B. quoting this Scripture of the Apostle Paul, viz. In Christ
Jesus I have begotten you, through the Gospel; concludes, that Paul did mainly
insist upon his begetting them unto the Truth, as an Argument to persuade them
to obey his positive Charge to follow him; by this then, those who have
begotten any to the Truth, are the fittest to rule over such whom they have
begotten.

If this be worthy Observation at this Day, I then may well query, Whether
those who would Rule over such whom they have not gathered, are not Intruders,
and Busy-Bodies, meddling with that which concerns others more than themselves?

Moreover, I query, Whether any of these foregoing Scriptures give the least
Countenance for whole Assemblies to Minister by their Writings, that which may
be Matter of Faith, and relative to the Conscience, and to be a Bond thereon,
before their Understanding is illuminated; especially when what they do
Minister first springs from the Gift either but of one, or at most but a very
few of them? For since every man ought to Minister according as he has
received the Gift; and that, if any speak, they ought to speak as the Oracles
of God; and that if any Minister it ought to be done of the ability which God
gives, according to that of Peter, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. I cannot but again query,
Whether the endeavoring to obtain a Multitude of Hands to confirm and approve
that which is given forth by one, or at least a very few, may not become a
Temptation to many to run beyond their own Lines; and when they have so done,
instead of waiting on their own Gift, make it their Business to stand by what
they have done, though it may prove no better (in the best sense) than a
standing by the Gifts of others, out of, and in the neglect of their own Gifts?
And so such may become but little honor to the Brother, who Ministered in his
own Gift, as the Oracle of God: and not only so, but little credit to the
Truth, if such by meddling in things without their Line, bring forth Confusion
and Disorder: For what can be the Offspring of such, who labor and travel in
the things they understand not, but the Brats of Babylon?

Besides, those who are of such forwardly spirits, as to pin their Faiths on
other Men's Sleeves, and say Amen, to what other Men say, before they have an
Understanding opened to see the same, may often times approve (notwithstanding
this usual saying, Can the Brethren Err?) of such things which are not
ministered as the Oracles of God, though pretended so to be: And if any whose
Understandings God has opened to discern this kind of weakness in such (who
(boasting in other Men's Lines, of things made ready to their Hands) in very
deed take too much upon them) do out of true Love endeavor to convince them,
that so they might wait on their own Gifts. There are some ready to bring forth
what befell Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, because they said to Moses, and Aaron, Ye
take too much upon you; and what befell Miriam, because she said, Has the Lord
indeed spoken only by Moses? has he not spoken also by us? and make such a use
of these Scriptures as that they give occasion of Jealousy to some to conclude,
That there are some do believe, that God has raised up some Outward Person to
be amongst the Children of Light at this Day like unto Moses, and as he was in
that Day amongst the Children of Israel.

Amongst the Children of Light in these our latter Days, I never understood of
any deserving an higher Title, than an Elder, or Ministering Friend; But if such
mean, That God has raised up any Outward Man or Men, from whose Lips Gods
People must at this day receive the Law of Christ, and Record it in Books for
Generations to come, as his Law: I know there are many of the Children of
Light, who retain their First Love and Integrity for the Truth to this day, and
Honor enough in their hearts for every Brother, both Younger and Elder, that
keep faithful in their Place, and in very deed take not too much upon them, can
receive no such Testimony; not only because they know it to be against the
Nature of the Second Covenant, to expect such an appearance; but also, because
they believe, that Christ is that Prophet, whom the Lord promised, He would
raise up like unto Moses, whom we are to hear in all things; and that his
appearance is, and will be in the heart, where his Voice, as a Lawgiver, is to
be heard, and accordingly to be obeyed.

Thirdly, Though I pretend not to know the Occasions whereon the Apostles writ,
further than the Scripture manifests; yet I do know, how Truth was Preached in
the beginning amongst those, who (through the Power thereof being gathered) were
called Quakers, and that many would have undoubtedly fallen, both on the right
hand and on the left, should the ancient Laborers, after they had been
Instruments in the Lords hands to gather Thousands unto the Truth, have thus
said:

We are your Fathers, who in Christ Jesus have begotten you through the Gospel;
and we have on that foot a certain Authority in the Power over you, and to
command such things as are needful for Order and Unities sake; and that there
lies an Obligation on you to Reverence, Honor, and Obey us: And though you are
our Witnesses that we have often Declared, that our Commission from God was, to
turn People from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God, that so
they might all come to be Ordered and Governed by the Appearance of that Power
in themselves; Yet we did not mean, but that when we had gathered any unto the
Truth, we should be those, who ought to have the Rule over them; and that such
should observe our Traditions, or follow us, without giving them a Reason why:
And though they might in truth be submitting themselves one unto another in the
Lord, according to the Apostles Counsel, yet all of them must submit to us, and
Reverence, Honor and Obey us, and not think it any Contradiction to the being
led by the Measure of Gods Grace in themselves.

Should our ancient Brethren, Laborers in the Gospel, have thus said, I do not
see that therein they would render themselves of another mind, than R.B. is of,
if his Lines may be looked upon as the product of his Mind: but should they have
so done, doubtless, as I have said before, many would have fallen, and
Jealousies have entered the breasts of Thousands, That though these our
traveling Brethren, exalted the Spirit of God in man, as the only sufficient
Rule for man; and declared, that the Scriptures were not a sufficient Rule to
man; yet in stead of leaving us to that Rule, which they have declared to be
sufficient, they strain that which they have declared not sufficient, to make
it as much as in them lies, a Rule for them to Rule over their Brethren.

R. B. in his first Section, which treats of the Ground and Cause of the
Controversy, speaks, Page 15. " of a sort of Persons that would needs be
Innovators, and given to change and introducting New Doctrines and Practices;
not only differing, but contrary to what was delivered in the Beginning: and
Page 17. speaks of such, " who with swelling words talked of, and Preached up a
higher Dispensation.

To which I say, This Language leaves the Reader still Ignorant of what sort of
Persons they are he hints at; for that he tells not his Reader what was
delivered in the Beginning, and what is introduced contrary thereunto; neither
do I know how he well could, unless by report from others, since his Age would
not admit him as a sufficient and sensible Witness thereof; I shall therefore
take the pains to do it for him.

The Doctrines delivered in the Beginning were chiefly these, and such like,
viz. [That a Measure of Christ's Light and Grace of God was given to every Man
to profit withal, that this Grace was sufficient; that that which may be known
of God, was manifested in us; that the Scriptures were not the Rule, but the
Spirit; that that which was not of Faith was Sin; that we should draw Water out
of our own Wells; let it be your own, and not another: that we should not
boast in other Men's Lines of things made ready to our hands; but that since
every one must give account for himself, we should see for our selves; believe
for our selves, and savor for our selves and not pin our Faiths on the Sleeves
of any, lest we should become Will-worshippers.]

But now there are a sort of Innovators, given to change, who introduce such
Sayings, and Doctrines as these are.

First, That this Light will undo all, or at least, a Pretense to the Light;
which I cannot account Sound Language, if Paul's Testimony, Phil. 1.15, 18. was
Sound; who said, Some Preach Christ of Envy and Strife; What then?
Notwithstanding every Way, whether in Pretense, or in Truth Christ is Preached,
and I therein Rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

Secondly, That to pretend want of clearness in Sight, will not excuse any from
Disobedience to God, who submit not to the Sentence of an Assembly (or some or
other of them) which may in any tolerable Supposition be termed the Church of
Christ; and so are ready to Judge their Brethren as Apostatized from the Truth,
if they walk not according to the Lines and Measures of others, though they
have no Faith therein; contrary to that of Paul, who to the Corinthians said, 1
Cor. 10.15. Having Hope when your Faith is Increast, that we shall be enlarged
by you, according to our Rule; And whether these are not of that number, who
bring another Gospel than what we have already received, and so subject
themselves to the Curse, whilst they are endeavoring to manifest others
Accursed; Let Gods Witness in all Judge.

There are at this Day, who seem to make no Distinction between such as would
have no Iniquity reproved, and those who Conscientiously scruple to submit to
the Dictates of others, till their Understandings are Illuminated; these are of
that number who divide not aright, and seem so void of Charity as not to
distinguish between the Precious and the Vile: for though it was so, that Paul
in These. 3.6. (a Scripture quoted by R. B.) thus says, Now we command you
Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves
from every Brother, that walks disorderly; and not after the Traditions which
he received of us (and then Comments upon it) "what more positive than this?
and yet the Apostle was not here an Imposer.) To which I thus say, that this
Scripture is no Warrant for any to follow the Commands, or Traditions of others
at this day, until convinced of the Truth, and real Service of Obedience to
such Commands, or Traditions; which is evident by the reason that Paul in the
following Verse gives for the urging Obedience to his Precept, viz. for ye your
selves KNOW how that ye ought to follow us: So the Knowledge of their Duty was
the Bond, rather than Paul's Command, Verse. 14. of the same Chapter (being
another Scripture quoted by the aforesaid Author, Page 27.) Paul says, If any
Man Obey not our word, by this Epistle, note that man, and have no Company with
him, that he may be ashamed. This related to such of whom Paul Verse. 11, 12,
13, of the same Chapter, says, we have heard that there were some among you
that walked inordinately, and work not at all, but are Busi-Bodies; therefore
them that are such, we command and Exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that they
work with Quietness, and eat their own Bread; and ye Brethren, be not weary in
well doing; and then he exhorts, Verse. 14. If any man obey not our Saying, etc.
which plainly relates that to so undoubted and necessary a Duty mentioned,
Verse. 11. That such who were Busi-bodies, walking inordinately, might not in
their busy inordinate Spirit, eat the Bread of others, but work, that they
might eat their own Bread but whosoever they are, that shall bring such
Scriptures as these, to manifest that we ought to submit to the Outward Forms,
Prescriptions, Ceremonial Dictates, or decisive Sentences of others, when they
are or may be Matters of Conscience, and that there lies an Obligation in point
of Duty to Obey, in every or any of such Things, though we see it not, shows
themselves a sort of Busybodies, wanting work.

Paul, 1 Cor. 14.37. (a Scripture quoted by the aforesaid Author) thus says,
If any man think himself to be a Prophet or Spiritual, let him acknowledge that
the things that I write unto you are the Commandments of the Lord: and Verse.
34. of the same Chapter, Paul says, Let your women keep silence in the Church,
etc. Here Is a positive proof that women ought to be silent in the Church, and
that by the Command of Paul, and therefore me thinks it should be a shame for
such who plead for Women's speaking in the Church, and not only so, but for
their Service with respect to Exercise in Discipline, to pin so much (as to me
appears the aforesaid Author does in his Treatise) on the word Command used by
Paul, when according to the measure of Gods Grace, and Truth which the Children
of Light have received, they have and do testify, and that according to Truth
(notwithstanding what Paul says, and has Commanded) that Note, I would not
hereby be understood to justify All Women that have spoken in our Meetings,
because many of them have of late been so rude in their Opposition to John
Story, as that I take it to be a mere Scandal to Religion; and am persuaded
that by Paul's Command, the meaning of the Spirit was not positively according
as his own words seem to intiate, not only because the Prophet (Joel 2.28.)
prophesied that the Lord would pour out of his Spirit upon Sons and Daughters,
and that they should Prophesy; but also for that in the same Chapter (1 Cor.
14.) he exhorts the Church (who doubless consisted of Women as well as Men) to
Covet Spiritual Gifts, but rather that they might Prophesy, saying, Ye may all
Prophesy one by one: all which considered; it is rational to take the Mind of the
Spirit to he, that there were some unruly, disorderly Women then in the Church
(as in these our Days are) who then had need (as some now have) to be warned to
keep silence, though others, that had received a Revelation from God, might
declare the same in the Church when met together.
Women as well as Men, and Men as well as Women, may speak in the Church of
God, according to their respective Measures, when the Spirit of the Lord moves.

And since as the Apostle Paul himself testifies, 1 Cor. 10.8. That his
Authority was given him for Edification, and not for Destruction; I cannot but
be more Charitable than to think, Paul ever used the Words Command, Ordain,
Traditions, and such like, on any other account, but that the Churches should
be followers of him, according as in their own Measures they had a Sense, or
Savor, that he was a Follower of Christ, and not otherwise: which comparing
Phil. 3.17. with 2 Cor. 10.13, 14, 15, 16. does evidently appear. The
forementioned Scripture to the Philipians thus says, Brethren, be Followers
together of me; and mark them that walk so, as you have us for an Ensample:
that to the Corinths says, But we will not boast of Things without our
Measures, but according to the Measures of the Rule which God has distributed
to us, a Measure to reach even unto you; for we stretch not our selves beyond
our Measure, etc. not boasting of things without our Measures, that is, other
men's Labors; but having hope, when your Faith is Increased, that we shall be
enlarged by you, according to our Rule, abundantly, not to boast in another
man's Lines, of things made ready to our Hands.

Hence it is evident, those who keep to their own Measures, follow Paul as they
have him for an ensample; and that those who hope and desire their Brethrens
Conformity to their Lines, before they have faith therein, are of another Hope
than Paul was, who (as is above recited) thus said, Having Hope when your faith
is increased; that we shall be enlarged by your, according to our Rule
abundantly. And so it plainly appears, that Paul did not desire the Corinthians
to walk by his Line, until their faith was increased, otherwise they might
become Proud Boasters of other men's Lines, made ready to their Hands, as many,
yea, too to many, at this day are.

I now come to consider of his 6th. Section, the Title whereof Page 47. is
this. viz. "How far this Government does extend in matters Spiritual and purely
Conscientious, in which the great question (says the aforesaid Author) is How
far in such Cases the Church may give positive Orders or Rules; How far her
Authority reaches or may be supposed to be binding and ought to be submitted
to. For the better clearing and examination of which, he thus further says, It
will be fit to consider; First, whether the Church of Christ have Power in any
Cases that are Matters of Conscience, to give a positive Sentence, or Decision,
which may be Obligatory upon believers.

" Secondly, If so, in what Cases and respect she may so do.

Thirdly, Wherein consists the Freedom, and Liberty of Conscience, which may
be exercised by the Members of the true Church diversely, without Judging one
another.

And lastly, In whom the Power Decisive is, in Case of Controversy and
Contention in such Matters.

As to the first, Whether the Church of Christ have Power in any Cases that are
Matters of Conscience, to give Positive Sentence or Decision, which may be
obligatory upon believers.

I answer, affirmatively, she has. And shall prove it from diverse instances
both from Scripture and Reason. Thus far the aforesaid Author.

The force of R B's Reason I apprehend to be chiefly comprehended in, or drawn
from these his following words, as by his writing Page 48, 49. more at Large,
appears. viz. "That we being gathered together into the Belief of certain
Principles and Doctrines (through the force of Truth on our Understandings) and
Practices necessarily depending upon them, these are as it were the Terms, that
have drawn us together, and Bond by which we become centered into one Body, and
Fellowship. Yet says he by a Marginal Note, "Not so the Bond but that we have
also a more inward, viz. the Life of Righteousness.

The Scripture proofs that he quotes are these, Gal. 1.8. 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. 2
John 10. thus further adding, "These Scriptures are so plain and clear in
themselves, that they need no greater Exposition to the unbyased Reader.

My place now is, to detect the impertinency of R. B's reason, and to show,
that he has quoted Scriptures, which are not to the purpose, yet I cannot but
first observe, that since the main scop of his Treatise, relating to this
Matter, both from Scripture and Reason; tends (as it were) chiefly, if not
wholly, to evidence, that such Principles, Doctrines, and Practices necessarily
depending thereon, are the Bond by which we became centered into one Body, and
Fellowship; is it not to be doubted that these kind of Terms have the greatest
room on his Heart, and the Marginal Description of a more inward Bond, viz, the
life of Righteousness, is but like the entertainment of Christ in the Manger?
But to proceed.

I do affirm, the Belief of certain Principles, and Doctrines (though believed
thorough the force of Truth on the Understanding) and Practices necessarily
depending upon them, are not the very terms and Bond, by which the Church of
Christ at this day, is become centered into one Body; though I do confess that
Certain Principles, Doctrines, and Practices, held and Practiced in a pure
Mind, are the Fruit and Offspring of that which is the Bond; but the Very Bond
they are not: If they were, how comes it to pass, that to this day, the
Members of Christ's Body (which is his Church) have not declared and agreed,
what and how many are those Principles, and Doctrines, and what are those
Practices necessarily depending thereon, that ought to be believed, received,
and Practiced by every member of the Church of Christ, as that by which they
are centered into the Heavenly Fellowship of Christ's Body?

With confidence I may say, that I never heard or understood of any such thing
yet extant amongst the Church of Christ, neither do I believe there is; and
doubtless if there was, the aforesaid Author being a man (to speak after the
manner of men) that is well read, and not of a Mean capacity, would have quoted
it, to free himself from the censure of such, who may Justly say, He has left
us in the dark, how to know these Members, who (to use his own Language, Page
49.) cut themselves off from being Members, by dissolving the very Bond, by
which they were linked to the Body.

Nay, I may truly say, That in the primitive days, there were many believers;
who were found in Opposite Faiths and Practices; witness those who Circumcised,
kept a Day, abstained from flesh; and others there were, who believed and
practiced quite otherwise; and yet we do not find, that the Bond which Centered
them into the heavenly Fellowship of Christ's Body was broken: for doubtless
many of them under those Differing Faiths and Practices, were of the number of
such, who were sanctified in Christ Jesus, or at least in some measure
sanctifying, which is the description of a Member of Christ's Body (according
as the aforesaid Author himself does in his Treatise signify) and this is
answerable to the Truth it self; Read Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8.

For further Discovery of the Truth of what I have asserted it is necessary to
query.

What are the very Terms and Bond, by which the Church of Christ is become
centered into one Body?

The Answer is plain, It Is the Spirit, according to Paul's Testimony, 1 Cor.
12.13. For by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one Body: Now the Baptism of
the Spirit may be witnessed by such, whose Integrity might lead them to Die for
Truth; but should they be Questioned by any one, What are those Principles,
Doctrines and Practices you hold, which were the very Terms by which you came
to be Centered into Christ's Body, and which were the Cause that gathered you?
(for so are his words, Page 47. relating to Principles and Doctrines) they
would be ready thus to say, What blind Questions do thou bring forth in thy
Carnal Sensual reasoning? 'Twas Gods Power and Spirit gathered us from amongst
such, as being out of the Life, gloried in their owtward Fellowships,
Principles, and Doctrines; and by his Power Circumcised our Hearts, and by his
Spirit we came to be baptized into one Body, and so are centered into the
heavenly Fellowship of Christ's Body: And as for thy saying, A Belief in
Certain Principles, Doctrines, and Practices necessarily depending thereon, are
the Terms and very Bond by which we became centered into one Body, and the
Cause that gathered us; this is not only wrong in it self (though as is said
before, they may be the Fruit of the Bond) but exactly like the False Churches
in the World.

Papists and Protestants of all sorts in the Apostasy, have Outward Marks and
Tokens (as being either of such an Order, or having such a Commission, or as
believing in such Principles, and submitting to such Practices, and the like)
by which the Members of their Churches are described; and therefore is it that
amongst those, there are outward Societies of Men, certainly known, as
aforesaid, according to the various Manners, and Ways which their Principles
admit and allow of, which are termed the Church of Christ: and these have many
Outward Orders, Rules, Prescriptions, Ordinances, Decrees, or Laws for the
Establishment and Preservation of their outward Society, which being agreeable
to the nature of their Constitutions, may become fit means for the Conservation
thereof: but inasmuch as the Belief of certain Principles, Doctrines, and
Practices necessarily depending thereon, are not the very Terms or Bond to
unite any in outward Assemblies, whereby to assume unto themselves the Title of
the Church of Christ (for that if held in a pure Mind (which is in the best
Sense) they are but the Fruit of that Bond, and when held in an Impure Mind are
no Indication that such are Members of Christ's Church) I cannot but say, it is
against right Reason for any to Prescribe, and Establish Outward Indispensable
Rules, and Orders, relating to the Conscience, and in order to be a Bond
thereon, for the Conservation of Christ's Body, since it is evident, that the
most certain and infallible Marks of Membership in the said Body, are Invisible
to the Outward Man, though felt and known to the Inward Man of the Heart: for
though Actions outwardly just, are many times the Fruit of the Spirit; yet are
not always certain Tokens, that those through whom they appear, are Members of
Christ's Body: but those who are Circumcised in Heart, and have the Answer of a
Good Conscience toward God, are the very Members of Christ's Church; and
therefore, the most proper Means for the preservation of such Members in the
Unity of the Spirit, and as Members of one Body, is that whereby they came to
be Circumcised in Heart, and gathered unto the Truth, which is no other but the
Spirit, and Arm of Gods Power, which surrounds all those that wait upon him,
and have a daily Dependence upon the Lord, with the Mind inwardly staid in the
Measure of that Grace, which the Apostle says is sufficient for them: and thus
the Baptism of the Spirit will be witnessed continually, in which every Member
of Christ's Body comes to be centered into an Heavenly Fellowship and Communion
each with other in the Life of Righteousness.

The next thing I shall examine, is, whether R. B's Affirmative Answer to this
Question, viz. Whether the Church of Christ has Power in any Cases that are
Matters of Conscience, to give postive Sentence and Decision, which may be
Obligatory upon Believers, be agreeable to Truth and Sound Doctrine.

My Observation hereon is this, That he has not here adjoined Inward
Conviction, whereby they might find Clearness in themselves, to the Sentence of
the Church, as necessary to the Obligation he Intends; and inasmuch as nothing
without an Inward Clearness and Conviction, can become a real, and acceptable
Bond upon a Believer to be at Unity with his Brethren, in the Belief and
Practice of Things relating to Conscience, and that those who are found in the
Practice of other Men's Lines, before they have Faith therein, may often times run
into the Sin of Hypocrisy, even as others may into the Sin of Negligence, who
through Unwatchfulness to their own Measures, want Clearness of Sight, and
Understanding to practice and join with those things, which others (waiting in
their Own Measures) may by the Spirit be led into: Therefore I cannot but say,
that the Scope and Bent of his Spirit, so far as from his words I can Savor,
in relation to this Matter, are not agreeable to the Truth and Sound Doctrine.

And since it is so, as R. B. observes, Page 35. "That God has not given us
our Reasons to no purpose; I shall according to the Line of right Reason, a
little further Observe.

First, I find R. B. treating in his 7th Section concerning the Power of
Decision thus to say, Page 66. "The only proper Judge of Controversy in the
Church is the Spirit of God; and the Power of Deciding solely lies in it, as
having the only infallible Judgment belonging to it; which Infallibility is not
necessarily annexed to any Persons, Person or Places whatsoever, by Virtue of
any Office, Place or Station any one may have, or have had in the Body of
Christ, that is to say, that any have Ground to reason thus, Because I am or
have been such an Eminent Member, therefore my Judgment is Infallible; or
because we are the greatest Number, or that we live in such a noted or famous
Place, or the like; though some of these Reasons may, and ought to have their
true weight in Case of Contradictory Assertions. Thus the aforesaid Author.

From all which, two things are Observable:

First, That the aforesaid Author accounts the Spirit the only Judge.

Secondly, That though he affirms, that the Church of Christ has Power in
Cases that are Matters of Conscience, to give positive Sentences and Decision,
which may be Obligatory upon Believers, yet through his whole Treatise I find
not that he has described, who are the Persons that are the Church, and where
those Persons do usually Assemble, as the Church of Christ; and therefore
though my very soul abhors lightly to esteem of the Elect of God, or to
undervalue the Power the Church of God either stands in, or are endued with;
yet since I do know, how dangerous a thing it is, for any to burden the
Consciences of Gods People, though under ever so specious Pretenses; and that
when we speak of the Church of Christ, we mean Visible Persons, distinguished as
outward Persons, by Names, that may be known to the Outward Man (though as
Members of Christ's Body distinguished not by such Names, but by that Name which
is written in Heaven, and known to the Inward Man). I cannot but query, To what
end does the aforesaid Author assign the Decision of Cases of Conscience (which
are Matters certainly to be known) so as to be binding on Believers, to Judges
so described, as that a greater Controversy may immediately arise, upon the
asking of this question, Who or where those men are? This, instead of removing
one Difference, or clearing one Doubt, may beget more. And whereas it may be
said, We assign not to men, as Judges; but to the Spirit of God in Men; yet
this does not wholly mend the Matter, whilst the Question remains unanswered
Who, or where are the Men, thorough whom the Spirit appears to Judge; or at
least so unanswered, as not to remove the reasonable Objections of such as may
gainsay: and so through these things the mind of the Weak may come to be
entertained with doubtful Disputations, rather then those things which tend to
Edification, contrary to the drift and bent of the Apostle's Spirit, Romans 14.1.
1 Cor. 14.26.

Secondly, I cannot yet cease from a further Observation on the aforesaid
Position, viz. [Which positive sentence and decision may become Obligatory on
Believers.] It Is true, the aforesaid Author does not here say, it ought to
become Obligatory upon Believers: yet to me it is evident, that he intends, that
such a Sentence ought to become Obligatory on Believers, seeing on one
Instance, as Proof to his Affirmation, he thus says, And is not this
Obligatory on all the Members, etc? Further saying, with relation thereto, I
cannot tell that any Man of Reason can well deny this.

That which R. B. in these things seems to drive at, has (as to me appears) a
plain tendency to draw from the Measure of Truth in our selves (though I dare
not be so uncharitable as to conclude he so intends; and if any Line has dropped
from my Pen which may seem to import so much, I declare that not to be my
Meaning) or at least, to encourage the lending an Ear to the Sense and Judgment
of others, more than to that Sense and Savor, which we have within our selves;
For first, by Believers, I take the aforesaid Author plainly to intend, as well
such Believers as are no way concerned in giving forth such Positive Sentence,
or Decision, as those that are: else what is the meaning of these his words, And
is not this Obligatory on all the Members? And so such unconcerned may have no
better Ground to be at Unity therewith, than the saying of others. Now I cannot
tell how any man of reason can make out, that this seems any better than this
sort of Language. [Ye must believe as the Church believes] of which more anon,
that I may not be understood to reflect on any thing that may in any measure
savor of Truth.

Thirdly, It does seem plainly to contradict this wholesome Testimony of and
for the Truth, viz. That the Sentence and Judgment of any Man or Men
whatsoever, relating to Matters of Conscience, ought not at this day to be
given forth, but by way of Recommendation to the Conscience; (which to my
knowledge has been the Practice of the People called Quakers) and when the
Conscience is sensible that Gods Witness therein answers, then the Conscience
is or ought to be bound; other Bonds may make Hypocrites, and Busi-bodies, but
not good Christians.

Paul, writing to the Corinthians, tells them, We recommend our selves to every
Man's Conscience in the Sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.2. Here Paul became not a Bond
upon them, further than they had a Sense that Gods Witness in the Conscience
answered.

The same Paul tells the Corinthians, as before is quoted, thus: Having hope,
that when your Faith is increased, we shall be enlarged by you, according to
our Rule, abundantly. This does not manifest Paul's Desire was, that they should
walk according to his Rule, until their Faith was increased.

Let us now examine how R. B. by Scripture proves, that the Positive Sentence
and Decision of the Church in Matters of Conscience, may be Obligatory upon
Believers: for that he says I shall prove it from Diverse Instances from
Scripture; and in order thereto I find him to quote only three Scriptures.

The First, is Gal. 1.8. But though We, or an Angel from Heaven, Preach any
other Doctrine unto you, than that which we have Preached unto you, let him be
Accursed.

If this Scripture be a proper Proof of the Matter, then by the Word [we] Paul
must be understood to mean the Church, and that in the aforesaid Authors Sense;
Now the aforesaid Authors Sense, as appears, Page 68. is, That such Assemblies
are the Church, which in any tolerable Supposition may be so termed; but
doubtless Paul was so exact, as not to deliver any thing, as Doctrine, but what
he had seen, and handled, according to this Testimony recorded in the
Scriptures, What we have seen and handled of the Word of Life, that declare we
unto you: Which being certain, and infallible Tokens, are more than tolerable
Suppositions; and therefore I cannot but conclude, Paul never intended, that
such, who refused to be bound in Matters of Conscience, by the Sentences of
every such Assembly, which in any tolerable Supposition might be termed the
Church of Christ, should be pronounced Accursed; much less if they shall pretend
they see it not; and yet the aforesaid Author says (as hereafter is manifest)
to this purpose, That that shall not excuse such from Disobedience to God, who
submit not to the Sentences given forth by such Assemblies, or some or other of
them.

And likewise it ought to appear that a part of that Gospel, which the Church,
and not only Paul (who as he was moved of the Lord, writ to the Churches by way
of Exhortation and Doctrine) Preached to the Galatians, was, That the positive
Sentence or Decision of the Church, either ought to be Obligatory on all the
Members, or at lest Obligatory on Believers; or else that which by a natural
Consequence might import the same: but no such Doctrine, nor the import thereof
by any reasonable Consequence appears from the Church, nor yet from Paul to the
Galatians, or any else.

And since Paul is thus quoted, let us enquire how Paul did after it pleased
God to reveal his Son in him; for there were Apostles and Elders before him;
and yet he says, Gal. 1.16, 17. I consulted not with Flesh and Blood, neither
came I again to Jerusalem to the Apostles and Elders before me; and though
'twas not in a Case of controversy touching Conscience, yet 'twas in a Case
that to him was Matter of Conscience: And when he perceived that Peter and
other of the Jews would have constrained the Gentiles to do like the Jews, he
withstood Peter to the face, Gal. 2.11, 13. Now Peter and those other Jews
might have reasoned with Paul, and said, we are the Brethren, and the Church,
and our Practice ought to be a Bond on thee; and thou ought rather to submit
to us, than we to thee: but had they so done, doubtless Paul, would still have
withstood them, and have been Justified therein.

The Second Scripture R. B. quotes is, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. which thus says.
Holding Faith and a Good Conscience which some having put away, concerning
Faith have made Shipwreck, of whom is Hymeneus and Allexander, whom I have
delivered to Satan, that they may learn not to Blaspheme.

What Is this to the purpose, to prove, that the Positive Sentence, and dicision
of the Church in Matters of Conscience, may bind Believers? It Is so remote from
it, that it needs no explanation to show it so. Nay I may reasonably query,
Whether this Scripture be (to ordinary capacities) plain to the purpose that
Paul himself intends? For if we consult the Light, it does not tell us, that a
Delivery to Satan, may be an Expedient whereby to learn not to Blaspheme; if by
the word Satan is meant the Devil, as is usually understood.

The last Scripture he quotes for proof is, Joh. 2.10. If there come any unto
you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid
him rejoice, for so says the aforesaid Author the Greek has it.

Here also no mention is made of any positive Sentence, or decision of the
Church, nor yet the import thereof by any natural Consequence; and therefore we
will consider, what the word Doctrine is relative to. The foregoing verse tells
us thus, whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ,
has not God: Its now necessary to consider what was Christ's Doctrine; it is
well described by his Sermon in the Mount, Mat. 5.6. Chapters, wherein there is
not the least title to countenance this Sentence, That the positive Sentence or
decision of the Church, in Matters of Conscience, may be Obligatory on
Believers: Nay in that very case, Mat. 18.15, 16. Where it is said, If thy
Brother Trespass against thee, go tell him his faults; if he hear thee not,
take with thee one or two; if he hear not them, tell it to the Church; if he
refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man. The
Scripture does not say, that Sentence ought to be Obligatory on all other
Members of the Church of Christ, who might be no way concerned either in the
Admonition or Sentence, to look upon him as an Heathen Man; but it says, Let
him be unto [thee] as an Heathen Man.

Christ's Doctrine also was, that when he should depart hence the Father would
send the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, which (says he) shall teach you all
things: he does not say, the Judgment of the Church must be Obligatory on all
believers, nor yet that the Church shall teach them all things; for it is
evident by the Apostles writings, that they themselves had need of teaching.
These things duly weighed, I do according to Truth conclude, that the three
foregoing Scriptures, which he has quoted, do no way import to prove the
Matter he intends.

Besides, I remember only one Example of Decisive Judgment, or Sentence given
in the Scriptures by the Apostles, and Elders (who did it not as assuming
Authority so to do, saying, We are the Church of Christ, and we have Power to
Decide without your Assent: but what they did was by assent of the Differing
Parties (which assent is worthy to be noted by such who say (as R. B. has) we
boldly aver, we have Power to decide) and that speaks nothing in favor of what
the aforesaid Author seemed to drive at, when he said, And is not this
Obligatory on all the Members? but rather the Contrary; and that is in the
15th. of the Acts, where a Dissension is Signified between Paul and Barnabas on
the one hand, and certain of the Sect of the Pharisees ( who Believed and
Taught, Unless ye be Circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved)
on the other hand.

In Answer to this Question the Apostles and Elders agree, that Circumcision
was not fit to be laid on the Gentiles, which were Believers (who never were in
the Practice, nor yet had any Faith touching the same) yet do not say, that
their Sentence shall or ought to be Obligatory on all the Members of the Church
of Christ; nor yet that those Jews, who practiced Circumcision after they
believed, should desist the same: for then it might have been looked upon as
Obligatory on such Believing Jews; and the reason of that Sentence does plainly
agree with the Testimony of Truth received amongst the People of the Lord
called Quakers in the Beginning, viz. To walk according to the Measure
received: For the Apostles and Elders well knew, that (according as Paul said
to the Romans, Chap. 14.5, 23.) It was necessary for every one to be fully
persuaded in their own Minds; and that, whatsoever was not of Faith, was Sin:
and so could not suffer their Sentence (had they had Power so to do) to be a
Bond on those Jews who made Conscience of practicing Circumcision, after they
had believed, to forbear the same: and as to the Gentiles, it does plainly
appear, that the Decisive Judgment of the Apostles, etc. with respect to that
Controversy, touching Circumcision, was not a Bond upon them, contrary, but
according to their Faith; and therefore this Example can be no President, or
Warrant for any to submit to the Sentence, or Decisive Judgment of any
whatsoever, wherein there is no Faith, much less to conclude, that the
Conscience ought to be bound. For it is no more in the Powers of Believers, or
any else, to force an assent of their own Consciences, to the Sentences and
Decisive Judgments of others, though pretending themselves the Church of
Christ, without an Invisible Operation, and Conviction thereon (through which
alone it is capable to be bound) than it is in our Powers so to alter the
outward Shapes of our Faces, as to make them like unto other Men's, from whose
they vary.

Moreover when I consider, how Innumerable Controversies have a risen touching
the Authority of the Church, and the Decrees that have been brought forth
touching Matters of Conscience, under the Notion of the Church of Christ, in
Ages past; and that the like Controversies in probability may arise at this
Day, should any number of Persons whatsoever Assemble, and not only say, we are
the Church of Christ, but also thus, we have power to bind and lose; and upon
that foot give forth Positive Sentences, and Decesive Judgments in Cases that
are Matters of Conscience, in order to be Obligatory upon Believers; I cannot
but query (especially since the People of the Lord called Quakers, have not
Preached up this Doctrine, (ye must Believe as the Church Believes) but have
commended their Testimonies on the behalf of Truth to every Man's Conscience in
the Sight of God, that therein they might be manifested) I say, I cannot but
query, Where lies the Service to God, and his Truth, for any to concern
themselves to treat on such Subjects, as may give Occasion to receive the weak
to Doutbfnl Disputations? For though Christ said What you bind in Earth, shall
be bound in Heaven, Yet we do not find in the Scriptures of Truth, that the
Apostles, or any Assembly under the Notion of the Church of Christ, ever made
use of that Expression to show their Authority as Christ's Church; but rather
labored to beget People unto God, that so they might become Members of Christ's
Body which is the Church, and be in Subjection to Christ the Head, to whom all
Power is given in and over his Church, who are Fellow Members and
Fellow Servants of and in his Body; whose Power and Prevalency with the Lord is
better demonstrated by coveting to Wash each others Feet, according to the
Example of Christ their Lord and Master, than to be in the Exercise of Outward
Jurisdiction, as Lords and Masters over each other: For that agrees not with
the Testimony of Paul, Romans 14.10. who thus said, Why do thou Judge thy
Brother? why do thou despise thy Brother? for we shall all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ; for it is written, says the Lord, every Knee shall
bow to me, and all Tongues shall Confess unto God; so then every one of us
shall give an account of himself to God; let us not therefore Judge one another
any more.

The consideration of these things puts me in mind, that there are some, who in
their buisy minds are apt to be considering, What sort of Joys Heaven, Yields
to the Faithful after this life; whenas their time would undoubtedly be much
better spent, in contemplating how to come thither: or if they have assurance
thereof, to be demonstrating the Way to others, if called thereto. To this sort
may such be likened, who will needs give themselves the trouble to treat how
far Christ's Government extends, though [of its increase there is no end and in
what Cases, that are matters of Conscience, the Church has Power to give forth
Positive Sentences, that may obliege Believers; though nothing can be an
acceptable Bond upon the Conscience, until by the Light convinced; and that in
such Cases, greater Controversies may arise, whether such as give forth such
Sentences, are the Church or no, than were before concerning the Matters
whereof they assume Jurisdiction: and therefore of such it may be truly said,
That their Time might be much better spent in the Exercise of their Minds unto
God, that if they are not Subjects of Christ's Kingdom and under his
Government, they may attain thereto, and be subject to his Power, to whom all
Power both in Heaven and Earth is given, and that being thereunto attained, may
be preserved therein unto the End, and be demonstrating unto others, how to
attain the same, if called thereunto.

Concerning the Power of decision, R. B. Page 66. says, as on another occasion
is already quoted; "The only proper Judge of Controversy in the Church, is the
Spirit of God, and is not necessarily annexed to any Persons, or Person, or
Place whatsoever, etc. That is to say, that any have ground to reason thus,
Because I am or have been such on eminent Member, therefore my Judgment is
infallible; or because we are the Greatest Number, or that we live in such a
noted or famous Place; though some of these reasons may and ought to have their
true weight, in Case of Contradictory Assertions

Here I cannot but query, That if the Spirit of God be the only proper Judge of
Controversy in the Church (as the aforesaid Author says it is) how then can
there be any weight in any other thing else beside the Spirit? And whether
these his words, viz. Some of these reasons ought to have their true weight, in
Case of Contradictory Assertions, (when relative to that which he himself
concludes is unalterably seated in the Spirit of God) seem not a contradiction
in common sense? And whether under this very Notion, those who are but weak in
the Faith, or of a Temporizing Spirit, may not have an eye to some Eminent
Member, or the Greatest Number, or the Brethren in some noted or famous place,
more than to the Spirit of God and measure of his Grace in themsevles; I leave
to the Judicious Reader to consider. Besides, why are not the Meanest of the
Flock, the Lesser Number, and some Inconsiderable Ignoble Place, mentioned, and
that some of these also may and ought to have their true weight, since the
testimony of Truth has been, that God has chosen the Foolish, Weak, and vile
despised things of the World, to confound the Wise and Mighty? R. B. Further
says, Page 68. " First, That there never will nor can be wanting in Case of
Controversy, the Spirit of God to give Judgment thorough some or other in the
Church of Christ so long as any Assembly can properly or in any tolerable
supposition be so termed.

" Secondly, That God ordinarily has employed such whom he has made use of in
gathering his Church, though not excluding others.

" Thirdly, That their, de facto, giving a positive Judgment in such Cases,
will not import Tyranny and Usurpation; neither will the pretenses of any
Contradicting them, or refusing to submit on the account they see it not,
excuse them of being guilty of Disobeying God.

But of these three Assertions may be collected without the least abuse of the
Authors words, this short ensuing sentence.

That a person's not submitting to the positive Judgment, touching Controversy,
given by any Assembly (or at least by some or other of them) which may in any
tolerable supposition be termed the Church of Christ, is Disobedience to God,
though the persons refusing pretend, they refuse to submit on the account they
see it not.

By this sort of Language, every one must not only now believe, as the Church
believes (of which that I may not be misunderstood, I refer the Reader to what
shall be written thereon in what hereafter follows) but also must believe as
any Assembly (or some or other of them) does, which in any tolerable
supposition may be termed the Church of Christ, or at least submit to such,
though the persons refusing shall pretend they see it not.

He that runs, may read a body of darkness and confusion herein, what a long
step at once is here, from under Christ's Government, that now submission must
be to any Assembly, or some or other of them, that in any tolerable
supposition may be termed Christ's Church? Nay, if the want of sight being laid
for an excuse, shall not excuse Submission, may I not farther say, What a long
step at once is this to magnify that Devotion, whereof Ignorance is the Mother,
and that zeal which is without knowledge? Is here any room left to see and
savor for our selves? And if this be not an apparent mark of an Imposing
Usurping Spirit, and an evident Abuse to the profession of Truth, and the
ancient Laborers therein, whose Testimonies were [We preach not our selves;
nor yet that you should be Followers of us; otherwise than as you have an
Inward Sense in your selves, that we are Followers of Christ] let God's Witness
in all Judge. To the same witness I cannot but yet appeal, whether the
submission, that seems to be aimed at, is not one of the greatest steps to an
Apostasy, that has appeared in our Age, or since the Truth has in these
latter years been published amongst us? for I do know, having been a witness of
the primitive gathering, and testimonies amongst us in these latter ages, that
one part of the Glory of that Administration, under which Thousands in these
Nations were gathered unto God, did consist in this, that after they had been
wandering from Mountain to Hill, from under one form and outward
Church Fellowship into another, they came to be turned to the sure guide in
themselves, Christ's Light, and warned not to look out, neither to be in the Lo
here is and the Lo there is, but to be faithful to their Own Measures; for that
according to Paul's Testimony, God's Grace was given to every one, according to
the Measure of the Gift of Christ. But to return.

Let us examine how he proves his first Assertion, viz. That there never will
nor can be wanting in Case of Controversy, the Spirit of God to give Judgment,
through some or other in the Church of God, so long as any Assembly can
properly, or in any tolerable Supposition be so termed. His Proof is on this
wise.

For the first, says he, "To those who believe the Scriptures, there will need
no other Probation, than that of the 28th. of Matthew and the 20th. And lo I am
with you always, unto the End of the World. And Verse. 18. And the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it.

How this proves the Matter to me, appears not; for these Scriptures do neither
expressly, nor by any natural Consequence say, That any Assembly is the Church
of Christ, which may in any tolerable supposition be so termed; nor yet speak
any thing of Controversies arising amongst the Members of the Church of Christ.
Had he brought the first Scripture to prove, that Christ would be with such
whom he at this day makes use of to Teach all Nations (as he did his Disciples
at that day) whilst they should teach to Observe the things that Christ (to
whom all Power is given) commands (not the Commands of Assemblies, which may in
any tolerable Supposition be termed the Church of Christ, but the things that
Christ Commands) he had exactly hit the Mark: But as to the Matter, the
aforesaid Author seems by his Words to drive at, it is far from being to the
purpose.

And as to the second Scripture, had he brought it to prove, That the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against that Church, which is built on the Rock Christ,
'twould have answered the End; But alas! it is far remote from proving, that
God's Spirit will appear to decide Controversies in every Assembly, that in any
tolerable supposition can be termed Christ's Church. And so I cannot but
conclude, that these and several other Scriptures, which he has quoted as
Proof of his Assertions, seem rather strained to Vindicate what he asserts,
than that his Assertions are according to it; on which hand he says in his
Epistle to the Reader, That both Papists and Protestants have greatly gone
aside; which might have been a Caution to him, not to have Erred in the same
Path, as now he has done.

Let us a little further examine his Words, [Tolerable Supposition.]

When we are not certain of the Truth of any thing, and yet are apt to think it
is or may be so, we commonly say, My Supposition is, that it is or may be so;
and though the aforesaid Author adjoyns to the word Supposition [Tolerable] yet
that ascertains nothing, it only imports such a Supposition may be sufferable,
that is, may be suffered to be a Supposition, not a thing that is Certain.

There are Assemblies Obvious to every Eye, that knows any thing of
Christianity, which cannot on any Terms be supposed the Church of Christ. There
are other Assemblies which have several Marks and Tokens of the Church of
Christ, so far as several things outward, professed and acted may be such; and
yet notwithstanding, not owned by the Lord as the Church of Christ; The present
Age as well as Ages past yields many Presidents to prove the same; for that
it is Obvious there have been many Assemblies under various Forms, who profess
Faith in Christ, Works of Righteousness, and diverse Truths owned by the true
Church of Christ.

Now whether such things professed and owned, may not be ground for a tolerable
supposition, that such Assemblies are the Church of Christ, I leave to the
Judgment of the impartial and Judicious reader, having this further Testimony
to add, that the World has too much been troubled with the Sentences, Decrees,
and Decisive Judgments of too many Assemblies, supposed to be the Church of
Christ, or that on tolerable Supposition have been so termed, who have rather
increased than ended Controversies, as History does at large manifest.

And since R. B. undertakes by Reason to evidence the same, I shall (according
to the Line of Right Reason and Truth) take upon me further to discover the
Fallacy of his so confident Assertion.

The Qualifications of a Member of Christ's Body, is Sanctification through the
Spirit. Wheresoever any number of Persons, so qualified, are Assembled in
Christ's Name, there is the Church of Christ, though they are of that number,
who are of the lowest Degree or Rank in the Body. Now, an Assembly of such
Members may be as Insensible and void of Understanding in many Divine Matters,
and Mysteries relating to the Kingdom of God, as the Ear of the natural Body
may be Insensible of what the Eye does see; and so may have Cases of
Controversies brought before them, whereof they are no more competent Judges
(not being Gifted thereunto by the Spirit) than the Eye of the natural Body is
capable to distinguish between the Diversities of Voices, and Sounds, or the
Ear of Diversities of Colors; and yet may be all Faithful in their Places,
walking according to their respective Measures of Grace, which God has given
them; so that none can in Truth say, such an Assembly may not properly be
called the Church of Christ, being built upon him their Rock, and having
perfect Fellowship each with other in the Life of Righteousness.

Obj. And whereas some may be ready to Object and say, Why do thou seem to
reflect on this Sort of Language, We must Believe as the Church Believes? Note.
This Question is stated in a Printed Book, and published by one called a
Quaker, whose name is omitted for the reason mentioned in the Preface to the
First Part.
Is not the true Church in the true Faith? and must we not either Believe thus
as the true Church Believes, or else do we not manifest both Folly and
Hypocrisy to profess ourselves Members thereof?

Answer. To this Objection, having in my foregoing Lines used such an
Expression, I thus say, The General Assembly and Church of the First Born are
written in Heaven, Heb. 12.23. But I do not find that this General Assembly,
set forth their Creed, recorded on Earth; by that I thus mean, I do not find
any certain number of Articles of Faith written in the Scriptures of Truth,
which every Member of this General Assembly did Believe, and which every one,
who should come to be gathered into the Fellowship of Christ's Body, ought to
Believe; and though there have been so many Diversities of Creeds in the World,
according to the various Apprehensions of diverse Assemblies, assuming to
themselves the Title of the Church of Christ, yet to this day I find not
amongst the People of the Lord called Quakers, that any certain number of
Articles of Faith, are given forth from any General Assembly, or Particular
Congregation, under the Notion of the Church of Christ, as their Creed, and as
a Measuring-Line, by which those, who are either in, or departed from the
Faith, may be known: and the reason hereof is evident; because it is against the
Fundamental Principle ( viz. the Light) to exalt any other Measuring-Line, than
that by which we were Baptized into the one Body of Christ ( viz. the Spirit.)
Having thus promised, as a more particular Answer to the Question, I thus say,
I confess, the true Church is in the true Faith, and every Member thereof is in
some measure (at least) of the same Faith, that all the Elect of God are of; so
that it may in Truth be said, every Member of the Church does in some measure
Believe as the rest of the Members do; I say [in some Measure] because as there
were diversities of Gifts and Operations, so also were there Differences in
Measures of Faith; and therefore does the Apostle wisely say, to this purpose,
Let him that Prophesies, Prophesy according to the Proportion of Faith, Romans
12.6.

But should any arise to say, it is Folly, and Hypocrisy to Professones self a
Member of the true Church, and yet not Believe thus, as the true Church
Believes, without any further Explanation of the words, or of what is intended
thereby, such may subject themselves to censure: for by the words [True Church]
in this Sentence (and yet not Believe thus as the true Church Believes) will be
understood the rest of the Members, from whom one or more differs in Faith: Now
there may happen to be a weak Brother, whose Faith in some particular Matters
may be otherwise than the rest of his Brethren's is; this Case happened amongst
the Romans, to whom Paul thus writ, Romans 14.3, 4, 22, 23. Let not him that
eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him that eats not, Judge him
that eats: for God has received him. Who art thou that condemnest another
Man's Servant? to his own Master he stands or falls. Have thou Faith? have
it to thy self. He that doubts, is condemned if he eat, because he eats not
of Faith; and whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin.

Here a Diversity of Faith is Evident, and that between Brethren and Members of
the Church, and yet neither appear to be Fools or Hypocrites: he that did eat,
was not to be Judged, because he was received of God; and he that did not eat,
was so far from being Judged, that the Apostle condemns the very Eating
whilst there was a Doubt (though the Abstinence was the Fruit of Weakness)
These things considered I appeal to Gods Witness in all Consciences, whether
Truth can be served at this Day, by asserting under the name of one called a
Quaker, such Principles, as give occasion of Jealousy, that this Doctrine is
promoting amongst us, We must Believe thus as the Church Believes, without
removing those Objections, which for want of an Explanation, may necessarily
follow.

It Is a true saying, That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the
Church, that is built upon the Rock Christ; and that the Elect cannot be
deceived: but notwithstanding it is thus said, yet we know, that particular
Members of the Church of Christ have erred.

Objection, Yet some may be ready to object and say Note. This Objection is so
laid to ^n in the same Book wherein the last answered Query is written.
Though some particular Members may be liable to err, it is neither reasonable
nor just to conclude, the whole Body or Church of Christ is liable to err.

To this I say; God forbid that the whole Church of Christ should err; yet I
say, neither the Light within us, nor the Scriptures of Truth without us, do
evidence that any Member, one more than another, is by any peculiar Election
exempted from being liable to err, no more than Particular Persons were from
all Eternity Elected, and others Reprobated; and so it appears to me, that the
Promise was not with respect, that some should continue still Faithful, and not
liable to err, though others, being liable thereto, should err; but with
respect to every Member of the Church, whilst established on the Rock Christ:
so that not only a part of the Church, but every Member thereof, whilst built
on the Rock Christ, shall be so preserved, as that the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against any one of them; and this seems to me to be evident from the
very Connection of the words of the Scripture, Mat. 16.18. And upon this Rock I
will Build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; that
is, against the Church built (and whilst remaining) on the Rock Christ. But if
any Assembly, through Unwatchfulness and Disobedience, depart from the Rock
Christ, whereon they were built, then in that State they cannot properly be
called the Church built and remaining on the Rock Christ; and so having been
liable to be overcome, the Gates of Hell do prevail; and therefore, though it is
impossible that any one Member of Christ's Church, whilst abiding in the Seed
(in which the Election stands, and to which the Promise is) can be deceived;
yet notwithstanding, I affirm, that every Member of Christ's Body (and if every
Member, than the whole Church) is liable to err; if they wait not in, and keep
not unto that, in which their Preservation stands.

Christ said, Watch and Pray, that ye enter not into Temptation: this was
spoken not with respect to some particular Members in the Church of Christ,
that were liable to err, and as if there were others that were not. And
therefore its reasonable to conclude, that all may thorough Temptation be in
danger to err, if they watch not, but yet my Faith is, that a remnant will be
preserved so watchful, as that, being built on the Rock Christ, the Gates of
Hell shall never prevail against them.

These things being duly weighed, and considering what great Abuse has been
made of Scriptures that speak to this purpose, That the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against the Church of Christ; and that what they bind or loose on
Earth, shall be bound or loosed in Heaven; and that also to maintain an
Antichristian Yoke of Bondage, under the pretense of Christ's Church, saying,
That it cannot err; it appears not much more like one called a Quaker (if we
consult the Writings of some of those ancient and Honorable Laborers, who
were Instruments in the hands of the Lord to turn Thousands unto the Light
within us, as the unerring Guide) to treat on such Scriptures (if applied to
outward and settled Assemblies, as such as are not liable to err) than a
treating on this Scripture, Take, eat, this is my Body; and apply it to outward
bread, would. And though none amongst the People of the Lord called Quakers (as
ever I yet heard) treated on the later Scripture in Approbation of the sense
and application before recited; yet I find the aforesaid Author, treating on
the former Scriptures, and that (as to me appears) with respect to settled
Assemblies (who, if they watch not, may err) which is easily to be savored, if
the whole scope of his Treatise be but duly weighed. The service for God and
his Truth, in his so doing, at this day, is hard to be understood by many, who
have an Honorable esteem for Truth, as preached in the beginning: especially
since it may occasion many to stumble and fall, through a Jealousy that those
Scriptures in process of time may be used to enforce Obedience to Outward
Sentences, and Decrees relating to Conscience, whether the Understanding be so
illuminated as to see the service of such Obedience for God and his Truth, yea
or nay.

And since it is so, that of late much is spoken touching the Authority of the
Church, and that the Church is not liable to err, and that the Apostasy shall
never enter the Generality more, it is at this time with me to treat a little
further touching things of this nature; And though I would not be understood to
say, that the Church of Christ is not invested with Power from on high (for
every Member thereof according to measure stands in the Power) or that the
Apostasy shall enter the Generallity again; yet I have this certain sense, that
in Asserting the Authority of the Church, and her infallibity, etc. time has
not been so well employed, as might have been in an inward exercise, to be
comprehended in the Power, thereby to be preserved out of all Apostacies and
error; but to proceed. We read that the Author to the Hebrews tells them, They
were come to the Heb. 12.13.
General Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn, which are written in Heaven,
and to God the Judge of all; we do not find that the Scripture speaks of the
Authority of this General Assembly so that their Sentences and Decisive
Judgments should be a Bond on Believers to obey, though they see it not: but
says, God is Judge of all. Neither do I find that the Scriptures make mention
of any General Assembly of the Church of Christ, other than in this place: And
since the word [Church] is mostly used in Scriptures with respect to particular
Congregations, or Assemblies, what ground is there to exalt the Power of a
General Assembly above any Particular one? especially since no such Assemblies
(whether General or Particular) as Assemblies of men, have Power one above
another, further than the Power of God appears more eminent in Degree in one,
than another: for God by his Spirit alone is Sole Judge; which appearing
(though but through an Handmaid, or meanest of the Flock in the least of
Assemblies) ought to be submitted to when God's Witness in the Conscience
Answers, whether an Assembly esteemed a General Assembly approve thereof or no.

Where two or three are gathered together in Christ's Name, there is the Church
of Christ. Matthew. 18.19, 20.
Christ says, If two of such agree on Earth, as touching any thing they shall
ask the Father, it shall be done for them of my Father, which is in Heaven. Can
the Agreement of a General Assembly do more than this, viz. than Prevail with
the Father? and therefore I may well query, Why the agreement of Two in any
Case, who in Christ's Name agree, ought not to have as great a Prevalency
amongst their Brethren, as the Agreement of an Assembly, esteemed a General
one, ought? And why the People of God at this day may not have an Eye as well
to two Brethren, who in Christ's Name agree, and are at Unity in the Truth, as
unto an Assembly esteemed a General One?

Though particular Societies of Men may constitute some Persons or Person to
represent them, and so may conferr a Power on them to negotiate Outward,
Worldly Affairs, and by reason of such Constitutions there may be Assemblies,
which in that respect may be called General Assemblies; yet I query, Whether
any Assembly of the People of the Lord can in a proper Sense be called a
General Assembly of the Church of Christ, unless such a one where every Member
of Christ's Body is convinced, because as they pretend to the Exercise of no
Power in their Assemblies (when negotiating the Affairs of Truth, as Members of
the Church of Christ, and not barely as men) but Gods Power; so they do not
profess, that as such they have Power to confer Gods Power and Spirit on any?
for they account that only proper to Christ the Lord: and therefore if any
particular Congregation should attempt to send Persons, as their
Representatives, to any particular Place, in order to meet together, as a
General Assembly of the Church of Christ, or that any part of the Church,
without such particular Election or Mission, should Assemble together, and call
themselves the General Assembly of the Church of Christ.

I Query, Whether those so affirming, would not therein manifestly err? Yet I
would not hereby be understood to Judge it as an Evil, for any, whether
Apostles or Elders, or any else, to meet together, when, where and as often as
they in the Spirit shall find Freedom from the Lord so to do; nor yet, being
met together, to judge them for giving forth any thing by way of Recommendation
to the Consciences of their Brethren, when they find freedom from the Lord so
to do. Yet in this Case every one had need to wait in their Own Gift, that so
they may not exercise themselves in things beside their Gifts; and then, what
such bring forth may have an Answer in the Consciences of their
Fellow-Brethren. But should such Assemblies take upon them to give forth
Positive Sentences, Decrees, or Decisive Judgments in Matters of Conscience, in
order to become a Bond upon Believers to Obey though they see it not; and in
defect of Obedience to such their Sentences, pronounce all such their brethren,
who may refuse to obey the same, Rebellious against the Lord, they would
therein manifest themselves to be laying another Foundation, than that which
has been already laid; and so it might be Just with the Lord to withdraw his
comforting Presence from them,

R. B. Page 63. treating of the Liberty of Conscience which may be exercised by
the Members of the True Church diversely, without Judging one another, thus
says; "There is a certain Liberty and forbearance also, that is more
particular, and has a relation to the Circumstance of Times and Places, which
will not hold universally; the first was in suffering Circumcision to the Jews;
the second was, in Observation of certain days; the third Abstaining from
meats.

To which I say; The aforesaid Author, as in other things, so also in this, is
mistaken (if he means that Circumstances of Times and places, are the Ground
of Christian forbearance) which is manifest from what the Apostle says, Romans
14.3, 4. Let, not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him
that eats not, Jadge him that eats; Who art thou that Judge another man's
Servant? To his own Master he stands or falls: which evidently shows, that
in as much as every one must answer for himself, it is fit every one should
believe for himself, and so practice, without being imposed upon by others. And
this is the Ground of all Christian Forbearance, and not Circumstances of Times
and Places.

And though Page 65. R. B. says, "That is accounted a doctrine of Devils,
which in another respect was Christian forbearance; which I take him to assert
from his observation on 1 Cor. 8. throughout, and 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. The latter
Scripture tells us, That commanding to abstain from Meats, is a Doctrine of
Devils; that to the Corinths says, If Meats make my Brother to offend, I will
eat no flesh while the World stands; This does not in any wise show, that a
Command to abstain from Meats was at any time, or in any respect Justifiable:
for if he would have this Assertion pass for Truth, he ought to have proved,
not only that a Command to abstain from flesh, was a Doctrine of Devils, which
that to Tymothy does, but also that such a Command was once Christian
Forbearance: but nothing of this latter appears, nor yet can be proved from the
Scriptures of Truth.

And as to the case of Circumcision, R. B. says, " 'Twas permitted to the
Jews for a time.

To this I say, we find, that many of the believing Jews were not come from
under it; and that those Jews, who saw beyond it, did not condemn such their
Brethren: but we do not find that the Apostles (as persons, that had power to
permit or not permit such a practice in the Church) did approve of it in any of
the Jews, or condemn the same in such as practiced it, until by Faith they saw
beyond it: for as on the one hand, 'twas not in their Commission to preach up
Circumcision; so on the other, 'twas not in their Power to be a Bond on any to
forbear, who through Faith were not first lead therefrom.

For though the Apostle says, Gal. 5.2. I Paul say unto you, if ye be
Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing, and Gal. 4.9, 10, 11. But now
after ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the
Weak and Beggarly Eliments? Ye observed Days, and Months, etc. I am afraid of
you. Yet this did not at that time condemn that Christian Liberty, and
Forbearance, which the Apostle before approved, in and with respect unto such,
as made Couscience of Circumcision, and the Observing Days; for it plainly
appears, he spoke to a People, who were redeemed out of those Beggarly
Eliments, and were come past those Rudiments which is evident by these his
words, how turn ye again? And so he might well exhort such neither to
Circumcise, nor yet be in the Observation of Days; for that God does not
usually lead into those things, which he has led out of; and this might well
consist with the Truth, even at such a time and season, when others, thorough a
Conscientious Scruple might in a plea for both, with respect to themselves, be
uncondemned.

These things considered, and that also we find the Apostle exhorting the
Churches, not to be Judging one another with respect to things relating to
Conscience, there is great need for every one to watch against a Censorious
Judging Spirit, lest whilst any are Judging their Brethren, they themselves
become Castawayes.

Having in some Measure cleared my Conscience, I have this further to add; That
it is a blessed thing for Brethren to dwell together in Love, and Unity; yet
this Love and Unity ought to consist in the Truth, else the blessing is not.

I doubt not but there are many who are ready to conclude, That an Universal
Unity ought to be established in the Churches, by the Assistance of outward
Instruments; that as we are Members of one Body, so we may not only be one in
Faith, one in Doctrine, but also one in Practice, with relation to Discipline,
Order and Outward Forms of Government.

My soul should rejoice to see that Day, wherein we might all be so led by the
appearance of Christ's Spirit in us, under his Government, which ought to be
exalted over all, as that this Oneness might thereby be witnessed amongst all
the Families of Gods People at this Day. But since it is so with the Church of
God at this day, as it was with the Church in the Primitive Days, viz. that
there are diversityes of Administrations, and diversityes of Gifts and
Operations in the Body, and yet thorough the same Spirit; it behooves every one
diligently to watch, that we Judge not one another by reason of these differing
exercises; as if these things consisted not with the Unity of the Body.

And since also it is so, that amongst the primitive Believers there were such
as practiced Circumcision, some made Conscience of keeping a Day, and some that
Absteyn'd from eating Flesh, and others that did not, and yet a
Christian-Liberty and Forbearance was so exercised, as that they were not to be
Judging one another about these things, and that we find not that these
differing exercises in a Christian-Liberty, did subject any of those Believers
exercised therein to the Censure of being out of the Unity of the Body; I
therefere do reasonably conclude, that the infallible Mark, whereby any Member
of the Body is known to be in true Unity with the Body, does not consist in
Profession and Belief of certain Principles and Doctrines, and Practices
depending thereon; nor yet in Obedience to the Measures of others; but in the
Circumcision of the heart, and an Answer of a good Conscience toward God, and
that every Member keeps his own order, Office and Place in the Body, thorough
his Obedience to the Measure and Gift of Grace in himself, which he has
received from God to Profit withal. The most infallible mark and token then of
a Member in the true Unity with the Body of Christ, is an inward invisible mark
that cannot be stamped on any, but by the impression of Gods Power on the heart;
and therefore is it, that the outward endeavors of all such Christian
Professors, as have been and are in the Apostasy, instead of attaining to an
Heavenly Union in the Spirit, have at most but arrived to an Outward Unity,
consisting in their Outward Conformities and Uniformities, according to the
Commands, Traditions, Decrees, or Examples of Men.

When in Ages and Generations past, the Apostasy first entered as a Flood, I am
persuaded, that all who have known the Truth, and have had the Consideration
and true Sense thereof upon their Spirits, do conclude, that the Cause thereof
sprang through an Inward Departure from the Anointing in themselves (Obedience
whereunto according to the respective Measures of Grace given of God, and
received by each Member, was a manifestation of that wherein the Unity of the
Body stands) and as the Apostasy entered, no doubt but the Traditions and
Rudiments of Men came to be exalted; against which the Apostle Paul cautioned
the Colossians, saying, Col. 2.8. Beware lest there be any that spoil you
through the Traditions of Men, according to the Rudiments of the World, and not
after Christ; but yet notwithstanding, I Question, whether any have been
greater Pretenders to Unity, than those who have been exalting the Traditions
of Men; and shall leave it to the Judicious Reader to consider, whether a
sufficient Evidence hereof appears not in diverse Apostatised Note. * Men of
prejudiced Spirits, may conclude that I herein strike at the true Church. God
forbid I should so do, for the true Church never exalted the Traditions and
Rudiments of Men: for though the Apostle said, in 2 These. 2.15. Hold the
Traditions which ye have been taught; yet his very Prayer in the next verse,
That the Lord would establish them in every good Word and Work, shows, that his
Desire was not, that any should follow the Traditions of any further than the
Lord might establish them therein; and this was far from following the
Rudiments and Traditions of Men, of Imposing his Traditions, otherwise than
according as they should be established therein by the Lord.
Churches professing Christianity, wherein is established by Outward means what
is to be Believed, and what is to be practiced; and yet doubtless as remote
from the Unity, wherein the Fellowship of the Saints in Light does consist, as
the East is from the West, and so in their Unity (being but Outward) have found
no more acceptance with the Lord, than the Unworthy Eaters did, whilst they
discerned not the Lords Body

Many of Gods People yet in the Body are Witnesses that, one part of that
Testimony which accompanied the Servants of the Lord in those latter Days was
against Outward Forms, Traditions, Prescriptions, Decrees, Ordinances of men,
with relation to Matters Spiritual and Divine, and wherein the Consciences of
Gods People might be concerned, as being those Rudiments of the World, out of
which he has determined to gather his People (for to the Children of Light
they appeared more agreeable to the Nature, and Tenor of the First-Covenant
than the Second) and not only so, but to establish his Church on the Rock
Christ, that so, as they received him, they might walk in him, according to
their respective Measures of Grace given them of God to profit withal, and
which, as the Apostle declared, was sufficient for them.

Now, Inasmuch as the Testimony of Truth has been, that what God leads out of,
he usually leads not into again; I appeal to Gods Witness in all Consciences,
whether an Indispensable Establishment of Outward Orders, Prescriptions, and
Decrees for the Members of the Church of Christ to walk by, and submit unto, at
this Day, and wherein the Liberty of their Consciences may be invaded (of which
my meaning is no other Liberty than what the Gospel allows) does not seem to
exalt that sort of Unity, wherein the Fellowship of the Saints in Light does
not consist, and so consequently may become the means to draw the Minds of Gods
People outward, and to cause them to look at Outward things (under the notition
of Things established in the Church) more than to the Anointing in themselves;
let Gods Witness in every Conscience Judge.

Objection, But perhaps some may object, and say, May not a false Liberty get
strength by a Plea for a Gospel-Liberty?

I answer, nay; For such a Plea being righteous, Sin and Iniquity (which is a
false Liberty) cannot get strength thereby: And though I do confess, the Enemy
of man's Soul may make use thereof, as the Devil did make use of Scripture, when
he tempted Christ to throw himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple, saying,
The Lord shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, yet it is not reasonable
to conclude, a just Plea can strengthen any in a fleshly Liberty; but the
Tempter may, if he prevail. However, I cannot see it yet to be my Duty, to
cease to do good, though another may pretend that thereby evil may abound; and
since R. B. speaks, Page 28. of a false Pretense of Liberty, and that (as I
take his Lines to import) with respect to Disobedience to certain things
ordained, relating to Order in the Church, its with me to describe, What that
Liberty of Conscience is, which is according to the Gospel. And in order
thereunto, it is necessary to consider, that the Gospel is Glad-tidings of
Salvation, which is not attained, but by witnessing the end for which Christ
was manifest in the Flesh, and that was to save People from their Sins, hence I
conclude, a Pleafor a Gospel Liberty of Conscience, is a Plea for a Freedom of
the Conscience from Sin, and so consequently, a Plea for a false Liberty of
Conscience is that which pleads for Sin.

Objection, I am yet Sensible, that some may yet further thus object, The
difference lies not here: for we find many who contend for Liberty of
Conscience to plead against all Sin; and that many, who would not have it
extend so large as thou seem to plead for; do also plead against all Sin;
and therefore thy distinction does not yet satisfy.

To this then, I thus say, The true Professors of Religion say, Heaven is the
Mark they aim at; and that this is not attainable without Peace of Conscience;
and that every man must give an account of himself to God.

Hence the Law of Divine Nature teaches us, that since we must give account
for our selves, we ought not to be imposed upon, but suffered to believe for
our selves; and whosoever on that score (and no Evil End) claims a Liberty of
Conscience, it ought to be granted him, and this is not contrary to that
Liberty, which the Gospel allows: If then any, who deny all Pleas for Sin, rest
disatisfied in their Consciences touching certain Orders ordained by some for
the Church to practice, and refuse the practice thereof on this score, that
they have no Faith touching their Service in the Church: this cannot properly
be called a Plea, under a false Pretense of Liberty; but rather a just and
righteous Plea, according to that Liberty of Conscience which the Gospel allows.

To conclude; let us all watch against that Spirit that would insinuate a
Belief, that we ought to follow the Commands, Traditions, and Examples of Men,
when Gods Witness in our Consciences answers not, otherwise such Insinuations
(though none of the ancient Laborers in the primitive gathering may either
stand by or own the same) may make way for men principled as R. B. by his small
Treatise seems to be, to assume Authority to Command and Rule, not only over
such their Brethren, whom they have been Instrumental to gather (though in R.
B's Sense, as is before manifested, such are the fittest to rule over those
whom they have begotten to the Truth) but also over the Labors of others, and
then style themselves the Church of Christ, (though not guided by the unerring
Spirit so to do) and then also pretend that they have Power in Cases that are
matters of Conscience, to give positive Sentences, oblieging Believers to Obey,
Receive, and Own the same; and that it is Disobedience to God, not to submit to
the Positive Sentences, and Decisive Judgments of any Assembly, or some or
other of them, which in any Tolerable Supposition, may be termed the Church of
Christ, though we see it not; and so by degrees may endeavor to divest Christ
of his Government and Prerogative, who alone is Lord over the Conscience, and
by his Spirit in us, is become our only Lawgiver, and who alone by the
influencing Virtue of his own Spirit, is able to bring unto that Love and
Unity, which through the Life of Righteousness finds exceptance with the Lord
of Life.

William Rogers.
Having now done with the citation of what was writ in answer to the aforesaid
Book of Government, and considering, that in the First Section thereof, the
Author (as is already cited and Observed) writ of a sort of Persons, that would
needs be Innovators, and given to Change, and introducing new Doctrines and
Practices, not only differing, but contrary to what were delivered in the
beginning; and in Page thirteen seems reflectingly to treat on such kind of
language as this, I must stay till I be convinced, as if such language was
knocked down in the beginning; and as may reasonably be taken from the scope of
the said Book, to reflect on such among the People called Quaker, who are not
so Zealously affected with the Outward Forms of Government, under the Notion
of Church Government, pretended to be established amongst them, as the Author
or Approvers of his Book were: we think it necessary to cite a Testimony
Published in Print by Isaac Penington the younger, in the year, One Thousand
six hundred and sixty, Being a part of a Discourse, Entitled, The Authority
and Government which Christ excluded out of his Church, etc. And as it lies all
together word for word and not taken by parts and pieces here and there. Our
end in citing this Testimony is, that the impartial Reader may consider,
whether the said Testimony has any Coherence with that part of the said Book
of Government, which is Objected against, by us or does contradict any subject
matter that we have treated upon.



The Testimony of the said Isaac Penington, the Younger, now follows.
"THe Apostles and Ministers of Christ came from Christ with a Message of Life
and Salvation, with a Testimony concerning the Good Will of God, and his Love
to Mankind, pointing out the Way from Death to Life, from Bondage to Liberty,
from Wrath and Destruction to Peace and Salvation. What they have seen, what
they have felt, what they have tasted, what they have handled, what they have
found redeem and deliver them, that they declare abroad to others, as they are
moved, as they are sent, as they are guided and assisted.

Now that which they preach to, is Men's Consciences in the Sight of God. They
open the Truth which they know, they give their Testimony in the Moving,
Leading, and Power of the Spirit; and they leave it to the same Spirit, to
demonstrate it to Men's Consciences, as it pleases. They are nothing; they can
do nothing; they cannot convert any Man to God; but the Power that speaks by
them, the same Power works in other Men's Consciences at its Pleasure: And
here is the beginning of the Government of Christ in the Heart, when his Truth
carries Conviction with it to the Conscience, and the Conscience is drawn to
yield it self up to him, then he lays his Yoke upon it, and takes upon him the
guiding of it: he cherishes it, he cleanses it, he comfort it, he orders
it at his Pleasure; and he alone preserves it pure, chaste, gentle, Meek, and
pliable to the Impressions of his Spirit; and as the Conscience is kept single
and tender to Christ, so his Government increases therein: but as it becomes
hard, or subject to Men's Wills, so another Spirit gets Dominion over it.

Therefore the great work of the Minister of Christ, is to keep the Conscience
open to Christ, and to preserve Men from receiving any Truths of Christ as from
them, further than the Spirit opens, or to imitate any of their Practices,
further than the Spirit leads, guides, and persuades them. For Persons are
exceeding prone to receive things as Truths, from those whom they have an high
Opinion of, and to Imitate their Practices; and so hurt their own growth, and
endanger their Souls. For if I receive a Truth, before the Lord by his Spirit
make it manifest to me, I lose my Guide, and follow but the Counsel of the
Flesh; which is exceeding greedy of receiving Truths, and running into
Religious Practices without the Spirit. Therefore the main thing in Religion,
is to keep the Conscience pure to the Lord, to know the Guide, to follow the
Guide, to receive from him that Light whereby I am to walk, and not to take
things for Truths, because others see them to be Truths; but wait till the
Spirit make them manifest to me; nor to run into Worships, Duties,
Performances, or Practices, because others are led thither; but to wait till
the Spirit leads me thither. He that makes haste to be rich (even in Religion,
running into Knowledge, and into Worships, and Performances, before he feel a
true and clear Guidance) shall not be Innocent: nor the Lord will not hold him
guiltless, when he comes to visit for Spiritual Adultery, and Idolatry. The
Apostles were exceeding tender in this point; for though they certainly and
infallibly knew what was to be believed, yet they were not Lords over Men's
Faith; but waited till he, who is Lord of the Faith, would open the way into
Men's Consciences. They did not take upon them to be able to turn the Key, to
let in Truth and Conviction into Men's Spirits (as men in these Days have been
too apt to undertake) but directed them to him who had the Key, there to wait
for the Conviction and Illumination of their Minds, and so to receive in, as
they found him give forth to them.

Let every man (says the Apostle) be fully persuaded in his own Mind: take
heed of receiving things too soon, take heed of running into Practices too
soon, and doing what ye see others do; but wait for your own particular
Guidance, and a Full Persuasion from God, what is his Will concerning you. Tho
I know this to be a Truth, yet do not ye receive it, till God make it manifest
to you; receive Truth from his Hand, stay till He gives it You. Indeed the main
Matter in Religion, is to keep out the wrong part, the forward part, the
bastardly birth, from running into Duties, catching of Openings, and laying
hold of Promises; and to feel the Heir born of the Immortal Seed, to whom all
belongs; and the other Birth never afterward get up above him, but be subdued
and brought into Subjection.

Again says the Apostle, Take heed of doing any thing doubtingly; be not
forward; be not hasty; wait for the leading; wait for the Manifestation of the
Spirit. Be sure thou receive what thou receives in the Faith, and Practice what
thou practisest in the Faith: For whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, being an
Error from the Principle of Life, which is to guide: and thereby thou losest
ground, and dishonourest Christ, and come under Condemnation.

And so the Apostle warns Believers, To take heed of drawing one another on too
fast, or of Judging one another in such things as some of them might have Light
in, others not. He that eats, not to Judge him that did not eat; and he that
did not eat, not to Judge him that did eat; yea in Matters of Worship, he that
observed a Day, and kept a Sabbath, not to Judge him that observed not a Day,
or kept not a Sabbath: For the Jews, which were truly converted, yet were hard
to be drawn off from the Observation of their Sabbath, and could hardly bear
with the Believing Gentiles, who were never taught to keep their Sabbath with
them, but were taught to esteem every day, and sanctify it to the Lord Romans
14.5. And those who esteemed every day, and dedicated it to the Lord (ceasing
from Sin, and resting to him; for under the Gospel we are not to set up a new
Type, but to enter by Faith into the true Rest, which is the Substance of what
the other signified) could hardly bear with them who observed a Day. Even in
the Apostles Days, Christians were too apt to strive after a wrong Unity, and
Uniformity in Outward Practices and Observations, and to Judge one another
Unrighteously in those things. And mark, it is not the different Practice from
one another, that breaks the Peace and the Unity; but the Judging of one
another because of different Practices; he that keeps not a Day, may unite in
the same Spirit, in the same Life, in the same Love with him that keeps a Day;
and he who keeps a Day, may unite in Heart and Soul, with the same Spirit and
Life in him who keeps not a Day; but he that Judges the other because of
either of these, Errs from the Spirit, from the Love, from the Life, and so
breaks the Bond of Unity. And he that draws another to any Practice, before the
Life in his own Particular lead him, does as much as in him lies to destroy the
Soul of that Person, Verse. 15. This was the Apostles Rule, for every one to
perform singly to the Lord what he did, and not for one to meddle with the
Light or Conscience of another (undervaluing his Brother, or Judging him,
because his Light and Practices differed from his, Verse. 10. of that 14th
Chap.) but every one to keep close to their own Measure of Light, even to that
proportion of Faith and Knowledge which God of his Mercy has bestowed on them;
and here is the true Unity in the Spirit, in the Inward Life, and not in an
Outward Uniformity, that was not necessary in the Apostles Days, nor is it
necessary now: and that Eye which so dotes upon it, overlooks the one Thing
which is necessary. Men keeping close to God, the Lord will lead them on fast
enough, and give them Light fast enough (for he takes care of such, and
knows what Light, and what Practices are most proper for them) but for Men to
walk on faster than the Lord holds forth Light to them, this overturns them,
raising up a wrong thing in them, and the true Birth hereby comes to suffer, to
shrink, and be driven back. And Oh! how sweet and pleasant is it to the truly
Spiritual Eye, to see several sorts of Believers, several Forms of Christians
in the School of Christ, every one learning their own Lesson, performing their
own peculiar Service, and knowing, owning, and loving one another in their
several Places, and different Performances to their Master, to whom they are to
give an Account, and not to quarrel with one another about their different
Practices, Romans 14.4. For this is the true ground of Love and Unity; not that
such a man walks and does just as I do; but because I feel the same Spirit of
Life in him, and in that he walks in his Rank, in his own order, in his proper
way and Place of Subjection to that; and this is far more pleasing to me, than
if he walked just in that track wherein I walk: nay (so far as I am Spiritual)
I cannot so much as desire that he should do so, until he be particularly led
thereto by the same Spirit which led me. And he that knows what it is to
receive any Truths from the Spirit, and to be led into Practices by the Spirit,
and how prone the Fleshly Man is to make haste, and how dangerous that haste
is, will not be forward to press his Knowledge or Practices upon others; but
rather wait patiently till the Lord fit them for the receiving thereof, and
fear lest they should receive and practice too soon, even in that part which
cannot serve the Lord. And this I can truly say concerning my self, I never
found my Spirit forward to draw any, either to any thing I believed to be true,
or to any Practice or Way of Worship I observed or walked in, but desired that
the Power and leadings of Life might go before them; and was afraid, lest men
should receive things from my hand, and not from the Lords. Yea, and this I
very well remember, that when I walked in the way of Independency (as it has
been commonly called) I had more Unity with, more Love toward such as were
single-Hearted in other Ways and Practices of Worship (whose Spirits I had some
feeling of in the true Simplicity and in the Life) than with diverse of such who
were very Knowing and Zealous in that way of Independency, in whom a wrong
thing in the mean time had got up, which had caused them to swerve from the
Life, and from the Simplicity.

So that the true Church Government being in the Spirit, and over the
Conscience, as in the Sight of God, the great Care must be to keep it within
its Bounds, that nothing else govern but the Spirit, and that the Government be
extended only unto that which is to be Governed.

First, Care must be had, that nothing Govern in the Church of Christ, but the
Spirit of Christ: that nothing else teach, nothing else exhort, nothing else
admonish, and reprove, nothing else cut off and cast out: Every Minister in the
Church is to watch over his own Spirit, that it intrude not into the work of
God, that it take not upon it to be the Teacher the Exhorter, the Reprover,
etc. And every Memis to wait in that Measure of the Spirit which he has
received, to feel the Goings forth of the Spirit in him that teaches and
governs; and so to subject not to Man, but to the Lord, to receive from the
Lord, to Obey the Lord. Not to know any Minister according to the Flesh, but to
receive and submit to what comes from the Spirit, in the Spirit. Not to know
Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, but the Spirit ministering in them. Paul may Err,
Apollo may Err, Peter may Err and did Err, when he Compelled the Gentiles to
live as the Jews, Gal. 2.14. for which Paul withstood him to the Face, Verse. 11
and Barnabas also did Err, Verse. 13. but the Spirit cannot Err: and he that
keeps to the Measure of the Spirit in himself, cannot let in any of their
Errors, if they should Err, but is preserved; for the least Measure of the
Spirit is true, and gives true Judgment: but he that receives never so great a
Measure of the Spirit, yet if he keep not Low therein, but lifts up himself
because thereof above his Brethren, may easily Err himself, and draw aside
others into his Error.

Secondly, Care must be had that the Conscience be kept tender, that nothing be
received but according to the Light in the Conscience; the Conscience is the
seat of Faith; and if it be not kept close to the Light, which God Lights
there, Faith is soon made shipwreck of. Christianity is begun in the Spirit,
which keeps out the Fleshly Part, with all its fleshly Wisdom, and Reasonings
about Spiritual things: and as the beginning is in the anointing so must the
Progress be. As the Spirit begins in the Conscience, by convincing that, by
persuading that, by setting up his Light there, and leading the soul by that
Light: so that Light must still be eyed, and according to its growth and
manifestation in the Conscience, so must the Soul stand still, or go on.

The great error of the Ages of the Apostasy has been, to set up an Outward
Order, and Unformity, and to make Men's Consciences bend thereto, either by
Arguments of Wisdom, or by Force: but the Property of the true Church
Government is, to leave the Conscience to its full liberty in the Lord, to
preserve it single and entire for the Lord to exercise, and to seek Unity in
the Light and in the Spirit, walking Sweetly and harmoniously together in the
midst of Different Practices; yea, and he that has Faith, and can see beyond
another, yet can have it to him-self, and not disturb his Brother with it, but
can descend and walk with him according to his measure. And if his Brother have
any heavy Burden upon him, he can lend him his Shoulder, and bear part of his
burden with him. Oh how sweet and lovely is it to see Brethren dwell together
in Unity! to see the true Image of God raised in Persons, and they knowing and
Loving one another in that Image, and bearing with one another through Love,
and helping one another under their Temptations and Distresses of Spirit, which
every one must expect to meet with.

If thou art a Christian in Deed and in Truth, preserve thy Conscience pure and
tender toward God; do not defile it with such Religious Practices, Duties,
Ordinances, etc. as thou do not feel the Spirit leading thee into: for all
such are Idols, and exceedingly polute thee. And be tender also of thy Brothers
Conscience, and be not an Instrument to draw him unto any thing which the Lord
leads him not into; but rejoice if thou find him in Simplicity of Heart
startling at any thing: for if he abide here faithful, his Guide will in due
season appear to him, and clear up his way before him; but if he be too hasty,
he may follow a Wrong Guide, and that Guide will never lead him aright toward
the Kingdom, but entangle him further and further from it.

Oh how many have run a Whoring from the Lord! how many have first lost the
Guidance of his Spirit, and then drowned their Life in Religions Performances!
How many have Drunk of the Cup of Fornication from the Life, at the Hands of
the Fleshly Wisdom! How many have filled their Spirit with New Testament Idols
and Images! How many have even hardened their Hearts and Consciences, by
following the Doctrines of Men, their imaginary Meanings of Scriptures, and the
imaginations and Dreams of their own Hearts! Is it not time for men at length
to turn back toward the Lord, to wait for the Visitation and Light of his
Spirit, from whom they have gone a Whoring, and whom, in all these things they
have grieved? And if ever any feel and enjoy the Guidance of God's Spirit,
their Conscience must be kept tender to it, and ready to hear and follow his
voice, who speaks in Spirit to that which is born of him, which infallibly
knows his Voice, and (being kept clear) cannot doubt Concerning it. My Sheep
hear my voice (says Christ) they know it, and the voice of the strange Spirit
they know not, so as to follow it, but turn from it both in themselves and
others. But, that which is not the Sheep, but has only got the Sheeps
Clothing, cries out, How shall we know the Voice of the Spirit? we may be
deceived; Nay, that which is born of God, that which is the Elect of God,
cannot be deceived. Wait therefore for the Birth of the Spirit, to which the
Spirit is given for a Guide, who infallibly guides it out of Deceit. All
Deceivers are out of this Birth, out of this Spirit; perhaps in some Birth or
other framed from the Letter, and living in the Imitation of some Practices and
Ordinances from the Letter (under which Cover they lie in wait to deceive) but
Strangers to the Life and Power, and to that Wisdom which begets and bears to
God. Thus the Jews Erred, and deceived their Proselites before the coming of
Christ: Thus the Christians (in Name) have generally Erred all along the
Apostasy, and indeed (for the Generality) have not been true Christians, but
only a persecuted Remnant amongst them: whose Life has been nourished and
preserved, not by Doctrines and Observations, which they have been taught by
the Precepts of Men, nor by the Knowledge which they themselves have gathered,
but by a little Bread, daily handed to them from the Father of Mercies, out of
the Wilderness: that was the thing which nourished their Souls up to God,
though many of them knew not distinctly what it was that nourished them, nor
how they came by it.

Object. But is not Uniformity lovely? and does not the Apostle exhort
Christians to be of one Mind? and were it not a sweet thing if we were all of
one Heart and one Way?

Answer. Yea; Uniformity is very lovely, and to be desired and waited for, as
the Spirit of the Lord (which is one) leads and draws into one. But for the
Fleshly Part (the Wise Reasoning Part of Man) by fleshly Ways and Means to
strive to bring about a Fleshly Uniformity, which insnares and overbears the
tender Conscience, this is not Lovely, nor Spiritual, nor Christian. And the
Apostle, who Exhorts Christians to one Mind, yet does not bid them, force one
another to one mind, but walk together sweetly, so far as they had attained;
and wherein they were otherwise minded, God in his due time would reveal more
to them, Phil. 3.15, 16. He that has, to him shall be given; and the Intent
and Work of the Ministry (with the several Ministrations of it) is to bring
into the Unity ( Ephesians. 4.13.) as Persons are able to follow, and not to force
all Men into one Practice or Way; that is the way to destroy the Faith, and the
true Unity, and at best can introduce but a Fleshly Appearance of Unity into
such a Form of Worship and Godliness, as eats out the Power. And for being of
one Heart and one Way; Blessed be the Lord, this is in measure known and
witnessed: The Way is one, Christ the Truth of God; and he that is in the
Faith, and in the Obedience to the Light, which shines from his Spirit into the
Heart of every Believer, has a taste of the one Heart and of the one Way; and
knows that no Variety of Practices (which is of God) can make a Breach in the
true Unity. This is the one Way, for every one to be subject to the Light of
Christ's Spirit, which he has received from Christ; and every one keeping here,
there is also one Heart kept in the midst of all the Variety, and diversity of
Practices.

It Is needful to be observed, that in the City of London a Free Meeting was
held between R. Barclay and me, in the presence of G. F. and many others,
wherein we treated on many things contained in R. B's Book of Government, which
I then did, and ever since have accounted Erroneous: and on the whole matter,
one part of the Meeting, viz. Charles Marshal with thirty six Persons more,
advised R. B. (as anon by their Paper cited will appear) on this wise, "It is
the desire of this Meeting, that the said R. B. (as he feels in himself the
Openings of Life thereunto) will in Christian-Condescension to the Capacities
of the Weak, write an Explanatory Postscript to the said Book, for the Sakes of
all such as may be supposed to have misapprehended any Expression therein. Now
forasmuch as the said R. B. has by way of Epistle to Friends written an
Explanatory Rostscript (though not Printed the same) I thought meet to cite it
together with my Observations thereon, as follows.

Aberdene Prison the 6th. of the 1st. Month 1679.
Dear Friends and Brethren;
"UNto all my Dear Friends and Brethren, unto whose hands this Paper may come,
or who may be any ways more particularly concerned in the Contents hereof, is
the Salutation of my unfeigned Love in that unchangable Truth, whereunto it
has pleased the Lord to call me, according to his great Mercy, so as to be a
Partaker in some Measure of the Peace and Glory, which in this Day is revealed,
wherewith my Heart has been often filled, as I have waited in Faithfulness,
according to the Dispensation of Light manifested in me, and to me: And since
it pleased God to make me a Living Witness of the Precious Truth, and to commit
unto me my share of the Ministry thereof, my Conscience bears me Witness in the
Sight of God, that I have Labored according to my Knowledge, to follow Love
and Peace with all my Brethren, and to do those things which might tend to
Advance, Strengthen and Confirm Unity and Brotherly-Love, as also to avoid what
had a Tendency to beget Strife, Jealousy, or Evil Surmises, like as I have
studied as well in my public Testimony as in my Writings, to beware of any
thing that to my Understanding might minister just Occasion of Stumbling, or
Offense to the least of my Brethren, or the youngest and weakest Babe in the
Truth, as such as are conversant with me in my own Country, as well as those
elsewhere, where I have traveled, can bear Witness.

Nevertheless, as I cannot shun any part of that Labor and Service which my
Lord and Master Jesus Christ calls me to, so in Obedience to his Requirings,
near five Years ago I wrote some Sheets concerning the Lawfulness and Necessity
of the Government and Order of the Truth, having principally and only in my
View therein to bear a Faithful Testimony against all false Liberty and
Disorder on the one hand; and against Imposition and Dominion on the other;
Intending no less to guard against the one, than the other; and this I did with
particular Respect to some of my near Friends, whom I found liable to some
Mistakes in that matter; And I do sincerely declare before God, who knows I
speak the Truth and lie not, That in the writing thereof I had not the least
Purpose nor Intention to meddle with, nor concern my self in any of those
Debates, that have since fallen out amongst Friends in Westmoreland, or
elsewhere, relative thereto: much of which, as it had not then a being, when I
wrote that Book, so the Substance of that Matter was then unknown to me, so I
can safely say, that I had not so much as one remote Thought, or any
Remembrance of the lest beginnings of that Affair, which I knew, during the
time of my writing of it: so that nothing could be Intended by me therein
relative to that matter, which as it is sufficient to vindicate my Innocence,
and Integrity to all, as to my Intentions; so I cannot forbear also to
signify, that as often as I have had Occasion, seriously and in the holy Fear
and Dread of God to reflect upon those Papers, which I have often done, because
of the Opposition they have met with from some; W. R's. First Observation.
This shows that R. B. does not only Justify what he has done, but also
signifies, that he labored with all the Care and Circumspection he could so to
express himself as not to offend in a word; and therefore since I know he is
well skilled to word his meaning, I might reasonably have expected, that he
would have cited out of his Book of Government those Passages therein
contained, which will Evidence that all his Explications by this his Postscript
may he found in his Book, which was needful to have been done (if he so could
(but I certainly know he cannot) that his circumspection might appear;
especially since he has affirmed, that the very Explications of his words
given in a Letter hereafter cited (as his own Explications) are to be found in
his Book, as appears by the said Letter sent abroad by himself, and that (as
may reasonably be taken) intended by him to be in his Favor. But if the
Impartial Understanding Reader, will be at the pains to compare R. B 's Book of
Government, with this his Postscript, and the Explications given of his words
in the aforesaid Letter, I may with boldness affirm, he cannot but then appear
guilty of great Confusion: a taste whereof the Reader may have by duly
weighing my 6th. and 9th. Observations annexed to this his Postscript.
I have never found occasion to repent or retract any thing from the Matter or
Principle there asserted by me, but have the Testimony and Approbation of Gods
Light and Spirit in my Heart, for my Work and Service in that Matter. Moreover,
albeit I labored with all the Care and Circumspection I could so to express my
self as not to offend in a word; yet had I known, or could have foreseen that
any thing in the wording or expressing thereof would have Stumbled, or hurt
any, I have that tenderness and hope allways to have to the least of the
Household of Faith, that I would have rather omitted, or changed any such words
or Expressions, than ministered them any Occasion of Dissatisfaction: And
therefore I was not a little surprised when I understood, that several Sheets
of Paper were spread abroad in Opposition to that Book of mine, at a time when
I was wholly a Stranger to these Proceedings, by reason of my Imprisonment for
the Truths Sake; especially W. R. a Person who not only to my self, but
afterward before many Witnesses professed a singular respect and friendship to
me, The Reasons of spreading my Answer to a part of his Book of Government
before 'twas sent to him were these. First, I was concerned in Conscience to
detect the Errors as expeditiously as I could. Secondly, I did not know where
to send unto him, supposing that at that time he was beyond the Seas; and
though it is said in a Letter, which is pretended to he mine, though never
signed nor published by me (of which more anon) that my publishing thereof
before I gave R. B. notice of my Objections and Intentions therein, was not
according to Gospel Order; yet I disown that Expression, because it cannot be
contrary to Gospel Order to detect by writing, Errors (relating to Doctrine
and Discipline) that are in print.
and yet without once acquainting me. W. R's Second Observation.
Now what followed upon my meeting with that Person at London near two Years
ago will appear by a Copy of W. R's own Letter annexed hereto, and the Sense of
those Brethren, who were Witnesses to that Transaction: So that resting
thereupon in my own Innocence, especially since those in such places, where the
greatest Dissatisfaction was said to be, did for the most part signify to me
their Satisfaction, I forbore hitherto to meddle any more in that matter,
hoping it might have dyed of it self, and being Conscientiously gathered in
that Spirit wherein I desired rather to bear, than by seeking too earnestly to
vindicate my self, any ways advance or foment Controversies among Friends, by
multiplying Papers, having some hope, he might (according to the advice of the
Brethren) have called in his Papers. And as to what related to me If that
pretended Letter of mine expresses my Satisfaction, as to the Soundness of his
principles, and his sense of things scrupled, yet there is not a word in the
said Letter signifying, that I mistook his book, and if upon the debate of that
matter R. B. in words declared himself otherwise principled, than his book
taught, yet I cannot but now say he has given me just Occasion to impeach him
for a man of a stretched Conscience, in saying as aforesaid thus, "I have never
found Occasion to repent or retract any thing from the Matter or Principles
there asserted by me.
his Letter sufficing, W. R's Third Observation.
wherein he expresses my Sense of the things scrupled by him to his own
Satisfaction, and his Belief of the Soundness of my Principles; and truly, I
have been so willing to starve that Spirit that has any life in Divisions or
Controversies of this kind, either in my self or others, that since I read
those Papers of W. R. at London (now near two Years ago) I have not so much as
once looked out upon them until now. And albeit I might have mentioned that
Transaction without any disadvantage to my self, but otherwise, as most, if not
all at present can testify, yea W. R's own Letter does import.

R. B. now seems to proclaim his own Virtue, in not mentioning, unless on
Enquiry, the matter between us, insinuating, that he might have mentioned it
without any Disadvantage to himself, and that in my own Letter I imported so
much. This I affirm, is but a further Confirmation to me of his stretched
Conscience, taking Liberty to vindicate himself from that which forever will
lie upon him to his Just Defamation, until he repent, as cannot but appear to
every impartial and understanding Reader, who will be at the pains to peruse
his Book of Government, my Answer and his Explanatory Postscript, with the
Observations thereon.
Yet I do not remember, W. R's Fourth Observation.
that I did ever so much as once mention it to any, unless their Inquiry
occasioned it: yea, I have wholly concealed it to this day from diverse Friends,
in whom I am nearly concerned, and whom I know would be very apt to justify
and commend my whole proceedure in that Matter; so unwilling was I to fill the
Minds of any with such things, being otherways weightily concerned, as well
with the Inward Work of the Lord in my own Soul, as in those Concerns of Truths
Prosperity, both abroad, where I had a Service, and at home, with respect to
the present continued Suffering Friends lie under here. But since he has so
far walked in another Method, as to labor to keep up the Remembrance of those
things, and busy the Minds of Friends with them, having, as I am informed,
made a further mention of these Papers to my Disadvantage, I am constrained to
say something in my own Defense, and of the Truths asserted by me, wherein, as
the Lord knows the Integrity of my Intentions, and the Tenderness of my Heart,
so I hope my way herein will commend it self to that of God in the Consciences
of all the Tenderhearted.

" Here a Letter, pretended to be mine, is again brought, as Evidence, though
nothing to the purpose, as before in the third Observation appears, and not
only so, but seems to insinuate, as if what is declared in that pretended
Letter to be his meaning, he will now give under his own hand which is a mere
Fallacy in several respects, as anon will be made appear, for that his
Postscript does not manifest himself principled as that Letter expresses.
Witness the 6th. and 9th. Observations.
And albeit these things, W. R's Fifth Observation.
which were chiefly scrupled at by any, be suffiently cleared by W. R's own
Letter, yet that all may be satisfied in having them from my own hand, I am
free to signify this as to them, only I will permise this to the serious
Consideration of not a few, who seemed to be startled at that Book, who retain
that Tenderness to God, and regard to the hurt of their own Souls, as to make
Conscience unjustly to accuse the Innocent, that since it was asserted by some,
and entertained as a Truth by diverse, that that Book was writ upon design, and
with a particular respect of prejudice to some Persons, whom I did not so much
as once think on in writing of it, with somewhat worse, which I am not willing
to remember, far less to mention, whether those that propagated and entertained
so false and groundless a Jealousy, to the Prejudice of the Innocent, have not
reason narrowly to examine what Spirit they were influenced by in so doing,
which certainly could not be of God, and whether they ought not thence to take
Occasion justly to suspect the Effect and Fruits of the same Spirit in them,
even when it has appeared in things, for which they may have somewhat more to
say: surely with men of Inward Tenderness, this cannot but have great weight.
And albeit, that my Intentions were so clear in this Matter, yet I will not say
but the Lord, whose Ways are unsearchable, and past finding, out may have
purposed by those Papers seasonably to reprove and smite at a wrong Spirit. And
therefore all concerned had need in true Tenderness, and godly Fear, to beware
how they shut out and turn by the warnings and Admonitions of the Lord, seeking
to carp at, and find fault with the Innocent Instruments, lest they be found
Foolishly like those Dogs, that run after and seek to bite the Stone, because
they cannot reach the Hand that threw it. I have known this by manifold
Experience to have been a Snare to many, and therefore without the least
Prejudice or Reflection upon any (God knows) out of true Tenderness and Love do
desire, it may be seriously weighed in the true Light by all that may feel
themselves concerned in this Matter.

Since R. B. ( as before is signified in his Lines, touching which I made my
first Observation on his Explanatory Postscript) affirms, that he has never
found Occasion to repent or retract any thing from the Matters or Principles
asserted by him; and that he labored with all the Care and Circumspection he
could, so to express himself, as not to offend in a word; I may now with
Confidence affirm that his words therein (since he well understands the
Propriety of Words and Sentences) may be justly taken to be the meaning of his
Mind That now his Fallatiousness may appear, I shall in order thereto cite his
very words, relating to the Matter in hand, touching Jurisdiction over Men's
Property.

R. B. in his Sixth Section, treating how far this Government extends, Page 39.
thus says, This Order reaches and takes up the Composing of Difference. as
to outward things; and further says We do boldly averr, as a People gathered
together by the Lord, unto the same Faith, etc. that we have Power and
Authority to decide and remove these things amongst our selves. From which
positive Sentence it naturally follows, that the Church ( touching whose
Authority in Government he treats) has Power to decide and remove in Cases of
Differences touching outward things; and since in the same Section he uses the
words Meum and Tuum with respect to outward things, touching which Differences
may arise, it naturally follows, that the Power claimed is in that Case a Power
over Property. I now desire that the Reader may observe, that in this his
Explanatory Postscript he says not one word of the Assent of the Parties
Differing, which clearly shows that though ( as in the Fifth Observation is
signified) he intended to give under his own hand, that he is principled as the
aforesaid pretended Letter says he is, yet he therein deals fallaciously,


But now as to the things scrupled at, W. R's Sixth Observation.
whereas some did suppose, that I did ascribe to Friends an absolute
Jurisdiction over men's Property in outward things; therein I have been greatly
mistaken, for I never intended any such thing, but simply to hold forth that
which by the Apostle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. is urged, that whereas there
would a manifest Scandal arise from Friends going to Law together, that
therefore such as will rather go to Law than seek to come to Agreement by the
Interposing of Friends, ought with a respect to their bringing such a Scandal
be censured, since it cannot be supposed that any such Difference as to outward
things can fall out amongst Friends but some or other may be found, who either
by their own knowledge, or by Advice and Information of such as may be known in
the Matter Controverted, may bring it to an End.

Secondly, that whereas I say, there will not be wanting in case of
Controversy, the Spirit of God to give Judgment, through one or other in the
Church of Christ, so long as any Assembly can properly or in any tolerable
Sense be so called; some have supposed, that by these last words I did
insinuate, as if any Assembly, assuming to themselves the Name of the Church of
Christ, and having some show of it, may of right claim the Power of such
Decision, and ought accordingly to be submitted unto: such a thing never entered
me, but was far from my Intention: for albeit that I Judge, that an Assembly
may sometimes deserve the Name of the Church of Christ, or not to have lost
that claim, albeit not altogether so fresh and lively at least in the
Generality of its Members, and so under some languishing, and hazard to decay,
if Life do not again come up more abundantly, as may be seen in the Example of
the seven Churches of Asia, whom notwithstanding of the several weaknesses
diverse of them were under, yet the Apostle, or rather the Spirit of Christ by
the Apostle, Dignifies with the name of the Churches of Christ: Neither did I
intend to make this Judgment necessarily to attend every particular Church, or
Assembly; but by the Church there I understood it in a more universal Sense,
that is, some or other among all the Churches of Christ, who being spoken of in
the Complex may be rightly termed the Church of Christ: And this is manifest in
the same Example of the Churches of Asia, for albeit we might suppose there
might have been wanting in each of them some to give forth this true Judgment
concerning them, yet in respect they were such, as in some tolerable
Supposition might be termed the Churches of Christ ( Rev 2.4, 5, 14, 15, 20.
Chap. 3.16.
albeit some of them had lost their first Love, and were near to have their
Candlestick removed; and some had the Doctrine of Balaam, and of the
Nicholaitans, and some suffered the Woman Jezabel, and some were Lukewarm, and
ready to be spued out) we see God would not suffer them to be without a certain
Judgment, but gave forth one through the Apostle John, who was a Member of the
Church; but to esteem that any Assembly may be tolerably supposed to be the
Church of Christ, where either the true Doctrines and Principles are wanting,
or the true Life and Power in some good measure is not felt and known, is far
from my Thoughts: Yea, how far I am contrary-minded may be seen at large in my
Apology upon the 10th Proposition now published in English, Page 194, 195, 196,
200, 201, 202, etc.

R. B's Discourse now shows, that he holds forth TWO BONDS by which the People
of the Lord are centered into one Body. But the Apostle's Doctrine was, that by
one Spirit we are baptized into one Body, and so the Bond but one. And though
R. B. terms my Comparison a Scornful Reflection, yet I affirm 'twas
Christian-like enough so to say, if the Reason given in my Answer be but duly
considered, which was, That the main Scope of his Treatise relating to that
Matter, both from Scripture and Reason tended, as it were chiefly (if not
wholly) to evidence, that Principles, Doctrines and Practices (necessarily
depending thereon) are the Bond by which we became Centered into one Body and
Fellowship, though he names not what those Principles, Doctrines and Practices
are: For a further Manifestation of his weakness on this Subject, I refer
unto my Answer.
Thirdly, W. R's Seventh Observation.
Whereas it was thought strange, that I should call Doctrines and Principles
the Bond, and Terms of our being together; I understood it only of an Outward
Bond, and that I laid the stress upon it no further, appears in that I affirm
these Principles and Doctrines to be the Product of Truths Power and Virtue
upon the Heart, which appears by what is Printed upon the Margent, and W. R.
saying in his Papers, that this was but like the Entertainment of Christ in the
Manger, shows too little of Christian-Sobriety, and too much of a Scornful
Reflection, for which I will rather choose to forgive him, than therein to
contend with him. For how much I value that Inward Bond (to wit, the Life of
Righteousness) beyond the Outward, and that I esteem the Outward not at all to
be valued, but as it comes from the Inward, may be seen through out all I have
written in my Apology upon the 10th Proposition, W. R's Eighth Observation.
and elsewhere. If this be his meaning, yet his Book does not so declare.
And my affirming, that any denying of any of Truths Principles and Doctrines,
is a ground of disowning; was only in respect, that who do so, do manifestly
thence make it appear, they have broken the Inward Bond first, from which that
Outward did naturally spring and arise. W. R 's Ninth Observation.
Experience tells me, that the great Difference among Friends in the Nation is
about Outward Orders pretended to be Established by G. F. and by the aforesaid
Letter (which R. B. accounts a clearing of himself) it is signified, that R. B.
declared his meaning to be, not only with respect to all the Outward Orders and
Forms of Discipline in Government amongst us, but also with respect to the
Power of God: which, being Compared with his now declared Meaning on the same
Subject, shows again that he does not by this confirm (notwithstanding his
pretense so to do) what is signified in the aforesaid Letter, because here is
no mention made of any Outward Orders ( Established and Practiced by the People
called Quakers) and that he pretends his Meaning to be an Establishment on the
Spirit only, and such as are led by it; which is a clear discovery of his
Fallaciousness and will so appear to such as may peruse his words, whereon the
Fifth Observation is made: for therein he pretends to give the same
Satisfaction as is signified in the same Letter. Besides, it is worthy our
Observation, that from R. B's words, some Persons are intended Establishers of
the Government upon the Spirit only (but yet with this Addition
(notwithstanding his word only) and such as are led by it: which to me seems a
two-fac'd kind of Expression; for if the heart of a man be the place wherein
the Laws of Christ are writteu, and his Government is to be exalted, and that
we have no ground to expect any other Government, or Governors to be like unto
Moses, save Christ Jesus by the Manifestation of his Spirit in us; why could
not he have been contented to have stopped his Pen at the words [SPIRIT ONLY?]
but forasmuch as he makes this Addition, and such as are led by it, I must
confess I am in some measure at a stand, touching his meaning thereby, and have
a Godly Jealousy, that notwithstanding his pretense to the Spirit, and that
nothing done by mere Imitation will any thing avail; yet when it may serve his
turn, he may from his own Lines bring forth another Conclusion, and infer a
Subjection to others, under the Notion of Governors over the rest, and that
the Dictates of the Spirit in us, must give way to the pretended Dictates of
the Spirit in others; by which means at length it may so happen, that the
Profession of the very Principles of Truth (as held forth amongst us in the
Beginning) may be Irradicated: for if once the Day come, wherein the Faith of
any is, that certain Persons (above or distinct from any others) are the Men
who are led by the Spirit, and that the Government of Christ is Established on
them, then in probability it will naturally follow, that instead of Embracing
this Primitive Exhortation, [turn in your Minds unto the Light that shines in
your own Consciences] many will be turning their Minds out unto unto the
Dictates of others; and were it so, that what R. B. aims at should be granted
viz. the Establishment of Christ's Government, on men led by the Spirit: this
then might be objected, that many might pretend thereto who were not led by the
Spirit, and where the Spirit of Discerning is wanting in such as are to be
Governed, they may be in a ready and open way to Destruction. But on the
contrary, let this undoubted Truth be held forth, viz. Let every one be
obedient to his measure of Grace and Light received from God, and that the
Light and Grace is a Reprover of all Sin, then there will be no Stumbling nor
By-Path walked in. Moreover, his Language in another respect seems to me
inconsisting with the Truth; because the Government treated upon to be
Established is pretended to be Christ's Government, that the Establishers, are
certain Persons signified by these R. B's words, We did Establish it, that the
Object whereon it is Established is the Spirit: all which considered I may
truly say, that it is a work not fit for poor Mortals to pretend to, especially
if we consider that it is already Established by God himself on Christ's
Shoulders. But if instead of that which occasions this Observation R. B. had
signified, that those who are led by the Spirit, are subjects under Christ's
Government, I know that such Language would have reached the Consciences of
many.

I now come to take notice of these R. B's words, And yet it is strange that W.
R, in his Papers should labor so much against this, affirming very positively
that nothing ought to be given forth in the Church of Christ but by way of
Recommendation, and not of Command.

On this I Observe, First, the said sentence is made up of a Part of one
sentence of mine, and with the addition to that sentence of these R. B's own
Words [and not of Command] and all this (as by his discourse to me appears) to
insinuate a belief, that I hold a Principle so large, as that the very
Murderers of Christ, those that persecuted and burned the protestant Martyes,
and all Idolotry, wickedness and superstition were to be thereby Justified,
which my Soul abhors: and blessed be the Lord he has given me a better
Understanding than to assert any thing from which such horrid conclusions may
be drawn; and indeed his language seems to favor of that Spirit which opposed
the Children of Light in the beginning, saying The Jews acted from the Light
in them, when they crucified Christ. And since R. B. is so disingenious, as not
to lay down all my words, nor yet the occasion (which if he had, his present
discourse hereon would have seemed more impertinent) I shall therefore on this
subject further add; R B. in his book of Government asks this question,
Whether the Church of Christ has Power in any cases that are matters of
Conscience, to give positive sentence and decision, which may be Obligatory
upon believers, and then proceeds to Answer the said Question thus; I Answer,
affirmatively, she has, on this occasion (treating amongst other things) I
say, that it does seem plainly to contradict this Wholesome Testimony of and for
the Truth, viz. That the sentence and Judgment of any man or men whatsoever
relating to matters of Conscience ought not at this day to be given forth but
by way of recommendation to the Conscience, which to my knowledge has been the
Practice of the People called Quakers, and when the Conscience is sensible that
Gods Witness therein Answers, then the Conscience is or ought to be bound,
other bonds may make Hipocrites, and busy Bodies but not good Christians. It Is
now to be Considered how from these my aforesaid words, spoken on the
aforesaid, occasion with respect to a dislik^ of o^^ Believer, or Disciple of
Christ, his imposing upon another, Contrary to his Conscience R. B. can draw a
conclusion, that my my Language in that Sentence, has a Tendency to Justify
the Jews in crucifying Christ, and those that persecuted and burned the
protestant Martyrs; and not only so, but Idolatry, Wickedness and Superstition,
etc. And whereas after he has made his aforesaid insinuation he freely agrees
to my words, if (as R. B. says) his meaning be, that no man of or from himself
only or by Virtue of any office etc. Ought to command any thing to be performed
in the Church; but (says R.B) if he will say that no man, albeit really moved
by the Spirit, etc. ought to go further than a recommendation, it is a most
insolent limiting of God Under a false pretense of Liberty. These foregoing
words of R. B. gives me occasion thus to Answer, that since my words would
admit of a Construction allowable by himself for Truth, his secret Evil
Insinuations fall to the Ground; and as to the latter part of his Construction
thereon I thus say, That what God moves to, ought to be Obeyed, that his power
is unlimmitable, that all his actions motions and commands are just, because
they are his: But yet, though I so grant I do Affirm, that there is not the
least Ground in the Scripture of Truth, nor yet from the Light of Christ, to
believe, that in this our day God has, or by his Spirit will move any member
of the Church of Christ to give forth certain Orders and Prescriptions, with
respect to the rest of the members, as that which (though relating to their
Consciences) they ought to Perform, and Practice, whether they see if their
duty or whether tehy are or no free so so do; for if the Blind was not to be
accepted for a sacrifice under the First Covenant, much less can it be
acceptable under the Second, unless God should so command, which we have no
Ground to suppose; and foarsmuch as this Subject is largly treated on in the
7th. Section of the First Part of the Christian Quaker which is given forrh by
me on the behalf of my self and others concerned, I shall referr the Reader
thereto, for the further Mani. festation of the Truth, relating to this this
matter. And whereas R. B. says, that things may be proposed to the Church by
way of Command, I shall refer the Reader to the seventh Section of the First
Part of the Christian-Quaker, and also to my Answer to his Book of Government
contained in this Treatise, in both which the Scriptures urged by him, relating
to the word Command, and such like, are treated on and the meaning thereof
according to the Truth discovered.


Fourthly, If any did suppose that by my asserting, the Ancient Apostolic
Order was Established among us upon the Right Basis and Foundation, I intended
that these particular Orders relating to Outward Things, that were among the
Apostles either were, or were to be Established among us, they did much mistake
me, for I never purposed any such thing, but only to signify that by
Establishing the Government and Authority in and upon the Spirit only, and such
as are led by it, we did Establish it upon the same Basis, and Foundation
whereupon that Exercise in the Church in the Days of the Apostles was built:
for I am far from Believing, that the most exact Conformity to the Order and
Method of the Church in the Apostles Days, or even to what may be now appointed
by the same Spirit, without the Inward Life and Virtue go along, signifies any
thing; for I know that nothing done by mere Imitation will any thing avail in
the Worship and Service of God: and therefore that no Act done without
Conviction will any ways be profitable to the Doer; yet that hinders not, but
that such as forbear to do what by the Testimony of God in his Servants is
commanded to be performed in the Church are justly to be blamed, and be Judge;
dtherefore in respect that through Disobedience and unwatchfullness they have
blinded themselves from the sight and knowledge of their duty; for if it should
be said, no man were to be condemned for not doing that which he yet sees not
to be his duty, then no man were to be condemned who had by Iniquity and
Unwatchfullness brought hardness and blindness upon himself, for all the
Iniquities be commits afterward; and how would this tend to Establish Rantism,
the Substance of which is to bring their Consciences to that pass, as not to be
sensible of any Checks? then the Nations are not to be blamed for all their
Idolatry, Wickedness, and Superstition, for that they are not sensible of the
Evil of it: whereas Truth teaches us to believe, that had they been Faithful
to the small measure of Light in things more obvious, it would have further
opened and manifested other things. Then should not the Jews have been
condemned for crucifying Christ, since Peter says, they did it ignorantly, and
Paul testifies, that if they had known they would not have crucified the Lord
of Glory. Yea then all those that persecuted and burned the Protestant-Martyrs
were not to be Judged for it, because they supposed they did well in it, even
according to Christ's Testimony, who says, that in killing you they shall think
they do God good Service; shall men then never be condemned for doing evil or
omitting their Duty, because they see it not? what absurdity would
folthereupon, may easily appear; and yet it is strange that W. R. in his Papers
should labor so much against this, affirming very positively, that nothing
ought to be given forth in the Church of Christ, but by way of recommendation
and not of command; wherein he does either greatly mistake the matter as
affirmed by me, or otherways run into a far greater inconveniency than he is
aware; for if he mean, that no man of or from himself only, or by virtue of any
office or place he either has or has born in the Church of Christ, ought to
Command any things to be performed in the Church, I freely agree to it; and
have asserted the same in very full and ample terms. But if he will say that
no man, albeit really moved by the Spirit of God, ought to go further than a
mere reomendation, it is a most insolent limiting of God under a false pretense
of Liberty, and will necessarily conclude, that God has not Power to command
any thing unless men be content to agree to it. For the Controversy is here
drawn to a narrow Compass; for he that will allow, that God has Power to
command things to be practiced in the Church, and that those Commands must be
conveyed by immediate Revelation, through some of the Members of the Church,
and that it may fall out that some of the Members of the Church may thorough
weakness or unwatchfulness not be sensible they must either acknowledge that
such are to be condemned, or say that God has not Power to Command, or that
there is no such Revelations now a Days (as do the Priests and Truths Enemies)
or that Man is not Condemnable for Disobeying God, if he believe it not to be
his Duty, which is as much as to say, that Unbelief is no Sin. Now let these
things be seriously considered, how this is or can be avoided without granting
the things affirmed by me; for what way the Truth can be asserted, the Honor
and just Authority of God acknowledged, the necessity and continuance of
immediate Revelation affirmed, and the Iniquity of Unbelief not justified, and
the just Judgment of God upon the Rebellious and Disobedient vindicated,
without affirming what I have done.

And if any can do this in words more wary than I have done, I shall very
readily agree to it.

For that things may be proposed to the Church by way of Command, and further
than a mere Recommendation, the whole Current of the Scriptures shows, not only
to the Church among the Jews, where Moses and the Prophets do propose the Will
of God to be performed very positively and peremtorily; but even under the
New Covenant, as appears in the 15th. of the Acts, and in many places of Paul's
Epistles, particularly, that on 2 These. 3.14. If any Man obey not our Word by
this Epistle, note that Man, and have no Company with him that he may be
ashamed. This then being manifested with respect to those times, I would know
of W. R. whether Christ has now lost any of his Authority, or has left off to
rule his church immediately by his Spirit? whether so to affirm, be not
grossly to contradict the Ancient and Primitive Doctrine of Friends?

W. R 's Tenth Observation.
This is not my Concern, having given no Occasion in my Answer for this his
Defense and therefore do make no reply thereto.
Fifthly, Whereas some did suppose that I did make the Difference in the End
but very small betwixt Decissive Judgment among Friends and among Papists and
other Persons, because I say, they place the Decisive Judgment in the
Plurality of an Assembly, made up of their chief Teachers and Ministers; and
albeit I limit it not to that; yet I seem to affirm, That it most usually is so
conveyed, and so the difference only is, that they make it always so, and I
most usually. To this I answer, that if in Charity I may suppose this
insinuation comes not from malice, at least, it proceeds from great Ignorance
of the Popish Principles; and it were better for such to be silent, than to
Judge of things they do not understand, for the Difference here is very Great
and Fundamental, in respect both Papists and others do affirm, that men by
virtue of an Outward succession or vocation may have true Right to sit and give
Judgment in such Assemblies, albeit they be void of true Holiness, and have not
the Grace of God, which they say, is no necessary qualification to the being of
a Minister; so that they Place the Power of Judgment not only in the plurality
of Votes absolutely (in which we differ from them) but also in the Judgment of
such as may without any absurdity by their own Principles be supposed to be all
and each of them void of the true Grace of God; and whom (even supposing them
to be Gracious, they Affirm not at all to be led by the immediate Spirit of
Christ, which they say is now ceased: now, can there be a greater difference
than is betwixt these two, to wit, to affirm, that the Power of decision is in
an Assembly of men (to being Members of which assembly the Grace of God is no
necessary qualification) and who deny any such thing, as to be immediately led
by the Spirit of Christ, as a thing not attainable in these Days, and yet that
all Christians must be Subject to what the Plurality of such an Assembly so
Constitute do determine.

And to Affirm that the Power of Decision is only and alone in the Spirit, not
necessarily tied to a general assembly, but if it please God to make use of
such an assembly, yet neither to the Plurality of them, but in and thorough
such of his Servants, as he sees meet, and that none are capable, or can be
supposed to be Members of such an assembly, or esteemed such from whom such a
Judgment can be expected, or ought to be received, unless they be men in whom
the Grace of God, not only is, but has truly wrought to mortify and regenerate
them in a good Measure, in whom the Judgment of Truth really proceeding from
the Spirit will be manifest, to all who are Truly Faithful, who will
accordingly submit thereunto, not with respect to the Men, but the Authority of
God manifested in and thorough them; so that such as see not this Judgment
aright will be Justly Condemnable of God for their not submitting: Not as if
they should be accepted of God if they did obey, before conviction, but because
they brought this Blindness upon themselves thorough the unfaithfullness and
unwatchfullness, which renders them both guilty of the Blindness, and of the
Disobedience occasioned by it.

Now the vastness of the Difference that is here manifest cannot but be obvious
to any that will read and consider this Impartially without prejudice. Thus I
have passed thorough all the things that I have understood any to scruple at,
there being nothing else that I remember which is not either Relative to some
of the Particulars before mentioned or included in them; but if any Wonder why
I have closed this method and not rather made a formal Reply to W. R's Papers,
I hope these following reasons will satisfy all sober, and truly
Peaceable-minded Friends, who Love Truth's Prosperity more than Jangling, as a
sufficient reason for my so doing. First, forasmuch as the greater part of what
W. R. has writ, is wholly built upon the Particulars heretofore mentioned, W.
R's Eleventh Obsevation.
which Particulars being cleared and * his Mistakes therein removed, To
signify, that I wrest his Words, or put a Disadvantageous meaning contrary to
the signification of his words, is a false insinuation; neither did I mistake,
nor yet so signify by letter as anon from the Observations on that letter
termed mine, will be made appear: for I put no meaning on his lines, but what
the very Express Grammatical sense thereof (Compared one with the other) would
bear, as will sufficiently appear to such as will be at the Pains to compare
my answer to his Book of Government with the Matters I pretend to answer; and
though he pretends to leave his case herein to the Readers Judgment, yet he
Impatiently records his own unjust Judgment; first on this wise, surely it is
not Answerable to that candor and Justice that W. R. lays claim to, meaning as
his Express Words import, because I doubted that from the words of the Apostle,
Rule, Command, Ordain, etc. R. B 's. meaning was, that, some things others
ought to obey whether they see it their Duty yea or nay. Alas! had R. B. but
considered that in this his very Postscript he Renders it absurd to conclude
that men should not be Condemned for ommiting their Duty, because they see it
not, and that in his Book of Government he says, neither will the pretenses of
any contradicting them, or refusing to submit, on the account they see it not,
excuse them of being guilty of disobeying God. Me thinks then he would have
forborne to Judge me as aforesaid: and though he signifies that I make a
Digression, concerning the Second Days Meetings in London, I say it cannot
Properly be called a Digression, since it is Matter of Observation on such as
were concerned in the Approbation of R.B 's Book of Government: besides Robert
Barclays Disingenuity is apparent in signifying, that I Judge the Apostle Paul,
and yet says not wherein: I shall therefore cite the Matter occasioned him
falsely to affirm that I Judge the Apostle, my words are these: The Scripture R.
B. quotes, is 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. which thus says, Holding Faith and a good
Conscience which some having put away, concerning Faith have made Shipwreck, of
whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered to Satan, that they may
learn not to Blaspheme. Having thus repeated Paul's words, I then proceeded in
these words. What Is this to the Purpose to prove that the Positive Sentence and
Decision of the Church in Matters of Conscience, may bind Believers; it is so
remote from it, that it needs no Explanation to show it so; nay, I may
reasonably query, whether this Scripture be (to ordinary Capacities) plain to
the purpose that Paul himself intends, for if we counsult the Light, it does
not tell us, that a Delivery to Satan may be an Expedient whereby to learn not
to Blasphem if by the Word Satan is meant the Devil, as is usually understood.
I now query of R. B. whether the Delivery of a Transgressour to the Devil be
according to his Light, the way to learn not to Blasphame? if not, his
Reflection on me, that I Judge the Apostle, is unjust and absurd.
as his own Letter signifies, the Superstructure falls of it self, as not
touching my Intention, nor yet reaching me; but only that Apprehension he
supposed to be my meaning, and to follow from my words, for which end he
oftentimes is so wary of as to affirm in his Papers, that to his Understanding
my words seemed to import, and my meaning seems to be so, in which things since
himself saw, and I have manifested his Mistake: I am not so great a Lover of
Centention, as to busy either my self, or mind of others with the Men of Straw
of his Making; but yet he was not so modest, nor kind to his Old Friend, but
that sometimes he does seek to render my words Odious, albeit the Mistake be
his own, by reiterate repetition, repeating that of the tolerable Supposition
of a Church at every turn above twenty times, but also he very obviously wrests
my Words, and seeks to impose upon me a Disadvantagious Meaning, that he may
furnish himself on Occasion there-after the more liberally to smite at me; as
where from the Apostles Words, saying, And we have Confidence, ye will do the
things we Command you, etc. And in another place, where he desires those to
whom he writes, to submit themselves to such as Rule over them, did infer that
some did appoint and ordain some things, and that there lay an Obligation in
point of Duty on others to obey; upon which W.R. very unfairly observes, It is
to be doubted his meaning is, others ought to obey, whether they see it their
Duty, yea or nay. I leave such Dealing to the Readers Judgment: surely it is
not answerable to that Candor and Justice that W. R. lays claim to. Secondly,
Because W. R. in these Papers has taken Occasion to extend himself in long
Digressions upon other Matters, not treated upon in that Book, and takes often
occasion to insinuate his Jealousies of Persons and Things, that I meddled not
with; as where he makes a large Digression, which takes up several Pages,
concerning the Constitution of the Second-Days Meeting at London, endeavoring
what he can to represent the hurt and abuse of it; and where he diverse times
insinuates, that some are usurping, or seeking to usurp a Jurisdiction over the
Consciences of the Brethren; and that some do believe, that God has raised up
some outward Person to be amongst the Children of Light at this day, as Moses
was of old among the Children of Israel, etc. And that some do lead many into a
temptation to run beyond their Line, by procuring a multitude of hands to
confirm what is given forth by one, or at least by a very few, with diverse
other things of this kind, which takes up no small part of his Papers: Now
these things are not pertinently brought in against me, nor would I judge my
self less impertinent to enlarge in a Contest concerning these things, which do
not immediately concern the thing under Debate; since the Person or Persons
aimed at by him in these Reflections, may take Occasion, as they find it their
Place to Answer, and perhaps may have had Opportnity to have discoursed with
him diverse of these things ere this time upon other occasions. Thirdly, since a
considerable part of W. R's Papers is taken up to Evidence, as he pretends,
impertinent Application I make of the several Passages of the Apostles, which
he thinks I have been too curious to collect, that make mention of these words,
Order, Rule, Command and Government, how he evinces that, I leave to the
serious Reader, being the more willing to bear his Reflections in that respect,
that he is so bold, when he cannot Compass his matter otherwise, not only to
censure me, but the Apostle Paul, saying of 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. mentioned by me,
that it is not only to the Purpose intended by me but that it is not plain to
the purpose Paul himself intended (at least to ordinary Capacities) adding,
that the Method there proposed by the Apostle answers not that which the Light
within tells us, since since then the Light he follows is such as finds fault
with the Apostles Assertions, I may the more patiently bear his affirming mine
to be Erroneous; and whereas W. R. labors to make it appear that the
Scriptures brought by me to prove a Power of Decision in the Church, do not
affirm any such thing, because in these Scriptures there is no mention made of
the Churches Division, yet if he consider that those places do speak (of the
Seperating from and Cutting off of Diverse Persons Forsaking their Fellowship)
to the Saints, who make up the Church of Christ, it necessarily presupposes a
Judgment of the Church, or Saints concerning these Persons for which they are
so cut off, from the Fellowship of the Body of Christ, which is his Church.

Fourthly, W. R's Twelsth Observation.
a great Part of W. R's work, R. P. now seems very confident that a great part
of my work is a Building up and then a Pulling down, but gives no Substantial
Reason to prove his Assertion. For it is one thing to discover for the Sakes of
others the Weakness, or Error both in Principle and Practice of one professing
Christianity; it is another thing to make ones self a Judge over the Consciences
of such, so as to Condemn them for not walking according to another
persuasion, though contrary to their own. This First is Commendable and the
only thing aimed at and performed by me in that Part of my Work which he
pretends is a Building up, and then a pulling down.

The other I Affirm R. B. is not Capable to render me guilty of, if he were,
Doubtless he would have done it, and then I should have Readily acknowledged my
Error therein. For Examples-sake I shall Cite one Instance. I positively
affirm, that this Judgment touching the Authority of the Churchs, in relation
to the decision of Difference Tonching Outward things is erroneous, and have
written somewhat large to manifest it so. This I did for the clearing of Truth.
And Perhaps he may term it as an evidence that I therein built that which I
destroyed, when I said, we find the Apostles Exhorting the Churches not to he
Judging one another, with respect to things relating to Conscience. But an
Inference will not hold, unless I had also declared, that if he, or any
Believer like minded with him, should Practice according to such a Judgment
they were then to be condemned: but that I have not done, for should I so have
done, his construction of my Building up and Pulling Down might have held; but
I am so far from being of such a Censorious Spirit, as that I think it is rather
his Duty (whilst so principled) to refer any such Difference arising between
him, and another Friend unto the Decision of the Church. This I hope will
suffice to show the Fallaciousness of his Inference and the abuse and
Perversion not only of my Intent but my Words themselves. And if his Inference
to my Words be good, than it is Plain that Paul might Justly be blamed when he
withstood Peter (Gal. 2.11.) to the face, Because Peter's was to be blamed.


is but a building up, and then a pulling down, wherein he apparently
contradicts himself, yea the whole scope of his Book implies a manifest
Contradiction; for whereas he plainly declares his writing to be a Plea for
Christian Liberty against judging and Censuring one another holding forth the
diversity of Opinions or Judgment in matters of Conscience but especially in
such matters as relate to Discipline and Government, is not, nor ought not to
be a Breach of Unity, which he understands may be supposed to be the
Diversities of Gifts and Administrations, mentioned in Scriptures which he
Expreses in these words upon Paul, in Romans 14. So then every one of us shall
give an account of himself unto God, let us not therefore Judge one another any
more. And again he says upon Chap. 14.34. which evidently shows, that
inasmuch as every one must Answer for himself, it is fit every one should
believe for himself, and so Practice, without being imposed upon by others; and
this is the Ground of all Christians forbearance. And again in another Place he
says, These things Considered, and that also we find the Apostle Exhorting the
Churches, Not to be Judging one another with respect to things relating to
Conscience, there is great need to watch against this Censorious Judging
Spirit, lest while any are Judging their Brethren, themselves become
cast-aways: He has many more Expressions of this kind. Now since this is the
whole Scope of W. R's. Papers, and that he did, yea has since he wrote those
Papers acknowledged me to be his Christian Brother, and many more, at least
then he did repute such, whom he Censures Judges and Condems, through his whole
Treatise, yea since his whole Papers are a Judging Censuring and Condemning of
me, and my Judgment in things Pertaining to Conscience and to my Judgment in
Matters of Government, and Outward Discipline does not the Work it self imply a
manifest Contradiction, so his very Writing Contradicts the matters that he
writes of, and pleads for, especially since he not only makes some General
Censure of me, and many others Professing the same fundamental Truths with him,
but is very partricular and Peremptory, yea insinuating accusations, as if I in
Particular intended to make way for an Authority to Rule over at least some of
my Brethren, as his very Conclusion intimates, and in Diverse other Places may
be observed; and it will aggravate this Injury done by him the more, that the
Reader may Observe as well in his own Letter, as in what is above mentioned,
that this his censure was Built upon his own mistakes.

So that I hope al who consider these things, will acknowledge a sufficient
Answer is hereby returned; and albeit I my self be fully satified, yet I should
not have churled the Pains of a Particular disquisition of every thing in
Order as Asserted by him (albeit he has not done that to mine, if I had not an
aversion from multiplying Controversies of this kind, for the desire I have to
avoid that sort of Work, and not for any strength of argumentation I Observe in
W. R's. Papers, has stoped me from so doing) but if any do apprehend that
strength of Reason in his Papers, as to Judge I was unable to Answer, or that
this is not satisfactory, it will but evidence the Weakness of their own
Understanding to the more Judicious, and I shall not think much to bear their
Censure; for I value more my own Inward Peace, and that of my Brethren, than to
Obtain an Applause of my natural Capacity, wherein if any Judge W. R. do
surpass me, I shall not therewith be troubled for I more and more see the
excellency of the simplicity that is in Truth, and of that Unity that it Leads
to, and thence do more earnestly than ever desire, to Witness all that is of
and from self, Crucified in me and brought into True Subjection to the Cross of
Christ, that there alone may be my Rejoicing, wherein I am at Unity with all
those, who make self of no Reputation, for the Seed Sake, that the Prosperity
of Truth may be advanced and the Peace of Israel Preserved.

Robert Barclay.


THe Reader may now take notice that Robert Barclay did not only spread abroad
an Explanatory Postscript to his Book of Government, but also therewith two
other Papers, adding thereto this Title.

Here now follows William Rogers his own Letter concerning this Matter, and the
Judgment of the Brethren, who were Witnesses to what past between him and me.

On which I observe, First, That the Brethren giving the Judgment, were but a
part of the Meeting.

Secondly, That the said Letter is pretended to be mine, though I never signed
any Letter or Paper, whereof what he has given forth is Copy. Yet must
confess, that when at that Meeting he declared himself by the words of his
mouth to be otherwise principled than I know his Book does teach, I did intend
the best I could (with a clear Conscience) to send forth amongst Friends of my
own accord, the most Favorable account of him and that Meeting as I could,
that so (if possible) breaches, then broken forth amongst Friends, might be
healed: but of this more anon, when I come to make my Observations on the
aforesaid Letter, and Judgment: yet at present I think it proper, before I cite
the said Letter and Judgment to notify the Reader, that by the little added
thereto it appears that R. B. has sent it abroad; and forasmuch as in the said
Letter it is signified in these words, Although Robert Barclay has given these
Explications of his meaning, yet the very Explications (as he says) are to be
found in his Book; it is rational to conclude, that Robert Barclay (if he was
then to be believed) was then principled as the said Letter declared him to be;
and how his Postscript will now bespeak his Credit, I know not, since he
therein does not declare himself principled according to the Expliations, given
in the said Letter of his words; notwithstanding in the said Postscript he thus
declares, " And albeit these things, which were chiefly scrupled at by any, be
sufficiently cleared by W. R's own Letter, yet that all may be satisfied in
having them from my own hand, I am free to signify thus as to them. From these
words what rational man could have expected less than a Confirmation of the
Sense given in the said Letter; but how remote he is from that, I doubt not but
will be sufficiently obvious to every impartial understanding Reader, that on
Perusal of the said Letter (hereafter-cited) his Postscript, and the annexed
Observations will give them all but their due weight: and if thereto they add a
due consideration of his Book of Government, no Question but he will then
appear like a man with three Faces, having on the Sheeps Clothing in the midst
of a briery Thicket, who wilest, striving to get out thereof, is the more and
more entangled. And though by one part of the Conclusion of his Postscript, R.
B. seems desirous of Unity with such, as rejoicing in the Cross of Christ, make
self of no Reputation, and that he values more his Inward Peace, than to obtain
an applause of his natural Capacity, wherein (as his own words are) if any
Judge W. R. do surpass me, I shall not therewith be troubled; yet in his
Apology for his not making a particular Disquisition of every thing in order as
asserted by me, he thus says, but if any do apprehend that strength of Reason
in his Papers, as to Judge I was unable to answer, or that this is not
satisfactory; it will but evidence the weakness of their own Understandings to
the more Judicious; which is no great Sign, that he is one who desires to make
self of no Repution, especially if compared with this his Expression (which my
first Observation has related to) and that to maintain Principles obviously
Erroneous, viz. I have never found Occasion to repent, or retract any thing
from the matter, or Principle there asserted by me; (meaning his Book of
Government) but have the Testimony and Approbation of Gods Light and Spirit in
my Heart, for my Work and Service in that Matter. For my own part I am
persuaded that the Law of Charity is accompanied with no such Rules, as to
prompt any rational Christian and Conscientious man to conclude, that R. B.
(considering his Capacity) is free from offering a wilful Violation to his own
Knowledge, Reason, and Understanding, both as a Man and Christian; and that to
keep up his Name and Repute: or else for some other (more sinister) end, for
which may the Lord in his due time give him Repentance to the Acknowledgement
of the Truth, and then I cannot but Believe, that the Lord will lay a
Constraint upon him to bear Testimony in plain against the Erroneous Principles
which he has been found an Asserter and Promotor of.

The Copy of the aforesaid Letter, termed to be my Letter, together also with
the Paper containing (according to R. B's Title thereon given as aforesaid) the
Judgment of the Brethren, who were Witnesses to what past Between him, and me,
does now follow; to which is added my Observations on both, manifesting the
Error of those who subscribed the Judgment, and concerned themselves as the
first Publishers.

The copy of a Letter pretended to be given forth by W. R.
Friends,
IT was upon me for several weeks past, if any occasion would in any wise
permit, to come up to the City of London, to be present among Friends from
diverse parts of the Nation at this time, that so I might have Opportunity to
confer with Friends, who were dissatisfied with me, touching what I had written
in Answer to Robert Barclays Book of Government. And a few days before my
coming up, Robert Barclay ( being in London) writ unto me to come up that we
might have a Conference at large touching the same. This his Request had the
greater Obligation upon me to be present in London at this Time. On Conference
had with him, we agreed, that a Free-Meeting might be had with Friends, in
whose Presence Robert Barclay and my self, might in all Coolness and Moderation
conferr together, that so all Mis-understandings might be removed, and the
Truth be evidenced to the Consciences of the Brethren then present.

The Meeting for this End was this day had, and a very Christian and fair
Debate was had, to the Satisfaction of both of us, as far as I can understand,
and the matters chiefly objected by me were fairly and Brother-like, and in
much Love discoursed, and upon the whole Matter I am satisfied, that Robert
Barclay is not Principled, so as I and others have taken his Book to import.

In particular, he does declare That his Book teaches not, that the Church of
Christ has Jurisdiction over the Outward Concerns of Friends, in case of
Difference, without the Assent of the Differing Parties, and that it was far
from his Intention.

For his Intention, as he declares, was only to manifest, that Friends ought to
submit their Cases of Difference to the Decision of the Church, and in Case of
Refractoriness, that Such Persons Ought to be Disowned.

That though Robert Barclay in one Place affirms to this purpose. That there
never will or can be wanting in case of Controversy the Spirit of God, to give
Judgment through some or other in the Church of Christ, so long as any
Assembly can properly, or in any tolerable Supposition, be so termed. He
declares, that the words were Sound, and further says, that thereby he
intends no other, but such Assemblies as in reality, and Truth may be termed
the Church of Christ. And whereas he says to this purpose, That it is
Disobedience to God, not to submit to the Sentence of such Assemblies, though
the Persons refusing to submit, pretend they see it not; yet he declares, that
his meaning thereby is not, that if they submit before Conviction of
Conscience, they therein find Acceptance with the Lord; but rather to show that
their want of Sight is through Disobedience, or unwatchfulness to the Grace of
God in themselves, which if they did take heed thereunto, would show it their
Duty to obey.

We also had Discourse touching his Assertion, that Principles and Doctrines,
etc. believed through the Force of Truth on the Understanding, are as it were
the Terms ( and in another Place, the Book produced, it appeared that he
asserted, there was a more Inward Bond, viz. the Life of Righteousness; and
that the Book declares, that we are gathered into the Belief of the Principles
and Doctrines by the Truth, and its Power and Influence upon our Hearts) and
the very Bond by which we became Centered into one Body, and Fellowship, etc.
and on a Debate thereof he acknowledged, that his meaning was not they were the
Original Bond, but rather as Fruits and Branches of that Bond, and so in that
respect might be as an Outward Bond whereby we are United in an Heavenly
Society.

We had also some Discourse touching his Title Page, wherein he asserts, that
the Ancient Apostolic Order of the Church of Christ is Re-establish't on its
right Basis and Foundation: touching which he declares, That his meaning is
not only with respect to all the Outward Orders and Forms of Discipline in
Government amongst us, but also with respect to the Power of God, which in the
Primitive Days was, and now is the great Order of the Gospel. And though
Robert Barclay has given these Explications of his meaning; yet the very
Explication (as he says) are to be found in his Book, if duly weighed.

Having given you an account in short of what was discoursed this day amongst
Friends, this further lies upon me to signify unto you, on the behalf of R.
Barclay I am satisfied that he is not Principled as I and many, by some
Passages in his Book, took him to be; and since it is so, that many have taken
an offense against him for that Cause (as may be doubted) even so far as to
Reject his Testimony, and Service for the Truth, it lies upon me as my Duty
even for his and the Truths sake to warn all, that they take heed not to
entertain Prejudice against his Testimony, or Jealousyes that may enter, on the
score of any apprehensions, or mistakes of his Book and that Answer that I have
given thereto, but rather in an unprejudiced Spirit to wait on the Lord, to
feel and Savor his Testimony, even as if the occasion taken had never been.

And I do Freely confess, that inasmuch as I Published my Book, before I gave
Robert Barclay notice, of my Objections and Intentions therein, I acted (in
that Respect) not according to Gospel Order, but am Justly worthy of blame
therein. It is with me also to signify to you that I am abundantly satisfied,
that Robert Barclays Book of Government was Written at or before the time of
its Date, for that he Solemnly Affirms it was so.

William Rogers.

The Copy of a Paper given forth by Charles Marshal and Thirty six Persons
more.
Forasmuch as William Rogers of Bristol, has lately written a Manuscript
against a Book of Robert Barclays, Entitled, The Anarchy of the Ranters, and
approved at the Second days Meeting at London, and has dispersed his
Manuscript in Several Parts of this Nation, without so much as first giving
either to the said Robert Barclay in Particular, or the Second Days Meeting in
General, any account of his Scruples, or Dissatisfaction concerning the said
Book of Robert Barclay, contrary to all Rules of Brotherly Love,
Christian-Fellowship, Gospel Order, and the Exemplary Practice of the Church of
Christ, to the Defamation of the said Robert Barclay, the great Derogation from
the Christian Authority, of the said Meeting, and the general Dis-service to
Truth, especially being sent unto Persons, who at present are Disaffected to
the present Unity of the Body of Friends. And whereas on the Seventh Day of the
Fourth Month 77. We whose Names are Under Written were met together in the
City of London, in the pure Fear and Holy Dread of the Lord God Almihty, to
hear what the said William Rogers had Objected against the said Book of Robert
Barclay, it appeared to us, upon a Deliberate, Serious and Impartial Hearing of
the Matter in controversy, that the Objections of the said William Rogers, lay
not so much against the Matter and Substance of the said Robert Barclays Book,
as against his way of Expressing some Passages therein: and that upon Robert
Barclays Defense and Explanation, the said William Rogers did Declare, that he
was Satisfied with Robert Barclay as to his Principles; but that he thought
some Passages in his Book might have been better worded, Confessing that he did
not Brotherly in Publishing his Book, before he had communicated his Exception
to the said Robert Barclay, and the Brethren of the Second Days Morning-Meeting
in London; it is therefore the Inward sense, Advice and Judgment of the
Meeting, that the said William Rogers forthwith do Deliver up into the hands of
James Claypoole, the Copy of his said Book, which he has here with him, and as
speedily as may he Recall all such other Copies of his said Book, as he knows to
be Dispersed in the Nation, or elsewhere, and that he also ought speedily to
Write a Letter to Friends, in all those Places where he does or shall know the
said Book to be Dispersed, and therein to clear both the said Robert Barclay,
and the Friends of the Second Days Meeting in London, from all such Aspersions
as by means of his said Book may be cast upon him, or them. And though it does
not appear to this Meeting, by any thing that the said William Rogers has
Objected, or Offered, that there is any Error or Unsoundness of Doctrine in
the said Robert Barclay's Book, yet forasmuch as there are some Terms or
Expressions therein, which some conceive might be made yet more plain, easy
and familiar, it is the Desire of this Meeting, that the said Robert Barclay
(as he feels in himself the Openings of Life thereunto) will in Christian
condescension to the Capacities of the Weak, write an Explanatory Postscript to
the said Book, for the Sake of all such, as may be supposed to have
misapprehended any Expression therein.

Charles Marshal, and thirty six more.

William Rogers his Observations, on a Letter given forth and pretended to be
his, together with his Answer to a Paper given forth by Charles Marshal and
thirty six Persons more, on the hearing of a Debate between W. R. and R. B.
KNowing that of late there has been spread abroad amongst Friends a Paper
subscribed by Charles Marshall and 36 Persons more, together with another, to
which my Name is only inserted, both relating to Robert Barclay and my self,
and that on Occasion of a Free Meeting had in the City of London, wherein some
Particulars contained in Robert Barclay's Book of Government (to part whereof I
writ an Answer) were discoursed between Robert Barclay and other Persons on the
one part, and my self on the other part: and that many false and wrong
Constructions are made thereof, whereby I perceive the Simple may be ensnared,
I am now on the behalf of Truth concerned thus to Inform the Reader.

That Robert Barclay and my self did agree, That twelve Persons nominated
between us should have a hearing of the Matter, with this Exception made by
Robert Barclay, That he would not so limit, as not to have Liberty to add two
or three others, giving this reason, that he expected some Friends to the City,
etc. I told him to this purpose, 'twas probable I would not deny the addition
of two or three Friends, if he should request it of me; accordingly he did
request it of me, and I granted it: but notwithstanding many others came at the
appointed time, who were not chosen by us, nor yet was there any Assent of mine
(or Desire of R. B's as I know of) that they should be present: whereupon I
refused to meet with them that Day.

After Friends perceived that I would not meet with them, not chosen, Note For
the Reasons in the Preface annexed to the First-part, his Name is omitted.
an Eminent Preacher, who stood by R. B's Book, told me in words to this
effect, that they would not assent to a Meeting limited to Robert Barclay's nor
my Choice; but as a Church would keep their Authority; and not only so, but
would vindicate every word in Robert Barclay's Book: Considering the Station
the said Person is in, and how much he is esteemed by George Fox; and that he
seems to be the right hand man for that Government contended for by Robert
Barclay, I easily perceived my Cause was already Judged, and that 'twas in vain
to expect a Meeting whereof I might have the choice of one half; but yet
notwithstanding, lest they should reflect upon me, as a Person afraid to stand
to that Cause I was engaged in, and having Faith in God I should be preserved,
I the next Day freely and of my own accord, gave notice to Robert Barclay,
George Fox, and others of my readiness to meet with any Friends, and so a free
Meeting was had between R. B. and my self in the presence of George Fox,
Charles Marshal and Diverse others.

When the debate between us was over, Robert Barclay proposes to this purpose,
to have some Satisfaction for the wrong I did him. I told him to this effect, I
wronged him not, and that neither my self, or any other was capable in this
Case to do him so much right, as he was capable to do himself, by writing a
Postscript to his Book; this being a reasonable Proposal of mine, the Meeting
did approve of his writing a Postscript, and withal counseled me to call in
my Manuscript in Answer; which I neither did, have, or can assent unto; but
told George Fox and many more public Friends, that if I should in that respect
take their Counsel, before I saw it my Duty, I should manifest my self a
notorious Hypocrite.

The Reader may also take notice, that in much haste I drew up a few Lines,
with intent to have sent it of my own free will to some Friends, by way of
Epistle, and to have given it under my own Hand: these two following
Considerations were the motives thereto.

First, Charity obliged me to have a Regard to Robert Barclay's Testimony, as
a Public Person, since he has publicly declared himself otherwise
principled, than I say, his Book does plainly teach.

Secondly, Since there has been some Debate between us, I thought it necessary
to insert some of those things whereof we debated, that so those who had heard
the Fame of his Book, and my Answer, might take Occasion from thence to
examine, whether Robert Barclay's Sense and Explications by word of mouth were
agreeable to his Book, or no: and also to insert so much therein, as to
manifest that Robert Barclayes Cause was not right, which to every discerning
Eye cannot but appear from the said Paper, though such who espouse Robert
Barclay's Cause, may by their smooth Glosses deceive the Simple thereby.

And when I had written what was in my mind, the aforesaid, eminent Preacher
being alone with me urges Diverse Alterations and Additions, and after I was on
Horseback, departing the City, desired me to give him that so raced and
interlined Paper (but not manifested his intent to Publish the same) to whom I
Answered, I would not, unless he would promise me to send it me without the
least Alteration, or Addition of a Title, which he then Solemnly promised, but
is not yet performed, and so the spreading of that Paper or any Paper under the
notion of Copy thereof in my Name, without my Privity or Assent, was very
Abusive, and I can account it little better than forgery. For my Memory is so
good as to know, that my Hand was never to any Paper, whereof this given forth
in my Name is Copy. And forasmuch as the said Pretended Letter declares nothing
of Error contained in my Answer, therefore the force of the said Answer is
nothing abated thereby.

And now if that very Paper which is sent abroad under my Name, without my
Assent, were sent by me: for the sakes of such who may misconstrue the same, I
thus Observe.

It Is therein thus said; I am satisfied that Robert Barclay is not Principled
so as I and others have taken his Book to Import. And in another place, as I,
and many, by some Passages in his Book, took him to be.

The words spoken by Robert Barclay himself unto me before Friends, manifested
that he is not principled as his Book teaches, and therefore I hope none will
abuse my Charity, in believing the words of Robert Barclays mouth rather than
what his former Writing says, my so doing does not import that I mistook his
Book; for I Affirm, that his Book is Erroneous, and showed him otherwise
Principled than the words of his mouth imported. Again in the said Paper it is
thus said.

In Particular he does declare, That his Book teaches not that the Church of
Christ has Jurisdiction over the Outward Concerns of Friends in case of
Difference, without assent of the Differing Parties, and that it was far from
his Intentions.

As to this I thus say, I hope none will read so carlesly as to conclude, that
because I say, He does Declare, etc. therefore they will conclude that I do so
declare. If I should have so said, I should have egregiously wronged my
Conscience because I knew not where to find such an Explication of his words,
this Sentence was inserted to tell Friends what he says, and not what I say.
And so every one has liberty to search his Book that they may see whether he
speaks Truth, or no, for I now positively Affirm, having since searched his
Book again, that there is not any one Word or Sentence to be found thorough all
his Book, that does in the least measure import that his Book does so teach as
he says it does, and yet since my departure from London he had the Confidence
(or rather I may say the Impudence) to Affirm that Forty Brethren had given it
as their sense, that it did so teach: whenas it appeared that many of the
Meeting who also had put their hands to the account given of the Meeting as
aforesaid, were not Principled that it ought so to teach, as R. B. says it
does, and being for the satisfaction of many desired to show the Sentence that
so imported, he refused so to do; and doubtless the real Reason of his so doing
was guilt upon his Conscience, for that he could not tell where to find it.

I also find in the said Paper, that Robert Barclay in one place Affirms to
this purpose, That there never will, nor can be wanting, in case of Controversy
the Spirit of God to give Judgment thorough some or other in the Church of
Christ, so long as any assembly can properly, or in any tolerable supposition
be so termed; and that he Declares the Words are sound, and so he has
concluded as the said Paper imports, That it is disobedience to God, not to
submit to the sentence of such Assemblies, though the Persons refusing to
submit pretend they see it not. Here also I cannot but Observe, That it is
unreasonable for any to conclude, that I Judge the Sentence sound; for I
testify, it is Erroneous, and never assented or thought it otherwise, and that
there is no consistency in Truth between that which he declares to be his
further meaning thereon, and the words in his Book. Which cannot but appear by
comparing his further meaning in the said Letter, and his Book together.

The said Paper does further manifest, that Robert Barclay thus in his Book
asserted, viz. That the Ancient Apostolic Order of the Church of Christ is
re-stablisht on its Right Basis and Foundation, and that his meaning therein
was not only with respect to all the Outward Orders and Forms of Discipline in
Government amongst the People called Quakers, but with Respect to the Power of
God, which is the Great Order of the Gospel, and that though Robert Barclay
has given these Explications of his meaning, yet the very Explications, as he
says, are to be Found in his Book.

Let the Judicious Reader Consider, whether this can any way credit Robert
Barclay, or the Second Days Meeting, that approved his Book; as evidence that
it cannot, I say, that all the Outward Orders and Forms of Discipline in
Government amongst the People called Quakers do not appear to be the Ancient
Apostolic Order of the Church of Christ, and that I have sufficiently
evidenced in my Answer, and if so, how can his Meaning be according to truth.

Secondly, It Is true that the Power of God is the great Order of the Gospel,
and is of ability to Establish us, but we not of ability to Establish it; and
therefore whatever Robert Barclay may say, it is not rational to conclude, that
according to his Meaning (when he writ that Sentence) it had Relation to any
thing but Outward Orders, and Forms of Discipline in Government; and as to his
saying that the very Explications are to be found in his Book, I Affirm, on a
further Diligent Search, that there is no such Explications to be found
therein; and I hope those who have a concern on their Spirit for Truth, will do
me so much Right, as to Examine his Book, since the Case by the spreading of
the said Paper under my Name is brought to a narrow issue, for now it is easily
to be manifested, whether herein I have wronged Robert Barclay, or whether
Robert Barclay is not wrong, and the Second Days Meeting too, whilst they
Justify and own his Book.

In the said Paper it is thus further said, viz. This further lies upon me to
signify unto you, on behalf of Robert Barclay, I am satisfied that he is not
Principled, as I and many by some passages in his Book took him to be; and
since it is so that many have taken an offense against him for that cause, and
as may be doubted even so far, as to reject his Testimony and Service for the
Truth, it lies upon me as my Duty even for his and the Truths Sake to warn all,
that they take heed not to entertain a prejudice against his Testimony on
Jelousies that may enter on the score of any apprhensions or mistakes of his
Book, and that Answer that I have given thereto; but rather in an unprejudiced
Spirit to wait on the Lord, to feel and Savor his Testimony, even as if the
occasion taken had never been.

This Caution plainly appears to be written on this Charitable foot, that would
be unjust to measure his present Testimony in public, by his Errors in his
Book, or from Jealousyes or mistakes of any kind whatsoever. And as to these
words, any apprehensions or mistakes of his Book, and that Answer I have given
thereto, it does not follow that I mistook or Misapprehended his Book: for had
I so done, I would plainly have confessed the same.

The said Paper, as I am Informed, is termed my Paper of Condemnation; this I
suppose is taken from these words that I find written therein, viz. I do freely
confess that inasmuch as I Published my Book, before I gave Robert Barclay
notice of my Objections, and Intentions therein, I acted in that respect not
according to Gospel Order, but am Justly worthy of Blame therein; as to this I
have this to say, that though I confess my self Blame worthy, and not acting so
civil as became me to my acquaintance, for that I writ not to him that I
Intended to Answer his Book, yet I in no respect took Blame to my self more
than so; and to speak the Naked Truth, I, rather took more Blame to my self
than the Case did require, being no way inclined to Extinuate that which I
thought was not so Civil as became me, I dare not say evil, for I really
thought that he was in Holland, and so knew not where to write to him when I
intended to Answer some Passages in his Book, but yet always did and still do
Justific the spreading abroad of my Answer, and that I had no Obligations to
send him a Copy thereof, since all the Copyes I had Leisure to write were
little enough to clear my Conscience, by endeavoring to undeceive those, who
either were or might be deceived by his Book. And if by that eminent Preacher's
aforesaid earnest Pressing to alterations (at a time when I gave not my self up
to discourse with any) there be any such Word as not according to Gospel Order,
I must say, that Word is rather the Word of that other Persons, than any thing
freely coming from me. For I must say again, I am not conscious of any Blame,
unless my not writing a few Lines to Robert Barclay to signify my Intentions,
may be termed blame worthy for his Endeavors (if he should have been so
minded) to call in his Book, would not have Obstructed my writing that Answer I
did, because his Book was so spread that 'twas out of his Power to call them
in: and inasmuch as this Book could not be so Properly called a Particular
Trespass against me as a Reproach to the Truth in General and the Profession
thereof: I cannot account my spreading an Answer to detect the Errors a breach
of Gospel Orders, though not sent to him first. Besides, it is Observable, that
the aforesaid account, given by Charles Marshall and Thirty six Persons more on
this occasion, signifies nothing of my acknowledgment to have acted contrary to
Gospel Order.

And as to the Paper given forth by Charles Marshall and Thirty Six other
Persons, I have this to say, that it is hereby manifest that the Second Days
Meeting in London approved Robert Barclay's Book of Government, and so
consequently are Approvers of the Error and False Doctrine therein contained.

That his Book is Erroneous and does contain False Doctrine, I sufficiently
manifested, and is more largely treated on in my Answer; and if it appeared not
to the Meeting, as they say it did not, I am sorry it should be so: but I know
it did appear to several of the Meeting: and yet I must confess, I wonder not
at such a Testimony, since I certainly know some of the Subscribers of the said
Paper, have been exercised so much to preach False Doctrine for Sound, as that
I account such improper Judges of what is False Doctrine, and what Sound: and
as to the rest not so accostomed, I hope it is no worse than the Fruit of their
dull hearing, or want of Memory. However my great Satisfaction is, that every
unprejudiced Person has Opportunity to inform himself by a serious Perusal of
Robert Barclay's Book, without either giving Credit to them or me, barely
because we so affirm.

And whereas they thus say, And has dispersed his Manuscript in several parts
of this Nation, without so much as first giving either to the said Robert
Barclay, or the Second Days Meeting, any Account of his Scruples, contrary to
all Rules of Brotherly-Love, Christian-Fellowship, Gospel Order, and the
Exemplary Practice of the Church of Christ, to the Defamation of the said
Robert Barclay, the great Derogation from the Christian Authority of the said
Meeting, and the General Disservice of Truth. If by this they mean, that my
sending abroad my Manuscript was contrary to the Rules of Brotherly-Love, etc.
I utterly disown that Testimony, as Erroneous; for I have sufficiently proved,
both by Word and my Manuscript, that Robert Barclay's Book is Erroneous,
containing false Doctrine, and inasmuch as 'twas Publicly spread abroad, to
the Dishonor of God and Truth, a Concern for the Truth came upon me to
discover that Error, that the Souls of the Simple might not be deceived; and
Inasmuch as I knew, that had he been willing to call in his Book, yet it could
not take off the Obligation on me (for 'twas out of his Power to call them all
in, being so publicly dispersed) I thought it not my Duty to give him, or the
Second-Dayes Meeting Copy thereof first: yet as soon as my leisure permitted, I
sent Copy to London, directed to Steven Crisp and another public Person, that
so when I came to London (as afterward I did) they might (if I had committed
any Error therein) have treated me according to the merit thereof: but when I
came to London no one accused my Answer as erroneous in any Respect, and if
there was any neglect to peruse it, 'twas their Fault, and not mine, since
there was Opportunity for the said Subscribers to view it; for I manifested,
that I had it with me at the Meeting held as aforesaid, and though I desired
the Privilege to make use of it, before the Meeting, to help my Memory, even
as Robert Barclay made use of his, yet being then desired to forbear, I made no
use thereof at the Meeting. However, if they have this to say, it was their
Duty to have perused it before they had given a Judgment that my dispersing
the said Manuscript, etc. is to the Defamation of the said Robert Barclay, the
great Derogation of the Christian Authority of the said Meeting, and General
Disservice of Truth, etc. but I certainly know all that gave that Judgment, had
not then perused it.

And as to their saying, 'Twas to the great Derogation of the Christian
Authority of the said Meeting (meaning the Second Days Meeting) I have this to
say.

That I never understood, that Friends owned any Authority, in any of our
Meetings, as a Christian Authority, but the Power of God, which is Invisible,
and cannot be diminished; and therefore I may well query, whether it is not
Great Weakness in any to conclude, that I am capable to do any Action, which
can either lessen, diminish, or take from that Authority: and I hope none of
the said Subscribers are so remote from Truth, and a good Understanding as to
conclude, that the Second Days Meeting has any Authority given them by Man;
but if any should be so Weak, I must tell such, that as I never gave it any, so
am wholly incapable by writing to lessen it, if they have any.

And whereas it is said, that the Objections of the said William Rogers lay not
so much against the Matter and Substance of the said Robert Barcly's Book, as
against the way of Expressing some Passages therein. This I say is untrue, my
Objections were against the very Matter and Substance of some things contained
in his Book.

On the whole matter I have this to say, I could not obtain a Meeting of
Friends to be chosen by Robert Barclay and my self, though the Person
immediately concerned; which agrees not with the Examples of the Scriptures of
Truth, Read Acts 15.1, 2. And that the aforesaid Eminent Preacher, as the Mouth
of others, under the Notion of the Church, Obstructed; and though in the
Meeting held, Friends Deportment was grave, orderly, and inoffensive, as to me
ward whilst the debate on my Objections held, yet I am greatly satisfied, that
by the Publication of the said two Papers, every Impartial Reader, that will be
at the pains seriously to weigh the said Papers, this Answer, and Robert
Barcaly's Book and Postscript, may easily discern the Error of Robert Barclay
and Charles Marshal, with the Thirty Six subscribers, but those who will have
an Eye to Papers and Books for the Writers Sakes, more then for the matters
Contained therein, may in time come to have their Understanding so Veiled, as
to be brought to worship Images, and to esteem See George Fox his Book of
Women's Meeetings wherein he queries, and was not Micah's Mother a virtuous
Woman. Read Judges 17th. and then a few Lines of these and such like Women were
recorded for their Wisdom and their Virtue.
Michah's Mother a virtuous Women in Israel, though she caused a Molten Image
and, a Graven Image to be made, and put in the House of her Son, Judges, 17. If
any should be offended at these Lines, let such Exhort Charles Marshall and the
other Thirty Six Subscribers concerned, to make, better Use for time to come,
of so much Condescension as appeared in me, (for the sake of Robert Barclay,
whom I once accounted my Brother) when I perceived from the Words of Robert
Barclay's Mouth, that he appeared a better Principled Man than his Lines
imported.

William Rogers.

The FOURTH PART OF THE Christian-Quaker Distinguished from the Apostate and
Innovator. WHEREIN

A RELATION is given of several Proceedings, (since George Fox's Wife caused a
Paper, dated the 21th. of the 11th. Mon. 1672. to be Read against John Story,
in a Quarterly Meeting in Westmoreland: Therein signifying, that he judged the
Power of God, as it broke forth in Hymns, or Spiritual Songs.) And is chiefly
to discover, That George For has Erroneously concerned himself in the
Divisions amongst the People called Quakers.

Which therefore may serve for A WARNING TO THE Children of Light, that their
Dependency may not be on G. F. (a misled, fallible Man) nor yet on any Mortal
Man, Men, or Name whatsoever, save the Name of JESUS; who is given of the
Father, to be Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth.

By William Rogers.

Hosea 9.7. The Days of Visitation are come, the Days of Recompense are come;
Israel shall know it; the Prophet is a Fool, the Spiritual Man is Mad, for the
Abundance of thine Iniquity, and great Hatred.

Printed in the YEAR, 1680.

The FOURTH PART OF THE Christian-Quaker Distinguished from the Apostate and
Innovator, etc.
THis small Treatise is chiefly designed to be Communicated unto those, who
profess the Appearance of Christ Jesus, the Son of the Eternal God, by his
Light in the Consciences of the Sons and Daughters of Men, to be a sufficient
Guide unto the Father of Life: The Faith of such is, That those who receive
this Appearance, (or Gift of God) so as to Live and Walk according to the
Divine Motions and Dictates thereof, shall come to know the Salvation of God,
through Christ Jesus, their Lawgiver, Lord, and Savior.

It Is publicly known, that this Principle of Truth has been held forth, and
owned by those, who (in Derision) have been called QUAKERS; of whom it may be
now said, (to the great Grief, and Exercise of the Spirit of the Faithful
Followers of Christ amongst them) That though the Principle, in which such of
them, who have received from God a Divine and Spiritual Knowledge, have
believed, is Unchangeable; yet the Enemy has so prevailed, as that the Seeds
of Dissension and Discord sown amongst them, have taken so deep Root, as that
their Public Meetings for Worship, in several Parts of this Nation, have
become the Stages of Contention, to the Dishonor of God, his Truth and People.
And in diverse Parts of this Nation, it is reputed, that George Fox is (at least)
one of the Chief Abettors of one Party, and John Story of another: But how far
that Report may (with respect to G. F.) have Credit with others, besides my
self, I shall leave to the Sense and Savor of the understanding, impartial
Reader, when he has thoroughly perused this Treatise.

And though, from their Names mentioned in the Title Page, some may be in
Expectation, that the Difference between the People called QUAKERS, with
respect to the present Separation, in some Parts of this Nation, may be Treated
on at large; yet that is not my present Design, or Purpose: Though I must
confess, that Matter is at large Collected, and impartially Stated, and lies
ready by me for the Press; and in Probability, may come forth, or (at least) a
Part thereof, more than what is in this Fourth Part contained, in its proper
Time and Season; unless the Lord shall be pleased to change the Hearts of the
Persecuting Opposers of John Wilkinson, and John Story, and other Servants of
the Lord, unto whom the Truth is as dear as ever; and that the Door may be
opened again, in our Public Assemblies, for Worship of God; whereby those who
have the Word of the Lord to Publish in the Demonstration of his Power and
Spirit, may not be so frequently obstructed by the airy, imaginary, and empty
Discourses of such, as have pretended to have the Word of the Lord to declare,
when it has evidently appeared, The Lord has not spoken by them, if so be the
Tree may at this Day be known by its Fruit, as well as in Days past: But
rather, that the Words of the Prophet are fulfilling, if not fulfilled in them,
when he said; The Prophet is a Fool, the Spiritual Man is Mad, for the
Multitude of thine Iniquity, and great Hatred, Hos. 9.7.

For I am a living Witness, that Imagination has so possessed the Heads and
Hearts of many, that Travel under the Notion of Ministering Friends, as that
instead of manifesting a Divine Understanding in the Things of God, or speaking
the Word of Truth in season, they have brought forth the Fruits of an unsound
Mind; showing forth no better Resemblance, or Evidence of being Ministers of
the Gospel of Christ, (that divide the Word aright) than the Confused Chaos,
before the Creation of God, was of the Beauty and Order that now is in it. And
for my own part, I am well satisfied, (and that on sufficient Ground, too large
to insert) that either the Multitude of Iniquity, or Great Hatred, through the
Influence of G. F. possessing the Hearts of such, is the Occasion thereof.

But notwithstanding, my Design is not (as I said before) to Treat at large on
the present Difference, between the People called QUAKERS, with respect to the
present Separation, in some Parts of this Nation; yet since I am also
satisfied, (and that on sufficient Ground) that G. F. has been one of those
very Persons, occasioning the Differences to arise unto the Height they now
are, or (at least) a Countenancer thereof, at a large Rate; I purpose to Treat
a little thereon, and partly as relating to G. F. that so the Impartial Reader
may consider, Whether if G. F. had contented himself (in Reality and Truth)
with the Place of a Servant of Christ, that sought not Dominion over his
Brethren's Faith, and Consciences; nor yet to expect Submission to his outward
Precepts, Prescriptions, or Orders, further than every Friend to Truth was, or
might be, by the Light of Christ in the Conscience, led, and guided therein;
The Differences now amongst Friends, touching which some seem ready to bite and
devour others, might never have been.

For my own part, I in no wise question, but that G. F. is one chief
Instrument, that a destroying and devouring Spirit has entered into some
amongst the Flock; and that many a Simple, Honest-hearted Friend to Truth and
Righteousness, have received and believed Lies, and slanderous, false Reports
against many Brethren undeservedly; to the betraying of their Simplicity, and
Love to the Truth, and filling their Hearts with Hatred, Enmity, and Prejudice,
And of this am I as well satisfied, as I am that there is a God in Heaven,
before whom both He, and all the Sons of Men, must come to Judgment; and that
the Blood of many such, if they perish (before true Repentance) will be laid at
G. F 's. Door: Otherwise, I should not have appeared to discover the said G. F.
as in Conscience I am now constrained to do.

And therefore, a Warning is now proclaimed unto all such, That they Redeem
their Time, because the Days are Evil; and proceed no further to receive and
believe Lies, and Scandalous Reports against such, (whom they have once
accounted Honorable) on the Credit of G. F. as a Man that for several Years
past, has not Erred: For many are this day Witnesses, that his Actions have
rendered him an Erroneous Man. And for as much as he has refused to give that
Satisfaction for his Errors, as in the like Cases he has prescribed for
others, it has increased the Concern of my Conscience to discover the same,
and that also for the sakes of the Simple, and Honest-hearted; and that those
Innocent, and Tender Children, that are growing up from the Loins of Believing
Parents, etc. may, in their tender Years, be awakened and warned, that they may
not be Captivated in the like Snare; and so bred up in a mere Form, and
affected with Airy Imaginations, which have no Tendency to open their
Understandings; thereby to give unto them the Knowledge of those Principles of
Truth, which the Faithful, by the Spirit, have been led to own, and hold forth;
nor yet the Way of the Kingdom of God, that so their Footsteps may be directed
into the Path of Peace, and they come to know a lively Feeling and Sense of
that Immortal Power and Spirit, by which the Everlasting God, (whose VVayes are
Unchangeable) reached unto many in the Beginning, when the very Thoughts of
being Embondaged again with the Beggarly Elements and Rudiments of this World,
or of having our Eye or Dependency on any Mortal Man, was loathsome.

I shall now proceed to lay down a few of those things, which are, in some
Measure, an Evidence to me, That my aforesaid Sense touching G. F. is true;
referring the Reader for further Satisfaction, to the First and Fifth Parts of
The Christian-Quaker distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator.

First, I take notice of Seven Questions, which were sent unto John Wilkinson,
by Robert Barrow and others; who said, They were desired by G. F. so to do.

The Queries are as follows, together with the Substance of the Answers
thereunto.

Query 1. Whether did thou say, concerning that Paper sent down to the
Quarterly Meeting at Kendal, That it came from the Female?

Answ. I Remember no such Words; yet was greatly troubled at a Note, This is
that Paper mentioned in the Title Page, that G. P's. Wife caused to be Read in
a Quarterly Meeting, and was given forth in her Name.
Paper from the Female, Read with grievous Accusations against our Faithful
Brother John Story; which (as I said) greatly troubled me, and many besides me,
knowing his Clearness from such Things, and knowing his Vessel filled with the
Power of God, in abiding in his House.

Qu. 2. Whether did thou say at the Quarterly Meeting at Kendal, to Margaret
Fox; What Ground or Foundation have Friends, to practice things which are
imposed by Man, or in the Will of Man, which the Scripture gives no Authority,
or Warrant for; or Words to that Effect?

Answ. The Words, as stated in this Question, I did not speak to M. F. yet the
Substance I own for the Truth in it.

Qu. 3. Whether did thou Read, or consent to be Read, in the latter-End of a
Quarterly Meeting at Kendal, a Paper of Anthony Pearsons, or others, that
directed or advised, That the Way of Truth should be as the Way of a Ship in
the Sea; or such like?

Answ. Nay: But if they mean no Impression of Form left behind, I like it well,

Qu. 4. Whether did thou advise, That Papers of Condemnation should not be
Recorded?

Answ. Nay; I had no Occasion to Advise: But my Advice was, and is, That
Condemnations should not stand on our Deacons Books to Posterity, according as
the Meeting agreed unto; because Failings in the Holy Scripture, have proved
Weapons for the Man of Sin to fight with against Perfection: This is one Reason
of many, that was given. Neither would I have them go further, than the Offense
is known; nor continue longer, than the Memory of the Offense abides; that we
may walk in the Footsteps of the holy Flock of Christ, and not Retain, when
God Remitteth; but Measure, as we would be Meeted unto; and Judge, as we would
be Judged; considering our selves, lest we also be Tempted.

Qu. 5. Whether thou opposed bringing in Friends Testimonies in Writing,
concerning their Faithfulness, or Unfaithfulness, in the Case of Tithes?

Answ. Nay; for I brought in One my self, as a Testimony against Tithes. I
never gain-sayed or hindered, neither would I force any one to write such
Testimonies. One ought not (in my Judgment) to use Force against another, in
bringing Testimonies for God, beyond the Force of the Word of Life.

Qu. 6. Whether did thou approve, or consent, or were present at the racing
or tearing out of the Book H. G's Paper of Condemnation, for being Married by a
Priest?

Answ. Nay; but Friends agreed, that Papers of Condemnations should be taken
out of the Book.

Qu. 7. Whether thou did not say, as touching Tithes, That thou would have
all Friends left to their Freedom, to pay them, or not to pay them?

Answ. I remember no such Words spoken by me, as to put such an Indifferency
concerning Testimonies for God, against the grand Oppression of Tithes; but I
would have no other Force amongst Friends used, but the Word of Life, to stir
them up with Testimonies for God, against the Grand Oppression of Tithes; which
I have suffered the spoiling of my Goods for denying this many Years.

Here follows Sixteen Queries delivered to John Story by R. W. and T. L. ( it
being pretended, that G. F's desire was, that John Story should Answer them)
and the Substance of John Story's Answers thereto.

Qu. 1. Whether did thou say, concerning the Paper sent down to the Quarterly
Meeting at Kendal from G. F. That it came from the Female?

Answ. It was never so said by me, to the utmost of my Remembrance.

Qu. 2. Whether thou preached, or said, That Tithes in themselves was Not
Unlawful?

Answ. I never so preached and said, to the utmost of my Remembrance, at any
time, That Tithes, as they are now first paid and received by the Generality in
England, were not Antichristian.

Qu. 3. And, Whether did thou preach in the Meeting, when they of Preston met
with you, That Paul was let down in a Basket; and that when they Persecuted you
in one City, you should Flee unto another; and that Christ sometimes preached
upon the Mountains, and by the Seaside; and the like?

Answ. I do not remember, that ever I preached of Paul's being let down in a
Basket; nor yet of those Scriptures, If they Persecute you in one City, Flee
unto another; but may do, when God puts them in my Mouth: But have used the
Scriptures of Christ's Preaching in Mountains, and by the Seaside. If any have
accused me for abusing those Scriptures, let them Exhibit their Accusations,
with their Names to it, and send it to me; and if I cannot defend my Innocence
therein, they may have their desired End.

Qu. 4. Whether there was not a Boy, or some other set upon an Hill, as a Mark
for some to know where the Meeting was, when they met without Doors?

Answ. I Remember no such thing.

Qu. 5. And, Whether there was not One or Two appointed to come to Kendal every
Seventh Day, to receive from thee, or others, Instructions where the Meeting
should be the First Day after?

Answ. I know none so appointed.

Qu. 6. Whether the Persons or Person were not then, or at some other time,
ordered privately to communicate it to some Friends; who were to discover the
Place and Marks by which the Meeting might be known, where it was; which some,
for want of the Knowledge of, wandered a great part of the Day to find it, but
could not?

Answ. I Remember no such thing.

Qu. 7. Whether their Houses, which were offered to meet in, were not refused,
when they met as aforesaid?

Answ. I know no House offered to Meet in, refused; and William Chambers's
Faithfulness, in offering his House, was kindly Accepted by Friends; though we
did not Meet there, being too far for the greatest Part of the Meeting to go;
and other Places much nearer, with which we were well satisfied.

Qu. 8. And, Whether did thou say, That to make a Distinct Assembly of Women,
was a Monster, and Ridiculous?

Answ. I never said the Things that are Cited in this Query, neither as to the
Matter nor End for which they are so peevishly stated: For I believe, if a
Congregation of Women be together, they may Worship God, and Edify one another,
though there be no Man amongst them. Yet I have said to this purpose, That to
set up a Meeting of Women by themselves, (a Select Meeting separate from the
Men) once a Month, or Quarterly, only about the Practice of God's Worship, and
to give that Practice as the Reason, Cause, and End for which they separate
themselves in so Meeting together, would seem to be Monstrous and Ridiculous
amongst Christians. And as for Meeting of Women by themselves, about outward
Business; when there is an Absolute Occasion for their so meeting about
Business, most proper for them to inspect into, I neither am, nor ever was
against. But yet I would not have them carry it so high to us, as to threaten
us with the Gainsaying of Core, and such horrid Offenses, for simply asking, or
discoursing about the Reason, or Necessity of their so Meeting.

Qu. 9. Whether did thou say at a Meeting, at William Chambers 's, when
Margaret Fox was at Prayer, Friend, Keep Order?

Answ. I did not: Yet being grieved in Spirit, that I could not distinguish M.
F's Words, when at Prayer, because of the Noise of Deceit, I spoke Three low
Words to my self only.

Qu. 10. And, Whether did thou say, That Margaret Fox had been a Hearer of
Lies and Stories these Fifteen Years, and cared not what she said of any; but
would not hear the Truth spoken from none?

Answ. To the best of my Knowledge and Remembrance, such things were never said
by me: Yet I am sure, she has asserted many grievous Lies under her Hand of me.

Qu. 11. Whether did thou say, That whosoever did Sing or Sound, whilst
another was Preaching or Praying, it was Confusion and Disorder, and a Spirit
of Delusion that led them to it?

Answ. I never said these Words, as set down in the Query; neither did I over
deny any Singings, Soundings, Breathings, that had their Rise from the Spirit
of God: But all Images my Soul abhors.

Qu. 12. Whether did thou term or compare such Singing or Sounding, to a Cat,
or Catterwouling, or like unto an Horse, or Belching of a Calf?

Answ. I never did so compare it; but I gave a Relation of another that did.

Qu. 13. Whether did thou Read, or cause to be Read, or consent to the
Reading of, in the Latter-End of the Quarterly Meeting, a Paper of Anthony
Pearsons, that directed, That the Way of Truth should be as the Way of a Ship
in the Sea, and such like?

Answ. I consented to a Paper that had some such Words; but knew not 'twas
Althony Pearsons.

Qu. 14. Whether did thou advise, That Papers of Condemnation should not be
Recorded, or gain-sayed it; and the bringing in Friends Testimonies concerning
Friends Faithfulness, or Unfaithfulness, in the Case of Tithes?

Answ. To this Fourteenth Query, John Story answered much to the same purpose
as John Wilkinson did to the same Questions, signified in the Fourth and Fifth
Queries to John Wilkinson, already Cited.

Qu. 15. Whether did thou consent to, approve of, or were present at the
racing or tearing out of the Book H. G's Paper of Condemnation, for his being
Married by a Priest?

Answ. No.

Qu. 16. And, Whether did thou say, Thou would have all Friends left to
their Freedom to pay Tithes, or not to pay Tithes?

Answ. To this Sixteenth Query, John Story answered much to the same purpose as
John Wilkinson did to the same Question; which was the Seventh proposed to John
Wilkinson.

Though before the giving forth of these Queries, there might be some small
Differences amongst Friends in the North, which were aggravated by G. F's Wife,
partly by her causing to be Read in the Quarterly Meeting in VVestmoreland, a
Paper dated the 21st. of the 11th. Mon. 1672. given forth by her against John
Story; and therein signifying, that he judged the Note, John Story denies, that
he ever Judged the Power of God.
Power of God, as it broke forth in Hymns, or Spiritual Songs: Yet many were
not so well satisfied, that G. F. was one of the chief Persons that occasioned,
or at least encouraged the keeping alive of those Differences, until these
Queries were sent to John Wilkinson, and John Story. But then Jealousies
entered many, that occasion was sought against them; and merely because they
could not gratify that Spirit in G. F. which (as was also Jealoused) had
Accepted of such Submission from some, as many Faithful Friends have abhorred.

I now come to make some Observations on the aforesaid Queries; wherein I
shall consider the Matter of them, and the Manner of Negotiating that Matter.
It Is plain to me, that if John Wilkinson, and John Story had answered to each
Query proposed to them respectively, [Yea;] then (since G. F. received the
Information, and prosecuted the same) the Informer against them to G. F. would
have had his End; which doubtless was, To render them guilty of Evil Principles
or Practices, and have G. F's imaginary Authority to prosecute them for the
same.

The Consideration whereof, leads me thus further to observe, That if any one
of the Matters therein contained, could not render the Person therein concerned
by his Answer [Yea] guilty of Unsoundness in Principle, or of any Evil
Practice; then 'twould follow, That G. F. (as well as the Informer) endeavored
to make the Person so concerned, an Offender in that Particular, which is no
Offense.

The Reader may now weigh the Matter in the Balance of the Sanctuary; which,
if he does, he will doubtless perceive, that the Answer (Yea) to several of the
Queries, will not render either of them, either Unsound in Principle, or
Blameworthy, as to Matter of Fact.

From the Nineth Query to J. S. and his Answer, it is observable, That if J. S.
had said, Keep Order, by way of Reproof to the Noise of Deceit, by one Person,
(though pretending to sing for Joy, whilst another was Praying) it is no Matter
of Evil Fact; but a Shame to any one so to Esteem it, since God is a God of
Order, and not of Confusion, in the Church.

And indeed, to me there is one thing above many others, that seems worthy of
Observation; and that is the Second Query to John Wilkinson, when an Answer
[Yea,] could not render him an Offender, unless it is sound Doctrine, That the
People called Quakers, ought to practice Things that are Imposed by Man, or in
the Will of Man, which the Scripture gives no Authority or VVarrant for. If G.
F. would be so plain, as positively to assert that, which seems to be employed
in that Query, (if from a Query any thing may properly be employed) then 'twould
put an End to the Controversy with many: For then it must be asserted, That
there is either One, or more, that have Power to Impose in the Will of Man,
that which the Scripture gives no Authority, or Warrant for.

But notwithstanding, I will suppose, in favor to G. F. that as Answer to this
he may thus say, I did not put that Question with an intent to justify
Imposition in the will of man; but rather to find out, whether what Robert
Barrow, and others, have endeavored to impose, (having a persuasion, that my
Papers have been given forth in the Motion of God,) was accounted Things
imposed in the Will of Man; and that if it should so appear, John Wilkinson,
unto whom the Question was proposed, might condemn the same; since I affirm,
that I have given forth nothing to be imposed, but what I have been Moved by
the Spirit of God to give forth, and therefore ought to be submitted to. The
Consideration of this suposition puts me in remembrance of an Objection raised
in the seventh Section of the First Part of the Manuscript, wherein the
Differences amongst Friends are collected, as before is hinted; which with the
Answer thereto, may be proper to Cite on this Occasion. -- The Objection and
Answer follows.

"Object. The Spirit of God, which is but One in All, has moved in our
Brethren to give forth certain Orders, Commands, and Prescriptions, and
therefore we ought accordingly to obey; and this cannot be called the Dictates
of fallible Man; but of the Spirit, given forth through man: and wast thou
(that pretendest, Thou see it not thy duty to obey) but obedient to thy ow
measure, thou would then see it so, and be one with the Brethren, and
therefore we cannot but tell thee, it is Thy Duty to obey, since the Reason thou
see it not thy Duty, is thy Want of Diligence, and not waiting in thy own
Measure. Besides, we find, that G. F. has lately given forth a Paper; the
Import whereof is, to justify Prescriptions.

" To this we say, That if the Spirit of God moves in any Member of the Body of
Christ, to give forth certain Orders, and Prescriptions, with respect to the
rest of the Members; as that which (though relating to their Consciences) they
ought to perform, and practice, whether they see it their Duty or no, or
whether they are free so to do or no; then no doubt, but they ought so to Act,
and Do, because the Spirit of Truth has so moved. But this is to suppose that,
which under the Dispensation of the Second-Covenant, we have not the least
Ground from the Scriptures of Truth, or Light of Christ, to suppose; and so we
do not believe, that we ought to expect, that any such Motion from the Spirit
of God, should appear through any one or more Members of the Body of Christ,
with respect to other Members of the same Body. And our Faith is, That all
those who are Heirs of that Kingdom which is Everlasting, are entitled to a
like Freedom; not to be imposed upon each by other, contrary to that Divine
Sense and Heavenly Understanding, which as Coheirs and Co-workers together,
they are made Partakers of: And this in the ensuing Discourse, will evincingly
be manifested from the Scriptures of Truth. However, we must confess, he that
is not diligent to wait upon God in the Exercise of his own Measure of Grace
received, is by the Light of Christ Condemnable; not for refusing to perform
that which he sees not to be his Duty, with respect to the Observation of Other
Men's Lines made ready to his Hand, wherein he is not satisfied; but for his
Neglecting to wait upon God, because it is manifest in every one, that has been
convinced of the Truth, that it is our Duty to wait upon God. And this our Sense
and Reason answers to the Testimony of the Scriptures of Truth; where it is
said, Romans 1.18, 19. The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness;
because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them; for God has
showed it unto them. So it is clear to us from the Scriptures of Truth without
us, as well as from the Light of Christ within us, that the Wrath and
Condemnation of God goes forth against such, as live not answerable to what God
has manifested in them: But it is neither agreeable to the Scriptures of Truth,
or Light within, for any to pour forth their Judgments against any, for not
following, or giving heed unto this, or the other Outward Prescription, or
Observation; wherein the Conscience is concerned, when such are Not convinced
thereof to be their Duty from the Mainfestation of God's Spirit in them.

The next thing to be considered is this, That in all the last mentioned
Objection, there is no Plea for Obedience unto, or following any thing, but the
Spirit in its Appearance, whether through the Brethren, or thy self. -- From
whence we observe:

First, That there is no certain Description, who are meant by the word
Brethren.

Secondly, That it is the Appearance of the Spirit, that we ought to follow.
Now, should this Question be asked of such, who may so object, as aforesaid,
Wouldyou have us follow we know not what? We are ready to believe, that they
would say, Nay, if they answered any thing to the Question: And if so, then the
Force of the Objection falls; for that we account it our Duty to follow the
Appearance of the Spirit of God, through the meanest Member, when our
Consciences are convinced, that it is the Appearance of that Spirit. But before
we cannot say in Truth, though we should do as such an one would have us, That
we are Followers of, and led by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 12.13.
No more than Jesus can in Truth be called Lord, and not by the Holy Ghost.

Besides, we cannot on this Occasion but testify, That as that Obedience which
is of Faith in Christ, finds Acceptance with the Lord; so that Obedience which
is not of Faith, being Sin, is but a Dead Performance, Romans 14.23.
and not the Fruit of a Living Member; who through the Obedience of Faith unto
Righteousness, is made alive unto God. And therefore, it cannot be the Duty of
any Member of Christ's Body, to run before his inward Guide; but to wait upon
the Lord, that all his Actions may be regulated according to the Manifestation,
and Revelation of the Spirit of God in himself: Which seems clearly agreeable
to the Testimony of the Apostle, where he says; Phil. 3.15, 16.
If in any thing ye be otherwise-minded, God shall reveal even this unto you:
Nevertheless, whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule.

He that savours the Things of God, may easily perceive, that the Meaning of
the Spirit through Paul, unto those Philippians, was, That those who were come
to a State of Perfection, should walk by that Rule whereunto they had attained;
but those who had not attained so far, and were otherwise-minded, were to wait
for the Revelation of the Son.

And now, to conclude as to this Objection; We have this further to add. That
we do know, many of our Opposers, or at least, such who are not at Unity with
us, have very confidently made use of such Discourse, as is contained in the
last recited Objection, to induce us to follow Outward Prescriptions, and
Orders, though not convinced of its Service; which occasions us to be jealous,
That in Process of Time, the Enemy may so enter in at this Door, as that
Darkness may more generally over-shadow again, than it yet does; though our
Hope in God is, That he will lay such a Constraint on many of those, whose Eyes
are open, beholding the Approached Apostasy, as that they may be raised in a
Sense of God's Indignation, and appear as Lions on the Behalf of the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah, to oppose every Appearance of that Spirit, which would be
exalting Self, or any Outward Form, Observation, Prescription, or Order, to be
as a Bond on the Members of Christ's Body; when by the Light of Christ, (their
alone Lawgiver) they are not fully persuaded thereof in their own Consciences;
which undoubtedly was the Meaning of the Spirit through Paul, when he writ unto
the Romans, Chap. 14. Ver. 5, 23. Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own
Mind; for whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin.

And to come a little closer to the Matter in hand, It Is too too evident, That
Nonconformity to Outward Prescriptions, is taken as a Mark of Apostasy, even
amongst those who have been under the Profession of Truth; of which many
Instances (too too large here to insert) might be produced out of the Second
Part of this Meaning an Historical Manuscript, made mention of in the Preface
to The First Part of the Christian-Quaker.
Treatise; unto which we refer the Reader. However, that the Impartial Reader
may here have one Instance, that this our Sense is not wholly groundless, we
say, John Wilkinson, and William Rogers testify, That a Friend at the Meeting
at Drawell (which Meeting is spoken of in the Second Part of this Meaning the
aforesaid Historical Manuscript.
Treatise) signified, that G. F. should say to this Effect, He that is not for
Women's Meetings, (meaning (as was understood) Women's distinct Meetings, as
exercised amongst Friends) was not fit to fit in Men's Meetings: By which
Sentence, it is evident, (if the End wherefore Womens-Meetings were by many
first assented to, be considered) that if the Form of Relieving the Poor
prescribed by G. F. should not be Assented to by any Elder in the Truth, those
who refuse so to Assent, may be subject to an Excommunication by G. E. and his
Adherents, from the Meetings of the Men.

Besides, it has been an Observation of late, That these Questions, or
Questions to the like Import, have been frequently ask't, by such with whom we
cannot be at Unity in all things: viz.

Are you for Womens-Meetings? Meaning distinct Womens-Meetings from Men:
Amongst whom; under Pretense of Taking Care of the Poor, another thing seems to
be more chiefly aimed at, as anon will be made appear.

Are you for Recording Condemnations? Meaning thereby, whether the Parties, who
have Condemned their Failings, (and through the Mercies of the Lord, have been
Restored, and their Offenses blotted out, and forgiven by him) Assent thereto,
or no?

Are you for Settled Mouthly and Quarterly-Meetings, touching Outward Business;
since those who would have Meetings as occasion offers, are accounted Designers
to throw down all Meetings for Outward Business, relating to the Affairs of
Truth?

And when these, or such like Questions have been asked of Friends in Truth,
that could not answer thereto [Yea] we are sensible; that it has been taken by
many Adherents to G. F. as a sufficient token of a Dark, Leavened, Rending,
Dividing Spirit; and merely (as we take it) from an Apprehension, that the Form
they stand for, is thereby struck at, (though the Services would be effectually
performed in another Method, as Experience in the Counties of Westmoreland and
Wilts, have of late testified) for were it not so, that great Stress is laid
upon the Outward Form of Things prescribed to be practiced, How comes it to
pass, that John Story is Articled against by Robert Barrow of Kendal, and
Twenty-Six other Persons; as in the Second Part of this Meaning the aforesaid
Historical Manuscript.
Treatise (Section the Fourth) appears, on this wise, in the Fifth Article,
viz. John Story speaking amongst many Friends of the Danger of Forms, because
of the Consequences that might follow, said, That amongst the Christians of
old, the Differences that did arise, were about Forms; which could not be
seasonable Words, when we were Establishing the Churches in the Holy Order of
Truth.

Much more might be Collected from the Articles (being Forty-Four in Number)
Exhibited by the aforesaid Robert Barrow, etc. to show, How Earnestly and
Zealously the very Outward Form of Things is contended for: Which occasions us
in all Seriousness of Spirit, thus to say, May the Lord God of Heaven and Earth
so Preserve his People, that they may not be ensnared by those, who have raised
so great Contention about the Outward Forms of Things prescribed to be
Practiced amongst the Professors of Truth; lest they with them prove to be
Boasters, Proud, Blasphemous, False Accusers, Despisers of those that are Good;
which are the very Marks and Tokens of those who had a Form of Godliness, but
denied the Power thereof; From whom the Apostle exhorts, to turn away: And how
far these Marks rest upon many of those, who so earnestly contend for their
Outward Forms, we leave to the Impartial Reader, with the Light of Christ, to
Judge, when he has thoroughly perused this Meaning the aforesaid Historical
Manuscript.
Treatise, especially the Second Part.

Oh, Friends! The serious Consideration of these things, bows us before the
Lord; and in a Sense of his Mercies to us, we can no longer keep Silence; but
in his Fear, declare unto all, That our Consciences are concerned for the Cause
of God, and his Truth; And since it is so, that an ill Use is made of that
Spirit of Forbearance, and Condescension, which we are sensible has been used
by many of our Brethren, it is now become our Portion to unburthen our selves
of that, which has been our Burden; believing; that the Lord is not only
Arisen, but will yet more and more Arise, Against that Spirit that would Exalt
it self over the Heritage of God; endeavoring to Rule over their Consciences,
whenas Christ alone is Lord thereof.

It may be now worthy our Observation to consider, whether any Encouragement
was given by our Lord and Master, Christ Jesus (whilst on Earth) unto his
Disciples, to become Rulers one over another.

We find, that he Exhorts his Disciples; Judge not, that ye be not Judged: Be
not ye called Rabbi; Matthew. 7.1 and 23.8.
for one is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are Brethren: But he that is
Greatest amongst you; shall be your Servant; and whosoever shall Exalt himself,
shall be Abased; and he that shall Humble himself, shall be Exalted.

Here Is no good ground to believe, that Christ intended, that when he was
departed, his Disciples should be Exalting themselves one over another, as
Governors and Rulers: And if we consult the Scriptures of Truth, we shall
find, that though his Disciples had a Dependency upon him, whilst in his Bodily
Appearance, to be their Leader; yet he tells them, John 16.7, 13.
It is expedient for you, that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you: But if I depart, I will send him unto you; And he will
guide you into all Truth; for he shall not speak of himself.

Had it been so, that Christ Jesus intended the Exaltation of one of his
Disciples, as an Head or Supreme (unto whom the rest ought to have had an Eye,
in a more particular Manner than ordinary) he would have undoubtedly signified
so much: But doubtless, he saw that their Eye and Dependency was too much on
his Outward and Bodily Appearance; and therefore signified, It Is expedient I go
hence, that the Comforter come. Agreeable to which, are the Apostles Words;
Though we have known Christ after the Flesh, yet henceforth know we Him no
more; that is to say, After the Flesh no more.

All which, does clearly demonstrate unto us, It Is not according to the Will of
God, that under this Administration we should have our Eyes out unto Man; but
that our great Dependency should be on that Comforter, the Spirit of Truth,
which Christ testified, The Father would send in his Name, to teach us all
Things; and that this Comforter should be In us.

And therefore, on this Occasion it is with us to give this further Testimony,
That every Member of the Body of Christ, is through the Death of Christ, made
Dead unto any other Law, save the Law of the Spirit of Life, manifested through
the Arising of Christ, by his Appearance in every such Member; and so as
particular Members, are become Married unto him: And having all Fellowship each
with other in the Spirit, those who are such, ought to demean themselves each
toward other, full of Love, Charity, Bowels of Compassion, Long-suffering,
Forbearance, Meekness, Humility, Patience, Gentleness; and of all other
Virtues, that are the Fruit of the Spirit of God: But as to Obedience, every
Member owes that unto Christ his Head; unto whom, 2 Cor. 10.5.
Every Thought (according to the Testimony of the Apostle Paul) ought to be
brought into Obedience. Thus far the Citation out of the aforesaid Manuscript.

And now, to return again to the Consideration of the Matter contained in the
aforesaid Queries; It Is evident, that granting the Answers of John Wilkinson
and John Story to be true, it renders them Innocent Men, so far as related to
the Matters queried: And yet, it is too plain to me, that this gave not G. F.
Satisfaction; (to which I intend to speak more particularly here after.) And
forasmuch as it could not be Just, according to his own Rule, (who has often
exhorted Friends, To follow Reports until the Author was found) to conceal the
Informers, had the Answers of John Wilkinson, and John Story given him
satisfaction, then I query, Whether 't was not much more unjust to Conceal
them, when the Answers gave not Satisfaction; especially since John Wilkinson
testifies, That he writ to those who pretended G. F. desired an Answer to the
Queries, to desire G. F. to give the Names of the Informers, with the witnesses?

That now which satisfies me, that the Answers gave not Satisfaction, is this;
Robert Barrow, and others concerned (at the Request of G. F.) with John
Wilkinson, and John Story, touching the said Queries, were amongst other
Subscribers to the Forty-Four Articles of Accusation, drawn up against John
Wilkinson, and John Story, either jointly or severally; wherein the Matters
queried, were reduced into Articles of Accusation: And not only so, but were
concerned in writing a Letter unto others, touching this Business; wherein they
gave this Description of John Wilkinson, and John Story, viz. And Friends, it
is not any Personal Trespass against any of us, that we charge them with, nor
any Particular Concern of our own, as Men, that we are in the Defense of: But
the Cause of Almighty God, and in the Sense of the Wrong they have done to him.
But yet, notwithstanding, from the same Letter they say, They have born a Dear
Love, and Honorable Respect unto them, in the Holy Truth.

Comparing this with what is written in the Third Article of the Forty-Four
Articles before-cited, viz. Slighting the Heavenly Motion on G. F's Spirit, in
that Case, in the Unity preciously felt, and closed with, (meaning the Rule or
Form of Church Government, set Forth by G. F. (as by the said Article appears)
it is to me evident, that in the Sense of all, who are Espousers of those
Articles, a Slighting of G. F's Outward Rules, Methods and Orders, with Respect
to Church Government, amongst the People called Quakers, is a Slighting of the
Cause of God.

I now appeal to all such, as are not ignorant of that Respect, that is given
by Robert Barrow, etc. unto G. F. whether it is Rational to suppose, that Robert
Barrow, etc. would have concerned themselves in Subscribing and Abetting such
Articles, as related to the said Queries, without his Approbation or Permission.

Besides, I well remember, that in a Reply made by Robert Barrow, and others,
to John Wilkinson and John Story, their Answer to the Forty-Four Articles
aforesaid, John Story is accounted a Man of a Dark Spirit, and in Confusion,
because he did not believe, That what was given forth by G. F. was by him
intended to be urged with Severity, upon any of God's Faithful People; but as
Instructions and Directions commended to the Churches, etc. Which being
disliked by many Friends, unto whom the Knowledge thereof came, I was the more
concerned, to query of G. F. (when I had Opportunity) Whether he owned that
Sense given of John Story on that Occasion? And thereupon, being in his House
at Swarthmore, before the Meeting at Drawell, (occasioned by the said
Differences in the North) I spoke to him of it; which occasioned him to call
for the Answer, wherein I affirmed it was: And when the Passage relating
thereto was produced, I also well remember, that he spoke not one word to
Condemn the same, nor yet to manifest the least Disapprobation thereof: Which
seriously pondering many Months after, on Receipt of a Letter Received from
him, Dated the 14th. of the 11th. Mon. 1676. and comparing it with something
written therein, (which, within a few Lines herein after will be Cited) I
thought it a sufficient Demonstration, that, Whatever was pretended to be John
Wilkinson's, and John Story's Failing; yet nothing would give Satisfaction, but
Submission to him, and his Outward Orders, Prescriptions or Rules, whether led
thereinto by the Grace of God, or no.

Object. Why do thou speak of Submission to him? Would not a Submission to
his Outward Orders, etc have given Satisfaction?

I answer. I am not satisfied it would, because G. F. in his Letter last
mentioned, thus writes of them. I tell thee, Them that thou calls Accused, are
not Right; for had they been Right, and in the Light and Power of God, as at
the first, they would have come to me, when I sent for them. Which seems not to
me, to be like unto the Language of that Good Shepherd, who was Principled to
leave the Ninety-Nine, and seek after the One, that which was lost.

After the Receipt of the Seven Queries by John Wilkinson, he writes to John
Blaikling, and the rest, to show unto them the Inconveniency of his Answering
such Questions, whose Tendency were to gender Strife; who not taking Warning
thereby, and still pressing for an Answer, John Wilkinson at length Answers
them; the Substance whereof is before Cited: And after that says, That he was
Moved of the Lord a second time to write unto those, who concerned themselves
about the said Queries; advising them to call in their Papers, and tell how far
they had been spread; Warning them ( in the Word of the Lord, that came unto
him the 20th. Day of the 6th. Mon. 1675.) to Repent, and Turn from their
Proceedings, and leave God's People to the Order of his Gospel and Command; and
that if they would not, then the Lord himself would break them, and turn them
one against another about their Orders. But yet they desisted not.

I am now sensible, that some (who may industriously endeavor to clear G. F.
from what is from the foregoing Lines justly (as I take it) laid at his Door,
in relation to the said Queries, proposed to John Wilkinson, and John Story)
may thus say; We are not satisfied from all thou yet have signified, that G. F.
was an Abetter of Robert Barrow, and those others who concerned themselves
about the aforesaid Queries, and Proceedings therein; and we believe, if G. F.
should be Interrogated touching it, that he would disown, that it was done by
his Authority, or Approbation. For the sakes of such, I desire them seriously
to consider the Observations, which I make on these following Words, mentioned
in a Postscript to a Certificate writ by John Blaikling, own was one of those
concerned with Robert Barrow, touching the Queries, and Proceedings thereon) in
favor of G. F. cited toward the latter-End of the Fifth Part of the
Christian-Quaker, viz.

"What do you think to do with your vainly Attempting to set One of Us against
Another, if you could, through your hatching and sucking up such Lies as these?
Does John Wilkinson, or such as stand by him, think thereby to have his lying
Prophecy fulfilled, who said, when a Renewed Care in the Churches of God,
according to Gospel Order, sprung amongst Us, and a Testimony was born against
Your Opposite Spirit, That we should be broken to pieces? Is this the Shift you
are put to, that he should not be found a False Prophet, with a Lie in his
Mouth, to charge a Lie upon me, to defame the Innocent withal.

My Observations hereon are these; What John Blaikling accounts a Lie, is only
a Query relating to G. F. and John Blaikling; and which John Blaikling gave me
occasion to Query, (as in the latter Part of The Fifth Part of the
Christian-Quaker will appear:) By which it evidently appears, that in John
Blaikling's Sense, G. F. was one of those [Vs,] unto whom John Wilkinson's
Prophecy extended; which was on the Occasion of the aforesaid Queries, and
related to the Persons concerned therein.

Now, forasmuch as G. F. spreads abroad the Postscript, wherein it is written,
as aforesaid; it naturally follows, that he owns himself to be one of those
[Vs] mentioned by John Blaikling; and they were the Persons concerned in the
Queries, as aforesaid.

I now come to signify, that after the aforesaid Forty-Four Articles of
Accusation were drawn up, Robert Barrow, etc. (all Informers against John
Wilkinson and John Story) writ to Nine other Persons, whom the said Informers
(without Assent of John Wilkinson and John Story) chose as Judges, to Judge the
Case, thereby (as I suppose) to avoid the Slander of being Accusers and Judges:
But John Wilkinson and John Story would not own their Authority, and so refused
to appear before them; and thereupon they proceeded to Judge the Spirit, that
was guilty of the Things contained in the Forty-Four Articles, without
Exceptions; which manifested their Weakness, as not capable to discern between
Good and Evil, Since many of the Articles were Uncondemnable. But forasmuch as
it is not my present Purpose to cite the Particular Letters, Passages, and
Judgment on this Occasion, I willingly at present omit the same, with this only
Observation, That I am well satisfied, (from the Observations and Matters
already mentioned) that G. F. was privy to these Proceedings; and if he esteem
Himself one having the Care of the Churches upon him, (as no doubt, he does) he
would in probability have been a Reproof thereto, had he thought the
Proceedings Reproveable.

This Judgment became a Concern on many Friends in the Nation; so that several
from London writ to Friends in Bristol, to go down into the North, to endeavor
an Accommodation of the Differences; for that diverse Papers by this time, both
on the one Hand, and on the other, were spread up and down the Nation; and
Persons concerned came to be variously affected: Such as believed G. F. to be
what I know he has described himself, and that in my own hearing, viz. One
unto whom Infallible Judgment has been Committed in all Things; and that he
knew a State of Purity at Eleven Years of Age; received sufficient
Satisfaction, that John Wilkinson and John Story, and all at Unity with them,
were Apostatized, when they understood G. F. owned them not.

Thus the Door became shut unto these, whereby their Consciences might be
satisfied of the Goodness or Badness of the Tree from the Taste of the Fruit,
as if this were Sound and Rational Discourse: Alas! I have an Inward Savor,
that the Fruit of the Tree is bad; though I confess, I have been so far from
tasting of the Fruit, as that I have never seen the Tree, nor yet what kind of
Fruit it bears, more than by Report.

Here methinks this Observation and Objection may be urged as rational.

Obj. Thy whole Discourse seems to carry a kind of an Edge, against the Spirit
that of late years has acted through G. F. of whom it is certainly known from
his Writings (yet extant) That he has thus advised, Take heed of Judging one
another, and Judge not one another, I command you, in the Presence of the Lord;
neither lay open one another Weakness, behind one another Backs: For thou
that do so, art one of Ham's Family, which is under the Curse; and that there
be no Backbiting behind one another Backs, but Love. And so the same that
does Condemn behind the Back, is for Condemnation with the Light. It also can
be proved, That his Counsel has been, To follow an Evil Report, until the
Original Reporter be found: And his End, I believe, then was, That Judgment
might be laid on the Head of the Transgressor.

All which being seriously considered, the Objector may then say:

Object. How comes it to pass, that many of his Actions come under the just
Stroke and Censure of his own Words?

To this I say, I know not how better to Answer, than to testify, That Pride
must have a Fall, and that my persuasion is, the Lord has suffered this great
Evil to come upon him, and to be thus manifested unto those, who have professed
his Name, that they may have no dependency on any other Name, that may be given
under Heaven, but the Name of Jesus, the Eternal Son of the living God; and
that every one that has made a Profession, that the Appearance of Christ by
his Light in Man, is sufficient to guide such as obey the same unto the Father
of Life, so they may not be led by the subtle Crafts and Inventions of Men, to
leave that Teacher, and have their dependence on the Lines of others made ready
to their Hands, though under the very Pretense of being the appearance of the
Light it self. For under that Pretense, Satan in many Ages past, has shrouded
himself, as an Angel of Light; on which Subject, a large Volumn might be
Written, most evidently to illustrate the same, which I omit now, being not my
present Business.

This my Sense and Answer on the last Observation and Objection, I am now
sensible, may create in some this further Objection.

Object. What cunning Devices have been used amongst the People called Quakers,
whereby the Weak, and most Ignorant Sort amongst them, have been so ensnared,
as to Judge from a pretended inward Sense, that the Tree is bad, when the
Person so Judging, has neither seen the Tree nor Fruit, nor yet knows any
thing thereof, more than by Report.

To this I Answer, That some amongst them, (known to stand by G. F. even in the
vindication of many Errors, whereof G. F. is Guilty, to the dissatisfaction of
a very great Number amongst the People called Quakers) have published with
Seeming Zeal, and Thundering Lungs, such like kind of Doctrine, and Exhortation
as this: Away with this Jealous Spirit: Oh Friends! exclude the Reason, the
Wisdom, and the Iealousy, and have an Eye to the Brethren: If you do not see
your selves, then follow us that do see.

And no doubt, but this Doctrine has been sucked in by many; and then it is
easy to be favored, that if the Publishers thereof do but once put the
Bare-Skin on any Friends Back, (though never so much of the Lamb's Nature and
Spirit) there will not be wanting those Sorts of Beasts, with whom ('it is
supposed) Paul fought at Ephesus, (who undoubtedly were Unreasonable Men) to
bait that Person, on whom (to speak comparatively) the Bear-Skin is put.

This Discourse may occasion this further Inquiry.

By what Mark may we best be Informed to discover those Ministering Persons, in
your Public Meetings, who are of Party with G. F. (as thou take it) and that
are the Encouragers of such Doctrine, and Exhortation, (as beforementioned) to
exclude the Reason, the Wisdom, and the Jealousy; and to have an Eye to the
Brethren, etc? (By which word [Brethren] I know is meant one Party of those
called Ministering Friends.) This I query of thee the rather, because thou
accountest it a Good Rule, to Judge of the Tree by thy own Taste and Savor of
the Fruit.

To this I Answer; What Garb they may appear in, I know not; But the Garb they
have appeared in, and the Fruits they have brought forth, I well know, by the
Hearing of my Ear, which are these: They have been much Exercised in crying out
against Dark Spirits, Leavened Spirits, Troublers of Israel, (thereby intending
such as have, and yet do approve themselves Faithful Friends) gainsaying the
Testimony of such, as have declared the Word of God, in our Public Meetings,
in the Demonstration of the Power and Spirit; though they have not been capable
to detect the Publisher with any Evil Consersation, or Unsoundness of Doctrine;
and oft-times spend their Breath at an eager Rate, a long time together: when
some part (at least) of what they bring forth, (being but duly weighed) is a
mere Scandal to Religion, the Principle and Practice of our Ancient Friends, in
the Beginning: Not having a Word (in many such tedious Discourses I him at) to
inform the Congregation of the Principles of Truth, which the People called
Quakers, have professed; nor yet to direct the Hearers in the Way that leads unto
Life Everlasting

Obj. This (may some say) is treating of Things in a general Way, without
particular Matter, to evidence this general Reflection.

Answ. I confess, it is so; and that it ought not to be Evidence against any one
not named; neither is it my Design, that it should: But rather, that I may
thereby become a Remembrancer to those, who may read the same, that they may
consider, whether it has not been so, though at such times they may have been
so much swallowed up with Affection to an imaginary, airy Declaration, sounded
forth with the Outward Appearance of great Zeal, as that they have taken that
to be pure Good Bread, which in Reality is nothing but Empty Husks. And if any
shall think my general Reflection wholly groundless, let such give the Notice
thereof, and I doubt not, but I shall be capable to bring many sufficient
Witnesses to the Truth hereof: For at the Moment I now write, I am well
satisfied, there are Hundreds will testify the same, who have been
Ear-Witnesses, as well as my self.

However, I must also testify, That there are others amongst the People called
Quakers, (and that I hope, by far the greater Part) that cannot be affected
with such kind of Doctrine and Exhortation, as to Exclude the Reason, the
Wisdom, and the Jealousy; and (whether they see, or see not) to have their
Eyes unto others, so as to follow them: And these are not willing to concern
themselves, either the one way, or the other, in relation to the Differences,
further than from certain Evidence of Matter of Fact. And these, not receiving
sufficient Satisfaction, that John Wilkinson and John Story were such as
represented, have been (as I am fully persuaded) termed such as had let in
Jealousies, the Reason, and the Wisdom; and on that foot, termed Dark Spirits,
by the Publishers or Approvers of this Doctrine, Have an Eye to the Brethren;
and if you do not see your selves, you must follow us that do see. A notable
Expedient, whereby the Leader, and those who may be Led, may (like Blind-Men)
fall into the Ditch together; and instead of following the Bright Beams of the
Sun, may be found Followers only of the dark Body of the -- Moon.

To be short; When I consider whence they came, and how Great G. F. is Esteemed
with such, as Publish such kind of Doctrines and Exhortations, as before is
Cited; I am well satisfied in my Conscience, that there are many at this Day,
that have no better Measure to discover, whether one professing the Truth be
Right, and in the Light and Power of God, but by understanding how they stand
affected to G. F. and his Outward Prescriptions; as if all the Labors, Trials,
Sufferings, and Travels of Friends, were to center in the Exaltation of G. F.
The certain Sense whereof, has increased the Concern of my Conscience, to give
forth this Treatise, Entitled, The Fourth Part of the Christian-Quaker; to
which also is added, The Fifth Part of the Christian-Quaker; both which are a
proper Looking-Glass for those, who desire to behold G. F. in his proper Image.
But to return:

Robert Barrow, and Three more, (all Informers against John Wilkinson and John
Story) writ to some Friends of Bristol, on the Occasion of their Dislike of
some Proceedings in the North, and acquaint them, That by the Authority of
God's Power, they have an Understanding given them of God, to Act and Determine
in Affairs appertaining to the Gospel, and its Order. And forasmuch as this
has been signified unto G. F. by my self and others, in a Letter directed unto
him, and others, Dated the 22th. Day of the 2d. Month, 1679. and that he has
not yet manifested any Dislike thereof, (though something to that Purpose was
desired) it is cause of Jealousy, that their Pretended Power was but under him,
if not from him; and the rather also, because they are great Espousers of his
Cause; and that it is evident from what is already written, that G. E. is one of
those [Vs] already mentioned by John Blaikling.

At length, some Friends of London and Bristol agree, that Six Friends go into
the North, to endeavor an Accommodation of the Differences; and thereupon a
Meeting was had at Drawch in Sedberch-Parish in Yorkshire, (which continued
Four Days) to Audite the Differences; but had no Power given by the Parties
differing to Judge: For some, disaffected towrads John Wilkinson and John
Story, would not permit that the before said Nine Judges (so termed) should he
Excluded as Parties; and to the Meeting broke up, not agreeing too give any
Judgment in the Case. However, some took upon them to give forth a Narrative,
(so called) (but was rather a Judgment, with a large Preamble of Matters not
acted at Drawel) which disagreeing with the Relation I gave of Transactions in
that Meeting, (being One of the Six chosen to go down into the North) much
Writing was occasioned in Relation thereto; which being not my present Purpose
to Treat of, I here omit.

That now the Reader may have an Understanding of that Sense and Judgment, that
was with John Wilkinson and John Story, in relation to those Five Heads, from
whence all the beforementioned Forty-Four Articles do spring; I think meet to
Cite their Testimony, in Relation thereto, read at the Meeting at Drawel: And
then comparing such their Sense and Judgment, with those Ancient and Faithful
Testimonies of many laboring Friends in the Gospel of Peace, who changed not
their way, since they became Publishers thereof, to the Day they fell asleep;
it may then easily be savoured, from what Spirit all the Mire and Dirt, that
has been cast up against our Ancient (and yet Honorable) Friends, John
Wilkinson and John Story, has sprung.

Their said Testimony now follows.
ON the whole Matter, in the Fear and Presence of the Amighty God, we declare,
That as we do approve of Monthly and Quarter-Meetings, for the necessary
Service of the Truth; so we further say, That as these, or any other Meetings
of Friends in Tenth, shall be continued to answer these Services, we believe,
that as it now is, it also will become our Duty to be at Unity with our
Brethren in the Services thereof. And though one of us, ( viz. John Wilkinson)
did condescend to subscribe to a Paper, for the Execting a Womans-Meeting in
the Country, to answer the Ends in the Paper proposed; which (he testifies) he
then did in Singleness of Heart, for Vnity's sake: Yet according to that inward
Sense we now have, there appears to us no Absolute Necessity to continue
Womens-Meetings in this Country, distinct and separate from the Men; and
therefore, do Conscientiously forbear to Assent or Encourage to lay the
Intentions of Marriages before them. Yet that Inward Sense, and Heavenly
Understanding we have received from God, has and yet does confirm us in this
Judgment; That it is not agreeable with the Line of Truth, to oppose others in
the Exercise, and appointed Service of the said Meetings, as here-to-fore, and
yet settled and agreed upon; who being Conscientious therein, are otherwise
minded than we are. And if any of our Words and Actions have had any Tendency
to oppose, etc. (which we are not Conscious of; but if we were, we would
readily confess) we say, the Truth in us would have Condemned it, even as it
now does. And if it shall please the Lord to manifest unto us a Service in
those Meetings in the Country, as well as Cities, the same Integrity toward
God, which has dwelt with us these many Years past, we believe, will become a
Bond on us, to join Hand and Heart with others our Brethren and Sisters
therein: But till then, our Desires are, That this may not become an Occasion
of Straitness of Spirit each toward other; but that Embracing the wholesome
Counsel of the Apostle in another Case, (If in any thing ye are
otherwise-minded, wait till God reveal) we may walk together in that pure
undefiled Love of our God, which thinks no Evil.

That though many of our Brethren see a Service in Recording Condemnations, and
Leaving them upon Record to Posterity; yet from that Inward Sense, and Heavenly
Understanding we have, we see no Necessity to leave them upon Record to
Posterity, or retain them, when the Sin is blotted out, and remitted by the
Lord; neither to be extended further than the Offense is known; nor yet to
continue longer, than the Memory of the Offense abides. But if any see meet
from an Inward Sense of Truth in themselves, to leave such Testimonies relating
to themselves to Posterity, we have therewith Unity. That this our Sense may
be no Occasion of Straitness of Spirit each toward others, is the Earnest
Desire of our Souls; who desire the Prosperity of Truth, and Peace amongst all
the Churches of God.

As to Tithes, We can in truth say, 'Twas never so much as in our Hearts to
speak any Words whatsoever, with the least Intent to Strengthen any in the
Payment thereof; nor yet to weaken the Faith of any, having a Testimony in our
Hearts, that Tithes, as at this Day paid, are Antichristian.

That as Groanings, Sighing, Soundings, and Singings may proceed from Deceitful
Spirits; so also we declare Groanings, Sighing, Soundings, and Singings, may be
the Fruit of the Spirit of the Lord amongst God's People. And that as the First
is Discouraged, the Second ought to be Encouraged. And the Earnest Desires of
our Souls are, That as to these Things, nothing but the Spirit of Truth, and
sound Judgment may appear, either to Reprove, or to Encourage. And though we
have been Accused, as if we were Opposers of such Groanings, etc. which the
Truth approves; yet, God is our Witness, we know it not.

That though we have been represented, as Persons Encouraging Fleeing in Time
of Persecution; We say, we are not Conscious to our selves of so doing: For we
believe, those who stand not to their Testimony, but flee therefrom in the Day
of Persecution, may truly be accounted either Weak in the Faith, or Departing
from the Faith.

And thus having given our Inward Sense, according to the Vprightness and
Integrity of our Hearts, concerning these Five General Heads, from whence all
the Forty-Four Articles do arise, we shall with this conclude, That, the God of
Heaven is our Witness, our Desires are, to approve our selves Men of Peace, in
the Abhorrency of all Fleshly Liberty and Looseness, and to follow after Truth
and Righteousness, that the Regin of the Power of the Eternal God may be over
all; so will the Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and
his Christ.

As to the Two Questions Answered by the Friends and Brethren met on this
Occasion; We, in the Fear of the Lord say, We in the Proposing thereof, had not
the least Thoughts to obtain your Yea and Nay, with intent thereby to
strengthen such who may be accounted our Party, in any thing that is contrary to
Truth; nor to encourage Looseness, or Bad Spirits: But conscientiously to remove
the Scruples of some. And further, we say, We are better satisfied with your
Explication therein, than with your bare Yea and Nay: For that we as well as
you are sensible, Apostates, and Bad Spirits, seeking a Fleshly Liberty, have
made use of Arguments deducible from such Principles of Truth, to oppose the
Power of God it self, and the Practice of God's People in the Power.

John Wilkinson, John Story.


It Is now worthy the Readers Notice, That G. F. takes occasion to write unto
John Wilkinson and John Story sometime after the Meeting at Drawel; which being
Cited in the Eighth Section of the Second Part of the beforementioned
Manuscript, together with Answer thereto, pertinent on this Occasion; I think
meet here to Transcribe the same, together with those Observations that are
made thereon, in the said Section.

THis is the Word of the Lord to you, John Wilkinson and John Story, and your
Company, to call in all your Papers, which ye have given forth in your
Separation; which tend to nothing but disquieting Friends Minds, and bring them
into Strife, Jangling, and vain Disputing; and corrupt their Minds, and draw
them from better Things, and from the Lord, and his Peaceable Truth.

And you may see, if you will not shut your Eyes, what your Spirit begets
into, viz. Strife; and what Spirit is it, that has led and guided you. So, if
you do not give over your Work and Separation, the Lord God will blast your
Spirit and Work, and you will become hardened, and as bad as the old Opposers,
James Naylor, and his Company, and John Perrot, and Pennyman, and Cobet, and
Muggleton.

Mark your End; for the Seed of Life Reigns, and will grind to Powder its
Opposers.

This 23d. of 8th. Mon. 76. George Fox.


To the aforesaid Letter, John Wilkinson returned this ensuing Answer.
George Fox;
I Received thy Lines, in which thou say, This is the Word of the Lord to
you, John Wilkinson and John Story, and your Company, to call in all your
Papers, which you have given forth in your Separation, etc. I judge, thou
meanest not, that that is a Separation, that all Friends meet not Outwardly
together. Truly, George, we might have expected, thou would have told us in
Love, what the Separation thou speak of consisted in; whether we are
separated from the Light within, the Doctrine of Truth; or have builded again
that which we have once destroyed; or what we have left undone, that God's
Truth in our Hearts requires of us; and what Papers we have given forth against
the Light Within? When the Word through thee, concerning this Matter, enters
our Hearts, and gives Light to us, that the Light of Truth manifests us guilty
of a Separation from God's Truth, and Giving out Papers against it; we shall
readily confess it, and Repent. But till we know it, the Word of the Lord, that
is as a Hammer, and thy Prophesies be to them, who are in the Separation, and
in Strife, causing Divisions, viz. with Articles of Accusations, disquieting
Friends Minds with a New Form, and Way of Proceeding, carried on with a
Profession of Church Authority, and great Help; which indeed, was seldom wanted
in a Separation from Truth, when the Apostasy entered. And truly, there is great
Cause of Jealousy, what will be the End of these Things. Thou should have
told us, what new Things we have brought in, as bad as the old Opposers, James
Naylor, and his Company, and John Perrot, and Pennyman, etc. before thou had
told us, The Lord God would blast your Spirit and Work. And if James Naylor's
Opposition consisted in Not Reproving his Company, when they bowed to him, and
cried Hosanna, let it be a Warning to thee, and Reprove thy Company when they
give thee the Titles and Honor due to the Highest; lest they that love
Pre-eminence and Rule, outlive thy Time, and render thy Weakness to others, as
thou have done his, when thou art Dead, and in thy Grave, turned to Dust.
Therefore, be Humble, as a Member of the Heavenly Body, under Christ the Head,
who Rules in his Church and People, whose Right it is. And remember the word
to Moses, with the time and place of his Death, who sanctified not God in the
sight of Israel his people. Oh! well may Friends be called Apostates in their
Day, and be Cursed of Men when they are Dead, whose Condemnations are left on
Record by others to Posterity, in the Churches Books; seeing James Naylor by
thee is called an Old Opposer, who confessed his Weakness, Repented and Dyed in
Truth, and Peace with God: But, George, we might have been persuaded that thy
Counsel, and Advice thou gave to the Churches in writing, is greatly abused;
and we cannot Judge, how thou could intend Force, or such a way of proceeding
with Friends about them. That which I see at present tending to Unity is, for
thee to Manifest, what thou intendedst by them if thou intendest no force with
them (which thou could not do in Truth; for that would let thee see Divisions
would be the effect of them) then manifest the Abuse they have done to thee,
and thy Counsel to Friends, by their proceedings about them, that we may know
that thou art the same in Principle, in Doctrine, and Practice, as in the
beginning (when thy Testimony was recommended to the Witness of God in all
Consciences) that thou may clear thy self, that thou approvest of no Force
about Religion, but the Force and Effect of the Word delivered; that the
increase may be of God, and we all, unto whom Gods Love has been large, may
have Unity in Truth, as in the Beginning.

The 9th. Mth. 76. From thy Friend, John Wilkinson.


Unto this Letter George Fox gives this ensuing Answer.
John Wilkinson;
I Received thy Letter, as I judge, Subscribed J. W. wherein thou would seem
to shuffle off that which I writ to Thee, and John Story, and the rest, as the
Word of the Lord to you; and that I should have told you, Wherein you were
Separated, and what Papers you have given forth contrary to the Light and
Truth, etc.

Your Paper of your Eighty Subscribers, is not from the Light of Christ, nor as
it was in the Beginning, which you sent up and down; and if it was not to beget
into Strife, Why did you send it to Carlisle, and up and down to other Places;
and another Paper lately that you have sent, besides all your other Papers?

And as for my Papers or Writings, that I have been moved of the Lord to give
forth, I know no Friends that do abuse them; if thou know any, thou should
have mentioned them: And if thou were not Blind, (who art gone from the Light
of Christ, and the Spirit by which thou wast first Convinced) thou would see,
that I am the same as I was in the Beginning.

And as for thy Fear of making Force in Religion; there is nothing but what is
Pure can come into it: But look into your own Paper, wherein you say, None of
your own County, nor other Counties must sit amongst your Chosen Men, but whom
you have given Power unto, etc.

But I say ( as Christ said) unto you, He that Believes, is Saved; and he that
Believes not, is Condemned already. And thy Neighbors, and all that have been
concerned with you, do know what you are Separated from: And I say also, You
are Separated from that Power and Spirit, which did first Convince you; for if
not, you would have been in Unity with me, as at the first.

And thou had better have taken the Word of the Lord patiently, and not
resisted it: But it seems, it has been as a Fire unto Thee, and You. For it was
sent in Tenderness and Care unto you, and for your Good; though thou would
make thy self ignorant of what Separation you were gone into: For you are
separated from the Inward Light and Spirit; that you went from before you
separated Outwardly. And this Spirit was afraid of being limited; but it would
limit the Universal Spirit, both in Males and Females, as your Fruit has
manifested, concerning the Practice of Womens-Meetings, and Recording
Condemnations, and Admonishing Payers of Tithes, and other Evils, as your
Books, and Papers, and Neighbors can testify. But thou who have said, They
must be left to themselves, to Condemn this Year, or the other, etc. this gives
Liberty to the Flesh: For whilst it is to Day, they must hear his Voice.

But, John, I savor thy Spirit, and know that thy Words come from an Angry,
Disquieted, Fretful, Peevish Spirit. And poor Men and People! for my part, I
pity you, as knowing and seeing, that you are out of the Life, and are not in
the Spirit that did first Convince you, and so not in the First Love: And if
ever thou come to the tender Spirit, and Light of Christ in thy Heart, thou will see all those your Books and Papers of Strife, and your Separation is all
for Condemnation with the Light of Christ; and they are the Works of that
Spirit that led thee into Death, and Strife. And now thou cryest, What? and
Wherein? and This, and the Other: But come in, and look into thy self.

And I say again, It is the same Spirit that led James Naylor, and John Perrot,
and others; and John Perrot cried against Imposition, as you do; and against
the Mens-Meetings, as you do against the Women's.

Though I know, James Naylor did for himself Condemn that Spirit, that led into
a Separation; which had been well, if you had done so too: And his Resurrection
is Recorded, as well as his Condemnation. But many of his People remain to this
Day out, and have been, and are as much against Men and Womens-Meetings, as
you: And so it is but the same Spirit still.

And James Naylor's Opposition did not consist only in Not Reproving his
Company, for the Titles they gave him; but his Opposition stood several Years,
about other Matters; and his People cried against our Meetings, and sought with
all their Might to destroy them: But the Lord's Power blasted them all, that
did not come in by Repentance and Judgment.

And thou further say; Let James Naylor's not Reproving his Company, be a
Warning to me; and bid'st me, Reprove my Company, when they give me Titles and
Honor due to the Highest, etc.

Poor Man! Is here thy Envy broken out? But, What are the Titles? and, Who are
them that have given them? And, When? and, Where?

And whereas thou say; Lest they that love Pre-eminence and Rule, outlive
my Time, and render my Weakness to others.

John, Who are those that love Pre-eminence? And, What is my Weakness, that
they may render it? Why did thee not mention it in thy Paper?

But this is from a prejudiced, malicious Spirit, and not from the Light of
Christ, to render my Weakness, etc. when I am Dead, and in my Grave turned to
Dust. Nay, John, that which thee strikes at, and thy Company, and all the Evil
Spirits in the World have struck at, and all the Apostates before thee, shall
never turn it to Dust; neither shall you ever get it into the Dust; Glory to
the Everlasting God for ever. For, He that Over-comes, shall go no more forth,
and shall never Perish; and he that Believes on the Son of God, has
Everlasting Life.

But if this be the Way of thy Preaching, that the Members of the Heavenly Body
turn to Dust, I fear thou have begotten none to God; but into a Profession,
that will turn to Dust, like thy self; and Dust is the Meat of this Spirit;
that I know.

For I am in a Life that is over that Spirit, which neither Thee, nor the World
cannot touch: And if thou comes to be as Judas, and Betray the Truth to the
Priests; I know what thee, and they can kill, if God will suffer you: But I do
not fear it.

And I must tell thee, it is the Spirit of Judas, the Betrayer, that is gone
from Truth; and now would betray others from the Heavenly Body, in the Eternal
Fellowship, in the Eternal Head: For, That which is Earthly, is Earthly; and
that which is Heavenly, is Heavenly.

And thou bidst me, Be Humble, as a Member of the Heavenly Body, under Christ
the Head, etc. So, thou tell me, I am a Member of Christ, the Heavenly Body;
yet thou say, When I am turned to Dust, and Dead: Is this thy Doctrine? Are
the Members of the Heavenly Body turned to Dust, and Dead? This Doctrine surely
proceeds from Darkness, and not from the Light of Christ.

And, Is it to this thou would have me bow, and be humbled to? Nay, John, I
need none of thy Ministry; and it will do no good, in the State thou stands in,
to any: For it is an Angry, Malicious, Froward Spirit, that has possessed thee.

And further, thou bid'st me, Remember the Word to Moses, with the Time and
Place of his Death, who Sanctified not God in the Sight of Israel his People.
What do thou infer from thence, John, That I have not Sanctified God before
his People? So, thou have set me above a Common Member, and put me into an
Office then; but, Must that which Sanctifies God, be turned to Dust?

I thought, John, thou had owned Christ to be the Sanctifyer of all, who is
Greater than Moses, and the End of Moses.

But, John, Wherein have not I Sanctified the Lord? What Liberty have I given
to Sin; or any that are Faithful, that have not followed you in your
Separation? Have you not taken Offense against some of them, that came to
Admonish such as were not Faithful amongst you, and called it Over-driving
them; yea, such as have been moved by the Spirit of God? And, Was it not called
Popery, when some went to Admonish Preston- Meeting, when they did not stand
steadfast to the Lord? And, How was the Lord sanctified amongst you then? And,
How was the Lord sanctified amongst you, concerning your Paying of Tithes, or
your Conniving at your Wives or others Paying for you? Much of which I could
write concerning such like Things, but I shall forbear. But when you were in
Strife, I would have had you come over to me, that you might have been brought
into Unity before your Separation; but you refused.

Nevertheless, if Thee and John Story bring your Eighty Subscribers, and come
to me, I will show you wherein you Writings and Actions are contrary to the
Light of Christ Jesus, and Spirit of God, by which you were Covinced in the
Beginning.

Which had you loved the Gospel of Peace, you would have come to me, before you
had made such a Jumble with your strife up and down the Nation: For I have
heard by several Faithful Friends, where you have sent your Papers to
prejudiced Persons against Men and Womens-Meetings, and Recording
Commendations, and other Friends Practices; which has begotten a great Dislike
in Friends concerning you: For what has this been, but to stir up Strife, and
to sow Discord?

But, Are not David, and Manasses, and Peter, and many others their Sins
recorded, and their Repentances, and Changing recorded in the Holy Scriptures?
And, What needs John Wilkinson be afraid, and trouble himself about the
Recording the Condemnation of Sin, and the Resurrection of the Just?

But, Who has cursed David or Peter, or any other, (whose Condemnation of Sin
and Repentance, and turning from it, is Recorded) or called them Apostates?

And, What Spirit is this in John Wilkinson, that would not have such Things
recorded now, which the Spirit of Truth recorded in former Ages?

Surely, it is not the Spirit of God, nor Light of Christ: For if they be Sins
private, that only the Church knows them, then they go no further than the
Church: But if they be open Sins, to the World amongst Sinners, then their
Condemnation and Repentance must go as far as the Fact is known.

But if John Wilkinson be afraid, lest he should be Cursed, and his Company,
and counted Apostates to Posterity, if their Failings, Sins, and Transgressions
should be Recorded: Truly, without your Repentance, they will be Recorded; and
it would be well, if you did Repent and Condemn them; for then your
Resurrection would be Recorded out of this Apostasy: Else you need not question
standing upon Record. And they that have been led by you into a Separation, and
now come off from you, do not bless you, as several have declared: So you bring
that upon your selves, which you think to avoid.

But, Why should Thou and You be so afraid of having your Repentance from
Sin, and Evil Actions recorded, which you have committed in grieving God's
Spirit, and his People; and opening the Mouths of the World, without a Fear of
being Cursed, or counted Apostates? Is this the Cause you would hide your Sins,
and have no Testimony given forth against you? If Thou and You have such a Love
to them, Thou and You may keep them; but the Truths Testimony will stand
against all that is out of the Truth. And there are Condemnations upon Record
ever since 1652. so no new thing amongst us, but according to the Light of
Christ. But the Lord knows, I would have nothing but what is Pure to Rule and
Reign, and all Sin and Evil to be Condemned; and that which is Private to be
only amongst Friends; and that which is Public, to be publicly Condemned to
the World. And if the World should say, Such a one did so or so; there is a
Testimony upon Record, that such an one was Converted and Translated, to
Posterity, as David was from the Evil to Good, and from the Darkness to the
Light: And had you continued in the Light of Christ Jesus, and in his Spirit
that led the Saints to condemn those Evils, which are Recorded in Scripture,
and to Glorify God in their Resurrection, you would never have been in
Opposition against the Church of Christ's Practice now; in such things, by the
same Spirit, you call it a New Way. And that which would not have Sin and Evil
condemned, and condemns that which Records it, is for Condemnation: For,
instead of being Cursed (as thou say) them that do condemn Sin and Evil, and
arise out of that which is condennied, and this being Recorded to Posterity,
the Church, and their Relations can testify to their Change, and their Dying in
the Lord.

But I am sorry for you, ( the Lord God of Heaven knows) that you should
dishonor the Lord God, and his Truth and People in the North; and have
separated from the Light and Spirit, that did first Convince you: For, had you
been in the Love and Spirit, you would have been in the same Love, in the same
Gentleness, and Meekness, and Wisdom, that is pure, and easy to be entreated,
as it was in the Beginning. And so you have lost that Glory that was in the
Beginning, and your Nakedness is discovered; that the Priests, Justices, and
Drunkards can say, That the Quakers are Separate one from another.

And look into your selves, if there be not a Froward, Stubborn, Self-willed
Spirit, and Rough, and Short, that now may talk of the Light of Christ, and of
the Spirit, and would have Liberty; but is to be Reproved; and well it would be
for you, if you would turn at the Reproof.

And whereas thou speak of a Way of coming into Unity: Alack for thee! If
thou wast in the Universal Spirit, and Power of God, that is over All, thou
would not make such a Noise about Imposition: For indeed, it is the very
Spirit of Imposition in Thee and You, that does not know what it would be at it
self, nor to what to bring others. And much I could say, as to that: But that
whereby you may come into Unity, it must be in the Unlimited Power, and Spirit,
and Light, that did first Convince you, and brought you into Unity, and Meeting
without Prescription of your Elders, or Deacons, or your Members. So, your Way
to come into Unity is, to come to the Light and Spirit, that did first Convince
you, and Judge and Condemn this Spirit, that has led you into Separation, with
all its Works since: And then, in that Spirit, there is no Fear of Imposition,
but Everlasting Unity, in the Everlasting Seed, that bruises the Head of the
Serpent, and all his Sons of Belial, that are without the Yoke, and are afraid
of it. Now, there are them that would not be Yoaked with the Law of God, nor
with the Gospel, nor with the Word of God, which is a Hammer, and a Fire; and
this is counted Imposition by such to be Yoaked, and Hammered down, and to be
Reproved, and Rebuked, and Admonished; this is Imposition, and Over-driving,
though the Power and Spirit of the Everlasting God leads to it; which Spirit of
God sanctifies and exalts God, with a sanctified Spirit, and reproves all that
which dishonours him, or would defile, and walks not in the Spirit, by which
the Body of Christ is Baptized, and made to drink into. And the Spirit of God
charged, and warned, and reproved all the Unruly; and charged the Faithful to
stand fast, and Admonished, as in the Scriptures may be plentifully seen.

And what, Is this Imposition and Force, (think you) which God's Spirit led the
Prophets and Apostles unto, and had no Fellowship but with them that Walked in
the same Spirit? Or, Will you say, There is not the same Holy Ghost now, as was
then? Yes, I must tell you the same; and all that keep in it, are in the Holy
and Eternal Fellowship; and it leads to the same Practice now, as then: And all
such as the Apostles admonished, to have no Fellowship withal, ( as in their
Epistles, and in Jude) Might not those have cried Imposition, as well as you?

And whereas thou speak of a New Way, and a New Form, carried on with
Church Authority, etc. This is the Priests Old Spirit, that used to tell us of
our New Way, and, Where was our Religion Twenty Years ago? But our Way was
before the Devil was, and all the Words Ways, and all Apostates, and will be
when they are gone; and this I tell Thee and Them. But these Words of thine are
not from the Light of Christ, nor the Spirit of God; for I know no New Way, nor
New Form carried on with Church Authority, (as thou Reproachfully say.) But
here thou have manifested thy Separate Spirit and Mind: For the Authority of
our Men and VVomens-Meetings, is the Power of Christ Jesus, who is the New and
Living Way, and never changes. And all Men and Women, that believe in his
Light, and receive him, he gives them Power to become the Sons of God; and such
are Heirs of the Power, which is the Authority of the Meetings: And they ought
freely to come and go to that which they are Heirs of, without your Imposition
or Opposition.

And all that receive him in the Light, he gives them Power, and they are Heirs
of his Power, and his Life; So they are Heirs of the Authority of the Men and
VVomens-Meetings; and every Man and Woman that is an Heir, has Right to the
Authority; and they have taken their Possessions, and are taking their
Possessions. And you, in your Separate Spirit from the Divine Light of Christ,
say; Your Chosen Men, and them whom you have given Power unto: And say,
Usurpers of Authority have come amongst your Chosen Men, whom you have given no
Power unto: And that, None shall sit amongst your Chosen Men, neither of your
own County, nor others; but to tell their Message, and go their ways. And so,
this kind of Church Order amongst you, (as you call it) is worse than any
Court, or Assizes, or Sessions, or Courts. And much I could say to it; but you
may read your Paper, though you make a great Pretense of Liberty in it. But I
have not heard yet of any, that like your Prescription, that keep their First
Love and Habitation: And therefore, as I said before, the Way to come into
Unity, is to Condemn it all, and give over your Spirit of Strife, and
Fightings, and come into that which did first Convince you; that by it you may
be made true Members, and so come into Meekness and Unity: For I saw, many
Years before I went forth, that such should rise in Opposition; and so it is
nothing to me, because it is the same Spirit that has risen formerly in many
others; and the Peaceable Truth, and Gospel of Peace is over it, and it is out
of the Kingdom, that stands in Peace. And the efore, what I write, is for your
Good; and it had been well for Thee, and You, had you taken what I writ before
patiently: For I see, the more you stir, the more you will heap upon your own
Heads; and the further ye will put your selves, except you come to Repentance,
and come down in the Humility ( for thee and you are too high) and I Judge this
Spirit, as I said before, and its Works, with the Spirit, and Light of Christ:
For in the Spirit and Light of Christ is my Unity, that is atop of this Spirit;
and its Works; and in that is my love to all for their everlasting good,
whether they will hear or forbear; and my Life is out of your Spirit of Strife,
and over it; for the Seed of Life reigns, which had you kept in it, you would
have seen me the same now, as I was in the beginning; and being gone from that,
and gone into Doubts, Jealousies, and Questions, and Evil Surmisings (by which
you are blinded) so as you see not me, as I was in the beginning, as many
others have done the same before you; and when they are gone from the unlimited
Spirit of Christ, then they are afraid to be limited.

And therefore, be advised, and come to judge that Spirit, lest your Bonds be
made strong, and you grow worse and worse; and find not a Day of Repentance,
and the Lord give you up to Hardness of Heart, and to your Hearts Lusts, and
that your Latter-End be not worse than your Beginning; for it is the Universal
Spirit and Life, that your Spirits fight against, which, as I said before, God
will blast. And so, mind your End; for it will manifest it self, and has
manifested it self to all you that be in the Light, which, I fay once again,
come unto, and condemn this Spirit, and its Works, and your Separation, that in
it you may have Unity; for its out of the Paradise, in the Transgression.

I thought to have written nothing to thee, but to have sent thy Letter back
unto thee again, knowing what Spirit it came from, which indeed was not worth
Answering, but only to the intent, that thou and you might Repent, and come
into that which you were brought into in the beginning, and in that you will
see what a spirit is gotten up in you, that by it you may judge it, and not die
and perish in your Gainsaying: for the word which I writ to you will stand, and
you will find it, and I shall be manifest to that of God in all, though it be
the Condemnation of them that walk not in it; and my Unity is with them that
walk in it, and such need no outward Prescriptions, that are written with the
Spirit of God in one another Hearts, to gather them withal, who are written in
Heaven, and whose Names are written in the Book of Life, before the Foundation
of the World was, Glory to God for Ever.

And I shall not much take notice of You, if you continue in Strife, except it
be by public Testimonies. And the Jews might have reflected against the
Prophets, who spoke the Word of the Lord often to them, but they did not regard
it, neither would they be convinced, who stood in their Own Wills.

And truly, John, I must needs tell thee, Thou and You are gotten up into the
same, and I have been sorry for You, and my Spirit has sometimes Traveled; but
I saw there was a perverse Spirit in thee, when thou were at Swarthmore, though
I dealt tenderly, and plainly, and faithfully with you, and spoke the word of
the Lord to You, and told You, that If You did not come to that which did first
convince You, and bring all others, whom you had drawn into a separation with
You, to Condemn it, the Blood of all them would be required at your Hands; and
that was and is the Word of Truth, which will stand, and is Sealed.

And I was grieved that the Glory of the Lord, which had appeared in the North,
and his Name, should be dishonored by your cross thwarting Spirit, and that
You should bring an Evil Report upon it into the South, of any difference; but
that was and is a true Word, You are got up into a wrong Spirit, that is Rough
and Course, which I feel and see, that is not savoury nor gracious, which had
you retained your primitive Love, and Light and Faith, that works by Love, and
been in the quiet meek Spirit, and the Gospel of Peace, and in the Wisdom that
is peaceable, you would have sought the Peace, or come to me, as I desired You,
before these things broke out (as I said before) but you are of a High Lofty
Spirit, which those Virtues are over it, and they, and the Truth remain in
themselves, and amongst them, that have right to them; but they have little
place in You, till you come to that which will bring you to Condemn all the
contrary; For though, you think you may get ease by Scribbling and Writing, but
that will not ease you; for what you Sow, that you must Reap; for had they had
place in You, you would have been preserved in Peace. My love is to all that
fear God, and retain their First Simplicity in the Humility, the Foundation of
God, that stands sure.

My writing so largely, has been for the sake of the Simple, which Thou may
Communicate to them, that they may Hear, Fear, and Consider.

The 16th. of the 10th. Mon. 1676. George Fox.


Though the above-written Answer given by G. F. to John Wilkinson, be in it
self very remote from a Pertinent Answer to John Wilkinson's last recited
Letter, and cannot but be very obvious to many, without Observations and
Answers to any Part thereof: Yet for the sakes of some, that may be more Weak,
we think it needful to make some few Observations, and short Reply unto some
Part thereof.

The Purport of John Wilkinson's Letter, we take to be chiefly, that G. F.
might manifest Two Things: viz.

First, Wherein John Wilkinson, John Story, and such as G. F. might account
their Company, were separated from the Light of Christ within, the Doctrine of
Truth, or had builded again the Things which they once destroyed.

Secondly, That G. F. might clear himself, that he approves of no Force about
Religion, but the Force and Effect of the Word delivered.

G. F's chief Matter (as we take it) produced against them, is this: How is the
Lord sanctified amongst you, concerning your Paying of Tithes, or your
Conniving at your Wives or others Paying for you? This amounts to a plain
Accusation against John Wilkinson and others, (amongst whom, it may reasonably
be taken, that he means John Story for one) Tythe-Payers, either by themselves
directly, or else by their Conniving at others Paying for them. It Is no marvel,
that G. F. is so generally Reputed amongst Friends far and near, to report,
that John Story and John Wilkinson are Tythe-Payers; since he has written,
with Relation to John Wilkinson, etc. touching Tithe, as aforesaid: But though
he has so done, yet it is a notorious Falsehood and Untruth; for John Wilkinson
has not only been a great Sufferer for Tithes, but also was never known to
evade his Testimony in the least; or that his Wife, or any for him, ever paid
We are now sensible, the Reader may be ready to query, Whether there be no
Pretense to render John Wilkinson a Tythe-Payer? To this we answer, We never
understood any other Pretense, that such as have Accused him thereof have made,
when narrowly examined, but this, viz. That he pays Tythe-Male-Silver; and
whether that can he such a just Occasion, as to render him a Tythe-Payer, ( by
which he is taken to be a Man, that has no Testimony against Tithes, as a
Maintenance for the Priests) we shall leave to the Consciences of Vnprejudiced
Readers, when they have in the Light of Christ thoroughly weighed the Note, The
said Testimony is in this Treatise already Cited.
Testimony of John Wilkinson and John Story, Recorded in the Fourth Section of
this Second Part of Meaning the aforesaid Manuscript, mentioned in the Preface
to the First Part of the Christian-Quaker.
this Treatise; and compared the same with this ensuing Testimony, given under
the Hand of John Wilkinson, in relation to the Payment of Tythe-Male-Silver.
his Tithes. And as to John Story, he never was in a Capacity to bear any
Testimony therein, (being a Single Man, not managing any Estate in his
Possession) more than by Declaration against that Oppression, AS to
Tythe-Male-Silver, payable by me, John Wilkinson; I say, That I pay Two
Shillings Seven Pence yearly, termed on my Deed Tythe-Male-Silver; and that the
same I always paid ever since I enjoyed my Land: and that the said Sum is
under Fine, as the rest of the Rent to the King is. And this Fine has been
enjoined on the Possessor, in former Deeds; and that on the Death of a Tenant,
the next Taker is Finable for the same. And I never did understand, that there
ever was any Deed of Purchase of Tithes, for the Lands I enjoy; nor yet, that
the aforesaid Sum of Two Shillings Seven Pence, was ever paid in lieu of
Tithes; nor that any Friend accounted me an Offender for paying the same, until
of late. But though this be the State of my Case, yet I know others of my
Neighbors, possessing Lands of another Hold, are liable to pay a small Sum,
termed, Tythe-Male-Silver, or Composition-Money; and in Default of Payment, are
liable to Tithe in kind; and such have Deeds of Purchase for Tithe, wherein
such Composition-Money is expressed: But that is not my Case. Witness my Hand,
this 3d. of the 12th. Month, 1678.

John Wilkinson.



which he has often done; and in particular, both of them gave in a Testimony
in Writing of their Clearness in that Particular, both as to Judgment and
Practice: And yet notwithstanding, this Falsehood has undoubtedly been a great
Means, by which G. F. has obtained many Proselytes on his Side, to oppose John
Wilkinson and John Story, as Tythe-Payers, and so Consequently Apostates, and
Dark Spirits.

The Lord rebuke that Evil Spirit, that has entered the Leader of many People,
to cause them (through the Belief of Lies) to err. And as to G. F's so frequent
telling them, That they are Separated from the Inward Light, and Spirit, etc.
that falls of it self, being proved by no Convincing Instance, greater than
this his Saying, viz. If not, you would have been at Unity with me, as at first.

And whereas G. F. tells John Wilkinson, That he is of an Angry, Disquieted,
Froward, Peevish, Pretful, Malicious, High, Note, As to the words High and
Lofty. Spirit, with Application to John Wilkinson by G. F. we think it needful
to give a Character of John Wilkinson, and likewise of G. F. according to their
Deserts; and leave it to the Consciences of Impartial Readers, to consider,
which of them deserves to be termed of a High and Losty Spirit.

John Wilkinson, when he was first Convinced of Truth, had an Estate of
Tenant-Right Land, valued between Fifteen and Twenty Pounds, per Annum; and
ever since, (at Times and Seasons) when he is at Home, exercises himself in
Bodily Labor; sometimes at Plow, and sometimes otherwise. He also has ever
since kept his Family to labor; and so has Lived handsomely, according to the
manner of his Country, upon his Estate; which he has kept in his own Hand, and
managed the same by his own and Families Labor; having no more nor less Land,
than at first; nor yet is his outward Estate added to, or diminished from,
since that time, to the Value of Twenty-Five Rounds, to this Day. He Travels
often alone, without a Companion; but at all times, without any Attendant, as
his proper Servant; and contented with the meanest of Meats and Drinks, that
the Houses wherein he usually Lodged afforded: His Conversation lowly and meek;
And takes not upon him to give forth an Outward Directory, for the Children of
Light to walk by; nor yet was ever known to write to any, That if they were in
the Light, and Power of God, they would come to him, when he sent for them.

As to G. F. He was a poor Shoemaker, and of mean Parentage, having very
little, if any Outward Estate at all; that never (as we can understand) set up
his Trade, but work't Journey-works: For his Meanness, he neither was nor is
Despised, as we know of; for that cannot savor of a Christian Spirit. Since
his first Coming forth, we never have understood, that he has Labored with
his Hands, at his Lawful Calling, or any other; but are well satisfied, that
(at teast) for many Years past, whether in Bonds or at Liberty, he has not.
Since his first Coming forth, he has married Judge Fell's Widow of
Lancashire. When he Travels, it is certainly known, he has had such Attendance,
which (considering the Work he is on) may be termed Great, as well as when
resident in some Places, and not on Travel; and of late has Traveled with a
Man, termed George Fox's Man. And as to Enjoyment of Things that are Lawful in
the Creation, that may be termed Necessary for the Ease of the Body, and
Pleasure of the Palate; it is certainly known, that G. F. has often freely
made use thereof, when to be had, in a manifold larger Degree, than John
Wilkinson (so far as we can understand) ever did. Moreover, G. F. by a Letter
written unto William Rogers, dated Swarthmore, the 14th. of the 11th. Month,
1676. thus writes: I tell thee, Them that thou calls Accused, are not Right;
for had they been Right, and in the Light and Power of God, (as at the first)
they would have come to me when I sent for them; that all those Things, which
have made such a Noise, might have been fairly ended in the North, and not have
troubled any in the South. Those whom William Rogers termed Accused, are John
Wilkinson and John Story; and some of the Matters whereof John Story was
Accused, were Acted in the South; and so no reason to come to G. F. or any, to
have them Judged in the North.

We now query, Whether G. F. is not hereby manifested to be a Man of so High
and Losty a Spirit, as to endeavor to Assume unto himself a Power to Judge of
all Cases amongst Friends, even from North to South; and that such who will not
come unto him at Swarthmore in Lancashire, for that end, when he sends for
them, are not liable to be Censured to be wrong, and departed from the Light
and Power of God? Which being compared with what is written in a Marginal-Note,
in the Meaning the aforesaid Manuscript.
Ninth Section, gives us occasion to query, Whether there be not just Cause to
conclude, or at least to be Jealous, That G. F. looks upon himself Invested
with Power to Judge all Causes amongst the Children of Light, in this Day, as
Moses was amongst the Children of Israel in his Day?


Lofty Spirit, and of his Making a Jumble; he brings forth nothing Convincingly
to manifest the same: So those Evil Qualifications fall to the Ground. But yet
G. F's Letter evidently shows, that 'twas his own State, when he writ his
aforesaid Letter: For had he not been of a High and Lofty Spirit, he would not
have reflected on them several times, as not loving the Gospel of Peace,
because they came not to him; especially since 'twas not evident to their
Consciences, that he was free from having a Hand in the Occasion of that
Strife, touching which he would have had them come to him. The End whereof was
(as we suppose) that they might have submitted to his Sentence, or Judgment
therein.

Besides, if he accounted them gone astray, Why did he not act the Part of a
Good Shepherd, (according to the Parable, Leaving the Ninety Nine, to seek that
which was Lost) and seek after them; that so (if such as he esteemed them to
be) they might be again Restored? Had he so done, it would have denoted more
his Humility and Tenderness, than his bare saying, (as in his Letter he does)
Poor Men and People! For my part, I pity you; I am sorry for you: And yet, in
the same Letter threatens them, That their Failings, Sins, and Transgressions,
without their Repentance, will he Recorded: Which Threatening seems very
unbecoming him; not only because he has never manifested his Readiness to
Condemn his own Transgressions, or to Assent to their Recording, (though they
are very Notorious, as in this Treatise is largely manifested;) but also,
because he seems to allow unto them Liberty to continue therein: Else, Why
should he use in the said Letter such an Expression as this; If Thou and You
have such a Love to them, you may keep them; meaning their Sins, as the
foregoing Words plainly show. Which being but duly considered, (together with
what hereafter follows of the other Parts of his Letter) he has made (to use
his own Language) such a Jumble, as in Reason we cannot take him (if it be just
to measure his Meaning by his Words) heartily to desire their Repentance; (if
so fallen, as he took them to be) nor yet that he was free from the Characters
he assigns to John Wilkinson, viz. An Angry, Disquieted, Froward, Peevish,
Fretful, Malicious Spirit, when he brought forth his said Letter so full of
Impertinencies, invective Expressions undeservedly, and remote from the Matter;
which in a Tender and Christian Spirit, was his due to have kept unto, that so
far as he was Capable, he might have removed Stumbling Blocks out of their way,
and not have added a New Occasion of Offense; as if he (above all the rest of
the Sons of Men) was Privileged to cast Stumbling Blocks before God's People,
and yet not be accountable for such Unchristian-like Actions unto Christ, our
Lord and Master; who said, Woe unto him, by whom Offenses come!

As to the Second Particular, viz. That G. F. might clear himself, that he
approves of no Force about Religion, but the Force and Effect of the Word
delivered; we say, That G. F. has not writ one word in all his large Reply, to
satisfy Friends in that Particular; which doubtless he would have done, if he
could have said any thing, that might have cleared that Matter, to the
Satisfaction of such Friends as were wise in the Wisdom that is from Above, as
well as what he has so largely done, for the Sakes of the Simple; who indeed
must be very Simple, Foolish, and Blockish, if what G. F. has written, be
taken by them either for a Pertinent, Friendly, or Christian Answer, to so
Seasonable, Tender, and Christian a Letter; because the most Pertinent Matter
offered by him, as Answer thereto, is this: -- As to thy Fear of making Force
in Religion, there is nothing but what is Pure can come into it. Alack for
thee! If thou wast in the Universal. Spirit, etc. thou would not make such a
Noise about Imposition; for indeed, it is the very Spirit of Imposition in
Thee, and You, that does not know, what it would be at it self, nor to what to
bring others: And much I could say as to that. We now appeal to God's Witness
in all, Whether Men endued with that Wisdom which is from Above, can be at
Unity with such a Scossing, Shaffling, Impertinent Answer; wherein doubtless
there is not less than Three or Four Falsehoods, and Untruths, in Two or Three
Lines. The First we take to be contained in these Words; -- For indeed, it is
the very Spirit of Imposition in thee. The Second in these words; -- That does
not know, what it would be at it self. The Third in these words; -- Nor to what
to bring others. And if what he has written by way of Reflection in his
Letter, is written as grounded on John Wilkinson's Letter to him, (as it seems
to be, being Answer thereto) then there seems a Fourth Untruth contained in
these words; -- Thou would not make such a Noise about Imposition; when as
there is not one word about Imposition, in all John Wilkinson's Letter.

Now, as to John Wilkinson, with respect to these Slanders, we have this to
say; Our Experience tells us, he is not of an Imposing Spirit; (unless
Preaching the Word of Life, and Commending it to the Conscience, may be termed
such, which cannot be) and has approved himself wise in that Wisdom that is
from Above; and so knows what he would be at, and unto what to bring others, as
his Doctrine and Conversation has largely manifested amongst us.

It Is to be observed, that John Wilkinson in his aforesaid Letter, (on the
Occasion of G. F's reflecting upon him, John Story, and others, That they will
become as bad as James Naylor and Muggleton, etc. If they give not over their
Separation) thus writes to G. F.

"If James Naylor's Opposition consisted in not Reproving his Company, when
they bowed to him, and cried Hosanna; Let it be a Warning to thee, and reprove
thy Company, when they give thee the Titles and Honor due to the Highest; lest
they that love Pre-eminence and Rule, outlive thy time, and render thy
weakness to others (as thou have done his) when thou art Dead, and in thy
Grave, and turned to Dust, therefore be humble as a Member of the Heavenly Body
under Christ the Head.

On this occasion G. F. writes these following Sentences, But this is from a
prejudiced malicious Spirit, and not from the Light of Christ, to Render my
Weakness, when I am in my Grave turned to Dust, etc.

Nay, John, that which thou strikest at, and thy Company, and all the evil
Spirits in the World have struck at, and all the Apostates before thee, shall
never turn it to Dust.

But: if this be the way of thy Preaching, that the Members of the Heavenly
Body turn to Dust, I fear thou have begotten none to God.

So thou tells me, I am a Member of the Heavenly Body, yet thou say, when I
am turned to Dust, and Dead, surely this Doctrine proceeds from Darkness, and
not from the Light of Christ: And is it to this thou would have me to bow,
and be humbled? Nay, John, I need none of thy Ministry, it is an Angry,
Malicious, Froward Spirit that has possessed thee.

On these Sentences we thus Observe, that they show Malice, Envy, Perversion,
and Ignorance, or Darkness.

By his own Rule, his Prejudice and Malice appears, in rendering James Naylors
weakness, and not only therein, but in joining John Wilkinson with All the Evil
Spirits in the World, whose Doctrine, Life, and Conversation (so far as ever
we knew) in all manner of Godliness, and Honesty, has since his Convincement
of Truth, rendered him worthy of double Honor amongst many of his Brethren, and
his name G. F's Envy can never (as we are persuaded) blot out; but rather gives
an occasion to add to the Number of G. F's Transgressions, and Errors, which
are so numerous on Record in Meaning the before said Monuscript.
this Treatise, as that could it be made appear, that John Wilkinson was but
Guilty of the one Half thereof, we should be ashamed to own him, until he had
repented before the Lord: But much more should we disown him, if instead of
Repenting in such a Case, he should run at those as Evil Spirits, that should
(for the Clearing of their Consciences) spread his Errors before him; which
has been G. F.'s common Practice, and is now worthily Recorded, as a Testimony
against his Errors and Transgressions; that the Simplehearted may no longer be
betrayed either by his Fair Speeches, Threats, or Frowns.

As to his treating on the word Dust, by way of Reffection on John Wilkinsons
Ministry, and that from John Wilkinsons sound words, the impartial Reader may
easily discern his Perversion, in concluding that John Wilkinson tells him, he
(is a Member) of the heavenly Body, which does not follow from John Wilkinson's
Words, Be humble, as a Member of the heavenly Body, no more than it follows,
that a Disciple of Christ, is Christ, because Luke tells us, Whosoever will be
a perfect Disciple shall be as his Master.

As to his Ignorance or Darkness, it is thus Manifested; G. F's aforesaid
Sentences cannot be a sound Answer to any thing writ by John Wilkinson (which
it ought to have been) unless G. F. concludes, that that Visible Body (called
George Fox) shall not turn to Dust; because John willinson writ not his Letter
to G. F. with an intent, that that outward Body, called George Fox (which must
turn to Dust) was not to be concerned therewith.

Moreover, it is to be observed, what ever G. F's Judgment in that case be, when
he writ to John Wilkinson, he was willing to keep it to himself, because he
does not plainly acknowledge that his Body shall ever turn to Dust; but
positively says, That which John Wilkinson strikes at, shall never turn it to
Dust; his meaning he best knows, but yet this we know, 'twas needful enough to
have explained his meaning, because the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 6.13, 15, 19.
The body is not for Fornication: Know ye not, that your Bodies are the Members
of Christ? shall I then take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members
of an Harlot? God forbid: know you not, that your Body is the Temple of the
Holy Ghost, which is in you, whom you have of God, and you are not your own?
And 2 Cor. 4.11. That the Life of Jesus might be made Manifest in your mortal
Bodies.

We now Query of G. F. whether these Bodies which the Apostle Paul termed the
Members of Christ's Body, were not the same in which the Holy Ghost dwells, and
the Life of Jesus was manifested? And if so, then (according to the Apostles
Doctrine) Mortal and convertible unto Dust. And whether or no an exclusion of
all mortal Bodses whatsoever, from being concerned as Members of the Church
(which is Christ's Body) be not the very ready way, whereby all Liberty and
Looseness that is pleasing to the mortal Body, may be Indulged and Nourished?
And not only so, but whether the Men and VVomens Meetings will not Fall of
Course, and so no such Places where those who (as George Fox says) are Heirs
of the Power, may go to in Order to the taking of their Possessions, as George
Foxe's Language, in his aforesaid Letter, is.

It Is further to be observed that G. F. has not yet done with these Words,
turned to Dust; but proceeding, asks John Wilkinson this Question, "Must that
which Sanctifies God be turned to Dust: I thought, John, thou had owned
Christ to be the Sanctifier of all, who is greater than Moses, and the End of
Moses; but John, wherein have not I Sanctified the Lord? To this we Answer.

If G. F. (who is a Mortal Man) was capable to Sanctify the Lord (as in his own
Sense by his following Words he seems to be) why does he so impertinently let
his Pen run by way of Reflection on John Wilkinson, for using
Scripture Language so seasonable, and so pertinent as he did? Doubtless the
Reason was, a Fretful, Peevish, Angry, Spirit then possessed G. F. So that we may
in his own Language (used in his Letter to John Wilkinson) say to him, It Is a
Spirit that does not know what it would be at it self, but if G. F. had not
been Capable to sanctify the Lord, he is Manifested a Scoffer, to ask the
aforesaid Question, viz. But, John, wherein have not I Sanctified the Lord?
However let his Mind, Sense, Meaning, or End in so Querying be what it will, we
shall undertake to give thereto, this Answer, viz.

G. F. has not Sanctified the Lord, in writing his Book of VVomens Meetings,
which consists of Ninety Six Pages in Octavo, and in all the Book throughout,
we do not find above half a side (and that also scattered here and there) that
treats of that Service; for which the Meetings of Women were chiefly
understood to be held, and that the Drift, and Scope of the rest of the Book,
seems to be chiefly for Proof of Women's Offering Sacrifices, Preaching,
Teaching, Exhorting, Admonishing, Prophesying, Governing, Judging, Singing,
Dancing, Playing upon Music, and that Micah's Mother, an Idolatrous Woman,
spoken of Judges 17th, was a Virtuous one; and that the Assemblies of the Women
did continue amongst the Jews, till they went into Transgression, but yet
Quotes for Proof of the last Assertion, only 2 Kings 23. which mentions nothing
to his purpose of VVomens, Meetings, more than that good King Josiah broke down
the Houses of the Sodomites, that were in the House of the Lord, where the
Women wove Hangings for the Groves, which good King Josiah burnt.

Neither do we believe, that he has Sanctified the Lord, in Accusing John
Wilkinson and John Story for Tyth-Payers, or Conniving at others Paying for
them, as in his aforesaid Letter he (as we take it) does; though they are
therein esteemed to be greatly Abused, and Misrepresented; and we never
understood, it could be proved against them. But that which aggravates G. F's
Sin is, That he has been guilty of Advising Two Persons to buy their Tithes,
(which is equal to a Continual Payment) viz. Nathaniel Crips, of the County of
Gloucester for one; and Robert Arch, living but a few Miles from the said Crips,
for another; as they are ready to testify, unto any Enquiring Reader; and as in
the Twenty-First Section of Note, It Is the Second, Part of the Manuscript,
first mentioned in the Preface to the First Part.
this Second Part, by their Testimonies appears.

G. F. tells John Wilkinson thus; But that whereby you may come into Unity, it
must be in the unlimited Power, and Spirit, and Light, that did first Convince
you, and brought you into Unity, and meeting without Prescription of your
Elders, or Deacons, or your Members: So your way to come into Unity, is to come
to the Light and Spirit, that did first Convince you; and judge and condemn
this Spirit, that has led you into Separation, with all its Works since; and
then, in that Spirit, there is no fear of Imposition. And in another Place of
the said Letter, G. F. says; I told you, That if you did not come to that
which did first Convince you, and bring all others whom you had drawn into a
Separation with you, to condemn it, the Blood of all them would be required at
your Hands: And that was and is the Word of Truth to you, and will stand, and
is sealed.

These Sentences of G. F. do lead us unto these necessary Observations.

First, That the Way to come into Unity, is to come to the Unlimited Spirit and
Light, that did first Convince them, and bring them into Unity; had G. F. ended
his Method for Unity here, he would have said, that which would have Answered
Gods Witness in our Consciences; but though he talks of coming to the
Unlimitted Spirit, yet his following Language seems a Design (so far as he is
Capable) to limit the Spirit, by adding these Words, viz. and Judge, and
Condemn this Spirit, that has led you into a Separation, with all its Works
since; by which (Comparing his said Words with his aforesaid Letter to John
Wilkinson and John Story, dated the 23d. of the 8th. Month, 76.) we take him
to mean, all those Dapers given forth since the Outward Separation, which being
without any Exception (and Compared with the Matters occasioning the said
Outward Separation) seems to Import, that in G. F's Sense, the Ancient Friends
of Truth, must of necessity be departed from the Light, and Spirit, if they
cannot Conform to some Outward Methods, in relation to the Management of some
outward Affairs, that some of his troublesome Party would Impose on the Chosen
Friends, for the outward Services of Truth. Oh, Gross Darkness!

But that which seems to manifest his Darkness yet more gross, is this; his
Letter to John Wilkinson Informs us, That such [meaning (as his Words to us
Import) such with whom he is at Unity] need no Outward Prescriptions; that is
written with the Spirit of God in one another Hearts, to gather them withal.

On this we observe, that unless another thing preserves those who are
gathered, than that which gathered them, there is then no need of Outward
Prescriptions for those that are gathered (unto whom only the Government
contended for reaches) and if so, which in Truth cannot be denied, why must
these Ancient Friends (who have been Convinced by the Light and Spirit of God)
be Reckoned had, and such whom God will Blast, unless they call in all their
Papers, which were chiefly given forth to Vindicate themselves, as not departed
from the Truth, though they could not be subject to Impositions or
Prescriptions of others.

G. F's Confusion does not End here, but is further Manifested in these Words,
viz. without Prescriptions of your Elders, because 'twas his own Counsel at the
beginning of Men's Meetings to choose particular Persons for that service,
agreeable to which Advice the Elders he now strikes at, were Chosen, and yet in
a scoffing manner reflects on the Words, Chosen Men, and on the departure of
others, when their Message is told, and as if that very Order were worse than
any Assizes, Sessions, and Courts? As to the departure of others immediately
after their Message is told, we are persuaded was never proposed by those
called Separate, whilst any coming thither had any Concern upon them, as
matter proper for the Meeting to take notice of, nor yet to Exclude any Friends
that were free to stay, after they had delivered their Message: For which
Persuasion sufficient ground is given unto us, from the writing of those called
Separatists, in the 11th Section of this Meaning the Second Part of the
aforesaid Manuscript.
second Part in these words, viz. We indeed Declare and Testify, that our Sense
and Meaning in what we proposed formerly to Reunite the Meetings, was, not to
hinder any Friends of staying in the Meetings, who behaved themselves Men of
Peace (as we Testified unto them in our Reply to their Answer to our Proposals)
but such as inclined to cause Offenses with rash Censures, and false Judgments,
which has made, and will make Divisions, contrary to the Doctrine we have
Learned. If they had Objected against any thing in Love, which we proposed, and
with respect to the Honor of Truth, given us any Reason of its inconveniency,
if we could not have Convinced them of the Inconveniency thereof, with
Weightier Reasons; we should readily have Consented unto them.

We now desire the impartial Reader, seriously to Consider, whether our
Persuasion aforesaid is not on sufficient Ground? And if so, then it is plain G.
F. Reflects on his own Church Order (as his Term is) as worse than any Courts,
Assizes, or Sessions, by which we may in his own Language to John Wilkinson,
say, That he knows not what he would be at, if his Words and Writings may be
taken to be his Real meaning at all times; but as to that we have no cause so
to Conclude, because we from this, and other his Words, Writings, and Actions,
are sufficiently satisfied, that he Concludes all wrong, and gone from the
Light and Spirit, that are not at Unity with what he says, Acts, and
brings forth, though it be ever so Repugnant to Truth, and grounded on ever
so false a Report and Scandal. And so, though he talks of the Unlimited Spirit,
yet we are persuaded, he would Limit every one to be subject to his Spirit; and
that if they have not Faith therein, they are wrong, and in a separate Spirit,
from the Light, and Spirit, by which they were first Convinced: And on this
Foot we do not question, but he concludes every one Wrong, that Conscientiously
may ask him any Questions for their Information, or Satisfaction touching him,
concluding, that it does spring from a Jealous Spirit, that ought not to be
satisfied.

The last thing we think meet to take notice of in his aforesaid Letter, is
this, he Repeats John Wilkinson's Words thus, And whereas thou speak of a
new Way, and a new Form, and carried on with Church Authority, etc. And then in
part of his Answer, thus says; for I know no new Way, nor new Form, carried on
with Church Authority, as thou reproachfully; say but hear thou have
manifested thy separate Spirit and Mind.

This manifests unto us, that G. F. (to use his own Language) does so Jumble,
that he knows not what he would be at; for Men and Women's Meetings are (and as
we take it in his Sense) accounted the Church, and what they carry on, is
accounted to be carried on by the Power whereof G. F. accounts them Heirs,
which is the Authority of the Church.

That now this Church have introduced New Forms, or else G. F. has introduced
New Forms amongst them, which they (as a Church, and under the Pretense of
Authority) do bring forth, we are satisfied, is as certainly known to G. F. as
G. F. is known to any one.

And therefore, his Denial, that he knows of no New Form, carried on with
Church Authority, is taken by us to be an absolute Quibble, Shift, or Shuffle,
if not a plain downright Falsehood and Untruth.

Having thus observed on G. F's Letter, as aforesaid, we desire the Reader
seriously to weigh in the Light of Christ Jesus, the Observations made thereon;
and then, we doubt not, but every such Reaer will have this Answer in his own
Breast, That what G. F. has written by way of Reply to John Wilkinson, could
not be given forth from the Spirit of the Lord, which cannot Lie; but is rather
the Fruit either of Ignorance, Pride, Scorn and Disdain in the best Sense.

It Is a common and tude Saying, Prids often times goes before a Fall: That G. F.
is Fallen, is manifestly proved in Note, It Is meant of the Manuscript, first
mentioned in the Preface to the First Part.
this Treatise, if being guilty of Error, and Matters of Eyil Fact, may be
accounted sufficient Proof. And that he has been of so Proud a Spirit, as to
expect a sort of Reverence, and Submission to him, which the Truth could not
own, we doubt not. May the Lord open his Eyes, to behold his Errors, and give
him Repentance; that so in a Sense thereof, he may Confess to the Glory of God,
and Rejoicing of his Faithful and Ancient Friends.

Though G. F. in his before-cited Answer unto John Wilkinson, seems to take
Notice of the Receipt but of One Letter; yet so it was, that John Wilkinson,
for the further clearing of his Conscience, writ another Letter unto G. F.
suddenly after; whose Copy now follows.

George Fox,
WIth the Truth of God in my Heart, I have of late been greatly concerned, in
the Remembrance of thee, in whom God appeared in the Beginning of the Day of
Life, and reached unto us with his Word; who gave us Faith to believe, and to
receive thy Testimony thou gave of his Light in our Hearts: which gathered us
into Unity with him, and one with another, and made us of the Church of the
Firstborn, or of the First Fruits unto God; continuing many Years in Love and
Good Will one to another: But of late Days, the Concord we once had, seems
much to be broken; and many Instruments, whom God has wrought by, (and in
great Love have labored together, but) of late time have greatly Iarred: And
the Cause God has manifested to me; That it is not in Principles of Truth, nor
in Christ's Doctrine, nor in any Practice, which Truth in the Members of the
Heavenly Body leads into; but about Prescriptions from thee, through the
Blind Zeal of the Weak, to promote thy Orders. It may be feared, many do eye
more the Orders from thee, than they eye the Lord in them; Accusing and Judging
all out of Truth, that practice not with all freed from them, using all Force
they can devise, according to the Power they have, to compel all unto them;
Censuring all Friends out of Unity, that come not to Practice with them; which
is the greatest Penalty and Persecution they can inflict, for want of Ourward
Power: And many Friends think it Godliness to Accuse and Condemn their Brethren
about Outward Things, before the Accused with Truth be led into them. George,
for the Love of God, and for his Peoples sake, open thy Mind plainly, what thou
intended by them: and make it known unto Friends, if thou intended Counsel unto
the Church only, and no Compelling into the particular Things to Practice, but
commending to God 's Witness, in all Consciences, to be led into the Exercise
and Practice thereof, as every one is inwardly persuaded of God, in each
particular, and not before: If thou so do, it would much clear Thee, and thy
Orders, from being the Cause of Division; for Iniquity works in a Mystery in
many, that think it Godliness to Accuse and Condemn their Brethren about
Outward Things, as I said before, which was the Cause of great Strife in former
Ages. But if thou open not thy Mind to Friends, and deal plainly, and testify,
Thou never intended, that any, who is Faithful inwardly to God, should either
be Accused or Condemned about thy Orders; and so let thy prudent Care appear
about these Things; the Breach amongst Friends and Brethren, is in great Danger
to grow wider; and then, I fear, the Cause of Divisions will lie at thy Door,
which God Almighty, in his Mercy, prevent, and raise Thee up to put a Stop
unto; for the Enemy of Truth has taken occasion from thy Orders, to work and
beget a False Birth in many, even Night-Visions, and False Prophesies, as the
Number of Accusations, and angry Proceedings about them of late declare, which
was not before in our Age: Neither did Heads nor Horus of the Dragon appear, to
cast down the Holy People, by lying against them, saying, That they oppose the
Holy Orders: And by approving of such Proceedings, is Satan let lose in our
Time, to deceive; and all that see his Transformings, he casts Floods out of
his Mouth against them, to carry them away, and casts such to the Earth;
wanting nothing to effect his Design, but the Outward Power to carry them on
to Kill: For his Wrath is against them that keep the Testimony of Jesus Christ;
and such he accuses of Fleshly Liberty, and Loose Walking, and of being
Separatists and Heretics. George, I desire thee once again, to warn all
Friends, that they neither Accuse nor Condemn one another any more, about the
aforesaid Things; for if that do continue amongst Friends, it will cause a
great Falling away, and God will visit with great Judgments that the Profession
of Great Power and Church Authority, will not save from, while the Accuser of
the Brethren in such (that is deeply in it) is not cast down. It is not the
Transforming of Satan into a Shape of Austerity, and forming Power to fright
the Simple into this or that Outward Observation, we have waited for, nor
labored after; nor a Feigned Profession of overcoming Love in words, that can
deceive us, ( Blessed be God, for his Gifts of Light for ever more) when such
are bitterly smiting their Fellow Servants, and filling Men's Minds with False
Accusations, that even our Holy Profession is defiled. What I desire of thee,
is not for fear of more Acousations, nor False Prophecies; they do not move me
from the Hope of the Gospel: But I desire it for Thy Good, and the Churches
Prosperity, and Peace. For an Image of the Government of Christ, consisting in
Outward Prescriptions, attended with Force over the Inward Man, we never
expected in this Gospel-Day, to bite and devour one another about; but the
Inward and Peaceable Government of Christ, to govern the Members of his own
Body, (the true Church) into all Practices, according to Godliness. And we are
bound to follow him, our Redeemer, who knits together in the Autient Unity, and
breaks not the Holy Fellowship amongst Brethren. I have cleared my Conscience,
(which was concerned in the Remembrance of thee) desiring thou may quit thy
self with Truth in all Things, in thy latter Days, that thy End may be Crowned
with True Honor.

Thy Friend in Truth, John Wilkinson

POSTSCRIPT.
WHat Spirit or Motion thy Prescriptions were from, is not my Concern; but I
need not ask, Whether the Holy Ghost, or the Spirit of Guile, Force, and
Compelling have attended them, if Trees in our Age may be truly known by their
Fruits.

The 9th. Month 76.

To this Letter John Wilkinson says, he never received Answer; which,
considering the Contents thereof, (and comparing it with what G. F. has writ
in Answer to his former Letter) is just occasion of Jealousy, that G. F.
intended Compulsion, so far as he was capable, as well as Counsel; and that the
Weight and Burden of all the Ill Consequences attending the late Divisions
amongst Friends, will lie at G. F's Door; since he has been so carnestly pressed
to give his Sense touching these things, which have occasioned the Division;
and yet has either Impertinently done it, (as his Answer to John Wilkinson's
first Letter beforementioned, does manifest) or else has not given Answer to
the Parties concerned: Which is evident, not only from his not causing an
Answer to be delivered unto John Wilkinson's last recited Letter; but also,
from the like Neglect unto William Rogers; who writ him Two large Letters, for
the Clearing of his Conscience, etc.

The Two Letters written by me unto G. F. do now follow.

Bristol, the 27th. of the 1st. Month, 1677.
George Fox,
"IN a bowed down Spirit to God, that my Pen may not commit a Tittle of Error
to this Paper, either by Want of Plainness, on the one Hand, or Taking too much
upon me, on the other, do I now write unto thee, in expectation that thou will
have a right Savor of my Integrity to the Truth, and so much Charity (if thou
apprehend I herein Err) as to inform me wherein: For my Hope is, that I shall
for ever have a ready Ear to hear, and a ready Mind to weigh any Instruction,
though but from the Meanest of the Flock, much more from an Elder Brother.

Thine of the 14th. of the 11th. Month, I received; but have nothing upon me to
write, as Answer thereto; not being willing to strive: Yet (through a Sense of
the present and increasing Distractions amongst Friends) I have somewhat on my
Spirit to clear my Conscience, (as in the Sight of God) having a certain Sight,
Sense, and Knowledge, that many honest-hearted Friends (as well as my self)
remain, for the Truths sake, Unchangeable in their Affections to the Two
persecuted Brethren, John Wilkinson and John Story: And many are more and more
confirmed through a Certain Knowledge, (which is a better ground than Report)
that Persons professing Truth, (and such as are supposed to be had in great
Estimation by those, who appear against John Wilkinson and John Story) do
foment Lies and Slanders, to the Dishonor of God, Increase of Division, and
Hurt of the Souls of the Simple; where the Lies, and False Reports of
Slanderous Tongues have place. This may be termed Matter of great Reflection;
but in as much as it is really True, it is proper enough to be spoken to thee;
because, I firmly believe, that thou art in a Capacity to be a Stop to such
things as these, by thy public Exhortation, to all such as are concerned in
this Matter.

I remember thy Public Exhortation has been (in a Paper read amongst Friends,
and not long since) To cease Striving, or to that Effect: My Soul would rejoice
to hear more Papers of that Tenor, read amongst Friends; and not only so, but
also that such Public Persons, as seem in a more peculiar Manner to esteem of
thee, than some others may, would show themselves true Friends to the Truth, by
following that Counsel. Such as are fit to be Exhorted, learn more by Example
than Precept or Exhortation. And if any exhort to Cease Striving, and should
yet be found Movers of Strife, or Encouragers of those that are, such therein
reach not to the Better Part, neither answer God's Witness in the Conscience,
though it proceeds from an Elder Brother.

Dear George; for so I call thee, ( not in Flattery, my Soul abominates that
Spirit, but) because thou wast once so to me, and that through a Sense of that
Immortal Life which appeared in theee; and as yet I dare not from Reports of
any, positively judge of thee otherwise; but yet cannot but tell thee, If I
should appear so Uncharitable as to make Reports (which come with the Face of
no less (if not much more) Credit against thee, than Reports against John
Wilkinson and John Story do) the Measure of my Faith concerning thee, I must
conclude, That thou also art guilty of Accusing wrongfully; And I know, it is
much doubted, that thy Example of Giving heed to Reports, has encouraged
others to do the like; and for want of discerning what is True, and what is
False, do sometimes run into such Actions and Proceedings, as are grand Marks
of an Apostatized Spirit.

Neither dare I positively Judge of thee from Jealousies that have entered,
which I confess abundantly have Note, The Reader may here take notice, that G.
F. in his afore-cited Letter of the 14th. of the 11th. Month, 1676. being an
Answer to one sent unto him by me, hints at something Written by me to him, and
so seems to make Answer, which ( as laid down in G. F.'s Letter) runs thus. And
thou (meaning my self) say, That there is a Spirit risen at this day, that
gives many occasion to be Jealous, that thou ( meaning G. F.) art looked upon by
some as that Prophet, which Moses Testified of, that God would raise up, etc.
but who those are, thou have not mentioned, and thou say Christ is that
Prophet (we know) that is to be heard, etc. and he is the only Lawgiver, and
no Outward Man, etc.

To this G. F. thus Answers, Then is not this Prophet to be in Man, to give
forth his Law, which comes after Moses? but I cannot deny that Prophet which
Moses spoke of, to be raised up, for I know, that it is he that is Opposed, and
his Law too, by many talkers of him, and the Light of his Glorious Gospel, and
the Order of it, etc. And what I am, I am by the Grace and Love of God, and
will not deny the Prophet which came after Moses, nor the Election before the
World began; though all turn into the Jealousies, in which they were before
they were convinced: for I believe, few of them that does oppose, knows this
Prophet, that comes after Moses, though they may speak of him in words, of
which Prophet I am not ashamed of.

Thus far G. F. in the said cited Letter, which being compared with what he
said in the Great Meeting House in Bristol, before several Hundreds in the
12th. Month, 1677. viz. I AM ELECT BEFORE THE WORLD BEGAN, I take to be
sufficient ground for such a Jealousy mentioned in this Letter.


from thine aforesaid, written unto me, more than all that ever I heard, I ever
was of this mind, To give little credit to Reports, that tended to the Scandal
of a Brother: amongst other things this Jealousy enters me, viz. That thou
looks upon thy self, that Man at least, in whom the Son of God has appeared to
give forth his Law (and to be Recorded as his Law) under the dispensation of
the Gospel; even as Moses was the giverforth of the Law in that day: If this be
so, and plainly manifested, and confessed to by thee, and espoused by other
Friends; a separation will then plainly, and above Board appear; and many,
though not concerned in the late Differences, yet being Men of unchangeable
Spirits (and so cannot in that respect esteem of thee, otherwise than in the
beginning) will be concerned in this: But if this be not so, and be but so
declared by thee, the sense of many Friends is, that then the many Differences
lately arisen, and somented amongst Friends, may quickly cease, and the
primitive Love be restored, wherein we thought our selves (as far as ever I
could perceive) all Servants one to another, and to the Truth; but not Masters:
but until one of these do appear in plainness; no doubt but Jealousies, and
Differences will more and more appear, and increase; especially, if the
Weakness of any (though ever so few) be such, as to give occasions of Jealousy
to others, that their Faith stands in thee, when our Faith ought to stand in
none but the Power of God.

Thy Counsel has often been to this purpose, Follow an Evil Report till the
original Reporter be found, in order to the clearing of Truth, that so the
Guilty Person (whether Reporter, or he on whom the Report is) might Condemn the
same.

Now, whosoever has been the Reporter of a wrong thing against his Brother or
Sister, or has refused to bring forth the Author of a Report that is
reprovable, is (according to thy own Counsel) Condemnable; and as it was said
by Nathan in another case to David (who to Nathan confessed he had Sinned) Thou
art the Man, so if report (as credible as any that ever I knew) be true, may it
be said of thee, Thou art the Man: Thomas Lower has lately shown me a
Certificate as Evidence that John Story upon the coming of Persecutors to
disturb a Meeting, departed out of it; and I perceive this is intended to
render him a wrong Man; whereupon Iacquainted Thomas Lower to this effect, That
if Report of thee was true, thou wast in no measure less Gailty of such a
Crime, than John Story: he then Proposed to me, To have it under my Hand; I
told him, I would very freely so do, provided he would give it under his Hand,
that if it was proved against thee, thou ought to Judge and Condemn the
same; this he would not do, which to me denoted either a Spirit of Partiality,
or a sort of Fear like unto that, that is taught by the Precepts of Men; and so
I refused to Answer his desire; yet I now give it under my Hand to thee; and my
Plain end in short is this, viz. in expectation to receive a Plain, and
Satisfactory Answer from thee, that if it be possible, some sort of Jealousies
may be removed out of my Mind, or else the Reasonableness thereof more
confirmed; for it is a day wherein I account it my Duty to be plain, without
Respect of Persons, and the Duty of none to reprove others for shuflers, and
become shufters themselves.

Those Scriptures which mention the words [ Tradition and Examples] are in this
Day or Age Strained to prove it Friends Duty to follow the Traditions and
Examples of some of the Brethren, etc. How then can it consist with the Honor
of Truth, or Good Conscience, for such who Esteem of thee above their Brethren,
and who seem to esteem of themselves as Countenanced by thee, to Condemn any
Brother for doing any thing, if so be it be according to the Example thou have
given?

Since therefore (as I said before) Example is a better Teacher, than Precept,
how can it be other than thy Duty to endeavor the removing these stumbling
Blocks out of the Way of God's People, by giving thy Testimony, That thou art
not Guilty in either of these particular Things, if in Truth thou can do so?
And by farther manifesting (if it can be proved against thee, and made appear
unto thee) that thou art so Guilty, that then Thou will Judge and Condemn the
same, as that whereby thou have offended the Church of God; but if Clear in the
Sight of God, thou may also be cleared in the Sight of his People; and those
who have reported such things concerning thee, may Judge and Condemn the same.
I hope this Proposition will not be looked upon by thee, and those who contend
for the Establishment of an Outward Form of Government amongst God's People at
this Day, unbecoming the Pen of the Meanest Member in the Body. But if it
should, I may justly appeal to God's Witness in all, whether that Outward form
of Government, contended for both by Word and Printing, be such, under which
Equal Justice may be Administered to Every One, and the Infirmities of every
Member of the Body be equally brought to Judgment.

If thou should look on my Lines as the Fruit of too great Presumption, I
have this to say, that what I now Write, is barely to clear my Conscience; as
in the sight of God; and I am constrained in Spirit thus to do, knowing that
not any such Form of Government (wherein the Infirmities of every Member may
not be Equally Reproved, and brought to Judgment) can be the Form of Christ's
Government; nor yet that the seasonable mentioning of an Infirmity in an Elder
Brother, can be accounted a departing from the Truth, and an Indication that
such shall never Prosper.

Whatever the Calumnies, and false Reports, raised on several Brethren may be,
whereby, both they, and the Cause of Truth, may be rendered Ignominious, it is to
be doubted that the secret Cause of all these late Commotions, which distract
the Minds of many, springs from this; That some are esteemed to Exalt Thee,
above what is meet; that others are ecteemed to look on Thee, as Less than they
ought; and that jealousies enter many, that Thou esteemest of thy self beyond
what thou art. And if these, or at least, some of these things be that secret
Cause, and that Thou have no less esteem than the Repute of an Elder Brother by
all Friends (which, as far as I know, thou have not) how can it be less then
thy Duty to interpose, that such Differences as of late have arisen, may no
longer Live, to the Increase of Division amongst Gods Heritage: That so Records
to Ages, and Generations to come, may not tell our Childrens Children, that
that People who were clearly gathered out of all Outward Forms, Out-ward Heads,
and Outward Laws, relating to the Inward-man, to the Lawgiver in themselves,
should in so few Years, fall out concerning Outward Orders, and the Head-ship
of one Man; for so will it be Reputed, unless thou by Plain Testimony do
Clear the same, by Manifesting, that Thou never intendedst, that what thou have
given forth as Instructions, or Directions to the Churches, should be urged
with Severity (which is no less than an Inforceing) upon any of Gods faithful
People; but rather commended them to the Churches, leaving the same to God, and
his leading Grace in his People, to make use thereof, as he should Manifest a
need of such Direction, Counsel or Advice.

Many Ancient Brethren besides my self, account this but a Reasonable
Proposition, and that which we firmly believed, was according to thy Sense,
when thou Travelledst among us, and gave forth several things; and yet thou
may remember, that when I was at Swarthmore, I acquainted thee, that because
John Story had that very Sense, it was said of him, Truly John Story, thy
Darkness and Blindness is easily to be felt, and seen, and they must be very
Dim of sight, that see thee not. Oh the Confusion thy Dark Spirit is in!
Whereupon the Book, wherein it was so said, was in thy House brought forth,
amongst others, thy Wifes Son in Law was a subscriber thereof; and when John
Story his said Sense concerning thy giving forth some things was Read, and
their Answers thereto, wherein the above Sentences concerning John Story were
Read unto Thee, yet I never heard from thee, thy Wife, or her Son in Law, so
much as one word disapproving that Answer; but rather a Vindication thereof:
Now whether this be not a just Cause of Jealousy, and so thy duty in all
plainess to Answer this matter, that so Jealousies (which Friends are Exhorted
to shut out, and for which they are accounted little less than Offenders) may
be removed, let Gods Witness in every Conscience Judge.

In the beginning of that day, wherein we were young, and first convinced, and
turned to the Light, we experimentally came to know, That if we did walk
according to what it did certainly Manifest unto us, we could not Err. But now
I do know, it is the Labors of some (disaffected to John Wilkinson and John
Story) by false Reports, to turn the minds of Brethren one against another, and
this is not a turning the Mind to the Light, nor yet an Exhortation to keep
within the Limits of its Leadings; besides which is no safety; and so many
young People growing up, and who are fit Objects for the Seed, to take Root in,
have their minds much Exercised to consider whether this Report of such an one
be True, or that Report concerning another False, though neither of them True;
and so through their Affection, or weakness of Understanding (being too
Credulous of other Men's Words, and too much affected with other men's Lines,
made ready to their Hands) join to one party, and despise another, and all this
while (believing a false Report) are led by another Leader, than that whereby
Gods people in the beginning were led, viz. Christ's Light in the Conscience.
Such are in a ready way Eternally to Perish, and the Blood of such (if by
reason thereof they Perish) will be required at some Hand. May the Righteous
God in his Mercy turn the Hearts of such Watchmen, as have been guilty of this
sin, says my Soul, that so they may therein sin no more; for such things are
stumbling Blocks in the way.

If that Body, which is called George For (which must return to Earth from
whence it came) remains but a few Years upon the Earth, I have this firm
Persuasion that Experience will inform Thee, that my plain Lines are not only
the Fruit of a plain hearted Friend, but also a seasonable Caution, more worthy
thy Notice, than the Words of a flattering Tongue; with my Love to thee, etc. I
Remain

A Friend to thee and the Unchangeable Truth, William Rogers.


It Is now to be observed, That suddenly after I had sent the abovesaid Letter
to G. F. (which, I solemnly affirm, I did for the Clearing of my Conscience,
and could not with Peace of Conscience pass by the same) I had some occasion
calling me to the City of London; where being come, the aforesaid private
Letter was very publicly spoken of amongst Friends; for which I was compared
to Pennyman and Muggleton: Whereupon being startled, that such a Report should
go forth against me on the writing of a private Letter (before I had been
written to, or treated withal about it) I did desire to have an Hours private
Discourse with G. F. which he granted; though some Persons interrupted us, that
we staid not so long together.

At that time, and at some other time after G. F. urged me to Take my Letter
back, and Tear it, and he would Pass it by; but never spoke a word, nor yet
ever writ any Answer thereto, whereby I might be satisfied in the Matters
whereof it treated: And therefore, since I have been compared to Muggleton and
Pennyman, for writing that private Letter, it is thought meet it may be now
Published, and Recommended to the Consciences of every Reader.

Here now follows the other of the Two Letters, whereof I make mention, as
before, written unto G. F. by me, for the further Clearing of my Conscience.

Bristol, the 3d. of the 10th. Month, 1677. George Fox,
"I Have once more a Constraint on my Spirit to write unto thee, and in
Singleness of Heart thus to say.

On the the 25th. of the last Month, a Separate Meeting was held in our City;
unto which my Self, and diverse other Friends went on these Two Considerations:
First, To bear a Testimony against the Appointment of that Meeting, because it
was held in our Public Meeting House, though diverse Friends of the Monthly
Men and Womens-Meeting did Oppose the same, when Note, The said Proposition was
made after several Friends were departed, and the Meeting broken.
Proposed. And, Secondly, To prevent such Designs, which was believed might
have a Tendency to Deceive the Simple, by bringing forth Scandalous Papers
against John Story and John Wilkinson, toward whom many Friends dare not
demean themselves, as if they were Apostatized from the Ancient Truth. Being
thither come, a Testimony was born Against the Appointment, and Holding the
said Meeting; and some I believe, were made Instrumental to preserve others out
of the Snare, which was laid to Betray the Simple. But that which greatly
grieved my Heart, and which at this time is a Concern upon me to signify to
thee, was The Reading a Letter, which was said to be from thee.

If that Letter was really given forth by Thee, and made use of in the Meeting,
according to thy Intent and End, and so will stand by the Person or Persons
introducing the same to be read, as to their End and Intent therein; then it is
plainly evident, That thou art at least the Espouser, if not the Head of the
Cause of Men, that have appeared Partial, Unrighteous in Judgment, and
Persecutors in a high Degree. And, blessed be the Lord, (for in Zeal to the
Cause of Truth I speak it) that he has not only given me a Sight hereof, but
also Boldness (in which I have Peace) to testify against that Partial, Unjust,
Persecuting Spirit, in whomsoever it appears; that under a Pharasaical Pretense
of Love, and Bowels of Compassion, or such like, would destroy and murder the
Name and Reputation of the Lord's Servants; whenas I am fully fatisfyed, if
they would but Bow to Men, they might avoid the Stroke of their Passion.

Alas, Friend! little did I in Days past think, that thou would appear
either as a Head, or Espouser of the Cause of such; nor yet of any, who should
cast Stumbling Blocks in the Way of God's People: But now it is evident, that
thou art the Man, under whose Name Papers are spread; which seems as a
Strenghening to such, as well as one that puts Stumbling Blocks before the
Lord's People thy self: And therefore, if thou have any Regard to the Flock of
God; it becomes thee to cease sending abroad such Papers, or putting
Stumbling Blocks in the Way of the Simple.

Perhaps, thou may think the Language unbecoming me; yet I must tell thee,
That though Darkness has over-shadowed the Hearts of many, so that they seem
like Men Void of all Wisdom, and all Reason, (whereby it seems to me, as if
they were Proselytes of such amongst the Sixty-Six Subscribers at Ellis Hook's
Chamber; who coming with another Gospel, than that which stands in the Wisdom
of God, have Preached against All Wisdom and All Reasoning) yet the Eyes of
many of the Ancient Flock of God continue yet open, and have beheld the
Whimsies and Imaginations that have entered some, whereby the Name of God has
been but too frequently Blasphemed, and the Word and Power of God abominably
Abused, by such whom the Papers seems to be a Strength to; which has long
since created Jealousies, that the dread of that Ancient Power (which many
Brethren testified; Was with thee in the Beginning) is departed. The
Consideration whereof puts me in remembrance:

First, That though thou and many have judged John Perrot, as an Apostatized
Person from the Truth, for introducing a New Practice in the Church; yet those
who (as far as I know) stand in and for the same Faith and Practice they were
in from the Beginning, are now judged Apostatized, because they cannot embrace
(for Conscience sake) some New Prescription, which thou art accounted either
the Author, or Countenancer of.

Secondly, That though the Apostle thus exhorted; Little Children, keep your
selves from Idols; yet thy Book touching Womens-Meetings, etc. (very Scandalous
to the Truth, and worthy in several Particulars to be Judged and Condemned)
informs us, as if Micah's Mother, spoken of Judges 17. (when she gave Money to
make a Graven Image to be Worshipped) was a Virtuous Woman; for touching her
thou have thus written: And Was not Micah's Mother a Virtuous Woman? Read
Judges 17. and see what she said to her Son. And in a few Lines after, thou
thus testifyes; These, and such like Women are Recorded to Posterity, for their
Wisdom and Virtue: See thy Book, Page 43, 44.

Thirdly, Though there are Endeavors to send Papers to and fro, to bespatter
John Story, for going out of a Meeting when the Persecutors came; yet I know,
that thou thy self have been found in the like Action, and (if Reports be true)
the frequentest of any Man, that ever I heard called by the Name of a Quaker:
And it is to me a broad Sign, that this would not have been omitted, as a grand
Article against him amongst others at Drawel, had not thou been Guilty in the
like Case.

Fourthly, That though John Wilkinson and John Story are persecuted by such,
unto whom thy Papers seem a Strength, because they will not Condemn themselves:
Yet I never heard, that thou, as yet, have ever given forth any Paper of
Condemnation for the Errors thou have Committed, in writing the Book about
Women's Meeeting, etc. or any thing else: Though I cannot believe, but that thou
art Conscious to thy self, that Truth is scandalized thereby; unless so great
Imagination has entered thee, as to conclude, That all thy Words, Writings and
Actions are Right, because they are brought forth through thy Earthly Vessel.
And to speak plain, I must tell thee, Thou art not free from giving Occasion to
be Jealous, that thou do so conclude: Else, when I treated thee about the
Business of Micha's Mother, Why did thou tell me, as thou then did, viz.
That thou knew what thou did, and that Thou saw 'twould be a
Stumbling Block? But rather, on the Sight of thy Mistake, have ingeniously
confessed the same; for it is an Abominable thing in thee, or any Man knowingly to
put Stumbling Blocks in the Way of God's People. And know this from me, thou will never be able to wipe away the Reproach that lies upon thee, for writing
that Book, until thou Condemn and Judge thy self, for many things therein
contained.

And to be yet more plain; When I do consider, that the Reputation and Respect,
that has been given unto thee by many, (if not most of those, who in the Parts
here-a-way were first convinced of Truth) did first spring from the Testimony
we had concerning thee, from the Mouths of those whom we believed the Lord (and
not Thou) sent forth to gather us; it seems a very strange Thing, and the Badge
of a grand Apostasy: That any of the surviving Remnant of those Ancient
Laborers (being as sound in Doctrine and Principle, and as blameless in their
outward Lives and Conversation, as in the Beginning, and thereby manifesting
themselves Stayed in the Unchangeable Truth) should be Persecuted, and rendered
Offenders, for that which Truth declares to be no Offense; and yet thou so far
from being a Reproof thereto, that it is evident to me from my Discourse had
with thee at Swarthmore, and other things, that thou art become a Strength to
them.

Have thou forgotten, that Truth was Preached in the Beginning, under the Name
of the Unchangeable Truth? And, Is the Day now come, that a Remnant of the
Ancient Stock (who bore the Brunt, and Heat of the Day) must now be Persecuted;
whenas I am satisfied, if they could but now run with others to Change their
Way, they might yet be esteemed Good Friends?

Have thou forgotten, how often the Testimony of the Ancient Brethren were on
this wise, We Preach not our selves, look not unto us, but unto the Appearance
of Christ in your selves? And yet one Cause Assigned by thee, that John
Wilkinson, and John Story are wrong, is their not Coming to thee, and by the
sixty six Subscribers at Ellis Hook's Chamber in London, their not Coming to
Them? Truly those who have received their Ministry from God, are not to run
hither and thither at thy Call, or any man's Call whatsoever; though I do know
thou have (in a Letter written to me) Assigned their not coming to Thee, when
thou send'st for them, to be as a Proof, that they were not Right, nor in the
Light and Power of God. But by what Authority, or according to what Principle
of Truth, Men, called of God into the Work of the Ministry, must be declared to
be not right, nor in the Light and Power of God, because they come not to Thee,
when thou sendest for them, I understand not: for thou in thy best Estate, wast
but a Member of the Christ of God, unto whom we are all to come, when he calls:
And if any shall Affirm, that thou have, and do retain thy place, yet in that
Case, Thou can be but a fellowservant, accountable unto the Christ of God, as
every Member of the Body (whereof Christ is Head) is?

Have thou forgotten, how Thou have Testified against James Naylor's Spirit,
whose great fall was his owning, or at least not Reproving the Women, when they
Cried with a Carnal Tongue Hosanna to him? And have Thou no Sense, that its
gross Ignorance, and thick Darkness for any to look upon Thee, as that Prophet
whom the Lord by his Servant Moses Prophesied he would raise up, like unto him,
whom the People are to hear in all things? I cannot believe thou art Ignorant,
that such there are, who so Look on thee; and I never understood thou becamest
a Reproof to this Spirit.

Have thou no Sense, that the same Spirit of Ignorance, has and can look upon
that abominable Quotation, touching Micahs Mother, as well enough, which,
wherever it is, does undoubtedly Spring from this, that it is George's giving
forth, and so there must be something in it? And have Thou not been desired to
Clear things of this Nature, and to be a Reproof to such Ignorance and
Darkness, which tends to lead us into Egypt again? I am the man who have Cause
to be Jealous, that there are some who look upon others either Apostatizing
from the Truth, or standing in slippery Places; when they find not a more than
ordinary Respect for thee, I will not say, an Hosanna in their Breasts, as the
Women had in their Mouths for James Naylor; and therefore I cannot but say, it
might well become thee by a plain Testimony to Clear things of this Nature.

Many for Truth's sake, and out of an indeared Respect for thee in particular,
and a Hope that these little Differences amongst Friends might pass over (and
that thou would use the Interest thou have in the Hearts of the Professors
of Truth, to quell those many little Commotions, which seemed some Months and
Years past, but as sparks of Fire) have born in a Spirit of Patience; yet now,
since it is evident, that Ignorance, Envy, and Zeal without Knowledge, Join
Hands together, to make War against Gods Servants, and that thy Papers seem a
Strength thereto, therefore is the Zeal of the Lord of Hosts kindled to War in
Righteousness against that Ungodly, Insinuating Spirit, that makes it its
business to bespatter John Story and John Wilkinson, whereby the Simple-hearted
may be in danger to be turned out of the Way. It Is unnatural amongst the
Heathen, for the Father to pierce and Wound his Children; Oh Friend! Consider
of that.

If thou art the Head and chief Promoter of this War against the Ancient
Brethren, appear like a Man of War open-faced; and if thou art not, Remove the
Jealousies, that have entered the Breasts of many concerning thee, which I know
not how may be better done, than by a plain and Candid Answer to this and the
last Letter I writ thee, which I was constrained to write, to Clear my
Conscience; but thy not Answering my last Letter shows plainly to me, that thou
can not in Truth so Answer, as to keep thy self from coming under the just
Censure of Truth; for several Things which I therein say are reported
concerning thee, I know are True: And if such things are Crimes in others, How
comes it to pass, that the like are not Crimes, when committed by thee? And
therefore, since such things have been accounted by those, whom thy Papers seem
a Strength to, as Crimes; I cannot tell how thou can show thy self at Unity
with them, or they with thee, till by thine or their Repentance and
Condemnation, ye become Reconciled: For otherwise, either they will show
themselves Wrong, or thou will appear as if in thy own Sense, Thou were
Exempted from the Stroke of that Justice, which in the same Case is prescribed
for others.

And truly, Friend, it is much taken notice of, that All Reasoning, and All
Wisdom is preached against of late: Who would but think, that such Men esteem
all sorts of Ignorance and Unreasonableness, to be Virtue? For my part, I
measure not so; yet this measure I take, That when I find such an one to use
Wisdom and Reason, to evidence a Good Cause, I cannot but conclude, Such an
ones Cause is stark Naught; when his best Argument to evidence it to be Good,
is to cry out against All Wisdom, and All Reasoning. Such an Argument I have
not known to convince Men of Conscience and Wisdom, though some such have, or
may be, of whom Solomon thus speaks; How long, ye Simple Ones, will ye love
Simplicity, and Fools hate Knowledge! Turn ye at my Reproof.

One other Shift I have of late also observed, as a Practice to manifest a Bad
Cause to be Good, viz. To get a Multitude of Hands to vilify Ancient Brethren,
when not heard to speak for themselves; as that Paper signed by Sixty-Six
Persons at Ellis Hook's Chamber, against John Wilkinson and Jonn Story, does
evidence: For it is not Reasonable to conclude, 'Twas given forth with respect
to any Offense, but such as has been committed since the Meeting at Drawel;
because they have been once Condemned already, for the Things there treated on.

And therefore, I cannot but say, Here the Arm of Flesh and Egyptian Darkness
meet together; and the Lord has a Controversy with those who are guilty
hereof; and the Blood of the Deceived thereby, may be required at their Hands.
Oh! This Sin cries aloud in the Ears of the Lord of Hosts, thus to endeavor
the Defamation of God's Servants, under fair plausible Pretenses of Love and
Brokenness, or such like, when so much Gall and Bitterness of Spirit appears in
the Bottom, that Men of Understanding and Conscience cannot join thereto.

To be short; Things are brought to that pass amongst us, that those who
contend for the Ancient Principles of Truth, and to walk according to the
Measure of Grace received, are now accounted Bad Spirits, by such whom thy
Papers seem a Strength to; though the Cause thereof, is nothing but Matters
relating to their Consciences, and not any thing of Evil Conversation: By which
it is easily to be discerned, that Darkness is over-shadowing again, and the
Glorious Light vailing. And though it is said by some, That the
Simple-honest-hearted Join in, and so makes as if the rest were but Chaff, that
are in the Jealousies, and the Reasonings, and the Wisdom; I have this Faith,
That there are Hundreds of God's Ancient Flock, who have retained their First
Love, are those they call the Chaff; and many of those who are accounted the
Wheat, are such Chaff-Spirited People, who, had they not Outward Props to lean
upon, and Outward Persons to have an Eye unto, and Outward Papers, wherein they
think their Cause is pleaded, would quickly lose their Confidence, being Built
upon the Foundation that is Sandy, and not on the Christ of God; for were their
Faith in Him, their Faith would not stand in Man or Men: And this with many
(with whom Right Reason takes place, and the Wisdom from Above is known) is
plainly discerned.

Outward Forms and Precedents, eyeing others under the Notion of the Brethren,
is so much discours't on of late by some ignorant Persons, that it is but too
evident, that the great Difference amongst Friends, is about Outward Things and
Ceremonies; wherein some appear like People contending about the Shell, and
lose the Kirnel: Which occasions me to tell thee, That when I have heard thee
Preach against Austin the Monk's bringing into England a Snap-Sack of
Ceremonies, (which I have at many Meetings heard from thee) I then little
thought, I should ever see the Day, wherein thou should appear a Countenancer
of such, who fall out with Ancient Friends about Outward Orders and
Prescriptions; but rather would have appeared a Strength to such, who contend,
that their Order for Gospel-Discipline ought to spring from Truth within
themselves: For that was the undoubted Sense of those Honorable Brethren, who
knew a Travel of Spirit for the Gathering of those, who in the Beginning of
this latter Day were gathered, as a sort of First Fruits unto God; though some
others coming in at the Eleventh Hour of the Day, and seeming as Countenanced
by thee, appear of another Language.

I have this further to add; That if thou would be acquitted in the Breasts
of all Friends, As a Man that art not a Countenancer of such
Contentious-Spirited Men' that appear as the Beginners and Carriers on of this
War; it is needful for thee to satisfy Friends, whether thou do own all the
Forty-Four Articles, drawn up against John Wilkinson and John Story. Thy
Example of sending thy Questions abroad to be ask't of other Friends,
manifests, that it is reasonable in another Friend, to expect an Answer from
Thee: But yet I have sufficient Cause to doubt, thou will not be so plain, as
to Answer the Question; because I cannot believe, but that thy Understanding is
now so opened, as to see, that if thou own them, thou will bring thy self under
the Just Censure of Truth, for endeavoring to make any Brother an Offender for
that which is no Offense: And if thou own them not, then thou will show thy
self out of Unity with the great Opposers of John Wilkinson and John Story.

However, if thou refusest to Answer, 'twill be Evidence enough, that thou
walk not by that Golden Rule, To do as thou would be done by.

More-over, Since thy Papers give Testimony against a Spirit, Why do thou not
tell us in plain Words, who they are, in whom (according to thy Sense) it
works? For I much doubt, that if thou art not the Secret Mover to all this
Strife; yet the want of the Right Application of some Expressions in thy
Papers, testifying against Bad Spirits, etc. is one great Cause of the Increase
of Bad Spirits, and of their Scribbling. And therefore, be Plain-hearted: For I
do know, that a dark, imaginary Spirit is entered, and under the Outward
Profession of Truth: and that also, such a Spirit appears amongst those, who
espouse the Cause against John Wilkinson and John Story; and the Fruits that
are brought forth by them, which evidence that they are of such a Spirit, are
as follows: viz. Judging the Lord's Servants out of the Truth, for particular
Matters laid to their Charge, without hearing them speak for themselves, or
first sending their Judgment or Condemnation to them, before the spreading
thereof, contrary to the known Practice of Friends in Truth; gathering Friends
together, on purpose to entertain their Ears with Reports against John
Wilkinson and John Story, and refuse to bring forth the same to John Story's
Face before Friends equally to be Chosen, though desired so to do, both by John
Story and others: Magnifying Unity amongst Brethren, and yet appear those who
break the Unity; reproving the Spirit of Strife, and yet not only the Movers,
but Carryers on of Strife, both by Word and Writing, or (to speak in thy
Language) Stribling, to the Dishonor of God, and the Cause of Truth. And
though such, who espouse the Cause against John Wilkinson and John Story, may
suppose themselves capable to quote Thee for an Example, or at least as an
Approver of such Actions, (for none of them, as I know of, do so much as
suppose, that thy Words or Scribbling tends to reprove them) yet know this from
me, That there are many of God's Ancient Flock, who retain their First Love for
Truth; and every Honorable Labourer in the Vineyard, dare not approve of this
Late and Newfound Doctrine, published against All Reasoning and All Wisdom;
nor yet can suffer their Faith to stand in Thee, or any Man: And therefore, if
Thou, or any Man, bring forth a Dream, or pretend a Night-Vision, to run
against Faithful Friends, and on that foot Scrible against them, under the
Notion of Bad Spirits; it has no place with them, because the Day has
discovered such Folly to Men of Conscience, and endued with the Wisdom that is
from Above. But yet I cannot say, but that, as it has, it may have place with
some, who are of this Number and Sort; viz. Such whose Ignorance is so Great,
as to conclude it the Fruit of Virtue, to avoid All Reasoning, and All Wisdom;
or whose Understandings are so veiled, as to have an Eye to the Night-Visions,
or Dreams of Men, more than to the Truth in themselves; and on that foot,
eyeing the Scriblers of Papers more than the Matters therein contained; as
being convinced, that they ought to shut out All Wisdom, and All Reasoning, (a
most dextrous Expedient, where it takes place, for Antichrist so to exalt his
Kingdom, as that all manner of Iniquity and Deceit may quickly enter the Flock,
if once the Leader or Leaders of the People bring forth their own Imaginations
under the Notion of Night-Visions, and publish them for the Word of the Lord)
and then no marvail, if such conclude, That every Friend is justly Condemned,
if they are not at Unity with the Paper given forth by the Sixty-Six
Subscribers at Ellis Hooks's Chamber; as if now 'twere Good Doctrine or
Exhortation, to direct to the Spirit and Power that appeared in the Sixty-Six
Subscribers, (when they brought forth their Unchristian like Papen) instead of
directing to the Measure of Grace in themselves.

One thing more lies upon me to say unto thee; That though amongst the Princes
of the World, there are such Politic Contrivances to carry on their Designs,
as to engage such others therein; who for Self-Advancement, become of a
Temporizing Spirit, or for want of the Things of this World, are ready to
follow for the Loaves; for being of a Mean Spirit, are Hurried or Overawed
with Fear: And so, if their Designs succeed ill, then it is the Fruit either of
Evil Counsel, or ill Management; but if well, then they carry away the Glory
thereof: Yet it becomes not any one, or many, professing themselves Members of
Christ's Body, thus to do.

And now to Conclude; I have this further to Query, Whether thou Conclude thy
self no way obliged to bring thy VVritings to the Second Days Meeting in
London, to be approved of there, before they be Printed? If thou do not, Thou
have been wrong Represented; if thou do, and yet think all other Friends
are, (as it is to be doubted, thou do; for I have never heard, that thy Book
about VVomens Meeting was there approved, or that all the Things therein
contained, will be stood by, or owned by any one Friend in Truth) then it is an
evident Token, Thou would Exalt thy self: For, What is that less than to
conclude, That the Infallible Spirit is limited to appear through thy Earthen
Vessel only? For if (according to the Principle of Truth) the Spirit is the
Judge, and that its pouring forth in our Day, is upon many Sons, and many
Daughters; Why then should not the Appearance of the Spirit, through any
Vessel, have its free Passage, as well as through Thine? Or, Why must Some
VVritings, given forth by the Spirit, be brought to the Second Days Meeting,
to be approved; and Others not? But to return; I have this further to say, That
if Thou or any are so imaginary, as to conclude, That all thy Writings and
Books are given forth by the Infallible Spirit, and that as such they ought to
be made use of, (a part of which, I am satisfied, have so been, thereby to
obtain Proselytes against John Story and John Wilkinson) it appears to me, as
if thy Notorious Erring from the Infallible Spirit, in writing some things
contained in thy Book of VVomens-Meetings, has been permitted to be as an
Evidence Recorded against all such, who ignorantly look upon thee so to be, as
aforesaid: And therefore, it becomes thee to be Humbled before the Lord, and
to Acknowledge thy Errors therein.

I am not without a Sense, what Entertainment my plain Dealing will have
amongst many, if thou suffer it to be read or spread amongst any Prejudiced
against me, as thou did my last Letter; whereby I became Judged, before
Treated withal, either by Thee, or any touching the same: However this gives me
Satisfaction, that I have Counted the Cost; and if I must be Reproach't (as
once I have been already) for clearing my Conscience to thee, yet as I now
have, so my Faith is, I shall have Peace of Conscience, when the Neglect
thereof would have become my Burden.

And if any for this Cause should give forth such Papers against me, as are
undeservedly given forth against other Friends in Truth, and that also by such,
who have not heard them speak for themselves, 'twill redound to their Shame, as
in the End will undoubtedly be more publicly manifested.

For several Weeks past, it has been under my serious Consideration, whether I
might pass these Things over in Silence; but with Peace of Conscience, I cannot
so do: And therefore, do conclude, They are more worthy thy Notice, than the
Words of Flattering Tongues. I am

Thy Plain-Hearted Friend, William Rogers.


To the Two aforesaid Letters, I never received any Answer in Writing, nor yet
by Word of Mouth, as ever I remember, more than to this Effect: William, If
thou will take thy Letter back again, it is well enough, or such like Words. But
yet, on G. F's proposing to have a Meeting with me concerning them, we agreed
on a Meeting to consist of Twelve Friends on a Side; and after the Reading of
the last Letter, I by Writing under my Hand desired, That if George Fox had
ought against it, he would deliver me his Charge therein in Writing; and then I
would make Answer thereto: But my Proposition therein, G. F. refused to Answer,
and so the Meeting parted.

I now come to take Notice, that there was a Paper given forth from Ellis Hooks
his Chamber, by Charles Marshall, and Sixty-Five Persons more, as a Testimony
against John Wilkinson and John Story, to which Two Answers were written; and
not only so, but a Testimony from John Jonnings, and about Seventy Friends more
in the County of Wilts, and Thomas Gouldeny, William Ford, and My Self,
together with Sixteen Friends besides in Bristol, against it.

This I make mention of, because that Paper from Ellis Hooks his Chamber,
signed by Charles Marshal, etc. has proved but Fuel added to the Fire of
Contention, that was Burning before.

Now, forasmuch as I am well sensible, that G. F. esteems himself One having
the Care of all the Churches upon him; and that John Story positively affirms,
that when he was at Worcester with George Fox, He, viz. G. F. did then tell
him, (which he took as Threatening) Friends would Write against them, and that
the Power of God would cast them out, meaning John Wilkinson and John Story: It
may be needful for G. F. to give an Account, how he came to be so careless of
the Churches, as not so to sift into that Matter, as that the Unrighteous
Proceeding thereof might have been Judged, especially fince he was then in
London: The Neglect whereof in him, (so Circumstantiated, as he accounts
himself to be) occasions this Jealousy, That he was an Approver of the Manner,
and Method of their Proceedings; and so may account it a Fulfilling of the
Words cited, as spoken to John Story at Worcester; viz. That Friends would
write against them, and the Power of God would cast them out.

The Fire of Contention thus increasing, and it being rumored, that there was
a Separate - Meeting in the North; John Story writes unto the Two Meetings in
the North, viz. that called Separate and that called Quarterly; therein
proposing Expedients for a Re-uniting, which was Recommended by Thomas
Gouldeny, and My Self, together with Sixty Friends besides; and was Accepted by
those called Separate, as by their Testimony, signed by William Cartmell, and
Fifty-Seven Persons more, appears: But Robert Barrow, and Fifteen others of the
Quarterly Meeting, so termed, Condemned John Story's Proposition, before heard,
as by their Answer appears.

This also is thus hinted, because I doubt not, but that it may come to the
View of Robert Barrow; who (if he please) may thereupon take Occasion to
signify to me, That George Fox was not concerned in that Council; if in Truth,
he can so signify.

This I propose, because it is jealoused, That Matters of no less Moment, are
not very commonly Resolved upon by Robert Barrow, and others of Party with G.
F. without Advising with him, when they have Opportunities so to do; which
doubtless are frequent enough, since their Dwellings are but few Miles distant
each from other.

William Rogers.

The FIFTH PART OF THE Christian-Quaker, Distinguished From the Apostate and
Innovator. BEING AN ADDITIONAL Discovery (to the First and Fourth Parts of the
Christian-Quaker, etc.) THAT George Fox has been acted by an Erroneous Spirit,
and become a Reproach and Scandal to the Truth, which the Children of Light
profess and walk in.

By William Rogers.

Malachi 2.8, 9. But ye are departed out of the Way; ye have caused many to
stumble at the Law: ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, says the Lord of
Hosts: Therefore have I made you Contemptible, and base before all the People,
according as ye have not kept my Ways, but have been Partial in the Law.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1680.

The FIFTH PART OF THE Christian Quaker, Distinguished From the APOSTATE and
INNOVATOR, etc.
ON the 11 Month, 1677. George Fox came to the City of Bristol, and after he
had been there some little time, I was challenged by one professing the Truth,
to bring forth what I had, against G. F. This with some other passages between
Friends at that time, occasioned my self and others to be concerned, in drawing
up a few things wherein we were dissatisfied, not only relating to G. F. but
others also: a Part whereof (chiefly relating unto George Fox) does now follow.

The first Dissatisfaction.
We are not satisfied that G. F. has of late been guided by the Spirit of
Truth, in all such Matters relating to truth, wherein (of late) he has
concerned himself; neither are we satisfied, that those, who have of late
looked upon him, as a man worthy of double honor, and owned him in all such
Matters, have had therein a spiritual Discerning; neither are we satisfied,
that the bare esteeming of him, as one that has not of late in all things kept
his Place and Habitation in the Truth, can be the fruit of a Dark Spirit.

The Reasons of the above Dissatisfactions as to G. F. are in part, as
follows.

That diverse passages in his book entitled, This is an Encouragement to all
Womens-Meetings in the World, etc. are either unsound, or impertinently quoted.

The first Quotation.
Page 43. of the said Book it is thus said, And was not Micah 's Mother a
Virtuous Woman? read Judges the 17th, and see what she said to her Son.

The very words of the Scripture are these. And there was a Man of Mount
Ephraim, whose name was Micah, and he said unto his Mother, The 1100 Shekels of
Silver that were taken from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest also
in mine Ears, behold the silver is with me; I took it; and his mother said,
Blessed be thou of the Lord my Son: and when he had restored the 1100 Shekels
of Silver to his Mother, his Mother said, I had wholly dedicated the Silver
unto the Lord from my Hand, for my Son to make a Graven-Image, and a
Molten-Image; now therefore I will restore it thee; yet he restored the money
to his Mother, and his Mother took 200 Shekels of Silver, and gave them to the
Founder, who made thereof a Graven-Image, and a Molten Image, and they were in
the house of Micah, and the man Micah had an house of God's.

The Quotation is enough to show, that she was an Idolatrous Woman; and though
it may be said, it is but a question asked; yet in answer it may be said, that
if G. F's real judgment be so, that she was not a virtuous woman, he has
manifested thereby a scoffing Spirit; but to manifest that such an Answer
appears but a mere shift, the reader may observe, that about thirteen lines
following he thus says, So these, and such women are recorded to Posterity for
their Wisdom and their Virtue.

The second Quotation.
Page 43. And the woman of Tekoah, see what a Sermon she preached to King David,
2 Samuel 13.14.

The Scripture quoted informs us, that the woman was a subtle woman, whom Joab
caused to feign her self as a Mourner, and go to King David with a lying story
in her mouth, which accordingly she did; For when King David asked her; is not
the hand of Joab with thee in all this? she answered, Joab put all these words
in her mouth; so that if it were really so, that she had been the Occasion of
pacifying King David's wrath, yet it might more truly be said, that she
deceived King David by her Lies, than convinced him; besides, though the story
was framed by Joab, for the sake of Absalom, who slew his Brother Amnon, and
therefore fled, yet it appears that King David was appeased as to his Son
Absalom (as in 2 Samuel 13.39.) before the woman came to him with Lies in her
mouth. We now commend it to the Consciences of all to consider, how this Lying
story can be called a Good and Convincing Sermon, and be an evidence of a
Virtuous Woman; for in a very few lines after it is said (as before) These and
such women are recorded to posterity for their Wisdom and their Virtue.

The Third Quotation.
Page 23. And the Women had their assemblies in the days of the Judges and the
Kings; Now old Ely was not against the Assemblies of the Women, who assembled
by Troops, as you may see in the 1st Sam. 2.21, 22. though some men now adays
may be against Women's Meetings or Assemblies in the Gospel Times; and against
women's speaking and prophesying, etc.

The Scripture quoted tells us thus: So Ely was old, and heard all that his
Sons did unto Israel, and how they lay with the Women who assembled at the Door
of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; which only proves that there was an
Assembly of Men and women at the Door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation;
who committed evil together.

At the first view, this seemed so abominable a Quotation to prove the
Assemblies of purified women, under the Gospel distinct form purified men to be
necessary (which is the end wherefore 'twas (as we take it) quoted) that we
were concerned to inform our selves from the Scriptures, to what end women
assembled before the Door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; and we find by
a Marginal Note in the Scriptures that it was (as the Hebrews write) after
their Travel, when they came to be purified, as in Leviticus the 12th and 6th,
where it is thus said. Now when the days of her purifying are fulfilled, she
shall bring to the Priest a Lamb of one year old for a Burnt-Offering, and a
young Pigeon or Turtle Dove for a Sin-Offering, unto the Door of the Tabernacle
of the Congregation; which gives us occasion thus to query.

How can Women, coming in order to their Purification with a Sin-Offering, etc.
to the Door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, when defiled by the Men,
that there accompanied them, be a Proof for purified Women under the Gospel, to
assemble together distinct from purified men?

The Fourth Quotation.
Page 32. And likewise you may see Rachel and Leah their Counsel to Jacob, who
answered Jacob and said unto him, is there yet any Portion or Inheritance for
us in our Father's house? are we not counted of him as strangers? for he has
sold us, and he has quite devoured also our money; for all the riches that God
has taken from our Father, that is ours, and our Childrens: and now therefore
whatsoever God has said unto thee, do; this was Rachels and Leahs counsel unto
Jacob, and were not these three a Church then? and did he forbid them from
speaking in the Church? See Genses 31.14, 15, 16.

This we take to be a Quotation to evidence Women's speaking in the Church to be
according to truth; but yet we cannot own it to be much (if any thing at all)
better Argument for VVomens speaking in the Church of God, when the Church is
met to worship the Lord in his Spirit, than Women's Discourses with their
Husbands about their outward estates, does almost every day produce amongst us;
and were it so that no better Argument could be produced for the justification
of Women's speaking in the Church of God (in the sense we have understood
speaking in the Church) we might be ashamed of our Principle and their Practice.

The Fifth Quotation.
Page 42. And the Daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the Daughter of
Jeptha, Judges 11th. So here they had a Yearly Meeting on this Occasion.

Our observation now is. Jeptha made a vow unto the Lord, and thus said, If
thou shall deliver the Children of Ammon into my Hand, then that thing that
comes out of the Doors of my house to meet me, when I come home in peace from
the Children of Ammon, shall be the Lords, and I will offer it for a
Burnt-Offering. And so it happened that his only Child being a Daughter, came
out to meet him with Timbrels and Dances, and when he saw her, he rent his
Clothes and said, alas my Daughter! but yet at the end of two months, did unto
her according to his Vow, having given her two months time, to go to the
Mountains with other Virgins to bewail her Virginity; which afterward became a
custom in Israel to go Yearly to the Mountains to bewail the Daughter of Jeptha.

This occasions us to query, whether such a meeting occasioned on the Untimely
Death of a Virgin (for Jeptha's Vow was a Rash Vow) can be any Evidence of the
Matter, which is taken by us to be intended, viz. either for Women's speaking in
the Church, or Women's Meeting distinct from Men on the account of worship to
God, or performing Acts of Government, relating to Church Discipline?

Several other passages are contained in the said book, which we take to be in
order to prove either women's speaking in the Church, when solemnly met together
to wait upon the Lord to worship him in the Spirit; or VVomens distinct meeting
on account either of Worship, or exercise of Discipline in the Church of God,
as in diverse places of the said book may appear; but yet we are dissatisfied,
that they are pertinent to that purpose.

We find by a Paper given forth by G. F. that he thus writes, Friends, to you
all this is the Word of the Lord; take heed of judging one another, and judge
not one another, I command you in the Presence of the Lord, neither lay open
one another weakness behind one another backs; for thou that do so, art one
of Ham 's Family, which is under the curse, and that there be no backbiting
behind one another backs, but love, and so the same that does condemn behind
the back is for Condemnation with the Light.

This brings to our remembrance what Paul writ unto the Romans, chap. 2. ver.
1. therefore thou art inexcusable, Oh man whosoever thou art that judge
another; for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self: for thou
that judge. do the same thing; but we are sure that the Judgment of God
is, according to Truth, against them that commit such things; and think thou
this, oh man, that judge them which do such things, and do the same, that
thou shall escape the Judgment of God? From hence we observe:

1st, That unless G. F. pleads that he is more than a man, and on that foot
claims a Privilege that he may give Instructions to others, as aforesaid, and
yet be Justified in acting contrary thereto himself; and when he has so
pleaded, prove such a Privilege to be according to Truth, we are wholly
dissatisfied that he can escape the Judgment of God.

2dly, We are not satisfied, that all those whom we take G. F. to own, and who
have appeared against John Story and John Wilkinson, have acted in many things
relating thereto (and wherein we take G. F. also to own them) according to the
aforesaid Counsel of G. F. and if so, may be esteemed as persons worthy to be
judged according to the judgment given by G. F. and by the Apostle Paul also;
and therefore we desire that G. F. and the Friends who have pressed this meeting,
will declare whether or no, what G. F. has written (as aforesaid) be sound,
and whether he himself, and every one else, who has acted contrary thereto, be
condemnable; and when they have so done, we shall be ready to come to a fair
and equal Hearing, to manifest the Reasons of our Dissatisfactions in this
Case: But unless the friends who have urged this meeting will so do, we shall
be ready to conclude, that they are not willing that the things occasioning the
difference amongst Friends and the continuation and increase thereof, should be
brought to light; nor yet are willing to come to the touch, though they
themselves have been ready to reflect on us, as declining a meeting, and not
willing to come to the Touch.

The Reader may now observe, that such friends, as were at Unity with G. F. and
others that were at Unity with John Wilkinson and John Story agreed together to
meet, fairly to debate Matters that might be objected, and in order thereto
there were Articles of agreement touching orderly proceedings, the copy whereof
(with the omission of one parties Name and his Subscription; for the Reasons
mentioned in the Preface to the 1st part of the Christian-Quaker) now follows:

Bristol the 1st of the 12th Mo. 77.
Propositions agreed between -- and William Rogers on behalf of themselves and
others concerned, in order to a Meeting for the ending some differences
depending between them; and also others in the City of Bristol and elsewhere
interessed; and for satisfaction of any friend or friends in the things they
are dissatisfied.
1st, IT is agreed, by and between the persons above mentioned, That each may
have a Scribe to take all those Passages in the conference which to them
severally shall seem meet; and that before any one Head be left, or a new
Matter begun, all that each Party have thought fit to have written be first
read; if in any thing defective, amended; and finally agreed by both persons to
be a true Record, Minute, or Memorial of the Conference; and if any thing be
written or expressed short (or beside the Meaning of the Speaker) that the said
Speaker has Liberty to correct and help the said Expression.

2ly, That all things so written by both Scribes, and so agreed upon to be
recorded, shall be at the end of every meeting subscribed by both Parties, and
by at least six credible persons of each side, and by as many more as shall
please to sign the same as Mitnesses of what is so recorded; and the said six
respectively to be named before the Meeting begin, and they then to declare,
that they are free to it; but if in any thing they are dissatisfied with what
there passes, that though they subscribe the Narrative as Witnesses, that the
same is a true Narrative, yet that they have Power and Liberty (in case of
dislike) to declare or write their Protestation against the same.

3ly, That if any Friend present has any thing upon him or her to say, or
offer to the matter in hand, that such has his or her Christian Liberty to
speak his or her Mind; and that every such thing said by Friends on either side
(if the Friends that speak, or either of the two persons whose names are
hereunto subscribed, shall desire it) be also recorded.

4ly, That Matters or Subjects to be debated on by each party, be first written
down, and respectively delivered to each other.

5ly, That the meeting begin, and be held at the 9th hour in the morning, on
the fourth day of this instant, being the second day of the week, and at the
house of Richard Sneed.

6ly, That this Agreement be written in the head of the Narrative to be made in
pursuance of this Agreement.

William Rogers on behalf of himself and other Friends concerend.

The above Agreement was also signed by another Person on behalf of himself and
other Friends concerned.

On the foot of this Agreement there were three meetings, consisting of about
twenty hours, had in the City of Bristol, wherein the aforesaid
Dissatisfactions relating to G. F. were delivered in the Meeting.

It Is further observable, that inasmuch as nothing was agreed upon to be
recorded according to the Articles of Agreement, and that the Meetings broke
up, and the dissatisfactions of friends were not read thorough, William Ford
and my self sent abroad all the said Dissatisfactions that were prepared,
whereof those already mentioned were but a part, with an account of some other
Passages concerning Meetings and other Matters that the Agreement related not
to: the Rumor whereof (as I suppose) coming to G. F's Ears, I was informed by
several, that he rendered the givers forth thereof, or at least one of them,
Covenant-breakers, and it is credibly reported, that G. F. is the Person who
industriously spreads the same amongst Friends (of which more anon) as an
Evidence that Thomas Gouldney, William Ford and William Rogers are accused on
this score, for Covenant-breakers: we think it necessary to recite a Letter
written unto them on that behalf, the copy whereof does follow.

The 9th of the 6th Mo. 78.
Thomas Gouldney, William Ford and William Rogers, with the rest of John Story
's and John Willkinson 's Party, who are known or unknown.

"I Understand that you had a Meeting with G. F. and others at Bristol, at
Winter Fair last, and Articles and Covenants were drawn and agreed on both
sides, That no Papers were to go forth without the Consent of both Parties: and
contrary to all Covenants, Engagements and Contracts (when G.F. and the rest
were gone from Bristol) you have drawn up papers concerning the Meeting,
Manuscript Books, some thirteen, sixteen, or twenty four sheets (as it is said)
and have sent them into the North, Bukinghamshire and Barkshire (as they say)
and also you sent them by Lewis Landy into Hartfordshire, and Bedfordshire, and
Huntingtonshire, and ride up and down to dissaffected and loose raw people; but
this work has got you no Credit in the Nation, but has manifested you to be
Covenant-breakers, and not Men of Truth, nor Credit; for many Friends being at
Bristol Fair, and knowing of the Contract and Covenant, that no Papers should
go forth without both sides seeing them, and yet you contrary, secretly, in an
underly and treacherous way, sent Papers behind the backs of them that were
concerned, and (as they say) you never sent to them. This practice of yours is
more wicked and worse than the Priests; and so in this presumptuous, willful
Work of yours, to defame others, have defamed your selves, wherever your
Papers come, and made your selves of no Reputation nor Credit amongst Men, nor
as to the Truth; for who can trust or believe you, until you call in your
Papers again by Judgment and Condemnation, wherever you have sent them? for
such works as your spirit manifests, are not fit for the Society of Men; for
all judicious civil men would abhor your Practice and Doings, and do abhor it,
except some few Airy Notionists here and there, that cannot live under the
Cross of Christ: And is not this Scripture come upon you? which Christ says,
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks in dry places, and
returns again with seven other Spirits worse than himself; and the latter end
of that man is worse than the beginning. And would not some of you have been
ashamed to have broken Covenant and Promise, as you have done now, before you
were convinced of God's Truth? but as the Apostle says; The wicked shall grow
worse and worse. Surely had there been any tenderness toward God and his
Truth, that does not change, and had there been any regard to your Reputation
as Men, then wilfulness would not have hazarded all; but in that wherein you
have sought to defame-others, and make them of no Credit, you have defamed your
selves and made your selves of no Credit in all Countries, where your Books
have come amongst sober honest Friends, that keep their Integrity, which indeed
Friends at the General Meeting were surprised, could hardly believe it, when
they heard that you had sent your Books into the North and Esum, etc. and into
the East by Lewis Landy, and other places; and though you do degenerate from
Truth, yet to degenerate from common Civil Men, in breaking Covenants and
Engagements before so many Witnesses; but many that have heard of it, do
testify against it, in all Countries where it comes, and say, That will not do
your Business. And if these be your Weapons to set up John Story and John
Wilkinson with, these are very shallow ones; and if this be the Spirit that
cries against Forms, that run quite out of Form and Truth, that can break all
Covenants and Engagements so easily: but this is like John Story's creeping
Spirit's work, which has led you to act both contrary to Truth, and below
Natural Civil Men, and to be Covenant-breakers, and fierce despisers of them
that are good: and so these Papers and Doings of yours have given much
Satisfaction to the Country, to see your Treacherous Spirit, and of John
Story's, that you promote your Sect-Master, and the Fruits of his Separate
Meeting; and this Spirit does manifest itself to be contrary both to Truth and
sober Men in all Countries where your Papers have come to your Proselytes,
which indeed are not very many; and them that are, they are so ashamed of your
Work, that we cannot get a copy; but Lewis Landy has promised a Copy, as it is
said: and what you and John Story and John Wilkinson do sow; that will you reap
when God's Judgments come upon you, and you rewarded according to your Works;
and when Grim Death seizes upon you (whose Works you are doing in Wilful
Darkness) then remember how you have Justified the Wicked, and Condemned the
Innocent; and your latter end (as Christ says) is worse than the beginning.
But I desire that you may Repent, and condemn all that has been done by you on
this wise, and bring John Story and John Wilkinson to condemn it also, and so
come again into your first Love and into Unity with Friends; for at present we
see and take notice in our Countries, that none, but who are of loose Spirits,
are affected with your Works, for common, honest men abhor them.

S. H.


That now the Reader may know what is the pretended ground wherefore this
abusive Report is so confidently spread we desire the Reader to peruse the
Note, the said agreement is before cited in this treatise.
Agreement made between -- and William Rogers on behalf of themselves and
Friends concerned, which is mentioned in the last recited relation of passages
in the 12. Section, and therein they shall find that each party had liberty to
have a Scribe to take passages in the Conference, which to them severally
should seem meet, and that when any thing was read and finally agreed by both
parties to be recorded, the same should be at the End of every Meeting
subscribed by both Parties, and by at least six credible persons of each side;
but not a word intimating that no other Relation should go forth; and the
reason of that agreement was not to obstruct any Member of the Meeting (if no
Memorials of Passages in the Conference could by Agreement be recorded) to give
a Relation of the Truth; for had it been so intended, there would have been an
Article to that purpose to be a bond on the persons between whom the agreement
was made, and that they should, as much as in them lay, obstruct their Friends
on each side from doing otherwise; but the real End was, that nothing but the
Truth should go forth.

Moreover, it is necessary to signify, that the person who signed the aforesaid
agreement with W. R. interrupted the orderly proceeding of the Meeting, as
appears in the 22d. Section of this second part, which Section we Note the
Manuscript Wherein the said section is contained, is ready for perusal of any
Friend.
desire the Reader to peruse, and then seriously consider whether the said
person does not justly deserve to be styled a Covenant-breaker; which if he had
not, and that the Meeting had orderly proceeded (according to the intent and
meaning of the Articles of Agreement) and so a joint Narrative had been made,
and that those who had agreed thereon had desired, that that only might have
been sent abroad (for 'twas no part of the Articles, that what was to be agreed
upon as a Narrative, should be sent abroad) we are persuaded 'twould never have
entered in our thoughts, either to have sent or countenanced the sending abroad
of any thing else as a Narrative of the Passages.

However, so it happened, that nothing was so read, amended, and finally agreed
upon to be a true Record or Memorial of the Conference, nor yet any thing
witnessed by the six chosen on each side to subscribe the same; all which being
considered, together with this Circumstance, that the Manuscript hinted to be
given forth, was the Truth, and (as it relates to the Meetings in pursuance of
the said Agreement) is not denied so to be by some, who (being present at the
said Meetings) have undertaken to answer a part of the relation given forth
(touching which we have more largely treated on, in the Note the Manuscript
wherein the said Section is, is ready for perusal of any Friend.
22d. Section of this second part) it is notorious Wickedness to render men (who
have lived all their days in Credit and Repute) Treacherous, Covenant breakers
and men not of Truth, nor Credit amongst men, of no Reputation, and as if they
were not fit for the Society of men, that all judicious men would, and do abhor
their Practice and Doings: and all this on the down right asserting and belief
of a Lie, that the very Papers themselves would have manifested, had they had
but patience to have suspended giving Judgment until they had beheld what 'twas
whereon they gave Judgment; for the aforesaid Letter tells us, that they could
not get a copy, and renders it to be some thirteen, sixteen or twenty four
sheets, when 'twas not ten sheets in large writing and small Paper.

The Lord rebuke that lying Spirit that is gone forth, and obtains so much
Credit amongst simple people, and give an increase of his Wisdom; for all this
is grounded on this notorious untruth, mentioned in the last recited Letter,
That Articles and Covenants were drawn and agreed on both sides, that no Papers
were to go forth, without the Consent of both Parties.

Now forasmuch as the Publishers of the aforesaid Relation (or at least one of
them) are reputed for so doing, Covenant-breakers, and that it is credibly
reported, that G. F. is the person who industriously spreads the same amongst
Friends, (as before is signified) we now think it needful to signify to the
Reader that we have not only sufficient Evidence, that G. F. has written to
the same purpose unto a Friend, but also to such an one as has suffered one
that is no Friend, to have the sight thereof, which is evident by the following
lines, attested by Alexander Pyott and Cornelius Sarjant.

Part of a Letter written by G. F. to Joan Hily.
"I do understand that William Rogers and his company have spread abroad a bad
and lying Paper against me, and that he and they have, contrary to their Order
and Friends Agreement, ( when I and they were at Bristol, and had a meeting
with them) he has made a kind of Narrative of the same, and sent it abroad in
the Nation among bad spirits, and never sent it to me; but this is like the
Work of Darkness, I expect no better Fruits; except they do repent, which I
fear will be hard; though I can forgive them: I do not matter what they can do
or say against me, it touches me not; but in the end it will fall on their own
heads.

WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed do testify, that Joseph Forest of
Bristol, Button-maker (one that was never accounted (as we know or ever heard)
to be of the people called Quakers) related that he saw a Letter in the hands
of Joan Hily of Bristol, A. P. and C. Sarsant their testimony relating to G. F.
Lines.
Widow, wherein William Rogers was much vilified, as a wicked and bad man by G.
F. the said Forest asking Joan Hily who was meant by W.R. she said, William
Rogers; whereupon William Rogers desired us to go with him to Joan Hily to see
the Letter, who this day showed us a Letter lately written unto her by Isabel
Yeomans; what her writing contained we did not see nor hear read, but at the
end thereof we saw written the above-recited Lines, which Joan Hily said, was
written by G. F's. own hand, and subscribed by him; we also do believe, that it
was his handwriting.

Bristol 4th of the 11th Mo. 1678/9. Alexander Pyott.
Cornelius Sarjant.


On this occasion William Rogers in the presence of Joan Hily, Alexander Pyott
and Cornelius Sarjant, writes the same day to G. F. and repeating the Matters
of Accusation, etc. as abovesaid, thus answers:

ANd forasmuch as Joan Hily was desirous to know what I could say for my self,
I thought it necessary to acquaint thee, that I thus said to her, I have not
concerned my self to spread abroad any bad and lying Paper against thee, nor
yet have been any way concerned in spreading a kind of a Narrative, contrary to
any Agreement wherein I was concerned; and that thy Writing to Joan Hily
touching me, is a Slander and a Lie (the common Method thou of late, to thy
shame, have taken to scandalize men of Honesty and truly Conscientious) and so
will become thy burden; wast thou an innocent man, thou would have
endeavored in a Christian Method, to clear the things touching which I have
often written unto thee.

William Rogers.


It Is to be observed that though G. F. made mention of a bad and lying Paper
spread by William Rogers and his company (the term of an haughty and scoffing
Spirit) yet he mentioned not what that Paper was, nor yet what the Lies were:
the Reason whereof we take to be this, that the Faith of many are in him [as
one that cannot err, nor shall ever fall] so that if he affirm any thing
(though never so false) we take it to be unto many as an infallible Proof, and
doubtless on this foot did Joan Hily (as her words clearly imported) believe
those Lies written unto her by G. F. against William Rogers, and vilified him
to one not related to the people called Quakers, taking no care first to speak
with him to know what he could say for himself; neither has G. F. cleared
himself from being the Author of that scandalous Paper before cited, subscribed
S. H. though by a Letter written to him the 11th. of the 11th. Mo. 1678, by
Thomas Gouldney, William Ford and William Rogers, they manifested their
jealousy, that he was not unacquainted with the Person that writ it, and so
desired him to advise who it was, if he knew, saying, Truth sought no Corners.
Thus far the citation out of the aforesaid Manuscript.

It Is now worthy the Reader's notice, that G. F. has written nothing thereto
in Answer, to this day, but has given a further Occasion of jealousy, that he
was the very Dictator thereof, because it appears that he writ unto John Story
with relation to me, very much after the same manner, and in the same Language
mentioned in part of the before cited Letter subscribed S. H. That the Reader's
judgment may be free, I think it necessary to insert the very words written to
John Story touching me, which are as follows.

ANd also I do hear, that a Book or Narrative is made of our Meeting which we
had at Bristol, when I was there last, and spread up and down Westmoreland,
Cumberland, Yorkshire and the South, amongst prejudiced People; which was
utterly contrary to the Agreement then, that no Papers should go forth, without
the knowledge or consent of both Parties; which Agreement was taken down in
writing, as there at Bristol may be seen; and therefore, this Practice to the
contrary is below Common Moral Men, and not for the Society of civil People;
short of Christianity, etc. This their Work bespeaks their Spirit. A
Truce-breaking Spirit, a Covenant Breaking Spirit, and not to be Credited, etc.
short of Christianity, and below some Priests, to spread such things behind our
Backs in a secret, underly way; which does clearly manifest it is not the
Spirit of Christ, nor Honesty amongst men. Thus far G. F. to John Story.

At the penning of this unrighteous Reproach, I cannot but call to remembrance,
that there have been of G. F's Party, who have propesied Withering in Basquet
and Store upon me, and all that join unto that Spirit, as the term was; it is
well if G. F. has not spread his ungodly Reproaches against me undeservedly,
that so thereby my Name and Reputation may be defamed as a Proper Expedient to
bring a withering on my Outward Estate. I confess, it is a very likely
Expedient, if my Commerce were only amongst such as are ready to give Credit to
G. F's Scandalous Reproach before cited, written unto Joan Hily, concerning me,
in one Letter, which seems to be on the same foot as his writing unto John
Story, as aforesaid, is. Were his Character concerning me, and those whom he
accounts concerned in spreading the Narrative, made mention of, justly applied
to me, I should then blame no man refusing on that foot to commerce or trade
with me. And if so be his unjust reproach should have such an Influence, as
that all should refuse Commerce with me, what might become of Me, my Wife and
Children, whom, it is well known, I have hitherto comfortably maintained by my
Industry as a Merchant, and been able to be assisting unto others in my
generation? May the God of heaven abate the pride of G. F's lofty Spirit, that
he may cease to make Lies and Scandalous Reproaches, as well as a False
Certificate (of which more anon) his Refuge and Defense: For I affirm in the
presence of the Almighty God, they are Sins whereof he is guilty, and in this
treatise effectually demonstrated, if the Papers spread abroad in his Name, and
annexed thereto, are to be credited, as coming with approbation from him, which
to me is past question, being handed by those that are great Espousers of his
Actions, and Opposers of John Wilkinson and John Story.

And now, forasmuch as I have occasion to know from the words of G. F's Mouth,
that he accounted me Blameworthy or Reproveable, for securing a part of my
Estate (though for my Wife and Children) out of the Hands of the Spoilers;
which at length gave me occasion to prove G. F. guilty in a thing of the same
Nature, which he condemned (as hereafter will appear) I therefore think
needful, in order thereto, to cite a part of the 15th Section of the 2d part of
the before-cited Manuscript, which now follows.

The Reader may now take notice, that since the time William Rogers has been
so much concerned in the matters relating to this Controversy, Persecution
arose at the Meeting whereto he belongs in Gloucestershire, viz. Olvestone and
to prevent the Informers (who raised the Persecution for no other end but to
Enrich themselves, as is notoriously manifested) from making a Prey upon all
his moveable Goods, in that Place, he secured a part thereof which lay without
Doors, having unsecured Within and Without to the value of about three hundred
pounds, which lay Subject to the Spoilers at the place of his Residence; that
so none should suffer either for him or his family: On this occasion Reports
suddenly spread abroad, that William Rogers had now Manifested himself of what
Spirit he was of, and was so improved by his Enemies (under the Name of
Friends) that he would not suffer a Groat, and that others were fined for him,
if not paid Fines for him, which was very false; for that he affirms, the Fines
laid on him exceed ninety, if not an hundred pounds; and that a part thereof is
levied on his Goods without Doors, and never returned, but sold away to an
Enemy to Friends.

This we thought Necessary to insert, because we do not doubt, but that the
Cause of Truth has suffered, through the Belief of Lying Reports relating to
him; for when a Mare of twelve pounds value was distrained from him, 'twas
suddenly Reported, that he caused his man to buy her again, which was utterly
false; for that the Mare was sold by the Distrainer to an Enemy to Friends and
Truth, that kept the Mare for his own Use.

On this Occasion we think meet to recite a Paper, given forth by G. F.
touching securing of Worldly Estate in time of Persecution, together with an
Answer thereto by William Rogers.

London, 4th Mon. 1678. Friends,
ALL you that do make away, or over your Estates to the World, or your Servant
for fear of the Spoilers in time of Persecution, for the sake of Christ and his
Gospel, and the Worship of God; First do not you Distrust and Despair of God
Almighty, his Protecting and Delivering you with his Almighty Power? Secondly,
Are you sensible that the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof is the
Lord's, and that he gives the Increase, and that, how that he may Try you,
whether your Minds are in the Creatures, or with him the Creator? And whether
is it not a Greater thing to give up the Life and Soul, and to dye for the Lord
Jesus, than to give up the Goods and Estates, and suffering the Spoil of the
Goods for Christ's sake and Worshipping of God? and whether or no they that
cannot suffer the Spoiling of their Goods for God and Christ's sake, Worship's
sake, can give up their Lives, and suffer for Christ, who has dyed and
suffered for you?

And whether or no they that make away their Estates to the World, lest they
should lose them for the Worship of God, do not they distrust God of keeping
them, whose they are indeed; and have more belief and trust in the World, than
they have in God? And whether this Spirit, that does so, is not the Spirit of
the World, that does lust to Envy, and not the Spirit of God and his Wisdom;
but that which is Earthly, Sensual and Devilish, that would have its Liberty,
and not the wisdom that is above, that is Pure, Peaceable and easy to be
entreated? And whether he that will save his Life, and not lose it for Christ's
sake, does not he think to be his own Savior, and not Christ? And whether he
that will save his Estate, and not lose it for Christ's sake and the Worship of
God, by making it away to the World in time of sufferings, shall not lose it?
And so whether it is safer in this case to make away your Estates to the World,
that cannot save its own, or to make or commend it into the hands of God,
Creator of all, and Jesus Christ, by whom all things were made, who upholds all
things by his Word and Power, and the Great Lord of Heaven and Earth, and all
things therein; and which out of his hand a Sparrow shall not fall without the
Will of him that made them?

George Fox.


Read this amongst Friends, and send a Copy of it to Naylsworth.

The aforesaid Paper being read in the Mens-Meeting of Friends in the City of
Bristol, William Rogers bore testimony against it in the meeting at the same
time, as that which reached not his Conscience, coming from G. F. and had
therefore a Concern upon him to write an Answer thereto, which follows.

GEorge Fox having by his Paper, dated London the 4th Month, 1678. proposed
many Queryes, and caused them to be read in our Mens-Meeting of Friends in the
City of Bristol, it is now with me (being present in the said Meeting at the
reading thereof) to write something in Answer thereto, to be read in the said
Mens-Meeting; and as his was ordered to be sent to Naylsworth, I desir that
this also may be sent thither, to be read amongst Friends, and also sent to G.
F. that so he may Answer the Queryes I now propose.

The above-recited Paper I take to be wholly made up of Queryes to all those
who do make away their Estates, for fear of the Spoilers, in time of
Persecution, excepting this one sentence of Exhortation, viz. Do not distrust
and despair of God Almighty his protecting and delivering you with his Almighty
Power.

The queries being contracted amounts to thus much.

Are you sensible the Earth is the Lords, and that he gives the Increase, and
that how he may try you, whether your Minds are in the Creatures, or with the
Creator, and whether it is not a greater thing to give up the Life and to dye
for the Lord Jesus, than to give up Goods and Estates; whether those that
cannot suffer Spoiling of Goods for Christ's sake can give up their Lives;
whether those that make away their Estates, lest they should lose them for the
worship of God, do not distrust God of keeping them, and have mo^^ Belief and
Trust in the World than God; and whether this Spirit, that does so, is not the
Spirit of the World, that does lust to Envy, and not the Spirit of God and his
Wisdom, but that which is below, which is Earthly, Sensual, and Devilish, that
would have its Liberty?

Ans. To the Exhortation I say, it is in itself good, but would have much better
become the Mouth of G. F. if when the Persecutors came up one pair of Stairs in
our Meeting-Room in Broadmead, whilst he was speaking, he had not been of such
a Spirit (which some may term Distrustful and Despairing) as on a sudden to
step down, and hasten out of the Meeting at a Back pair of Stairs, which he
once did, and of which my Eyes (with many more) were witnesses: Besides, I
query of G. F. whether he does not remember, that when the Soldiers or some
other Persecutors came to a Meeting, in or near London, at a certain time when
he was there, he did not go out of the Meeting, and betook himself to an upper
Room or Cock-loft? For so have I been informed he did, and that by a person of
known Credit and Repute then present at the Meeting, who, as he said, had
discoursed with him at that time and place, near half an hour; and if Report be
true, this is but very little of what might at large be manifested to prove him
one of the greatest Fleers and Shifters in time of Persecution, that ever I
knew professing the Truth, and esteemed by others a faithful Friend.

As to the queries, I have this to say, that the Earth is the Lord's, that he
gives the Increase; that it is a nearer thing to part with Life than Estate;
that it is the Duty of a Christian to offer up both Life and Estate, rather than
to depart from his Testimony for the Truth, when the Lord calls for it: I am
also sensible, there is a Spirit that lusts to Envy dwelling in such, that
would lay heavy Burdens on others, but not touch them with their little
Fingers themselves; and that this is not the Spirit of God, nor his Wisdom; but
that which is Earthly, Sensual, and that would have its Liberty: I am also
sensible, that this very Spirit has lately, and yet does dwell in G. F. if God
has not given him Repentance. And therefore if any of you, unto whom these
Lines may come, may think, that this my sense of G. F. be not true, I desire
such (for the Truths sake) to use their Endeavor, that G. F. may Answer these
following Queries, viz.

Queries to GEORGE FOX.
I. Art not thou the man that have taken Liberty to stay almost a Quarter of a
year from Meetings, or at least a considerable time, though held in the very
House of thy stesidence; or if thou did at any time come within the aforesaid
space, whether it was not so seldom, that it became matter of Exercise to other
Friends for thy sake? and did not John Blaykling by Name manifest his Burden
and Exercise of Spirit, on thine and the Truths behalf, for thy so doing? and
did thou not after he had so done, a little amend in that Case?

II. Would thou not have accounted this in another, to be the Fruit of a
Careless, Slothful, Negligent, Libertine or Dark Spirit, that was either
departed, or departing from the Truth?

III. Have thou not a sense, that thy aforesaid Paper of Queries may cast a
Line of Reflection on every one, that may secure from the Devourer any part of
that outward Substance which God has given them to maintain their Families?
and yet art not thou sensible, that thou art the Man that have advised the Rich
to secure Worldly Estate, that so the Persecutors might not become Spoilers
thereof? And if so,

IV. Will it not evidently appear, that these thy Reflecting Queries are the
Fruit of that Spirit that lusts to Envy, and appears with two Faces?

V. Do thou not remember, that at a Quarterly Meeting in Gloucestershire,
suddenly after thy last departure from Bristol, there was a Person, that judged
me not sit to judge in that Meeting, because I had secured part of my goods
without Doors (though I had left * Note, My Fines have been above ninety pounds
Sterling, and I have more than double that value unsecured and subject to the
Spoilers at the place of my Residence, besides, what has been distrained from
me already.
Enough subject to the Spoilers besides?) and do thou not remember, that none
of the said meeting declared any Approbation of his so doing, and that thou thy
self then present, manifested a dislike thereof (as well as several others)
after thy usual manner thus, Whisht Whisht? Do thou not also remember, that I
then signified to this effect, If what I had done was a crime, those who were
accounted as the chiefest amongst us, were guilty of Crimes of the like nature?
Do thou not remember that nothing was then said in Answer thereto, either by
thee or any other? and if 'twas then a Crime, why did thou not then inform
the Meeting, and to speaking thine own Language, become a reproof to that
Spirit, and to me in particular? If it be not a crime, why have thou sent forth
thy Paper of Queries which plainly carries a Line of Reflection on such as have,
or may secure from the Spoiler, when I cannot but believe that thou do know
those who have not accounted their Lives too dear, to offer up for the
Testimony of Truth, Witness many faithful Friends in Reading, or near it.
and would not have departed a foot from the Meeting where their testimony for
truth has been concerned (though thou have proved a Shrinker) have
notwithstanding secured their Estates for their Families, and never have been
exhorted to the contrary, or reproved by thee, so far as ever I could hear?

VI. Whether thou have not, contrary to thy own Conscience and thy former
Counsel, written thy Paper of Queries to gratify that envious Spirit, which
exclaims against me, for securing Part of my Estate? And whether thou therein
have hot acted that behind my Back, by directing it to be read at the Meetings,
which I have, and usually do frequent, that thou wast either afraid or ashamed,
to have spoken to my Face in the hearing of others, lest openly in the view of
the Country, thou should have been detected for appearing with two Faces? for
so do I now believe thou have manifested thy self and that one of these
Appearances is but the Fruit of that Spirit in thee which, lusts to Envy,
because I remember not, that ever I heard, before the time of my late securing
something from the Persecutors, that any Friends judged one another in that
respect, or that any, from a Principle of Conscience, refused to do the thing
that I then did, which was no more than what I often have done, when there was
occasion for the Preservation of my Outward Estate, in that day wherein thy
respect was most unto me, though now, this must be made use of as the only
Matter of fact to stain my Reputation, and to render me one that is out of Truth.

VII. Whether it be not better, to secure a man's outward Substance, to pay his
Debts, and maintain his Family (when he is capable so to do) and keep steadfast
in his Testimony at Meetings, than when Persecutors come, to shift out of
Meeting, whereby both Body and Estate too may be saved, as thou have done?

VIII. Whether it be better so to do, as aforesaid, than to let all lie open to
the Persecutors, and depend upon thee, and -- to solicit at Council board? Thy
Language to Thomas Pierce of this City, occasions this last Query, which, as he
has said, was on this wise, or to this effect; What would you do, were it not
for -- Me and a few more to appear for you at Council Table, or before King and
Counsel?

IX. Whether thy writing so much of trusting God, being compared with thy
aforesaid Boasting Language to Thomas Pierce ( which has proved but like a
Reed of Egypt) shows not confusion?

X. Whether it be fit for one that feeds of the fat of the Land, and lives in
fullness of Plenty, attended in many respects like an earthly Prince, and that
has twelve or thirteen hundred-pounds, with the increase thereof for many
years (if any be) well secured out of the reach of the Spoilers and
Persecutors, to admonish a company of Poor, Innocent, Harmless Friends, that
may have three or four Cows a piece to feed themselves and Children, not to
secure them from the Spoilers? and if it be not fit for such an one so to
admonish, I then query, Whether thou art not the man that art so qualified, and
who in effect have so admonished?

XI. Whether a man under the aforesaid Qualifications and Circumstances, can by
such an admonition; as aforesaid, answer God's Witness in the Consciences of
such to whom he is so known, especially, when no better Care is taken, by the
Admonisher for the Relief of such, when their all is gone, than this, viz.
Never heed, the Fleece will grow again; don't despair, trust the Lord; spread
your sufferings before the Judges; be careful to send your sufferings to the
quarterly Meeting, that so they may be brought up once a year to London to be
recorded?

XII. Whether or no a suffering for the Testimony of such False Prophets, as
Solomon Eccles has proved himself to be, (as is manifest by his prophesying
John Story's death within one year, and since expired) can be called a
suffering for the Gospel of Christ? and if not, whether it be not better to
secure ones outward Substance from the Spoilers, than to let it lie open to be
taken away for Fines imposed for the preaching of such False Prophets? and
since, it is said, Solomon Eccles manifested the same first to thee, I query
whether thou wast not an Encourager of the said False Prophet, ( because it is
said he cries thee up as one that is greater than Moses) or whether thou did
become a Reproof to him?

XIII. Whether or no it be not the fruit of an Englighmed Understanding, in
those who are called dark Spirits, to secure what they have from being taken
away for Fines imposed, for the babbling of such, whose great business at
Meeting is to rail against Faithful Friends, under the Notion of Dark Spirits?
and whether otherwise the Prophesies of those, who have prophesied blasting and
withering outwardly, might not quickly come to pass where Persecution is?

The aforesaid queries, my desire is, that thou George Fox may answer, that
so the simple-hearted Friends may plainly know, what thy Judgment is in things
of this nature; for I have cause to believe that many such are at this day
drawn into the Belief and Practice of some things, for which they have no
sufficient ground from the Conviction of Conscience in themselves; but rather
as prompted thereto by such, who are like unto those, who lay heavy Burdens on
others, which they themselves will not touch with their little fingers; but
blessed be the Lord, there are Eyes that see and do perceive, there are Ears
that hear and do understand, and have boldness and Confidence given them of the
Lord, to stand in the Gap as Witnesses against such, who cry against Fleers in
time of Persecution, and yet are Fleers at such times themselves; that blame
others for securing their Goods from the Spoilers, and yet Secure their own;
that prompt the Poor to offer up their ALL, and yet take Care to advise the
Rich to secure their Estates; that cry against others as Unruly, because they
will not be subject to them, and yet think themselves not obliged to be subject
to any Rule but their own; that testify against Libertines, and yet take
Liberty to Backbite, Slander and False Accuse; that declare against
Tale-bearers, and yet be the chief Nourishers and Upholders of such; that bear
witness against Wickedness and Dark Spirits, and be so dark as to record Read
G. F's book touching Women's Meetings, page 43.44.
an Idolatrous Woman for a Virtuous one; and (as it is said) to try the Bad
Spirits; that cry against looseness, and yet be so loose as to quote a meeting
of Men and Women where Viz. The Meeting before the door of the Tabernacle of
the Congregation, where old Ely's Sons lay with the Woman, as in G.F's book of
Womensmeetings.
Lewdness was committed, to prove Women's Meetings as G. F. has done; that
would be accounted Watchmen, watching for Good, Healers of Breaches, Removers
of Stumbling Blocks; and yet appear Watching for Evil, and not for Good;
Increasers of Differences, by adding Fuel to the Fire, and casting
Stumbling Blocks in the way of the Simple; that appear Reprovers of such for
Tythe-Payers, who ever bore a Faithful Testimony against it, and yet advise
others to buy their Tithes; that say God has given them Infallible judgment in
all things, and yet appear notoriously Fallible. How far thou G.F. art
concerned in such things as these, will appear in the day of the Lord, when
every man's Words and Works must be brought to judgment; for I firmly believe,
thou art the man that have been guilty in all these things; and in the mean
time take this as the fourth Warning, Caution or Advice, from the Hand of thy
Friend (who never knew the Moment wherein I had more Peace in any one Action of
my Life than in what I now am writing) let the time past be sufficient, repent
for thy many Miscarriages, which God has raised me (as an Instrument in his
Hand) to discover unto thee; for the Imperiousness of thy Spirit has but an
ill Savor in the Noscrils of God's people, and as it was said of the priests
of old (whereof the prophet declares) that because they caused many to stumble,
therefore were they despised, and made vile before all the People; so it may in
time, be said of thee, unless thou Repent, because thou have laid
Stumbling Blocks before many.

The Righteous God is Witness between thee and me (when no mortal Ear, that I
know of, did hear, save our own) that thou toldst me (after thou grantedst my
Request of having an hours private Discourse with thee, at my being at London
this last spring) That thou knew what thou did in that Quotation of
Micha's Mother, that Idolatrous Woman (though thou rendredst her as one
recorded for her Wisdom and her Dirtue) and that thou saw 'twould be a
Stumbling Block: I therefore cannot but take this opportunity, seriously to put
it to thy Conscience; do thou think thou have done well to put a Stumbling
block before the people of the Lord? do thou think a blessing can attend such
an Action in thee, when Christ himself has pronounced a general woe against
those who are guilty thereof?

Oh George! consider, before it be quite too late; do not continue an
instrument to raise Divisions, Strife and Contention amongst the professors of
the Truth; for if thou do, the loss of many souls may be laid at thy door,
which in one day may be a burden too heavy for thee to bear.

Perhaps, some may think, many things I hint at, are groundless, especially the
matter relating to G. F's advising the rich to secure Worldly Estate, and to
buy Tithes; and therefore to come a little closer, I add these two queries:

I. Whether thou G. F. ( whilst Isaac Penington was in prison, and in
Erpectation of being premunired) did not thou advise, or at least encourage
Mary Penington, to secure her or their Estate? and whether afterward, thou G.
F. did not speak in discourse with another Friend about the same matter to
this effect, viz. What a condition she (viz. Mary Penington) had been in, had
it not been for thee (meaning as to outward Estate.) If thou G. F. deny this, I
will undertake to prove it, or bring Teltimony under the hand of a Credible
Friend in Truth, that Mary Penington did signify so much, as is queried in the
first part of the query, and also prove, or bring under the hand of a Credible
Friend in Truth, to whom thou G. F. spoke, according as is queried in the
latter part.

II. Whether thou G. F. did not advise Nathaniel Crips of the County of
Gloucester to buy his Eythes both of Priest and Impropriator? If thou deny it, I
will undertake to prove it, or bring it under the hand of Nathaniel Crips that
thou so did.

Bristol the 20th of the 7th Month 1678. William Rogers.

The aforesaid answer was read in the Men's Meeting of Friends of the City of
Bristol, at which some of the Party with G. F. seemed very uneasy; whereupon
some Priends to William Rogers proposed to this effect; That, William Rogers
was in the City (for he acquainted a Friend, that he would be within, at his
House, if Occasion should be to send for him, and ready to stand by what he had
done) and that, if they pleased, they might appoint a Meeting on purpose with
William Rogers on this Occasion; but none of the Party with G. F. appeared to
appoint a Meeting; the secret Cause whereof, we believe, was, because that some
of the Party with him were conscious to themselves, that G. F. in many things,
was represented no otherwise than he had manifested himself to be. Thus far the
Citation out of the 15th Section of the 2d. part of the said Manuscript.

To the aforesaid Answer and Queries given by me, G.F. made a Reply with a
False Certificate, (as hereafter will be mentioned) annexed thereto by John
Blaykling, unto which I writ a Rejoinder, and caused the same to be copyed, and
sent unto him. And forasmuch as some other Abuses laid at G. F's door are,
together with my Rejoinder, mentioned in the 21th Section of the 2d part of the
Manuscript beforeeited; I think it needful to insert, not only my Rejoinder, to
G. F. but also some other part of the said Section, pertinent on this Occasion
(with the Omission of some Names for the Reasons mentioned in the Preface to
the 1st part) which now follows.

ON the 21th of the first Month, 1678. Was delivered me a Manuscript,
subscribed G. F. with a Testimony and Postscript subscribed, John Blaykling.

What is therein written, and subscribed G. F. is a Reply to an Answer that I
gave toa Paper given forth by G. F. dated the 4th Month, 1678. which was read
in the Men's Meeting of Friends in the City of Bristol.

And forasmuch as G. F. has laid down two False Assertions, on which he seems
to build the greatest part (if not all) of those things which he concludes are
False Charges, I shall apply my self to manifest those two False Assertions,
and so the Force of his six sheets of Paper, (in answer to one of mine) will
for the most part (if not altogether) fall to the ground, as such an
impertinent idle discourse, that is nauseous to men of Honesty, and endued with
Understanding, unless it be the Fruit of Understanding, and Honesty (which I
know is not, nor can be) to give credit unto the words of a Man, detectable of
many Lies from the sight of his own Reply, and compared with what he pretends
to Answer.

Moreover, it is observable, that he not only praises himself at a high rate,
but also vilifieth and scandalizeth others in general terms, and sometimes in
particular, and yet brings no proof for either; to me it appears, that his best
skill to answer any thing, is (of late) so manifested, which cannot but be
obvious to every impartial Eye, that shall thoroughly peruse, and ponder his
Answer to me.

G. F's first False Assertion hinted at, as before, is contained in these his
words, viz. [My Paper is an Epistle to Friends, which thou confessest, is an
Exhortation in itself good.]

To this I Reply, this Sentence and Assertion is False, and not to be found in
my Answer to him; my own words, relating to an Exhortation in itself good, is,
in my Answer, to be found only in these two Sentences, viz. The aboverecited
Paper I take to be wholly made up of Queries, to all those, that make away
their Estates for fear of the Spoilers in time of Persecution; excepting this
one Sentence of Exhortation, Do you not distrust and despair of God Almighty,
his Protecting and Delivering you with his Almighty Power? to the Exhortation,
I say, it is in itself good, etc. Which plainly relates to that one sentence,
which I took to be an Exhortation, but not to all his Paper, which he terms an
Epistle to Friends. From G. F's words, viz. An Epistle to Friends, such as have
not heard what is contained in the said paper, may be apt to conclude, that it
contains something of Exhortation, Counsel, Doctrine, Instruction, Teaching,
Prophesying, or Prayer, or at least some Sentences; which imports his being
then exercised in some, or one of the aforementioned spiritual gifts: but no
such thing is therein found, more than what may be pretended from the aforesaid
sentence of Exhortation (as I took it) but that Sentence may also be taken for
a Query, as well as an Exhortation. And as to the rest of the paper, it is all
Queries, which gives me occasion to ask this question, viz. Whether such a
Paper can properly be called, an Epistle to Friends in Truth? especially since
it is easily savoured, that those he writes to are such, as in his esteem are
exercised in the spirit of the World, that lusts to Envy; for so his words
clearly import, if one of his Queries, and the beginning of his paper be
compared; the beginning of his paper runs thus; Friends, all you that do make
away, or over your Estates, etc. and then about the middle of his queries thus
says, Whether this spirit that does so, is not the Spirit of the World, that
does lust to Envy?

To conclude, as to this False Assertion; G F. has scattered the substance
thereof in at least, eight several places, in his Answer to me, which to speak
in plain and vulgar Language, is one downright Lie, told eight times over; and
since in the second Page of the said Manuscript, he seems to imply, that I have
not been Civil and Ingenuous as a Man, I now appeal to all ingenuous Readers,
whether this his Action shows any degree of Civility, or Ingenuity, either as a
Man, or Christian?

The second False Assertion before hinted at, I thus manifest; I proposed
Thirteen Queries to him, after I had answered the substance of his Queries, and
having so done, I then proceeded to add, and that in a distinct Paragraph from
the Queries, these few following lines, viz.

The aforesaid queries, my desire is, that thou George Fox may answer, that
so the simple-hearted Friends may plainly know, what thy Judgment is in things
of this nature; for I have cause to believe that many such are at this day
drawn into the Belief and Practice of some things, for which they have no
sufficient ground from the Conviction of Conscience in themselves; but rather
as prompted thereto by such, who are like unto those, who lay heavy Burdens on
others, which they themselves will not touch with their little fingers; but
blessed be the Lord, there are Eyes that see and do perceive, there are Ears
that hear and do understand, and have boldness, and Confidence given them of
the Lord, to stand in the Gap, as Witnesses against such, who cry against
Fleers in time of Persecution, and yet, are Fleers at such times themselves;
that blame others for securing of their Goods from the Spoilers, and yet Secure
their own; that prompt the Poor to offer up their ALL, and yet take Care to
advise the Rich to secure their Estates; that cry against others as Unruly,
because they will not be subject to them, and yet think themselves not obliged
to be subject to any Rule, but their own; that re^^^ite against Libertines, and
yet take Liberty to Backbite, Slander, and False Accuse; that declare against
Tale-bearers, and yet be the chief Nourishers and Uphoiders of such; that bear
witness against Wickedness and Dark Spirits, and yet be so dark, as to record
an Idolatrous Woman for a Virtuous one; and (as it is said) to try the Bad
Spirits; that cry against loesness, and yet be so loose as to quote a meeting
of Men and Women where Lewdness was committed, to prove Women's Meetings as G.
F. has done; that would be accounted Watchmen, watching for Good, Healers of
Breaches, Removers of Stumbling Blocks; and yet appear Watchers for Evil, and
not for Good; Increasers of Differences, by adding Fuel to the Fire, and
casting Stumbling Blocks in the way of the Simple; that appear Reprovers of
such to, Tythe-Payers, who ever bore a Faithful Testimony against it, and yet
advise others to buy their Tithes; that say, God has given them Infallible
judgment in all things, and yet appear notoriously Fallible. How far thou G.F.
art concerned in such things as these, will appear in the day of the Lord, when
every man's Words and Works must be brought to judgment; for I sirmly believe,
thou art the man that have been guilty in all these things.

From these last words George Fox, Page the second, thus says, And thou have
many queries upon my Epistle, and on thy conclusion say; Thou believe,
that I am the Man that is guilty of them all. So by this it appears, they are
charges against me: This Construction of G. F. is utterly wrong; for my words,
from whence he draws that conclusion, cannot in common sense, and according to
the Connection of words, so import, they being only relative to the preceding
matter, contained in a distinct Paragraph, after I had done with the Queries:
but yet I would not have any to think, that I asked one Question, as having no
ground so to query.

Moreover, it is observable, my aforesaid words will not amount unto a Charge,
because to believe and to charge are two distinct things; for a man may believe
a Charge, and yet have no hand in giving the Charge; but a man cannot honestly
charge another, and yet pretend he does not believe the Charge.

G. F's manifested Weakness does not end here; for suppose his Construction had
been my Meaning, he might then have justly accused me of Folly; but not justly
have rendered me one charging him with False Accusations (as on this occasion he
has done) since the Queries were not answered by me, without which no certain
Accusation could be really manifested, because questions may be answered in
Truth, sometimes by Yea, and sometimes by Nay: On this false Assertion G. F. is
become guilty of as many Lies, as my Queries before proposed are in number,
viz. thirteen. Besides, if G. F's Judgment, manifest in his reply, touching me
(viz. That I have manifested Madness and Folly) were true, yet my Folly has
not been so great, as to write one Lie eight times over, and thirteen
particular Lies (and all on the foot of two False Assertions) besides many
more, as hereafter in this my reply will appear (and that also dotectable from
the view of my Paper and G. F's Answer thereto) as he has done. I will not
adventure to say this, in him was the Fruit of Madness and Folly; though it is
evident, he does not heed what he writes; and in the most charitable
Construction, that I can put thereon, the Reason he so does (as I take it)
springs from an Imagination possessing his heart, that he concludes whatever
first arises in his mind (on the sight or hearing of any thing) is fit to be
brought forth, and stood by. And truly, it is to be doubted, the like
Imagination has possessed many (amongst whom I take John Blaykling to be one,
by giving forth a False Certificate) to cover G. F. in his Defense of a Lie
against the Truth; of which more anon.

I now come to signify that G. F's sending those Queries, was more like the
Action of a Friend to a company of Hireling Priests, than the Action of one
Friend to a Meeting of Friends, accounted by some the Church, and that what I
writ by way of Answer to him by name, was more plain than his smiting in
general terms, so far as Queries may be called Smiting. Neither was my reading
my Answer in the Men's Meeting against my former declared sense and Judgment,
though G. F. does so insinuate, instancing the case of Thomas Came, which is
remote from his purpose; 1. Because Thomas Came was never opposed by me, or any
that I know of, to read any Paper in the Men's, Meeting. And 2. when an
Agreement was appointed between Thomas Came and John Wilkinson in order to prove
John Wilkinson an Encourager of Wickedness; Friends were not willing to hear
Thomas Came read Papers, to prove other men wicked, not present, because the
business of the Meeting was to prove John Wilkinson Wicked; and though it is not
proper for one Friend to bring forth Accusations against another Friend, in
order to obtain a Judgment against the Accused behind his back, (which was the
case of John Blaykling and twenty five more. Accusers and Informers against
John Story and John Wilkinson, in order to have nine persons chosen by those
Informers, to sit in Judgment on John Story and John Wilkinson when they
refused to own their Authority over them) yet if one, that has professed the
truth, has sent abroad his Papers, having a tendency to put one Friend against
another, about securing Outward Estate, when he has advised the like, and not
only so, but has made Lies his Refuge, thereby abusing honest men, that cannot
submit to his will, it is proper enough for me, or any, that may have a Concern
of Conscience (as I have) to discover the fruits of such a Deceiving, Betraying
Spirit, though behind the back of him, in whom it appears: But should I choose
nine persons, and summon G. F. before them, as Judges over him, without his
Assent, and if he would not own their Authority, proceed to accuse and obtain
such Judges, to judge the matter, and spread that Judgment over a Nation, to
his Defamation, right or wrong, it would not add to my Credit, though I might
quote nine (who have been taken to be of the party with G. F.) for a President
in the very like Case; and not only so, but might also quote several others,
judging me, with respect to my Answer to G. F. without either hearing what I
could say, to manifest the Reasonableness of my so writing, or G. F. to plead
his Innocence, to all the matters written by way of Reflection on him.

And whereas G. F. says, that I said to Bray Daily, that I sent it (meaning my
Answer) to G. F. three weeks before it was read in the Meeting; I say that is
utterly false; it is probable I might acquaint him, 'twas written so long
before, or left some time before with Charles Jones senior of Bristol to be
sent to G. F. (for so I did) but he desired more time to consider, whether he
would send it or no, than I was willing to grant.

Page 32th of George Fox's Manuscript he thus says, Here it is evident thou
have fulfilled my former words, that these thy pretended Queries were all of
them real Charges, seeing here thou say, thou firmly believe, that I am the
Man, that has been guilty of all these things beforementioned; and therefore,
the less I do lake notice of them, because I know them to be all False and
Malicious Charges.

From the words [ All false and Malicious Charges,] I refer it to the Reader to
consider, whether there is not about five or six lies more, whereof he may from
thence be detected, and that from the view of his own Reply only, besides that
which may be termed Forgery, in adding to my words ( viz. beforementioned)
which words are none of mine, but his, and (as I take it) to render me to speak
what I neither thought, or intended. My first Query is about his staying almost
a quarter of a year from Meeting, or at least a very considerable time, though
held in the very house of his Residence; this he denies not, but pretends he
was VVeak, so that the breath of People, sitting near him, did overcome him;
further adding these his very own words, viz. So that it was hard for me to sit
by any out of the Meeting, much more in it.

In my third Query it is thus said; "And yet art not thou sensible that thou art
the Man, that have advised the Rich to secure worldly Estate, that so the
Persecutors might not become Spoilers thereof. To this G. F. answers, Thou have
not particularized any, though thou have generally charged me; and therefore,
this is a groundless Accusation and Calumny.

On this Query, I take occasion to observe, that he is detectable of several
Lies from the view of his own paper, if Isaac Penington and Mary his Wife may
be properly termed the rich; and if they may not, I query of G.F. whether any
among us may? The 1st Lie, whereof I take him on this occasion, to be
detectable, is, that he says thus, Thou have not particularised any; when in
my paper I had thus in particular queried, "whether thou G. F. whilst Isaac
Penington was in Prison, and in expectation of being Premunired, did not
advise, or at least encourage Mary, the Wife of Isaac Penington, to secure her
or their Estate? if thou deny it, I shall undertake to prove it, or bring
Testimony under the hand of a Credible Friend in truth, that Mary Penington did
signify so much.

The 2d I take notice of, is these his words, Though thou have generally
charged me: To which I say, I did not; for I named not the Rich in general; and
with this he charges me again in his Reply, in these words, viz. As thou go
over and over thy Paper of False Charges, that I should advise the Rich, in a
general way, to secure their Estates.

The 3d I take notice of, on this occasion, is from this word [groundless] when
as he does not deny, that he did so advise Mary Penington, signifying also,
That if Mary Penington in her weakness did secure her Land for her, and her
Children, etc. yet what is this to thy making away thy Estate, etc? and so bids
me, make what I can of it, saying, Hers was but a particular case; which leads
me to observe thus much, that my Query was not Groundless, and so this may (as
I take it) justly be termed the Third Lie, whereof he is detectable, from these
his before-cited words, viz. Thou have not particularized any, though thou have
generally charged me, and therefore this is a groundless Accusation and
Calumny: But that which aggravates his Error the more, is his thus saying, I
never advised thee to make away thy Estate, nor none else, as if Mary Penington
was no body.

And as to these his words, yet what is this to thy making away thy Estate?

I answer and confess, that G. F. amongst his many Lies, has written some
Truth; for it is very true, it is nothing to the making away my Estate; doubtless
it only secured their own, and not mine, neither was G. F. ever so friendly to
me, as to take so much care of me and my family: besides, on another score, I
may say, it is nothing to me, because I never professed my self principled to walk
by other peoples outward Patterns; without knowing a better ground so to do,
than a mere Outward Example, neither did I so do from any Dispensation given
me, from G. F. or any Body else, and if any shall seem displeased at my using
the word Dispensation on this occasion; to be plain, I shall tell the Reader in
short, that I find G.F. in his Reply thus to say, on the very Occasion relating
to Mary Penington, viz. For sometimes when people are weak and tender, and in
trouble, they are to be left in some Cases, which they cannot bear, as in
another case the Apostle said concerning Days, etc. but when they would make a
sect of it, and their Principle as thou do, then the Apostle judged them. On
which words of George Fox, these necessary Observations may be made, if friends
of truth are to be left in some cases, then (according as I take G. F's Meaning
to be) some body is to leave them; This some Body, in this Case, I take to be
G. F. supposing himself invested with Power in some Cases over Friends to leave
them.

Here I am sensible the Reader may query, What are they to be left to?

To this I answer, G. F. does not, in so many words tell what; but yet it is
plain his Meaning is (if it be just to measure his Meaning by his Words) not to
leave them to their own; for then Mary Penington (in probability) would not
have acted according to his Advice; because G. F. in his Answer says, He heard
Mary say, She durst not remove her Moveable Goods: and therefore I reasonably
suppose, that his further Meaning is, that he has power to dispense with
Friends doing something, contrary to what they (according to their own Measure
received) have Freedom in themselves to do, which to me is further evidenced
from the latter part of his words, which are these, But when they would make a
Sect of it, and their Principle, as thou do, then the Apostle judged them. To
which I say, he has quoted no Scripture to prove his Assertion, and I affirm
he is capable to quote none for proof, thus to write as a just Parallel in my
Case; However his words serve Effectually to manifest unto me his Pride or
Ignorance; for by these his words [make a Sect of it and their Principle]
(compared with what I have already observed on this Occasion) shows to me, that
acting according to ones Principle (in some Cases at least) without an
Allowance so to do from G. F. is worthy of Condemnation, which I take to be the
Fruit of his Pride, or Ignorance; all which being considered, occasions me to
query of G. F. Whether it is not Deceit in him to insinuate, as if Mary
Peningtons Securing her Estate, was the Fruit of her Weakness, when it seems
clearly to appear, that 'twas not only done in Persuance of his Advice, but
also he himself confesses in his Answer, That he heard Mary Penington say, she
durst not remove her Moveable Goods: And whether it is not the Fruit of great
Partiality and respect of Persons in G.F. to have so great a Regard to the
Securing of her Estate for her and her Children; and yet take occasion to
Query, Whether the Spirit that does so (meaning, Making away Estates, etc. for
Fear of the Spoiler in time of Persecution, etc.) is not the Spirit of the
World, that does lust to Envy, which is Earthly, Sensual, and Devilish; which
doubtless will be taken by some, to be intended by him as a Reflection on such,
as should so do, without a Dispensation from him?

To be plain, If G. F. had so great a Care for others, not outwardly related to
him, I know no Reason why I may not take the same Care for my Wife and
Children, which are many, though I have no Dispensation from him so to do; and
why he should Condemn me for so doing, I understand not; unless he thinks my
Care therein may prevent an Outward Blasting, which some of his Temporizing
party have Prophesied, will come upon me, and all that join to that Spirit, as
they were pleased to Phrase it.

In my 5th Query, it is thus said, " And do thou not remember, that at a
Quarterly Meeting in Gloucestershire, ( suddenly after thy last departure from
Bristol) there was a Person, that judged me not fit to judge in that Meeting,
because I had secured a part of my goods without Doors, (though I had left
above two Hundred Pounds value of Moveable Goods, subject to the Spoilers
besides?) and do thou not remember, that none of the said meeting declared
any Approbation of his so doing, and that thou thy self then present,
manifested a dislike thereof (as well as leveral others) after thy usual manner
thus, Whisht Whisht? Do thou not also remember, that I then signified to this
effect, If what I had done was a crime, those who were accounted of the
chiefest amongst us, were guilty of Crimes of the like nature? This G. F. (in
answer thereto) denies not, but in effect confesses it, by these his words,
But I did not say nothing else but whisht, whisht. I now desire the Reader to
compare this with his before-cited words, viz. I know them to be all (meaning
all my thirteen Queries before spoken of) False and Malicious Charges; and then
consider, whether he has not herein belyed his Conscience at a large rate?

I now come to reckon with George Fox for his Answer to my 10th Query; a part
whereof is, "Whether it is fit for one that feeds of the fat of the Land, etc.
and that has twelve or thirteen hundred pounds well secured out of the reach
of the Spoilers, etc. to admonish a company of Poor, Innocent, Harmless
Friends, that have three or four Cows a piece, to feed themselves and Children,
not to secure them from the spoilers, etc? if it be not fit for such an one so
to Admonish, I then Query, whether thou art not the man, that art so qualified,
and who (in effect) have so admonished? To this, a part of G. F's Answer is on
this wise, The Lord knows, I had neither twelve, or thirteen hundred Pounds in
my life, secured out of the Reach of the Spoiler. It Is true I might have had
something in the other Powers days, that descended to me as my Birthright;
but I gave it away to my Relations, not for fear of Persecution, or to make it
away from the Spoilers. On this I observe, that he does not deny, that he had
twelve, or thirteen hundred Pounds; but he denies that he had so much secured.
And as to his speaking of something, that descended to him, as his Birthright;
it is probable enough, that some, in Ages to come (comparing that with his not
denying to have had twelve, or thirteen hundred Pounds, and that he gave not
away what descended to him by Birthright for fear of Persecution) may
conclude, that he had some Estate by Birthright, which might be accounted
worth twelve, or thirteen hundred Pounds; or at least very considerable: But I
cannot take that to bespeak so much Credit and Repute to him, as a plain
stating that matter would be; because I can truly say (and so I believe many
more can) That in his Person I accounted the Testimony of the Apostle Paul
fulfilled, who said, God has chosen the Foolish things of the World, to
confound the Wise; and God has chosen the Weak things of the World, to
confound the Mighty; and Base things of the World, and things which are
Despised, has God chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to Naught
things that are, that no flesh should glory in his Presence: And partly on this
score, can I, in the fear of the Lord, say, (and that justly too) that he was
to me (whilst he kept his Place and Habitation in the Truth) truly Honorable;
and therefore, I am persuaded, that he would have added more to his Repute and
Name, to have acquainted the Reader (if he would needs discourse of his
Birthright) that he descended of Poor Parentage, and that before he went
abroad to preach the Light, he was a Journyman Shoemaker, and as such an one,
wrought Journey work with George Gee of Manchester (if he so did, as Report
says he did) and so have given Glory to God, that in years past, he made
Choice of so poor, mean and despised a Person, through whom to preach the
Everlasting Light, Christ Jesus, the Guide to the Father, and if G. F. had ever
since he went abroad to Preach, labored (whilst able and at leisure, with his
hands, as the Primitive Apostles did) or otherwise been industrious in an
Outward Calling, that the Gospel of Christ might not be Chargeable, and so had
gotten twelve, or thirteen hundred pounds, that also might have tended to his
Repute, especially, if instead of discoursing of that which descended unto him
by Birthright, he had signified that out of the twelve, or thirteen hundred
Pounds, he would take Care of his poor Relations, that so their Outward Man
might be somewhat more Refresht, and Comforted with necessary Food, Raiment and
Living, than of late Years they have been, and that whilst he was reputed to be
in the Enjoyment of all things needful as to Outward Enjoyments.

The Consideration of these things, brings to my remembrance, G. F's Language
in another Case, and occasions me to use the like; Poor George! I am forry for
thee, and pity thee; and one Reason amongst many more, that I could now give,
why on this Occasion I so say, is this, I well remember the day was, and yet
is, wherein I neither did, or do measure him according to the Nonsense of his
Words, but the Intent and Meaning of his Mind; and yet his disingenuity toward
me, is so great, as that it appears, that one of his chiefest Defenses for
himself (next to a Lying Tongue and suffering False Certificates to be made use
of in his favor, (of which more anon) has been to pervert sound and
undetectable words, to render his Friend guilty of so much Evil, as G. F. has
unjustly charged me with, rendering me intending that, which never was my
Meaning, nor yet the Import of my Words, as plainly appears by his concluding,
that all my Queries are Charges, though (as before is hinted) I would not have
any think, I asked one Question groundless, and that I accounted his Paper of
Queries (which he terms an Epistle) to be in itself a good Exhortation. And
since he writes that he gave away something, that descended to him by
Birthright; I think it needful, on this Occasion, to tell him, that it has
been credibly Reported, that John Story has been judged by him, or at least by
some of the Party with him, for giving unto his Mother the Rent of a small
Estate, that his Kinsman gave him; saying, John Story should have kept the
Estate in his own Hands, or at least got a Tenant that would not have paid
Tithes, that so a Testimony might have been kept up against Tithes: Which
occasions me to query of G.F. (if he was concerned in this matter) whether he
might not by that Rule, be worthy censure, for giving away something, that
descended to him by Birthright, and whether it might not as well have been his
duty to have kept the same, to have born a Testimony in the Case of Tithes, as
well as John Story's Duty so to have done?

In part of my twelfth Query, it is thus written, "Whether or no a suffering for
the Testimony of such a False Prophet, as Solomon Eccles has proved himself to
be, as is manifest by his Prophesying John Story's Death within a year, and
since expired, can be called a suffering for the Gospel of Christ? To the
twelfth Query a part of G. F's Answer is on this wise, Here is another of thy
deceitful Queries; but where the Deceit lies, he does not inform me, neither do
I understand wherein he places the Deceit, especially, since G. F. in his
particular Answer thereto, does not say, he was a true Prophet, but yet
signifies thus much in his favor, That he would not have him made an Offender
for words, since he acknowledged them; and this appears from G. F's own Words
on this Occasion, viz. And it is not right to make a man an Offender for Words,
if he acknowledge them; as I perceive, Solomon Eccles has done. I now
recommend the aforesaid Query and Answer to the Consiration of every Impartial
Reader, doubting not but all such will find George Fox detectable of another
plain, downright Lie, since he has with respect to all my Queries, thus said,
as before is cited, I know them to be all False and Mavicious Charges.

For a further Manifestation of that Spirit, which led G. F. in his Reply to
me, I think it needful to take further notice of those his words, viz. And it
is not right to make a man an Offender for words, if he acknowledge them.
Doubtless G. F. intended this as a Reproof to me, in terming Solomon Eccles a
False Prophet. What in and out babbling is this! when he durst not in Plain,
Downright terms say, He was no False Prophet; nor yet say, that he was on
this Occasion made an Offender for a Word by me; For if we say, It is not right
to make a man an Offender for words, if he acknowledge them; the Meaning
thereof in common sense, and according to a Christian Spirit is this, that if a
Man's Words express not his Meaning, and he so declares, when he is charged
therewith; Then if he say, that was not my Meaning, it is not right to insist on
a Man's Words in such a Case, to make him an Offender; but what is this to
Solomon Eccles, who after he had written, and given forth his Prophecy, to
continue, as that which he would stand by, did not pretend that he had not
expressed himself according to his Meaning; and therefore the words of G. F. as
aforesaid, seem but a deceitful Contrivance to cover a False Prophet. Moreover,
it is observable, that G. F. does not say, that Solomon Eccles has
acknowledged, that his Words were VVrong.

It Is also to be noted, that the Words so spoken by G.F. in Relation to this
False Prophet, Solomon Eccles, seem to be grounded on the Words spoken by the
Prophet Isaiah 29.21. That make a Man an Offender for a Word, which by the
Scope of the said Chapter, seems to relate unto the True Prophets, and has
been so expounded; and were not intended as a Defense for such False Prophets,
as Solomon Eccles has proved himself to be, who thereby had offended many
Brethren (especially in the City of Bristol, where he published his False
Prophecy) who therefore on that Occasion have had something against him, which
occasions me to query of G. F. whether he did not approve of this False
Prophet's going beyond the Sea, in the work of the Ministry? and if so, Whether
he has done well to encourage such a False Prophet, in such a Service, until
such time that he had known, that he had been reconciled unto his Brethren,
whom he had offended? But if G. F. shall deny, that he did Encourage him, I
then say (for it is best to be plain) that such a Denial is like to have little
Place with me (whilst G. F. appears, as of late he has,) not only because G.
F. seems to publish Lies (as it were by Heaps) but also because it is very
improbable that he (who had so great an Esteem for G. F. as to many is known he
had) should go in such a Service without his Approbation.

However, such a Denial may reasonably occasion an Answer to this Query,
Whether G. F. has been as industrious to bar the door against Solomon Eccles.
in offering his Gift, as he and others have been against John Story and John
VVilkinson's offering their Gift, though never proved to be False Prophets, as
ever we could understand?

One thing more is Remarkable on this Occasion from G. F. his Words, before
cited, viz. It Is not Right to make a Man an Offender for Words, when he
acknowledges them. Hence I take Occasion to query, Whether since James Naylor
came to a Sight and Sense of his Fall, and through true Repentance, and open
Confession before the Lord and his People, in many Parts of the Nation, found
acceptance with the Lord and his People; I say whether 'twas not a wrong
Spirit, that led George Fox to acquaint John Wilkinson and John Story, in a
Letter written Anno 1676. That they would become as hardened and as bad as the
old Opposers, amongst whom he reckons up James Naylor, not having so much
Charity, as therewith also to acknowledge his being, through true Repentance,
and Contrition of Heart, restored: It Is well if the Reason thereof be not,
because James Naylor could never be brought by George Fox (as Report says) to
condemn these Words, or words to this Effect, spoken by him, I AM BUT A FIGURE
OF ANOTHER.

I now come to take notice of what G.F. says to this my Query, "whether thou
G. F. did not advise Nathaniel Crips to buy his Tithes, etc. if thou deny it, I
will undertake to prove it, or bring it under the hand of Nathaniel Crips that
thou so did. To this a Part of G. F's Answer is on this wise; But for him to
turn this, and say, I advised him to buy his Tithes, he does me a great deal of
Wrong, and so he might have spared to impeach me Wrongfully. And in another
Part of his Answer, thus; In the Morning I was walking in his Chamber, I saw
this Spirit made some like Devils, that they mattered not what they said, to
blemish the Reputation of them, that wished them well, both Temporally and
Spiritually.

From the Word Temporally, it is rational to suppose, that G. F. for the
temporal Good of Nathaniel Crips, advised him to buy his Tithes, even as he
denies not that he advised Mary Penington, for the Good of her and her Children
(whereof I have already treated) to secure her Estate from the Spoilers; but
here methinks the Reader may be apt to query, What should be the Reason that G.
F. should seem to deny this, and not his advising Mary Penington to secure her
Estate, since here also he might have as well crept out (under the Notion, that
Friends in some Cases, when they are weak, are to be left;) as he did in the
Case of Mary Penington.

To this I say, G. F. can best answer, however the Reader shall have my
thoughts, which are these, I think that Isaac and Mary Penington had not of
late so honorable and good an Esteem for John Story, as Formerly, though they
may for G. F. even as Nathaniel Crips has of late been disaffected with G. F's
Actions in some things, though not with John Story's, so far as I know. Now if
G. F. should have denied the Matter relating to Mary Penington, it might have
occasioned the loss of his Interest in her and her Husband, and (with them) in
many more, because they know it to be Truth; and if he could have gotten Twenty
Eight Persons to have signed a False Certificate, that he did not so advise;
'twould have had no more Credit with them, than the signing of the False
Certificate, hereafter following, by Twenty Eight hands (whose End therein I
take to be, to evidence in his favor that, what I and many more, saw with our
Eyes, was Untrue) has place with me, and such many others, which is none at
all: but G. F. having already (in great Measure, as I suppose, if not
altogether) lost his Interest in the heart of Nathaniel Crips, he, peradventure
in that Case, scruples not to deny the Truth, and for ought I know, it is on
this Confidence, that he can obtain a False Certificate, under the hands of
Twenty Eight Persons, that he did not so, which though it might the more
confirm Nathaniel Crips, that G. F. is wrong, yet many others might be the more
confident that his Opposers are Wrong; and since the Import of his Answer
implies a Denial, that he advised Nathaniel Crips to buy his Tithes, I think it
needful here to cite, not only Nathaniel Crips his Certificate and Testimony in
that Case, but also the Testimony of Robert Arch, in Relation to G. F's Advice
to him also touching the Buying of his Tithe.

THis is to certify all whom it may concern, that G. F. being several Years
past at my house, and as he and I were speaking together, concerning Payment of
Tithes; I told him, that in the Parish where I dwell, there is both Priest and
Impropriator, and that both of them claimed Tithes of the Inhabitants, and
amongst our Discourse that we had thereabout, G. F. then advised me to purchase
the Tithes of them, this he spoke in Love to me, and I took it no Otherwise;
but if he will prosecute others for such things, whereof he is more guilty
himself, he will much lose his honor, and hardly ever recover it again; this I
thought fit (and indeed bound) to certify, whereunto I subscribe my Name

The 23d of the 11th Mo. 1677. Nathaniel Crips.

GEorge Fox being at my house (as I remember, it was that time that he came
into our Country, to set up the manthly, and quarterly Meetings) and there
being several Writings or Epistles read of George 's, which were as
Instructions to Friends, to be read at the quarterly Meetings, in which there
was written (as I remember) that such Friends that did pay Tithe, should be
exhorted, or admonished, which I took notice of, and when I had a convenient
Opportunity, as George was in my Garden, I told him there was two or three
Priests, and two Impropriators did claim Tithe of me or of my Land; but unto
the Priests I had never paid any, and as for the Impropriators, I did not much
contend with them, but did suffer them to take the Tithe; said G. F. to me
can not thou buy it? buy it (said he.) I answered him, that I did look upon
it to be no odds, or difference between paying of it, and buying of it. So that
what George did then say to me, I took it that it was in tenderness to me, and
so I believe to this day.

Burton-Hill the 18th of the 11th Mo. 1677. Robert Arch.

It now remains that I say something of G. F's Departure out of the Meeting at
Broad Mead, within the City of Bristol in time of Persecution, since a part of
his words in Answer thereto are on this wise: "Oh William! I am sorry thou
should affirm this Untruth, and father it upon the sight of thine own Eye,
which I say is utterly False: But I do remember many years ago, I was sitting
in a Meeting at Bristol, when another was speaking, and some Officers came up,
and took him away; and when he was gone, I kept the Meeting, and none meddled
with me, nor as much as asked for my name then, that I heard, or could
understand by any other, and I believe there are many in Bristol, that have not
let in Prejudice and Enmity against me, that will witness against this false
Charge, and for thee to term this a distrustful and despairing Spirit, etc.
this is not well. This is the substance of what G. F. says in his Answer to
me, as a Vindication of himself, but forasmuch as before I received his Answer,
he was offended at my discourse, touching this matter amongst Friends (which by
the way was occasioned through his Reflections on John Story as a Fleer in time
of Persecution (which never yet was convincingly proved unto me) and therefore
for the clearing himself, the best he could, gave forth a Paper; I think it
needful to add that also, that so the Reader may know the most that G. F. can
say for himself: but first the Reader may observe, that though G. F. says, for
thee to term this a distrustful and despairing Spirit; yet his so saying is
groundless; my own words were these, which some may term distrustful and
despairing: So the Reader may consider, whether this adds to the Account of his
Lies or no. I shall now proceed to cite G. F's Paper:

"WHereas William Rogers has falsely charged me, that I should Flee in time of
Persecution; and it is spread up and down City and Country, and brought to
balance John Story and his Company's Fleeing in time of Persecution, who had a
Boy set on a Hill to wave his hat to Friends when they met in Holes and Gills
in Westmoreland, which brought a Dishonor to God's Truth and People over a
great Part of the Nation; and several went to admonish him and the others of
it, but never did any of these these fourteen Years come to me, and admonish me
concerning Ringwood Meeting, or Bristol Meeting, where I am reported to Flee
(as they say) in Persecution; which are all horrid Lies -- As for Ringwood
Meeting, there is a Certificate to the contrary, that clears the thing: As for
the Meeting at Bristol, there came no Soldiers nor Officers while I was in the
Meeting, neither before nor after. Now at that time, I lay at Edward Pyotts,
and several Friends came from Bristol to me, and desired me not to come to the
Meeting, and said, What were they? and thou art more than a thousand of us; if
they were taken (they said) it was no great matter; but they would not have me
to come, unless I was Eternally Moved; I reserved my Mind to my self, and bid
them, Go their way, and did not say I would, or I would not; and afterward I
said to Edward Pyott, I shall go to the Meeting, and one may stay to guide me
through the Fields; and Edward Pyott said, his Son Edward might go with me: so
walking through the Fields, I met Dennis Hollister and Thomas Gouldney, and
Dennis Hollister said, What! would I go in the mouth of the Beast? and Thomas
Gouldney smiled at me, and I bid them Walk by, because many People were walking
there; and I met George Bishop after, and he said, what! would I go into the
mouth of the Dragon? and I bad him Walk by. Now they did all that ever they
could to stop me; so I past up into the Meeting, and Margaret Thomas was
speaking, but had quickly done, and the Fear was upon the People concerning me,
but after, the Power of God struck the Fear out of them, and Life sprang, and a
precious glorious Meeting we had; and when I was cleared, I was moved to Pray,
and when I had stepped down about three or four Steps, I was moved to turn back
again, and stood up, and told them: Now they might see there was a God in
Israel, that could deliver: and so I stepped down and went away, and Friends
began to busle out, and I said, Why do they busle and make such a throng? and
George Bishop said, 'twas time to break up the Meeting; so I came down the
Stairs, and there was neither Officer nor Soldier, nor nothing like any such
thing, and many Friends and People were in the Street. Now if I had been
persuaded, and had hearkened to them that would not have had me come to the
Meeting, what work would these evil Spirits have made above fourteen Years
afterward! and for any to say, I went up the Back-Stairs; I did not know which
was Fore-Stairs, and which was Back-Stairs, but went as I was guided, and
Friends say since, The one was as common as the other. This is a Malicious
Charge above fourteen Years afterward, and never come to my Face till now; to
justify John Story, they accuse me.

Now something I shall say concerning Ringwood Meeting, or about a Mile and an
Half thence; I came there overnight, and in the Morning about the sixth hour
there came about ten or twelve Women from Pool, and I was sitting within in the
house till toward the eight hour, and it being summer time, and hor, I walked
out with a Young Man into the Orchard, and after I had walked a while with him,
and asked him of the Affairs of Truth (for they had been many of them convinced
by me before I was Prisoner in Cornwall) and there came another Young Man to us,
and told us, The trained bands were rising, and he heard, they would come and
break up the Meeting; so one desired me to walk over the Style, it being, as I
judged, about the eight hour, so I walked over into the corn fields, on the out
side of the hedge, and one of the Young Men went from me, and of the Women,
some walked in the Orchard, and some went to refresh themselves; and I asked
the Young Man, What time of the day it was? and he said, Betwixt Eight and
Nine: and I asked him, What time the Meeting would come in? and he said, about
Eleven or Twelve of the Clock: and I said, If the Soldiers should come before
that time, we might happen to get a good Meeting afterward: and the Man said,
They are Neighbors, and Civil People; if they should come, they would hardly
meddle: But after the Young Man went from me a matter of two Bow shots, he
stood under the Hedge, waving his Hat to me, so I bid the other Young Man see
what ailed him; so I kept my walking and they did not come at me again; and as
I turned back to go round about the Orchard, there was a place I could see over
the Hedge, the Soldiers were all over the Orchard; I heard say, some of the
Soldiers did see me, but they were loath to meddle; so I being out in the open
Fields, where they might easily see me, truly I did not go in among them, for
it was between nine or ten a Clock, and they swept the Barn, and got in Stools
and Blocks. and we had a very large and blessed Meeting, till about Three of
the Clock, and broke up our Meeting in the Power of God and in Peace; and
afterward the Woman of the House being Dead, some desired me to walk up to a
Friends house about two Bowshots off in our way, and Friends went along with
us, and I bad them bring up my Horse thither, for I was to ride twenty Miles to
one Fries house that Night, and so I went up to that house, and Friends went
generally with me, and after we had refreshed our selves, we past away in Peace
and Quietness, and no Soldiers at all came. And how can this be called a
Fleeing in time of Persecution? and that was a horrid Lie, that I hid my self
in a Ditch; there was (as I saw) but a Bank cast up from a Lane, and I think it
was a Market Highway; and at this Fries House, I had a Meeting, and there the
Constables came to the Meeting; but News was brought, That their house was
broke up; so they let us alone; and also I heard, that the Soldiers came after
from Ringwood to the House, when our Meeting was broke up, but we knew nothing
of them, being gone before, and they never spoke to me none of them about these
things, these fourteen years; and in these Meetings the Glory of God was seen,
and Fleeing in time of Persecution, it was abhorred.

And as for their saying, Some body spoke in Bristol Meeting after I was gone
down; I know nothing of that, but I came down to Joan Hilyes, and Friends were
in the street, and came to me there, and I knew nothing, but they all came
down: and if I had fled in time of Persecution, I had not been in so many Goals
and Prisons, but might have kept out of them; and yet this they say, John
Story, he has born the heat of the day; and George For, he has fled in time
of Persecution.

G. F.

I now come to make these following Observations, on the words of his late
Answer, and former Testimony, touching my Charge concerning him; in his late
Answer to my Charge, he says, I remember, I was sitting in a Meeting at
Bristol, when another was speaking, and some Officers came up, and took him
away, and when he was gone, I kept the Meeting, and none meddled with me. Now
let us compare this with the former Testimony, which thus begins, Whereas
William Rogers has falsely charged me, that I should flee in time of
Persecution, etc. and then proceeds thus saying, As for the Meeting at Bristol,
there came no Soldiers or Officers, whilst I was in the Meeting, neither
before nor after. He that runs may read, that George Fox, in some cases, does
not matter what he says, which by his own Rule (witness his before-cited
words, in relation to Nathaniel Crips) is the very Mark of that Spirit, that
made some like Devils. By his former Testimony it also appears, that there were
some Friends at Edward Pyott's; and that he bid them, Go away; that Edward
Pyott's Son (who I know was a Young Lad then) accompanied him through the
Fields; that when Dennis Hollister and Thomas Gouldney met him, he bad them,
Walk by, because many People were walking there; and after that, he met George
Bishop, whom likewise he bad, Walk by; and though at length he came to the
Meeting, (and, as is credibly reported, by back and unusual Ways) yet I find
not one word positively testifying, That he stayed in the Meeting, until the
Meeting broke up; neither is it rational from his words to suppose, that he
thought the Meeting ought then to break up; for if he had, to what end did he
ask this Question, Why do Friends busle and make such a Throng? since it is
certainly known, that at the Breaking up of Meetings, it is usual to have a
Throng and Busle, and therefore, (comparing this with Testimonies, that
hereafter will follow, viz. that G.F. should say, Friends, keep your Meetings,
keep your Meetings,) it is rational to conclude, that though G. F. designed to
depart himself, yet he thought it not meet that the Meeting should then break
up; and if so, no doubt, this in G. F. may as justly be termed Fleeing in time
of Persecution, as the like action pretended to be done by another may: And to
be very plain, I no way doubt, but that if a False Witness-Bearer had
wrongfully said but thus much of John Story, as G. F. has said of himself,
there would not have wanted a G. F. or some of Party with him, that would have
scrupled to have said, John Story had acted from that very Spirit which said,
Master, save thy self.

And although all impartial and understanding Readers, from what is already
said, may have a sense that G. F. has Fled in time of Persecution (if the Rule
of himself or his Party be good, in relation to their Pretense of John Story's
departing out of a Meeting) yet for a further manifestation of what is now
intended, the following Certificates are cited.

WE do hereby declare, that we were present at a certain Meeting held in Broad
Mead within the City of Bristol, on account of the Worship of God, and that it
was at a time when Persecution attended Friends in their Meeting, and that at
that Meeting, George Fox stood up and spoke in the Meeting, and after departed
out of the Meeting at a Back-Pair of Stairs, a very considerable time before
the Meeting broke up, and was not taken Prisoner that day; and the ground of
his Departure at that time, we have cause to believe, was to avoid being taken
Prisoner.

Mary Gouldney.
Mary North.
Ann Day.

To this Testimony I also can bear witness, with this further Addition, that
after he stepped down from the place he stood upon to speak, and was departing,
some Friends were moving to go with him, and he perceiving it (as I took it)
said, holding out his hand, Keep your Meetings, Keep your Meetings; and
accordingly the Meeting was held, a considerable time longer after his
Departure.

William James.

I Do remember on this Occasion aforesaid, that George Fox did depart out of
the Meeting aforesaid, before the Meeting broke up, or Friends departed, and
that at that time Friends were attended with Persecution; and as he was
departing, he said to Friends to this Effect, Keep your Meeting; and I believe
his so departing was, to save himself from being taken by the Persecutors.

Nathaniel Day.

I Do on the Occasion aforesaid, declare, that I do remember, that George Fox
did depart out of the Meeting aforementioned, a considerable time before the
Meeting broke up, or Friends departed, and that at that time, Friends were
attended with Persecution; I do also remember that my Uncle Dennis Hollister
did acquaint me, that George Fox did advise him to absent himself from
Meetings, in time of Persecution.

Samuel Hollister.

And now, though it be not so immediately my concern, to take notice of what he
writes touching the Meeting at Ringwood, as that at Bristol, yet since he has
made mention thereof, and that it is (as I take it) the most he can speak in his
own favor, in relation to that Matter; I think it needful to make some
Observations thereon, which are real Cause of Jealousy, that G. F. was at that
time led by such a Spirit, as would have by him, and many of Party with him,
been termed, The Spirit that seeks to save Self, had it but appeared in John
Story.

The First thing I take notice of, is these his Words, There came ten or twelve
Women from Pool, who, in Probability, came with an Intention to come to a
Meeting; and yet by G. F's Relation, they came five or six Hours before the
Meeting was to begin: whether this be probable, I shall at present leave to the
sense of others.

The Second thing I take Notice of, is this, G. F. walked with a Young Man, and
then there came another Young Man; this is Cause of Jealousy that G. F. had a
shifting kind of design, to take Young Men for his Companions, even as he did
Edward Pyott's Young Son Edward, and bid some, whom he calls Friends, Go their
Way; (how good they were in G. F's esteem is a question, because he tells us,
they said, Thou art more than a thousand of us; and yet he does not manifest
his dislike of their so saying) and after this he bad some (who are known to
have been ancient, grave Friends) to walk by, because many people were walking
there.

The Third thing I take notice of, is this, that G. F. was for having a good
Meeting after the Soldiers were gone, saying, if the Soldiers should come
before that time, we might happen to get a good Meeting afterward; and though
the Young Man said in Answer, that the Soldiers were Neighbors, and civil
People, and would hardly meddle; (which was an Encouragement to George Fox to
stand in his Testimony) yet he kept still walking in the Fields.

The Fourth thing I observe is this, that one of the Young Men went from him
about two Bow shots under the Hedge, waving his Hat to G. F. this I may not
term a Boy on top of a Hill, waving his Hat to Friends (spoken of by G. F. by
way of Reflection on John Story, though denied by John Story, and by his
Answers intended only (so far as I understand) to show Friends the way to the
Meeting) but a Boy Under a Hedge, waving his, Hat to George Fox; and, as may
reasonably be supposed, to keep him from Meeting, because G. F. says, As I
turned back to go round about the Orchard, there was a place I could see over
the Hedge, the Soldiers were all over the Orchard; truly I did not go in among
them: I shall now leave it to the Impartial Reader to consider, whether if it
were so, that any Friends when they met without doors, did, for Convenience set
a Boy on top of a Hill, to wave his Hat, to signify the Way Friends might
pass unto a good Meeting, be not more justifiable, than to have a Boy under a
Hedge, to wave his Hat, to keep G. F. from Meeting.

The Fifth thing I take notice of, is this; [That was a horrid Lie that I hid
my self in a Ditch;] for my own part. I cannot imagine wherein, from G. F's own
words, the horrid Lie does consist, more than in saying, a [Ditch] when it
ought to have been said a [Bank] cast up, which in Probability is G. F's
mistake; for it is well known, that in many places where Banks are cast up in
the Country, there is also a Ditch; however, it is observable, that his words
cannot reasonably be taken to import a Denial, that he hid himself behind a
Bank.

The Sixth thing I take notice of, is this, That the Meeting broke up about
three of the Clock, and that he went not into the house where the Meeting was,
but to another, two Bowshots off, and stayed to refresh himself; and yet rode
twenty miles that Night, which is not very common for G. F. to do, as ever I
could understand, after a Meeting broke up so late.

The Seventh thing I take notice of, is this, that though as to that Meeting at
Ringwood (if Report be true) there are many notorious Circumstances, to show
him a Fleer in time of Persecution, yet I observe he makes mention but of one
particular thing, that he says is a Lie or False, and that is before
signified, which I take to be no more than saying [in a Ditch] instead of
[behind a Bank] which to me is a Demonstration, that he could not in Truth deny
other things reported of him on this Occasion, which puts me in mind thus
farther to say, that if instead of telling that they swept the Barn, etc. he
had named the Hour when he came in the Meeting, as well as when the Meeting
broke up; and that he did not advise the Friends to gather together, and then
be gone from them, until the Soldiers were gone, that so he might come and
stay a little while amongst them, and then be gone twenty miles that night, to
be sure to be far enough out of their reach; it might have made his Testimony
look with a better face, especially if he had had so much Patience as to have
gone into the house, after Meeting, to visit the Distressed Family, the Woman
(as he says) being dead.

To conclude my Observations herein, I thus say; That I firmly believe, 'twould
have tended more to G. F's Credit, plainly to have confessed, that at Times and
Seasons he has contrived to save himself, and keep out of the reach of
Persecutors; than after he has so done, to cover the matter by such sort of
Discourses, as these now manifested are; wherein his Weakness and Confusion,
does so appear, as cannot but be obvious to every Impartial and Judicious
Reader.

And now forasmuch as John Ward and twenty seven more, have given forth a
certificate intending thereby to clear G.F. I thought it needful to add that
also, that so nothing that may be pretended would have favored his Cause,
might be omitted by me, the said Certificate now follows.

A Testimony of some Friends of Bristol, in Answer to William Roger's False
Charging of George Fox, for Fleeing in time of Persecution, and particularly at
the Meeting House in Broad Mead in the same City.
"WHereas William Rogers in his Paper of Queries to George Fox (which some of
us have already given our Testimony against) has charged the said George Fox
to be one of the greatest Fleers, in time of Persecution, of any that he knew,
professing the Truth, and accounted by others a faithful Friend; and for
Confirmation thereof has brought an Instance at a Meeting here at Bristol, at
which George Fox was present, about fifteen years since, at which Meeting he
says, The Persecutors coming up one pair of Stairs, while George Fox was
speaking, the said George Fox (as some may term it, in a distrustful Spirit)
did step down, and went out at a back pair of Stairs, to which (he says) his
Eyes with many more were witnesses. As to which we have this to say, who were
generally, all of us, at all, or most part of the Meetings which George Fox was
at here, that we never knew or can remember, that ever any Persecutors did come
up the Stairs whilst George Fox was speaking, so as to occasion the ceasing his
Testimony on that account, as William Rogers would infinuate; but this may be
put amongst the rest of his False Calumnies and Charges. And we further
testify, that whereas there was two pair of Stairs, (one of which William
Rogers calls a Back-pair) that both pair of Stairs were common for Friends to
come up and down at, and that George Fox was known to come up the same Stairs
to that Meeting.

"And this Testimony we have in our hearts for George Fox, as a man Remote in
Spirit and Example from any such Practice, as Fleeing in time of Persecution,
though charged therewith by Apostates and Bad Spirits; and we have cause to
believe, that he has held up his Testimony in Faithfulness, both in Doing and
in Suffering on Truths Account, being confirmed herein by his large Travels,
Sufferings and Imprisonments in many Goals, in which we never knew that he has
flinched, but has endured Patiently; as also the known Care that has been
upon him, for the Preserving and Encouraging of all, by Word and Pattern, to
stand in time of Persecution. And this we thought fit to insert, as persons
concerned for the Vindication of our dear Friend George Fox's Innocence in this
Case, which we have done according to the best of our Knowledge and
Remembrance, who never saw any just Occasion for such a Charge as William
Rogers has so wickedly aspersed him with.

John Ware, and twenty seven Persons more.

I now come to make some Observations on the above Certificate; they render me
False Charging, and seem concerned to Vindicate G. F's Innocence in this Case;
yet they have done it but at a very poor rate, much like the perjured
Informers, that on the late Act have appeared against Friends; for first they
say, It is a False Charge, which is a positive Testimony against me, wherein
they undertake to prove such a Negative, which is impossible to be proved by
them, unless they had been Eye witnesses of what George Fox did in every
Meeting, in time of Persecution, at the Meeting House in Broad-Mead, that I
also was present at; but that, by their Certificate, it seems, they dare not
say; for when they came to disprove me by particular Evidence, they then thus
said, [WE WERE GENERALLY, ALL OF US, AT ALL, OR MOST OF THE MEETINGS, AT WHICH
GEORGE FOX WAS HERE] and that we never knew or can remember, that ever any
Persecutors came up the Stairs while George Fox was speaking. I appeal now to
every Impartial Understanding Reader, whether my charging of him for stepping
down on a sudden, and hastening out of the Meeting, must be wrong, because they
never knew another matter of fact relating to others; or whether it does
follow, that the Persecutors did not come up the Stairs at no such Meeting,
because they don't know, or remember the Matter, when not assigned to any
Meeting, wherein they dare say that they were present.

They say, that I have charged George Fox to be one of the greatest Fleers in
time of Persecution, of any that I know professing the Truth, and accounted by
others a Faithful Friend: Herein they, as I take it, (and as I am persuaded,
all Impartial Readers will,) falsely charge me; my Words were these, And, if
Report be true, this is but very little of what might at large be manifested to
prove him one of the greatest Fleers, etc. in time of Persecution, that ever I
knew, professing the Truth, and esteemed by others a Faithful Friend.

3dly, They say, that I, for Confirmation thereof, brought an Instance of a
Meeting here at Brastol, which George Fox was present at, about 15 years since,
etc. this also cannot be taken to be a true Charge from my words, not only be
cause I did not positively charge him to be one of the greatest Fleers in time
of Persecution, etc. but also because I did not signify the Time at which the
Meeting was held, though they say, 'twas about 15 years since; and so it
appears, that they are detected of several Lies, by comparing their Testimony
with what I have written. This occasions me to observe, that they do not say,
they never knew or could remember, that he stepped down, and hastened out of the
Meeting, at a Back-pair of Stairs, which is the matter wherewith I charge him
with the sight of mine own Eyes, and others also on this Occasion. And this
also I know, that his so Departure was a very considerable time before the
Meeting broke up; and were it not so, that these False Witness-Bearers were
conscious to themselves, that about fifteen years since George Fox so did, (as
I said my Eyes were witness of) what reason should they have for limiting my
Charge to that time?

I shall now leave it to the Consciences of all Impartial Readers to consider,
whether John Ware and the other twenty seven Persons, do not justly deserve the
title of False-Witness-Bearers, and not only so, but since George Fox, in his
Answer to me, has signified on this Occasion, that he believes there are many
in Bristol, that will witness against this False Charge, it be not rational to
suppose, that the aforesaid John VVare and the other twenty seven Subscribers,
have been by him betrayed to affirm whereof they know not, and yet
notwithstanding, their Testimony is lame, and not sufficient to serve his turn,
not only for the Reasons aforesaid, but also because they do not so much as
affirm, that the Meeting, held about fifteen years since, was in the time of
Persecution, and that he staid therein until the Meeting ended.

One thing more is Observable, G. F. informs me, some said, My Paper was not
worth answering, to which I said, Doubtless these words came from some of
George Fox 's Party; and since George Fox has acted contrary to their sense,
and written six Sheets of Paper in Answer to one of mine; what is become of
their Unity now? and whether this shows not that they are in Confusion amongst
themselves, especially since G. F. in his Answer says the less; I do take
notice of them, because I know them to be By George Fox's Rule, those who
matter not what they say, etc. are exercised by this Spirit, that made some
like Devils, witness his beforecited words, spoken as he was walking in
Nathaniel Crips his Chamber, which occasions me to query from his words [all
False and Malicious Charges] Whether by his own Rule he has not manifested
himself to be exercised by the same Spirit? for had he been a man that had
taken Care to have affirmed nothing but the truth, he would not have been the
Publisher (as well as Author) of so many Lies and Falsehoods, whereof to his
shame he is detected.
all False, Malicious Charges, whenas he has not only written six Sheets of
Paper (for the Copy delivered me, contains so many) by way of Answer, which is
a taking notice thereof at a large rate; but also it appears that many of them,
which by his general Expression he accounts False Charges, are not in his
particular Answers denied to be true, but rather an owning thereof, is plainly
implied from his words, as is already manifested; this I take to be one sign or
Token, that the Word of the Lord by his Servant John Wilkinson is fulfilling.

I now come to take notice, that G. F. accuses me, that I threatened the
Constables at their Perils, not to meddle with any thing of mine within doors,
etc. This I say is a False Charge; my words on that Occasion were to this
purpose, the Door is open, the Goods in the house are mine, they might go in,
and there was enough; but then I also told them, That if they did meddle, etc.
before I spoke with the Justice, I should lay that Injustice at their Doors,
because of right I ought to be first heard, before my Goods ought to be
distrained, and though G. F. hereupon said (as in his Answer appears) That I
had made all fast, yet he is therein in a twofold respect guilty of a False
Charge, because all was not secured Without, and none secured Within.

Having thus far, with respect to particular matters, cleared my Conscience, I
have this further in short to say, That should I trace G. F's Answer after the
same Method, as he has done mine, I account that Thirty Sheets of Paper would
not contain such an Answer, and might tend to endless Controversy, and
therefore I choose the rather to give the Reader but a taste of that Spirit, from
whence his bundle of Confusion and Falsehoods do proceed. And in the mean time
shall add this Query, Whether or no, since G. F. has written so many Lies, as
aforesaid, that are detectable from the sight of his Answer, and compared with
my Paper (which was an Answer to his queries) it may not be rational to
conclude, that he has taken such a Liberty to himself as at some times and
seasons to say any thing (Right or Wrong) to clear himself, and defame others,
that cannot be subject to his Will?

I now come to take notice of a Postscript, written by G. F. in these words,
Here follows the Epistle that has so touched William Rogers which he makes all
this Work and VVriting about, who would make me inconsistent with my self; and
so he might have done the Apostle, who one while Circumcised; and then again
forbid it: and one while said, They should not Judge one another about days,
and meats and drinks, and afterward Judged them for it, who made it their
Principle. But in William Roger 's Charges, he has not proved me inconsistent
with my self, but rather himself is inconsistent with what he was formerly.

To this I thus Answer, These few lines do manifest to me, that G. F. does not
divide and distinguish as he ought to do, if he be not ignorant of the
Scriptures, and of what I have written; and of what his name is too: The
Consideration whereof leads me to observe, that he has not quoted any
Scripture, whereby he pretends to prove his Assertion, and so no need to write
very large for Disproof of that, which he pretends not to prove; yet for the
sakes of some on this Occasion I shall thus add, That the Scripture no where
testifies, that the Apostle did forbid Circumcision in the same Case where he
practiced Circumcision; and that when the Apostle said any thing to this
purpose, by way of Exhortation to any amongst the Churches of Christ, that they
should not judge one another about Days and Meats and Drinks, it was (as I
have always taken it) with a tender Regard only to such who made Conscience
(which could not be unless they were principled) either to observe or not to
observe a Day, Meats or Drinks; and such the Apostle (when they acted from a
Principle so to do) at no time judged (as ever from the Scriptures of Truth, I
could understand) though in the Observations of some things legal, not having
so far received the Spirit, as to be led therefrom; and yet G. F. says, And
afterward judged them for it, who made it their Principle; as if the day was,
wherein they might observe a day, when they were not principled so to do; but
when they became principled to observe a day, then it became Sin and Matter
worthy of Judgment and Condemnation by the Apostle; and not only so, but as if
acting according to ones Principle, in Matters of Conscience, were Condemnable,
when practicing things not according to ones Principle, in matters of
Conscience might be justified. This I dare not conclude to have ever been the
Apostle's Meaning; but I am well satisfied is agreeable to the Practice of G.
F. (or some taken to be of his Adherents, who have published their Papers and
Judgments against many) and the real Cause (as to me is evident) is because
they are found, practicing according to their Principle, and cannot act (for
fear of Threats and Frowns of Man) against it.

And forasmuch as G. F. has made use of the aforesaid Instance, relating to
Circumcision, Days, Meats and Drinks on such wife, as if the Practice or not
Practicing of such things, were grounded merely on the Apostle's Permission,
and so by that Example, G. F. may do the like; I think it needful to add, that
when Contention arose about the Practice of Circumcision, Acts 15. it does not
appear that the Apostles assumed to themselves a Power to permit or not to
permit, nor yet to judge the Case Without the Assent of Parties differing; for
it appears the differing Parties agreed to go up to Jerusalem about that
Question, and at that time, the Apostles did agree, That Circumcision was not
fit to be laid on the Gentiles, which were Believers (who never were principled
to practice the same) neither did they endeavor to oblige those who practiced
Circumcision, after they believed, to forbear the same, before by the Spirit
they were led from it; and the Reason hereof (undoubtedly) was, because 'twas
safest both for Jew and Gentile, to act according to Faith, that so they might
not sin: for the Apostle says, Whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin; which
Assertion answers to the Light of Christ in the Conscience at this day, as well
as is agreeable to the Apostle's Doctrine.

And now that the meaning of the Apostle, as to the matter relating to
Circumcision, Days, Meats and Drinks may be a little further explained, I
think it needful to cite a Passage out of my Manuscript in answer to Part of
Robert Barclay's Book of Government, which may be pertinent on this Occasion.

"We find that many of the Believing Jews were not come from under
Circumcision, and that those Jews, who saw beyond it, did not condemn such
their Brethren; but we do not find that the Apostles (as persons that had Power
to permit or not permit such a Practice in the Church) did approve of it in any
of the Jews, or Condemn the same in such as practiced it, until by Faith they
saw beyond it; for, as on the one hand, 'twas not in their Commission to preach
up Circumcision; so on the other hand, 'twas not in their Power to be a Bond on
any to forbear, who through Faith were not first led therefrom.

"For though the Apostle says, Gal. 5.2. I Paul say unto you, if ye be
Circumcised, Chrast shall profit you nothing; and Gal, 4, 9, 10, 11. But now
after ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the
Weak and Beggar by Elements? Ye observe Days and Months, etc. I am afraid of
you: Yet this did not at that time condemn that Christian Liberty and
Forbearance, which the Apostle before approved, in and with respect unto such
as made Conscience of Circumcision, and the Observing of Days, before they had
so received the Spirit, as to be led out of it; for it plainly appears, he
spoke to a People who were redeemed out of those begganly Elements, and were
come past those Rudiments, which is evident by those his words, How turn ye
again? and so^e might well exhort such, neither to Circumcise, nor yet be in
the Observation of Days; for that God has not usually led into those things,
which he has led out of; and this might well consist with the truth even at
such a time and season, when others through a conscientious scruple, might in a
Plea for both, with respect to themselves (respectively according to their
differing Faith) be Uncondemned.

I shall now leave it to the Consciences of unprejudised Readers, whether what
G. F. has said touching Circumcision and Observation of Days, Meats and
Drinks is sufficient to justify his advising Mary Penington to secure her
Estate from the Spoilers (when she durst not remove her moveable goods, nor
made it as her principle) and condemn others that are principled so to do;
querying of such, Whether it is not from the Spirit of the World, that lusts
to Envy?

With this Testimony I shall conclude this my reply to G. F. that I certainly
know him to be a Man guilty of many things, which he has condemned in others;
and forasmuch as he, under the form of Government, has prescribed the giving
forth of Papers of Condemnation, as a proper means whereby such as in his sense
are departed from the Truth, may be received into Fellowship with some others
again, so he must expect that some (at least) of his known Errors and Failings
must lie on Record, unless he repent, and manifest such his Repentance, by an
Acknowledgment so publicly spread, as his Errors and Failings have been; not
but that an Acknowledgment unto, and Repentance before the Lord, in some Cases,
may be sufficient; but because, as he has been an Instrument to lay
Stumbling Blocks in the Way of many, so he may (even as James Naylor did before
him) by a candid Acknowledgment unto the Lord's People, be an Instrument (as
much as in him lies) to remove such Stumbling Blocks, and so come into Unity
again with the Lord, and his People in the Truth, from which he has departed.

William Rogers.

I now come to take Notice of a Postscript to G. F's Answer, written by John
Blaykling, who lives at Sedbergh in Yorkshire, which by the Way puts me in
remembrance thus to premise, That though G. F. in his Answer to some part of my
Paper (which he accounted a False Charge) has thus said, And I do believe that
are there many in Bristol that have not let in Prejudice and Enmity against me,
that will witness against this False Chrrge, Yet I doubt not but he might on as
goodground, have said the same with respect to John Blaykling, and many in
other Places, though they may know nothing of the Matters whereof they may
pretend to vindicate him, because I have lately had (over and besides what John
Blaykling adds in his Postscript) no less than six Letters, in Vindication of
George Fox; and condemnation of me (right or wrong) some whereof are subscribed
with Two Letters, whose Names thereby I cannot understand, and dated from no
Place; other some with a Name not known to me, nor yet dated from any Place;
this I may justly term a sort of mean and underly work, that is so far from
adding Credit to G. F's cause, as that it is to me plain enough, that he can get
a John Blaykling, a T. B. or an S. H. to write, or sign any thing when written
(right or wrong) that may, in his sense, tend to his Vindication and my
Condemnation. And now to proceed:

As to John Blaykling's Postscript, I find it contains about a Sheet of Paper,
which thus begins, Here follows the Testimony and Certificate from John
Blaykling, to the clearing of the Aspersions that William Rogers and others
would cast upon George Fox, as aforementioned. Therein he gives a large
Testimony for George Fox, as a man that renders not Evil for Evil, that is
blessed with Honor above many Brethren, and that thousands will stand by him
in an Heavenly Record unto the Integrity of his Soul to Truth, that still lives
with him; that his Life reigns, and is Spotless, Innocent, and still retains
his Integrity, whose Eternal Honor and Blessed Renown shall remain; yea, his
Presence and the Droping of his Tender Words in the Lord's Love, was my Souls
Nourishment. On which I observe, that if those thousands are such as John
Blaykling, John Ware and the twenty seven other persons, that signed the
aforementioned False Certificate, they will never add by that Spirit that led
them so to testify (as aforesaid) unto his nor their own Credit; and though in
a Dark Spirit, they may term it an Heavenly Record, yet I testify, such a
Record can never bear date from Heaven, because nothing that makes a Lie can
therein enter.

Moreover, as John Blaykling has given so large a Testimony to George Fox's
life, as Spotless, and as one still keeping his integrity to God, and his
Truth, though he is hereby detected of many Lies, (which Method of general
Applause, at so high a rate, used by John Blaykling, when undeserved, is more
like a Parasite to an Earthly Prince, than a Serious, Well meaning,
Conscientious Christian to a Servant of Christ, that seeks not the Praise of
Man:) so on the other hand has he vilified me, at so large a rate, as better
became the tongue of a Scold, than a Sober Man; for therein amongst many other
profane and Scandalous unjust Reproaches in general terms (without assigning
particular Matters of Fact, to prove his general Accusations) he has rendered
me one that has cast lying Slanders upon George Fox; though no Lie is proved,
either by him, or George Fox, to lie at my Door, and that also from a Spirit
that through its Envy and Rage against the Government of Christ in the hearts
of them that believe, ceases not with all its devices, with Lying Aspersions to
defame the Instruments in God's own Hand, calling my Paper a Lying Paper, to
defame the Brethrens Care in the Church of God; whenas there is not a word in
all my Paper, that can bear any such Construction, neither does he quote any of
my words that in Truth do manifest what he so asserts; and it is well known,
that I have been so far from being in Envy and Rage against the Government of
Christ, in the hearts of them that believe, as that it has been a great
Concern of Conscience to me, for several years past, both by Word and Writing,
to contend earnestly for the Exaltation of Christ's Government in the hearts of
Believers, which is clearly manifested by the import of what I have written in
Answer to a part of Robert Barclay's Book of Government, my Postscript to my
Narrative of Passages at Drawel, my Answer to the Brethrens (so termed)
Narrative after the Meeting at Drawel, several of my Letters to George Fox, the
Dissatisfactions subscribed by several (as well as my self) at Bristol, Anno
1677. and in diverse other Papers, in the giving forth whereof, I have been
concerned since that day, wherein it has evidently appeared, that such as
cannot be subject to some Outward Orders, or Prescriptions, given forth by
George, Fox or some others, assuming Authority so to do, are judged and
condemned for refusing submission, without true regard to a Conscientious
Scruple; as if the exaltation of Christ's Government in the heart, consisted in
Conformity to other men's lines made ready to our hands; a lively Instance
hereof may be easily discerned by those who shall peruse the forty four
Articles of Accusation, drawn up against John Wilkinson and John Story, and
proceedings in Relation thereunto, both before and after the four days Meeting
at Drawel, especially if compared with the Paper given forth from Ellis Hook's
Chamber, dated the 12th of the 4th Month 1677, subscribed by Charles Marshal
and 65 persons more, and the Answers thereunto, all which are recorded in the
Manuscript first made mention of in the Preface to the 1st Part of the
Christian Quaker, ready for perusal of any Friend desiring to view the same.

In the sense of these things can I truly say, that my heart is even melted
before the Lord, that Iniquity should grow to so high a pitch, in any that are
Professors of Truth, as to write at so wicked and ungodly a rate, as John
Blaykling has done, and yet bring forth nothing that does in truth prove me
worthy of the least of his evil Reflections, which now leads me to manifest
unto the Reader, what are the particular Matters of Fact that he charge me
with, since it is reasonable, that that should have been by him laid down, as
evidence that I am worthy of his general and gross Reflections.

In order hereunto, I say, I have diligently perused his Postscript several
times over, on purpose to notify every particular Matter of Fact, which in his
or any ones sense I did suppose, might be accounted Evil, and do not find more
than these two particulars following here cited, word for word, out of John
Blaykling's Postscript.

The First is on this wise, And as to that particular Reflection cast upon him,
which William Rogers, ( if his Interrogation be an Affirmation of the Matter)
would ground an Accusation upon, viz. Art not thou the man that have taken
Liberty to stay almost a Quarter of a year from Meeting? and did not John
Blaykling, by name, manifest his Burden and Exercise of spirit on thine, and
the truths behalf for thy so doing? [and having thus repeated my words, he
proceeds and saith] I answer, if William Rogers affirm, that I had a burden on
my Spirit, with respect to George Fox, as out of God's Counsel in that matter,
or as departing from the Truth, I do testify, that he affirms an Untruth, and
that it does arise in him from a Spirit of Envy, watching for Evil against the
Innocent, whom God justifies.

On this I observe, that John Blaykling cannot lay all his general and gross
Reflections at my Door on that account, because he himself does not take it to
be a Charge, unless my Interogation be an affirmation, which he does not there
affirm it to be, neither did I ever intend it so; yet it is rational to conclude
from the aforesaid words of John Blaykling, that I had ground so to query; and
therefore I now appeal unto God's Witness in all Consciences, whether John
Blaykling be not found contradicting himself, since in his Postscript, he thus
says, Is this the Shift you are put to, that he (meaning John Wilkinson)
should not be found a False Prophet, to charge a Lie upon me to defame the
Innocent withal? meaning (as may reasonably be taken) with respect to what I
query, as aforesaid, with relation to him and George Fox, which to me is an
Evidence, that the Word of the Lord by John Wilkinson is fulfilling, since it
appears, as aforesaid, that my Query was not groundless, and that George Fox
accounts it a False Charge. And though John Blaykling proceeds to query, does
not the Lord confound you in all your undertakings? yet there appears to me no
Ground for his so querying, but rather that his and G. F's Confusion, to their
Shame, is abundantly manifested, from what may be visible to every Impartial,
Understanding Reader, that will be at the pains to compare all written by
George Fox, John Blaykling and my self on this Occasion, without other proofs.

The Second particular matter of Fact laid by John Blaykling to my Charge, is
on this wise, And whereas William Rogers asks, if George Fox would not have
accounted this in another, the Fruit of a Careless, Slothful, Libertine or Dark
Spirit, that was either departed, or departing from the Truth, etc? implicitly
thereby charging him with it [To which John Blaykling thus saith] Might not
William Rogers have applied this at home, who knows in his Conscience what a
Libertine, Loose and Dark Spirit, departing from his Subjection to the Truth,
he has given way to, and has taken a Liberty to himself to make away his
visible Estate, or at least a considerable part of it, to avoid suffering
thereby.

On this I observe, that as to this particular, with respect to securing a part
of my Estate, Jo. Blaykling cannot lay all his profane and wicked Charges
against me at my door on that account, without contradiction to his large
Testimony for George Fox, as a man that is spotless and still keeping his
Integrity; because George Fox denies not (as before is manifested) that he
advised Mary the Wife of Isaac Penington, to secure her or their Estate, from
the hands of the Spoilers.

My last Observation is on John Blaykling's beginning of his Postscript, by
which it appears to me, that one of his ends was to appear thus public, as a
witness on behalf of George Fox, to clear all Aspersions, that my self and
others had cast on him, as before mentioned, and indeed he has done it
excellently well, if testifying that G. F. is spotless, without entering into
the Merit of Matters of Fact, be a sufficient proof; but if not, his Testimony
and Certificate is, for the most part, of no Credit. However it occasions me to
note what Irreligious Confidence attends him, thus to appear as a Witness to
clear G. F. of many things he knows nothing of; for John Blaykling was not with
George Fox at Bristol; and with Nathaniel Crips, when Occasion of Nathaniel
Crips his Charge touching G. F 's advising him to buy his Tithes was taken; and
yet John Blaykling's Certificate (as by the Scope thereof does plainly appear
to me) is to clear G.F. from all Aspersions whatsoever, or from whomsoever: To
be plain, such Attempts are a Shame and Scandal to Religion, and are an
Abhorrency to men of common and moral Honesty: but it is to be doubted, that
since that day, wherein John Blaykling, Robert Barrow and two others, gave it
under their hands, in a Letter to Friends at Bristol, That they by the
Authority of God's power have an Understanding given them of God to act and
determine in Affairs appertaining to the Gospel and its Order; John Blaykling
has been so puffed up with spiritual Pride, as that the Lord has suffered his
Wisdom to be turned into Folly, and his Zeal into Envy, whereby he now is (as
well as heretofore has been, in another Case relating to John Story) so
dexterous in giving forth a False Certificate.

And now to conclude, I recommend the whole to the Righteous Witness of God in
all Consciences, nothing doubting, but that the Lord will yet more and more
arise, to oppose that profane ungodly Spirit, which thus strives against his
Heritage, making Lies, False Certificates, Unjust Slanders and Reproaches, as
the chief Instruments, to take away the Good Name and Reputation of such, as
cannot bow to the Will of Man, nor leave the way of the Spirit of Life, wherein
they have begun, in Expectation to be made perfect through Conformity to
Outward Ordinances, knowing this, that those who have begun in the Spirit,
cannot be made perfect by the Flesh.

William Rogers.

We shall now conclude with a particular Matter relating to G. F. and J. Story.

George Fox writes unto John Story on this wise; " John Story, I have seen a
paper that is scattered up and down in Yorkshire, and Westmoreland, as I have
heard, and also that thou should show it to a Friend at Kendal; now if thou
had had so much Humanity, before thou spreadst this Paper abroad, thou
might have sent to me, to have known the Truth of it, or them that spread it
also; this practice is not Common Morality, nor Civil Honesty amongst Men,
which I do declare that thou either have forged, or have some to forge for
thee, those horrid Lies: for I never thought nor heard of those horrid Lies
before, except that of Drunkards and Swearers, and it is a Work of Darkness
from a Malicious Spirit.

The matter thus denied by George Fox is, what is contained in a Certificate
given under the hand of Henry Sweeting of Hartford, which hereafter follows;
And forasmuch as George Fox has charged John Story, That he either has
forged, or has some to forge them for him, meaning many things contained in
Henry Sweeting's Certificate, and thereupon expressly writes unto John Story in
these words; Thou must bring forth the Authors and the Informer, with his Town
and County, else they will lie on thine own Head: We thought it just and
reasonable, that what is done in persuance thereof, might be here cited, that
so every Reader's Judgment may be free, and the Reader left to savor in this
matter for himself, and so we shall leave all (after purusal of the following
Testimonies) to consider, whether it is so rational to conclude John Story a
Forger in this Case, as George Fox; for he that will adventure to add to
another man's words, and render them as another man's words, materially
altering the sense (which is accounted plain Forgery) and not only so, but
write many Lies when he may be detected both of the one and the other from the
sight of his own Lines, and compared with what he pretends to answer, (even as
before is manifested to have been done by G. F.) it is much to be doubted, that
he might sooner adventure to do as he is charged by Henry Sweeting, etc. when
the Matters charged are not to be proved under his hand; for then he has not
only the Advantage to deny the same, if he please, but also to have recourse to
John Blaykling and others for a False Certificate, as in another case already
treated on in this Section is manifested.

Here now follows not only the Testimony of Henry Sweeting, but of several
others to the same purpose.

GEorge Fox did say, that to the Separate Meeting of John Story there was
Whores and Rogues, Drunkards and Swearers; there came a couple to be married,
and one stood up, and said; Mr. Story, I take such a one to be my Wife; and the
other stood up and said, Mr. Story, I take such a one to be my Husband, and
they went afterward to drink and eat some Cake and Cheese, and said, Sir, I
will drink to thee, and doft his Hat; the other said, Thank you, Sir; and doft
his Hat, and where this was done, G. Fox he sent for the woman of the House to
know the Truth of it, he asked whether it was true; and the woman said, it was
true, it grieved her heart to see it. Also he said, that there was fallen from
John Story thirty at one time, of the honestest of them.

These Words were spoken by George Fox in my house in Hartford, and if G. F.
will come to Trial, I shall then prove the substance of what is above written,
by other Testimonies, that he spoke it in this Town, in other places;

Witness, Henry Sweeting.
Ann Sweeting.
Hartford 29th of the 12th Month 1678.
The cause of this my writing is chiefly, because I have met with a Paper,
wherein my name with others is, that came from G. F. which is a very abusive
Paper; although he speaks so much of John Story 's sending and spreading a
Paper, and not sending to him first, G. F. has done it, and must not be
corrected for this his great failing: I shall leave it to the Lord, who
corrects and judges in Righteousness, who is God, that sees and knows all.
Thus much following in Vindication of Truth.

I coming to Henry Sweeting 's house in Hartford, there was George Fox; and the
time I was there, I heard him speak, the greatest part of what is in a little
Paper, written by Henry Sweeting, with his name to the same: where I spoke to
G.F. then, and asked him, Wherefore he related all those miscarriages? to which
he would not answer me. And also I asked him about the Woman High Sheriff, that
he spoke so much of in our public Meeting, and this he referred me to Thomas
Robertson; this I here set down, that these things may bring him to remember
the Truth of what he spoke then; so if he, did speak a rabble of Lies, of
people, behind their Backs, be it upon his own Head; and he must be careful in
his Travel the time to come, to speak nothing but the Truth: for indeed I must
say, I never heard so much spoken by no man, that did profess himself to be a
minister of the Gospel, as if he had surrounded the Countries, to get up all
the miscarriages, and failings, done and committed in time past, which indeed,
I told him then, at Henry Sweetings, That it grieved my heart to hear him
relate such things; and so I left him at Henry Sweetings (where I found him in
his Carriage) going on hushing any one that had any thing to speak besides
himself.

This in Love from him that is his Friend Edward Perkin.

Friend, G. Fox;
THou have sent a Paper to judge me, concerning what I heard thee speak about
John Story, thou deniest it; but I testify in the sight of the Lord, that thou
said, Master Story, I take such a one to be my Wife: and I take such a one to
be my Husband, and eat Bread, and drink Wine, go together like Whores and
Rogues: Thou say, I have laid my foundation with Ties, but I have laid it
with the Light within; thou spakest at Richard Martin 's house, there was
Richard Martin, Christopher Tailor and others.

Mary Beal.

AT Baldock in the County of Hartford, George Fox said, There came a couple to
a Meeting to be married, where John Story was present; and the man said, Mr.
Story, Mr. Story, putting off his Hat; and when they had done, they had Wine
and Cakes, and the Man put off his Hat again, and said, here is to you, Mr.
Story. Witness,

Thomas Moss of Baldock, aforesaid.

It now remains, that we inform the Reader, what John Story said to the matter
of Charge contained in Henry Sweeting's Certificate, which is as follows, and
as it was taken out of a Letter, written by John Story unto a Friend of Truth;
as to the Report the Enclosed carries, I know nothing of it, no more than a
Child Unborn; and in the presence of Almighty God, I do deny any such thing was
done where I was present, or that I ever heard of any such thing done any
where, under the Profession of Truth. And as to that which they call a Separate
Meeting in Westmoreland, to manage Church affairs, I never was at any of them
to this day, neither was I of Counsel with them about any Business they
transacted in those Meetings to this day: I have acquainted them with it, they
also deny they know any such thing, and do deny the abominable practices of all
Rogues and Whores in the World. These are not the first Lies George Fox has
reported, both against my self and the Meeting they call Separate. He has not
given us Ground of late years to expect any Right of Justice from him. Thus far
John Story, on this Occasion.

We now think it needful to take notice, that G. F. in his lines to John Story,
before-cited, seems to import, that John Story did not act as a Moral, Civil,
Honest Man, short of Humanity, to spread the Paper of Henry Sweeting before he
sent to him to have known the Truth of it; whether John Story did so or no, he
best knows, yet, hence we may reasonably take Occasion to query; What became of
George Fox's Humanity, Civility, Morality and Honesty, when he spread William
Rogers his Name up and down the Nation for a Breaker of his Covenant under
hand, upon the bare Report of others, that he had sent abroad a Narrative, and
therein broke Covenant) before he sent to him to have known the Truth thereof?
if G. F. has a Conscience to evade an Answer hereunto, because he will not
fairly (as in truth he ought to do) acknowledge, that if the import of his own
words may be taken to be sound, he is thereby detectable of a practice neither
Humane, Civil, Moral or Honest: Then we further query, Whether 'twas not
abominable Wickedness for him to render William Rogers a Breaker of his
Agreement, that was written down at Bristol, by which he is rendered a Breaker
of his Covenant under hand, upon Report that a Narrative of Passages, at the
Meetings at Bristol, were spread, whenas he neither pretended to be informed,
what particular Matters were contained in those Papers, nor yet to which of the
Meetings they did relate; for touching some Meetings, there was no agreement
made underhand as to their Order, though there was to some other; but yet not
one word of Covenant or Agreement, that any person should be obliged, not to
send abroad a Narrative, whether it might relate to all, any, or either of the
Meetings; and so consequently his rendering William Rogers to be a Breaker of
his Covenant, etc. is certainly far short of Civility, Humanity, Morality and
Common Honesty, if G. F's Rule be good.

And now that the Reader may have a view of the very words written by G. F.
unto John Story, in relation to G. F's aforesaid Charge against William Rogers,
for Breach of Agreement, we think meet to add the copy thereof, which now
follows.

"ANd also I do hear, that a Book or a Narrative is made of our Meeting, which
we had at Bristol, when I was there last, and spread up and down Westmoreland,
Cumberland, Yorkshire and the South, amongst prejudiced people; which was
utterly contrary to the Agreement then. That no Paper should go forth, without
the knowledge and Consent of both Parties; which Agreement was taken down in
writing, as there at Bristol may be seen; and therefore this Practice to the
contrary is below Common Moral Men, and not for the Society of Civil People,
short of Christianity, etc. This their Work bespeaks their Spirit, a
truce-breaking Spirit, a Covenant Breaking Spirit, and not to be credited, etc.
short of Christianity, and below some Priests, to spread such things behind our
backs in a secret, underly way, which does clearly manifest, is not the Spirit
of Christ, nor Honesty amongst men.

We desire the Reader to compare the above cited lines, written by G. F. to
John Story, with a Letter subscribed by a nameless Author, S. H. already cited
in this Treatise, and so leave such, who have Salt in themselves to savor
withal, to consider whether or no it be not rational to suppose, that G. F. was
the dictator of that Wicked, False, Charging, Scandalous Letter, signed S. H.
especially since Thomas Gouldney, William Rogers and William Ford, on a
Jealousy, that G. Fox, was the Author thereof, writ unto him as is subscribed,
but received no Answer from him to this day.

Bristol the 11th of the 11th Month. 1679. G. F.

G. F.
A Letter, whereof the above written is a copy, came several Weeks past, to our
hands; but being dated from no place, nor yet signed any otherwise than S. H.
we could not tell unto whom to send Answer: We have sufficient Cause of
Jealousy, that thou art neither unacquainted with the Matter therein
contained, nor yet the Party that writ it, and therefore we desire thee to
acquaint us, if thou can, who it was, that wrote such a Letter, or a Letter
to the like import: but if thou shall pretend thou can not, then we desire
thee to acquaint us Whether thou do know of any thing acted by us, or either
of us according as in the above copy is mentioned, to render us, or either of
us Covenant-Breakers, and as in the above Copy expressed. The Reason why we thus
desire of thee, is this; it is commonly reported, that thou have thus rendered
us, and in particular to Joan Hily, thou have written of William Rogers, etc.
as a person concerned in sending abroad a kind of a Narrative in the Nation,
etc. contrary to their order and Friends Agreement, etc. George, Truth seeks no
corners; we desire thee, to be Plain-hearted, and send us an Answer by the
bearer hereof, who comes on purpose to bring this, and to receive an Answer
from thee: We are

Thy Friends, Thomas Gouldney. William Ford. William Rogers.



As before is hinted, no Answer is yet come, which is ground of Jealousy that
G. F. is Author of the said abusive Letter.

To conclude; My Desire now is, That every thing herein Treated of, may be
weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary; and then, I doubt not, but that it
will appear unto every Understanding, Impartial Reader, that George For has
been acted by an Erroneous Spirit, and been Guilty of many Things reproachful
to the Truth, for which he ought to Humble himself, if peradventure he may be
made Partaker of the Mercies of the Lord; and then no question, but God's
peculiar People will have a Sense thereof: But until he appear Humbled through
That Repentance that is never to be Repented of, his State and Condition is to
be lamented of. And though it is not in the Power of any Mortal Man, or any
Assembly of Men on Earth whatsoever, to Excommunicate from amongst the true
Members of Christ's Body a Servant of the Living God, unto whom through the
Obedience of Faith in Christ, is given an Earnest of the Great Salvation: Yet
if any one so outwardly pretending, has acted Erroneously, and has concerned
himself Against his Brother, at so large a rate, as cannot be vindicated,
unless that Rule, which Almighty God (as by a Finger from Heaven, through his
Son Christ Jesus) has laid down, viz. By their Fruits ye shall know them, be
to be esteemed as void; it is most just and reasonable to declare, That such an
one has cut him off from being a Member of the Body of Christ, by departing
from the Rock Christ, on which Preservation and Help is laid.

On this Score, I am now concerned in my Conscience thus to declare, and
conclude, That for sometimes past, G. F. has stood in a state of Separation
from many of the Lord's People. May the God of Heaven give him a true Sight and
Sense thereof unto Repentance; that so before his Body be turned to Dust, from
whence it came, he may be restored into Fellowship with them again, says my
Soul:

Bristol, 1st. Day of the 8th. Month, 1680. William Rogers.

THE END.
AN INDEX Of some of the Chief Matters Treated on.
A
Apostasy: A Discovery of several things, which may be justly termed the Fruits
of Apostasy and Innovation; and in particular, that John Wilkinson and John
Story have been Judged and Condemned by Persons, that have not heard them speak
for themselves; as does appear in an Answer given by Thomas Gouldeny, William
Forde, and William Rogers, to a Paper subscribed by Charles Marshall, and
Sixty-Five more, dated at Ellis Hooks his Chamber, London, the 12th. of the
4th. Month, 1677. 2d. Part, p. 72 to 84.

Apostolick-Order of the Church of Christ, Robert Barclay asserts, is
Established amongst the People called Quakers; and by the Scope of his Book of
Government, his Meaning is, with respect to Outward Orders, his Sense therein
disproved. 3d. Part, p. 23 to 33.

Authority of the Church, in Robert Barclay's Sense, 3d. Part, p. 54. The
Apostles assumed not Authority to give a Decisive Judgment in a Religious,
Conscientious Case, without being chosen by the Parties differing; and then
they gave their Judgment according to the Faith both of Jew and Gentile, unto
whom it did relate. 3d. Part, p. 65, 66. See Church Government.

B
Baptism of Water was the Ministration of John, not to continue to the End of
the World: 2d. Part, p. 45 to 50. The One Baptism spoken of by Paul, was the
Baptism of the Spirit: 2d. Part, p. 50.

Believers, in Robert Barclay's Sense, are bound by the positive Sentence, and
Decision of the Church, in Matters of Conscience: 3d. Part, p. 54. His Sense
and Reasons examined, and refuted: 3d. Part, p. 54 to 61. Believers in opposite
Practices, and yet the Christian-Bond of their Fellowship not broken: 3d. Part
p. 56. See Isaac Penington's Testimony touching that Authority which Christ
excluded out of his Church: 3d. Part, p. 89 to 98.

This Sentence, viz. [We must believe as the Church believes] Published by one
called a Quaker, examined, and the Truth cleared from such Constructions, as
may be erroneously imported from thence: 3d. Part, p. 73, 74. See 1st. Part, p.
23 to 27.

C
CHarity: An Objection grounded thereon, in favor of our Opposers, Answered;
showing Fruits of Weakness, Presumption, Danger of going beyond ones Gift,
excluding Reason, eyeing Man, and Things without, instead of our inward
Teacher. The Reason why the Word of Life becomes to some the Savor of Death:
1st. Part, p. 17 to 22.

Charles Marshall, a Subscriber, with Thirty-Six more, of an Unrighteous Paper,
on the hearing of a Debate between Robert Barclay and William Rogers: 3d. Part,
p. 128, 129. Observations thereon, manifesting their Error, and Partiality: 3d.
Part, p. 137 to 140.

Christ by his Spirit a Lawgiver, like unto Moses, 3d. Part, p. 9, 10.

Church Government: Our Sense of our Opposers Meaning, touching
Church Government, our Denial of that Meaning, and that no just Pretense be
under the Notion of Church Government, to claim a Power over Property and
Conscience.

The Doctrine of Robert Barclay, importing Power over Property and Conscience,
refuted; and our Sense touching the Method of deciding Controversies, laid down.

An Objection Answered, whereby it is plain, that Acceptable Obedience carries
with it Conviction of Conscience; and that Christ encouraged not his Disciples
to be Rulers over each other: 1st. Part, p. 44 to 61. See the 3d. Part, p. 35
to 41.

Diverse Sentences cited out of Robert Barclay's Book of Government; importing
an Approbation of such a Form of Outward Church Government, by some of the
People called Quakers, over others so termed; wherein they undertake to Teach
Traditions, Exercise an Authority to Ordain, Appoint, Command, and Rule over
others; whose Duty, in Robert Barclay's Sense, it is to submit: and that there
lies an Obligation on such as are gathered, to Reverence, Honor, and Obey
such, as are set over them: 3d. Part, p. 44, 45. The said Sentences examined,
and that which is taken to be his Sense on the Scriptures quoted, demonstrated
to be a Perversion; and that the words [Order, Rule, Command, Govern,
Government, Traditions, etc.] will not in the Apostles Sense, import an
Obligation on any Christian Believer, to act any thing relating to Faith or
Discipline, on a Religious Score; whereof by the Grace of God, or Light in the
Conscience, he is not persuaded to be his Duty: 3d. Part, p. 46 to 52.

Christian-Quaker: What he stands for: 1st. Part, p. 27 to 30.

Command: Who are deemed by our Opposers to have Power to Command, Ordain, and
Appoint: 1st. Part, p. 6, 7, 8. See Church Government.

Confidence: The Qualifications of such as abound in Confidence, without either
Knowledge or Zeal: 1st. Part, p. 76.

Conformity to other Men's Lines, without Faith, is contrary to the Apostles
Doctrine: 3d. Part, p. 53. See Church Government.

Conscience: Matters purely Conscientious, are Cognizable (according to the
Form of Church - Government, held forth by Robert Barclay) by the Church, and
their Sentence obligatory on Believers: 3d. Part, p. 53, 54. His Reasons
produced are refuted: 3d. Part, p. 54 to 69.

Contents, or Matters discoursed of, in an Answer to Robert Barclay's Book of
Government: 3d. Part, p. 19 to 23.

Convinced: I must stay until Convinced, proved to be sound Language, though
reflected on by Robert Barclay: 3d. Part, p. 42, 43.

Corah: 3d. Part, p. 9, 11, 47.

Cross of Christ consists in denying Self, and not in acting across to all
Societies, etc. 2d. Part, p. 35, 36.

Customs of the World: In what Sense denied: 2d. Part, p. 34.

D.
DIfferences touching outward Property, how in our Sense they ought to be
decided, between Brother and Brother: 3d. Part, p. 41.

Disunion amongst Friends: How it appears that it is so: 1st. Part, p. 4, 5.

Doctrines delivered in the Beginning: 3d. Part, p. 49, 50. Doctrines reputed
by Robert Barclay, the Bond by which we became Centered in one Body: 3d. Part,
p. 54. His Assertion, and Reasons for it, Refuted: 3d. Part, p. 54 to 59.

E
EDward Buroughs: A suitable Testimony of his, at the latter End of the
Preface; showing, That we ought to know the Spirit of God, to be the Ground of
all our Actions in our selves.

A Parable given forth by Edward Buroughs, touching the Scattered in Israel,
Anno 1661. showing, That there were unlearned Dogs, not acquainted with the
Shepherd's manner of Gathering the Sheep; but having something of the Wolfe's
Nature, would not be governed by their Master; and that there were others, well
acquainted with the Masters manner of Gathering the Sheep; and the Fruit of
both: Which may be termed a proper Distinction, through a Parable, of the
Fierce and Ignorant (in the best Sense) Zealots of our Times, as well as of the
Gentle and Prudent: 1st. Part, p. 78 to 83. Observations thereon: p. 83, 84, 85.

F
FAith: Different Faiths, and Persuasions in some Things, no Indication of
Disunion in the Spirit: 3d. Part, p. 74, 75. See Believers.

Faith taken in a twofold Sense; the one is, unto Salvation; the other, not
without a further Growth: 2d. Part, p. 63 to 67.

G
GEorge Fox.

Here now follows diverse Things, relating to George Fox, contained in the First
Part.
George Fox reputed a Setter-forth of Forms of Church Government, to be like
unto Moses; an Establisher of Men and Womens-Meetings, in a Separation each
from other. The said Meetings are called the Church: p. 9.

A different Sense either touching George Fox, the General-Meeting, or
Womens-Meetings is taken to be the Original Manifestation of Variance amongst
Friends: p. 61 to 67.

An Enquiry made, What is the Bait spread before George Fox, to concern himself
against such as cannot own, that his Directions should be urged with Severity;
which is no less than an Enforcing? p. 92. An Answer to that Enquiry, wherein
some Part of the Occasion and Mischiefs amongst Friends is discovered: 1st
Part, p. 92 to 96.

Here now follows diverse things relating to George Fox, contained in the Fourth
Part.
The Introduction to the Fourth Part shows the Occasion of writing that Part
chiefly relating to George Fox: p. 3 to 7.

Seven Questions proposed to John Wilkinson, and Sixteen to John Story, by
Order (as was affirmed) of G. F. together with the Substance of their Answers
thereto: p. 7. to p. 14. Observations on the said Queries, and Answers show,
that the Informer to George Fox, against John Wilkinson and John Story, would
have had his End, by their Answer, Yea; which doubtless was to render them
guilty of Evil Principles and Practices; and yet such an Answer to several of
the Questions might be Justified: And in particular, the Answer to the Second
to John Wilkinson, and the Nineth to John Story; unless we ought to practice on
a Religious Score, Things imposed in the Will of Man; and that it is reprovable
to exhort to keep good Order, etc. p. 14, 15, 16.

An Objection cited in Favor of George Fox, and such Brethren to whom
Obedience by some is reputed to be due, etc. together with Answer thereto;
manifesting that Obedience to the Spirit is due, but not to other Men's Lines,
whilst not by the Spirit convinced thereof. No Ground to believe, that Christ
intended One of his Disciples as an Head, over the Rest, after his Departure:
p. 16, to p. 25.

A Slighting George Fox's Orders, with respect to Church Government, accounted
by some a Slighting of the Cause of God: p. 26.

See p. 7 to p. 16, and p. 25 to p. 36. and then consider, whether it is not
Rational to suppose, that the drawing up of Forty-Four Articles against John
Wilkinson, and John Story, and Proceedings relating to them, were not by George
Fox's Approbation and Permission: And that whatever was pretended to be John
Wilkinson's, and John Story's Failing's; yet that nothing would give
Satisfaction, but Submission to George Fox.

Marks to know some Ministering Persons, who have been of party with George Fox:
p. 33, 34.

A Letter written by George Fox to John Wilkinson, signifying, that John
Wilkinson will be as bad as Muggleton, etc. if he gives not over his Work and
Separation: p. 41, 42.

J. Wilkinson's Answer thereto, desiring George Fox to clear himself, That he
approves of no Force about Religion, but the Force and Effect of the Word
delivered: p. 42, 43, 44.

A Letter returned in Answer by George Fox to John Wilkinson; signifying, that
John Wilkinson is separated from that Power, that first Convinced him; and
that, if not, he would have been at Unity with him, as at first: p. 45, 46. And
that, if John Wilkinson had loved the Gospel of Peace, he would have come to
him: p. 51. But yet he tells him, That if he loves his Sin, he may keep it; p.
52: and that, He thought to have written to him; saying, His Letter was not
worth Answering; and yet has written Answer: p. 59.

Observations on George Fox's said Letter to John Wilkinson, beginning p. 61.

George Fox accuses John Wilkinson as a Tythe-payer, either by himself
directly, or conniving at others paying for him; but proves it not.

A Testimony under John Wilkinson's Hand Against Tithes, is cited: 4th. Part,
p. 9.

George Fox accuses John Wilkinson to be an Angry, Disquieted, Froward,
Peevish, Fretful, Malicious, High, Lofty Spirit; and of his making a Jumble;
but brings forth nothing convincingly, to manifest the same: p. 63, 64, 65, 66.
On this Occasion a Character of George Fox and John Wilkinson is noted; from
whence there is a Reason to suppose, that George Fox would have All Causes of
Differences amongst Friends, even from North to South, come before him to be
Judged, when it pleases him, or else the Refusers may incur his Censure of Not
loving the Gospel of Peace: p. 63, 64.

George Fox clears not himself, That he approves of no Force in Religion, but
the Force and Effect of the Word delivered; and as to that Matter, gives a
scoffing, shuffling, impertinent Answer, wherein there (undoubtedly) is no less
than Three or Four Untruths in Two or Three Lines: p. 66, 67.

George Fox is detected of Malice, Envy, Perversion, and Ignorance, or
Darkness: p. 68 to 76.

Another Letter written by John Wilkinson to George Fox, manifesting his Sense
of the Cause of Divisions, viz. about his Orders, and the Blind Zeal of the
Weak to promote them; and entreats George Fox, to open his Mind, whether by his
Papers he intended Counsel only to the Churches, and no Compulsion: And
concludes with this Testimony; That an Image of the Government of Christ,
consisting in Outward Prescriptions, attended with Force over the Inward Man,
we never expected in this Gospel-Day, to bite and devour one another about: p.
77 to 80.

No Answer (as John Wilkinson says) came to the said Letter; which is taken as
an occasion of Jealousy, That George Fox intended Compulsion, so far as he was
capable, as well as Counsel; and that the ill Consequences attending some
Divisions amongst Friends, will lie at George Fox's Door: p. 80, 81.

Two Letters written by William Rogers to George Fox, spreading before him the
State of some things, relating to Friends of both Parties; which has been
either the Occasion, or the Fruit of Division. William Rogers his Jealousy,
(and the Ground thereof) that George Fox looks upon himself, as that Man at
least, in whom the Son of God has appeared to give forth his Law, (thereby
meaning, on a Religious Score, his Gospel - Law, relating either to Faith or
Discipline amongst the People called QUAKERS) which if plainly confessed to by
him, and espoused by others, would then put such an End to one Part of the
Differences, as that an Absolute Separation would be espoused by many, not
concerned in the other Differences, because they would not own such a thing.

John Story Condemned for not Acting according to George Fox's Example: A
Request to George Fox, to clear himself therein, if he can.

A Signification to him of Three Particulars, as Ground for him to interpose,
for the Ending of Differences amongst Friends; that Ages to come, may not say,
That the Division was concerning the Headship of One Man; and that it might not
be so Recorded, George Fox was desired to manifest, That he never intended,
that what he gave forth, as Instructions, should be urged with Severity (which
is no less than Enforcing) on God's Faithful People. Some of the Qualifications
of such, whom his Papers seem a Strength to. Several Things spread before him,
as the Fruit or Cause of Divisions, and Scandalous to the Truth, whereof he is
the Author or Occasion; together with a Signification of diverse things,
published either by Himself, or other of the Primitive Laborers, which are a
Just Reproof upon Him, or his Party at this Day; and in particular, that his
Papers seem a Strength to such as are Ignorant, Envious, and Zealous without
Knowledge.

A Warning to him, to remove the Jealousies out of the Minds of Friends
concerning him, or else to appear Openfaced. The Fruits of a Dark Spirit laid
down, of part whereof at least, George Fox is Guilty: p. 81 to 105.

Here follow diverse Things relating to George Fox, contained in the Fifth Part.
A Part of some Friends Dissatisfactions, touching some Things relating to
George Fox, and wherein he has been esteemed a Reproach to Truth; exhibited
before him in a Meeting at Bristol, the 11th. of the 12th. Month, 1677. p. 3.
to 10. A Copy of the Articles of Agreement for orderly Proceeding, relating to
the said Meeting: p. 10, 11.

A Copy of a Scandalous, and Unjust Reproachful Letter, written against Thomas
Gouldney, William Forde, and William Rogers, dated from no Place, and
subscribed S. H. grounded on a False Pretense, That they are Covenant-Breakers:
p. 12 to 15. Some Grounds of Jealousy, That George Fox is Author of the said
Letter: p. 20, 21, 89, 90. Observations on the said Letter, showing, That there
was no Ground for rendering them Covenant-Breakers: -- and so consequently, all
the abusive Language contained therein, falls to the ground: p. 15, 16, 17.

Part of another Letter grounded on the same False Pretense, written by George
Fox against William Rogers, which was made use of by the Person to whom George
Fox sent it, to defame Willm. Rogers to one not of the People called QUAKERS:
p. 18, 19, 20.

A Paper of Queries given forth by George Fox, touching Securing Worldly Estate
in time of Persecution; insinuating so far as by Queries may be that it springs
from the Spirit of the World, that lusts to Envy: p. 24, 25.

An Answer thereto by William Rogers, together with Thirteen Queries proposed
to him: p. 25 to 35.

A Rejoinder to George Fox's Reply to William Rogers his Answer, to George
Fox's Queries; manifesting, That George Fox is detectable of many Lies, from
the Sight of his own Answer, and compared with what he pretends to Answer;
several whereof are grounded on Two False Assertions: the First is to this
Effect, That William Rogers should term his Paper, (which he calls an Epistle)
a Good Exhortation in it self: The Substance whereof is cited in at least Eight
Places; which is one downright Lie, told Eight times over. The Second False
Assertion is to this Effect, That William Rogers had many Queries on George Fox
's Epistle, (so termed by him); and it appears, (as George Fox says) that they
are all Charges against him: On this Foot, George Fox is guilty of Thirteen
Lies: p. 30 to 42.

The Reader is desired to consider, whether George Fox be not detectable of
Five or Six Lies more, from the View of his own Answer only, compared with
these his own Words therein contained, viz. [I know them to be all False and
Malicious Charges,] besides that which may be termed Forgery, in adding to
William Rogers his Words, these Two Words, [viz. Beforementioned,] to render
him (as he takes it) to speak that which he intended not: p. 42 to 47.

George Fox's Discourse on the Occasion of Mary Peningtons Securing her Land or
Estate, occasions William Rogers to signify, That he had no Dispensation from
George Fox, to secure his Estate; and also, to discourse on the word
Dispensation; and at length to query, Whether it is not Deceit in George Fox, to
insinuate, as if Mary Penington's Securing her Estate, was the Fruit of her
Weakness; when it clearly appears, that 'twas not only done in Pursuance of
George Fox's Advice; but also, George Fox confesses in his Answer, That he
heard Mary Penington say, She durst not remove her Moveable Goods? And, Whether
it is not the Fruit of great Partiality, and Respect of Persons in George Fox,
to have so great a Regard to the Securing her Estate, for Her and her Children?
and yet take occasion to query, Whether the Spirit that does so, (meaning
making away Estates, etc. for fear of the Spoyler in time of Persecution) is
not the Spirit of the World, that does lust to Envy, which is Earthly, Sensual,
and Devilish? which doubtless will be taken by some to be intended by him, as a
Reflection on such as so do, without a Dispensation from him: p. 44, 45, 46.

Observations on George Fox's not denying, that he had Twelve or Thirteen
Hundred Pounds; but yet denies, that he had so much secured; and also, on his
signifying, That something descended to him, as his Birthright; wherein a
Token of Pride is manifested; and it is well, if he be not now ashamed of the
Meanness of his Earthly Parentage; which, whilst he kept his Place in Humility,
has been accounted a Sign of the Fulfilling of Paul's Words, when he said; God
has chosen the Foolish Things of the World, to confound the Wise, etc. p. 47,
48, 49, 50.

George Fox makes a False Application of Sound Words, which Words are these,
viz. And it is not right, to make a Man an Offender for Words, if he
acknowledge them; and as may reasonably be taken, to cover the False Prophet,
Solomon Eccles; because his following Words are these, As I perceive Solomon
Eccles has done: p. 50, 51, 52.

George Fox Condemnable by his own Rule, in making mention of James Naylor, as
an Old Opposer: p. 52.

Observations on George Fox's not acknowledging, that he advised Nathaniel
Crips to buy his Tithes; together with Nathaniel Crips, and Robert Arch, their
Testimonies, That George Fox did so Advise: p. 53, 54, 55.

Observations on George Fox's Answer, touching his Departure out of a Meeting
in time of Persecution in Bristol; and also, on his Testimony given forth
before, on a Report, That William Rogers should charge him for Flying in Time
of Persecution, in Bristol-Meeting; showing, that he has Contradicted himself,
by saying in his Answer to William Rogers thus; I was sitting in a Meeting at
Bristol, when another was Speaking, and some Officers came up, and took him
away. And in his Testimony given forth on the same Occasion he says; There
came no Soldiers, nor Officers whilst I was in the Meeting, neither before
nor after: p. 55, 56, 57.

George Fox's own Relation both of the Meeting at Bristol and Ringwood, shows
many particular Matters acted by him, which if it had been acted by John Story,
or some others, would in probability be termed, to come from that Spirit, that
said; Master, save thy Self: p. 57 to 62.

Diverse Testimonies, That George Fox departed out of the Meeting at Bristol, in
Time of Persecution, before the Meeting was ended: p. 62, 63, 64.

Observations on George Fox's Testimony, touching his Behavior at
Ringwood-Meeting, does manifest his Weakness, and Confusion; and that 'twould
have tended more to his Credit, plainly to have confessed, that at Times and
Seasons he has continued to Save himself; than after he has so done, to cover
the Matter: p. 64, 65, 66, 67.

A Certificate from diverse Persons of Bristol, in Favor of George Fox: p. 67,
68, 69. By Observations thereon, it is proved to be a False One, in several
Respects: p. 69, 70, 71.

George Fox, and his Parties Unity called in Question, and their Confusion
manifested; and He proved to be exercised by that Spirit, that made some like
Devils, if his own Words may be a proper Measuring-Line for him: p. 71.

George Fox, in a twofold Respect, rendered Guilty of a False Charge: p. 72.

George Fox's Doctrine, (viz. That the Apostle one while Circumcised, and then
again forbad it; and one while said, They should not Judge one another about
Days, and Meats, and Drinks; and afterward Judged them for it, who made it
their Principle) Examined, and found not a sufficient Argument, to Answer the
End intended by him; viz. To Vindicate his Advising Mary Penington to Secure
her Estate, that durst not Remove her Moveable Goods, and made it not (as
George Fox believes) her Principle; nor yet to Judge another for Securing his
Estate, when Principled so to do: Together also, with some Animadversions
touching Circumcision, Observation of Days, Meats, and Drinks, in the Apostles
Days; wherein the Truth is clear from some Constructions, which from George
Fox's Words, may be taken to follow: p. 72, 73, 74, 75, 76.

Observations on John Blaykling's Certificate, given forth in Favor of George
Fox; manifesting, That his Testimony for him, is more like a Parasite to an
Earthly Prince, than a Well-meaning Christian; and that his Villifying William
Rogers, is more like a Scold, than a Sober Man; for that he is not proved by
Particular Matter of Fact, worthy of any Evil Reflection.

John Blaykling's Certificate proved of no Credit, because he appears to clear
George Fox at a general Rate from Guilt, whenas George Fox himself knows,
(though he sent abroad John Blaykling's Certificate with his Reply) that John
Blaikling was not present with him, (and so could not be a Witness to clear
him) when Occasion has been taken to charge George Fox Guilty in several
Things: p. 76 to 83.

Something written by George Fox to John Story, denying that he cast all those
Scandals on John Story, which Henry Sweeting of Hartford has testified he did,
and since proved by several Witnesses, whose Testimonies are inserted: p. 83,
84, 85, 86, 87. John Story's Testimony of his Clearness of those Scandals and
Reproaches: p. 87, 88.

George Fox, by the Import of his Words, in a Letter ( page 83.) written to
John Story, if applied to his own Actions, in relation to William Rogers, will
be found detectable of a Practice neither Humane, Civil, Moral, or Honest: p.
88, 89.

Government: Two sorts of Government owned by us, viz. the One is the Outward
Government, under which we Live; the Other is the Inward Government of Christ,
not represented by Visible Persons, certainly known by Outward Natures, nor yet
Established by Man. Together with some Marks, by which the Opposers of Christ's
Government may be known: 3d. Part, p. 3 to 14. 27, 28, 29.

A Testimony on behalf of such as are in Subjection to Christ's Government;
wherein their Sense is manifested, touching the Effect thereof, and the Manner
of its Operation: 3d. Part, p. 33, 34.

Gifts: Diversities of Gifts are given. Inconveniences attending going beyond
the Gift given: 3d. Part, p. 30, 31, 32. Every one ought to Minister, according
as he has Received the Gift: p. 46, 47.

H
HYpocrisy: In the Printed Sense of a Public Preacher, (our Opposer) it is
declared, That it is Hypocrisy, to profess our selves Members of the True
Church; and yet not Believe thus, as the True Church Believes: 1st. Part, p. 9.
See Believers

I
Jasper Batt, and his Three Companions: A part of their Errors discovered, in
Replying to some Part of an Answer of Bristol-Friends, (cited 2d. Part, p. 72
to 84.) to a Paper Dated from Ellis Hooks his Chamber, London, the 12th. of the
4th. Month, 1677. Subscribed by Sixty-Six Persons, whereof Jasper Batt, and
his Three Companions are a part: 2d. Part, p. 85 to 92.

Jews: An Objection raised, Whether they acted not from the Light within, in
Crucifying Christ. An Answer to the said Objection: 2d. Part, p. 9, 10.

Ignorant: The way how the Ignorant have been Ensnared: 4th. Part, p. 32, 33.

Imposer: See Church Government.

Independency: The written Words of a Public Preacher; insinuating, as if the
Tendency of some of our Spirits were downright Independencies, are treated on;
showing, That we are Principled, to depend on the Sufficiency of God's Grace,
and not on Man, etc. 1st. Part, p. 38 to 42.

Infallibility, As relating to Internal Things, annexed only to the Spirit of
God: 2d. Part, p. 11, 12. How Men endued with the Infallible Spirit, are
Deceived and Fallible: 2d. Part, p. 12, 13. An Animadversion on this Sentence,
That the Church of Christ is Infallible, and cannot Err: 3d. Part, p. 13.

Iniquity not distinguished by our Opposers, from Conscientious Scruples: 3d.
Part, p. 50, 51.

Innovation: See Apostasy.

Innovators: 3d. Part, p. 49.

A Part of their Doctrine: 3d. Part, p. 50.

John Story and John Wilkinson: Some concerned in drawing up Forty-Four
Articles against them, confessed under their Hands, That it is not any Personal
Trespass against any of them, that they charge John Story and John Wilkinson
with, nor any particular Concern of their own, as Men, that they are in the
Defense of; but the Cause of Almighty God, and the Wrong they have done to him.
But yet some of us know, (and that from their own Writings) that their
pretended Wrong to God is a Slighting some of George Fox's Rule, etc. which, in
some of John Wilkinson's and John Story's Opposers Sense, are to be urged with
Severity (which is no less than an Enforcing) on God's Faithful People: 1st.
Part, p. 86, 87, 88, 89.

John Wilkinson writ to some, who of late were his Opposers, That the Word of
the Lord came to him the 20th. Day of the 6th. Month, 1675. the Import whereof
is, That the Lord would break his Opposers, and turn them one against another
about their Orders, if they Repent not: 4th. Part, p. 28.

John Wilkinson and John Story, their Accusers choose Judges, to Judge the
Matters whereof they Accuse them: 4th. Part, p. 29, 30.

The Testimony of John Wilkinson and John Story, in Relation to Five Heads,
from whence the Forty-Four Articles of Accusation, were drawn up against them,
relating to Church Government; wherein they particularly bear their Testimony
against Payment of Tithes: 4th. Part, p. 37, 38, 39, 40.

Isaac Penington, his Testimony, touching That Authority, which Christ excluded
out of his Church; and, Of the Danger of running into Religious Practices,
before led thereinto by the Spirit; and, Of receiving Things for Truths,
because others see them to be Truths; and, That the great Error of the Ages of
the Apostasy, has been, to set up an Outward Order and Uniformity, and to make
Men's Consciences bow thereto: 3d. Part, p. 89 to 98.

Justification, and Salvation through Faith in Christ, owned, and cleared from
the Objections of such, as have seemed to extend the Benefit of Christ's
Obedience unto Persons, whilst Sin is reigning in their Mortal Bodies;
showing, That though such as are in Christ are Redeemed from under the Law,
which consisted in Carnal Ordinances; yet they ought to be subject to the Law
of Faith, which is accompanied with Works of Righteousness, wrought in Man by
the Spirit of God: 2d. Part, p. 61 to 71.

K
Kingdom of GOD: Things relating thereto, are revealed to the Creature but by
one way, viz. the Spirit; though the Manifestation may be various, viz.
sometimes through Man, or the Scriptures, as Instruments, and sometimes through
Himself: 2d. Part, p. 2, 3, 4.

Knowledge without Zeal: Some Part of the Fruits thereof discovered: 1st. Part,
p. 73, 74, 75, 76. The Want of Knowledge, the Cause of a Perishing Estate, and
Bowing to Men: 2d. Part, p. 25. The Meaning of these Words of the Apostle,
[Knowledge puffs up:] 2d. Part, p. 26, 27.

L
LIberty and Forbearance, in Robert Barclay's Sense, refuted: 3d. Part, p 80,
81, 82.

Liberty of Conscience: A Description wherein it does consist: 3d. Part, p. 17,
18. What that Liberty of the Conscience is, that is according to the Gospel: In
particular, it admits of no Liberty to Sin: 3d. Part, p. 86, 87.

Light of Christ: What the Measure of it is, and the Effects of Obedience to
it: 1st. Part, p. 3, 4. See the 2d. Part, p. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Those who this Day say, We were taught to follow the Light in our Consciences,
and not the Orders of Men; and, That we will not have Men to Rule over us,
(thereby meaning such Men, as being in a Separation from the Established
Religion by Law, would yet be accounted Church Governors over us) utters
Language becoming Christians: And though Robert Barclay has reflected on such
kind of Language; yet it is proved to be Sound: 3d. Part, p. 43, 44.

M
MAgistracy: Obedience Active, or Passive due to it: 2d. Part, p. 30, 31, 32.

Master: On what Ground, and to whom the word Master is dis-used by us: 2d.
Part, p. 34.

Meetings: Some part, at least, of Nine Meetings for Worship of God in
Westmoreland, submit their Affairs (without Restriction either to Temporal or
Spiritual Affairs) to Established Monthly and Quarterly-Meetings, and Discharge
the Separates, (so termed, who are reputed to be of Party with John Wilkinson
and John Story) to concern themselves in their Affairs, meaning (as by the
Scope of their Words appears) the Churches Affairs: 1st. Part, p. 89, 90. Such
Submission may be by us reasonably taken to be (in the Sense of such
Submitters) a Mark to know a Member of the Church, at least in those Parts: p.
90. And such their Discharge, seems a Token of some Imaginary Authority, and
Design of the Exaltation of One Man, namely George Fox, (for which several
Reasons are given) in the Defamation of others; and that the Name of Monthly
and Quarterly-Meetings, are but as a Conduit to convey it to him: p. 90, 91,
92. See also, what is written touching Monthly and Quarterly-Meetings, in 1st.
Part, p. 11, 12, 13, 14; and then consider, whether it is not wholly Irrational,
that such should assume unto themselves the Title of Church, and on that Foot
expect Submission: p. 14.

The Order in Collecting the Sense of such Meetings spoken of: 1st. Part, p.
14, 15. And in what Sense the Counsel in holding such Meetings, was embraced,
and the End thereof: 1st. Part, p. 15, 16.

Monthly and Quarterly-Meetings of Men, and also of Women distinct from Men,
not owned by us to be Established as a Part of Christ's Government: 3d. Part,
p. 8 to 14. Womens-Meetings distinct from Men, how they came to be held, and
for what End: 1st. Part, p. 63 to 67.

The General-Meeting has usually consisted of uncertain Numbers of uncertain
Qualifyed Persons: 1st. Part, p. 7, 8. See also the 3d. Part, p. 7, 8. The
General-Assembly of the Cburch of the Firstborn: 3d. Part, p. 74, 78.

Members of Christ's Body, not certainly describable by Outward Marks and
Tokens: Outward Orders insufficient for their Conservation: 3d. Part, p. 57, 58.

No Member of the Church of Christ, one more than another, is exempted from
being liable to err: page 75, 76, 77, 78.

N


O
OBedience: What kind of Obedience finds Acceptance, and what not: 3d. Part, p.
26, 33. See Church Government.

Though the Obedience of Christ made many Righteous; yet it is no Proof, that
any were or can be made Partakers of that Righteousness, whilst Sin reigns in
the Mortal Body: 2d. Part, p. 67, 68.

Opposers: From an Objection raised, Occasion is taken to show the Difference
between Us, and our Opposers, though our Language relating to Principle and
Practice, in some things agree: 1st. Part, p. 30, 31.

Order of the Gospel, is the Power of God, and cannot be Established by Man:
3d. Part, p. 25.

Outward Orders: The Establishers thereof, under the Notion of Christ's
Government, Invaders of Christ's Prerogative: 1st. Part, p. 4. Reasons given,
why they are unsuitable to be accounted a Part of Christ's Government: 3d. prt.
p. 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 23, 24. See 1st. Part, p 6, 7, 8. See Church Government.

P
PErfection: Every Gift of God is Perfect. No such Perfect State attainable,
wherein it is not needful for Man to Watch: 2d. Part, p. 14.

A Cessation from Sin attainable: 2d. Part, p. 14, 15, 16, 19, 20.

Persecution: An Objection touching Securing Outward Estate, in Time of
Persecution, ( Christ's Words to Peter, and Readiness Action of saving Agag, being
instanced) is Answered: 1st. Part, p. 30 to 36.

Plain-Language: On what Ground used: 2d. Part, p. 34.

Power of Decision of Differences, by Robert Barclay's Words, imports a
Jurisdiction (in such as he accounts the Church) over Property: 3. Part, p. 35.
Observations on the said Sense, showing the Inconsistency thereof with Truth:
3d. Part, p. 35 to 41.

Power to Bind and Loose, is not from Christ's Words (so far as from the
Scripture we learn) pleaded by the Apostles, or any Assembly, under the Notion
of Christ's Church: 3d. Part, p. 66, 67.

Principles, Reputed by Robert Barclay, the Bond by which we became Centered
into One Body; meaning Christ's Body, the Church: 3d. Part, p. 54.

His Assertion and Argument refuted: p. 54 to 59. The like he says, touching
Practices and Doctrines: p. 54.

Professors of Christianity: How they come to disagree, touching some Religious
Matters; whenas, whilst they keep to Scripture Language, they agree in
Principles, termed Fundamental, that are relative to the Matter wherein they
differ: 2d. Part, p. 69, 70.

Prophet Raised like unto Moses, is Christ Jesus; and no other is owned by us,
like unto Moses, under the Second Covenant, but Christ Jesus: 1st. Part, p. 10,
11.

Q


R
REign of Christ is by his Spirit, in the Heart: 3d. Part, p. 4.

Robert Barclay: An Answer to his Book of Government, manifesting Erroneous
Doctrines held forth by him: 3d. Part, p. 15 to 88. The Chief Matters
discoursed of in the said Answer: p. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

Robert Barclay's Postscript to the said Book, by way of Epistle to Friends;
wherein he affirms, That he never found Occasion, to Repent or Retract any
thing from the Matter and Principles there asserted by him: And further also,
That though the Things chiefly scrupled at, are (as he says) cleared by Willm.
Rogers his own Letter; yet that all may be satisfied by having them from his
own Hand, he was free to Write his Postscript.

William Rogers his Observations adjoined to the said Postscript, show, First,
That Robert Barclay Justifies his Book. Secondly, That the pretended Letter of
William Rogers, is by Robert Barclay acknowledged to contain Robert Barclay's
Sense and Explication of the Matters scrupled in his Book. Thirdly, That his
Postscript was writ, that all might have his Sense of the Matters chiefly
scrupled under his own Hand, according to the Explications given in William
Rogers his pretended Letter. Fourthly, That, notwithstanding all this, the
Explications in the said Letter, are not to be found in his Book, nor yet all
of them in his Postscript; neither does his Postscript and Book agree, nor yet
either of Them with Truth, in many Things: 3d. Part, p. 99 to 124.

Rule: See Church Government.

S
SAlvation of Mankind: See Kingdom of God, and Justification.

Satan: The Qualifications of such, whom Satan has made use of, to rend and
divide the Church of Christ, viz. such as have Zeal without Knowledge, such as
have Knowledge without Zeal, and others that have abounded in Confidence,
without either Knowledge or Zeal: 1st. Part, p. 69 to 78.

Schisms: The Ground thereof, and some Marks by which it is known: 3d. Part, p.
41, 42.

Scriptures may be an Instrument, through the Spirit, whereby Faith in Christ
may be attained unto: 2d. Part, p. 3, 4. And albeit they have been owned by Us,
and our Ancient Friends, to be a Rule; yet we have not owned them to be the
Infallible Rule; but instead thereof, the Spirit: And yet they have been of
late streined by Robert Barclay, to make them the Rule, to rule over our
Brethren: p. 48, 49, 50, 51. See Church Government.

Sentences or Degrees, (of any Assembly, though pretending themselves the
Church) in Matters relating to Conscience, no Bond upon Believers, without
inward Conviction 3d. Part, p. 58, 61, 62. See Believers.

Sin: See Perfection.

Spirit: What is meant by this kind of our Opposer's Language; viz. Dark,
Leavened, Rending, Dividing, Separate Spirit: 1st. Part, p. 6.

Spiritual Matters, Cognizable by the Government held forth by Robert Barclay:
3d. Part, p. 53.

Swearing under the Gospel Dispensation, not Lawful in any Case: 2d. Part, 37,
38, 39.

Submission to any Assembly, that in any tolerable Supposition, may be termed
the Church of Christ, is so pleaded for by Robert Barclay, as that Want of
Sight shall not excuse being Guilty of Disobeying God: 3d. Pare, p. 69. That
Sense refuted; his Perversion of the Scriptures cited, discovered: 3d. Part, p.
69 to 80.

Supper of the Lord, the Night before he was Betrayed: p. 51. The Doctrine of
Christ at that Supper Owned: p. 51, 52.

Scripture reputed to relate to that Practice, Explained: p. 52 to 61.

T
TEstimonies: In what Case these words, (Let th'Testimonies of Friends arise)
have been notoriously abused: 1st. Part, p. 18, 19.

Traditions: See Church Government.

Tree of Knowledge, of Good and Evil, cannot properly be a Comparison, to
represent Knowledge that is Devilish, or the Thing that is Evil: 2d. Part, p.
28, 29.

Tithes, no Gospel-Maintenance to a Gospel Ministry: 2d. Part, p. 40 to 44.

U
Unity: Diverse Things laid down, wherein the Faithful were at Unity: 1st. Part,
p. 2, 3, 4. In what Sense the Apostle exhorted thereto: 1st. Part, p. 36, 37.
Inconveniences attending this Doctrine; no Unity, but in Conformity: 1st. Part,
p. 72, 73.

An Universal, Established Unity, with respect to Faith and Discipline,
relating to Believers in Christ, by Outward Instruments, is inconsisting with
Gospel-Liberty: 3d. Part, p. 82 to 86. See Believers. The Mark of a Member of
Christ's Church in Unity with the Body, is an Inward, Invisible Mark: 3d. Part,
p. 83, 84.

W
Wars, not Lawful to be entered into by Us, to work our own. Deliverance, from
under Oppressive Laws, and Magistrates: 2d. Part, p. 30, 31, 32.

Weak- Believers may be Received to doubtful Disputations, by assigning the
Decision of Controversy to the Church, since Contention may arise who (or
where) they are* 3d. Part, p. 59, 60.

Wisdom from Above; and that which is not from Above, is deseribed. Wisdom,
which we have as Creatures, is not that Wisdom, which by the Apostle is termed
Sensual and Devilish; but is given us of God; 2d. Part, p. 21 to 25.

Women, having received a Revelation to Utter in the Church, may Speak. Unruly,
Disorderly Women may be warned to be Silent, even as it is their Duty so to be,
in the Church: 3d. Part, p. 52.

Works: What sort are Necessary to Salvation, and what not. Works spoken of by
the Apostle James, are the same sort of Works spoken of by the Apostle Paul:
2d. Part, p. 16, 17, 18, 19.

Writings for Public View: By whom Approved, or else not to be Printed: 3d.
Part, p. 29, 30, Reasons against the Method of such Approbation and Limitation:
3d. Part, p. 29, 30, 31, 32.

X


Y


Z
ZEal without Knowledge: Some Parts of the Fruit thereof described: 1st. Part,
page 70, 71, 72, 73. Zeal, according to Knowledge, accepted by God: 1st. Part,
p. 70. A Part of the Qualifications of such, as are endued with it: 1st. Part,
p. 77.

THE Postscript following the Preface, is added to clear the Truth, as well as
my self, from this pretended Argument against my Printing, viz. That I came up
to London, to read a Charge behind George Fox 's Back; and, That though I
pretended a Readiness to Meet him, I had no Desire thereto: Which gives me
Occasion to lay down several Observations, and Reasons, invalidating the
pretended Argument; together with a Letter written by Me to James Claypoole,
and Three other Friends in London, to cover a Remonstrance to the Friends of
London: All on purpose, that they might use their Interest, to cause George Fox
to submit to a Hearing; that so, if possible, some Expedient might have been
found, to satisfy my Conscience otherwise, than by Printing: Which I acquainted
them of, as well as George Fox; and that I intended to proceed therein, unless
so much Notice should be taken of my Call for Justice, against the Reproachful
Actions, and Trespasses of George Fox, as that he might be brought to a Hearing
before Friends; to the end, that if Guilty, he might give Satisfaction; if not,
he might be Quitted. There are also signified in the said Postscript, several
Things, which are clear Evidences, that George Fox would not assent to any
Meeting for the aforesaid End: Which coming to my Knowledge, I was then free of
all Concern to solicit him more, either by Word or Writing, for a Meeting;
and had no further Bond upon me to forbear proceeding to Print, as Expeditious
as I could.

William Rogers.


