PRACTICAL DISCOURSES ON Sickness and Recovery, IN Several SERMONS, As they
were lately preached in a Congregation in London.

BY TIMOTHY ROGERS, M. A. After his Recovery from a Sickness of near two years
continuance.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the
lower End of Cheapside, Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey. MDCXCI.

To the Right Worshipful Sr. WILLIAM ASHURST, AND Sr. THOMAS LANE, Knights, And
Aldermen of the City of London.
Most Honored,
AFter I had once resolved to let the following Discourses see the Light, in
hope that they might be some way serviceable to the Glory of God, and the Good
of Men, especially of the Sick, or such as are recovered, I had no doubtful
Thoughts to whom they should be addressed. You were the Persons that I first
thought upon, and it is to You that I am obliged in a more than ordinary
manner. Therefore I take this occasion to make my Acknowledgments, and to
testify my Gratitude. It was from your Kindness, that in troubled and uneasy
Times I did obtain many a pleasant and quiet Retreat. In both your Houses in
the Country I always met with a cheerful Entertainment, and had there an
opportunity of Study, which together with the benefit of your Conversation, and
a leisure to think, without being diverted by the noise and burry of the
disagreeing World, made me to relish a very sensible Delight in being there.

It is to me and others a thing very observable, that the Honors which you
have received both from the King and your Fellow-Citizens, have made no
Alteration in your former engaging Tempers and Carriage: You are still as free,
as pleasant, and as affable to your meaner Friends as you were before. Whereas
we daily see many Persons, whom a little Honor or Advancement changes from all
the good Qualities they once possessed, to Loftiness and Pride; whom an high
Station fills with as high Thoughts, and who cannot from their more exalted
Condition look upon such as are below them without Contempt and Scorn. And tho
this may not cause them to lose some outward Civilities from those that are
dazzled with their shining Grandeur, yet they do thereby lose all that Reverence
and Esteem in the Minds of Men which other wise they might expect.

You are, for the great Zeal you have manifested to the Good of your Country,
and more especially to the Liberties and Privileges of this City, justly
beloved; and the more so, because you were always steadily resolved to promote
the true Interest of both, even in such a Season, when some that had either no
English Blood in their Veins, or no true Love to their Country in their Hearts,
were willing easily to part with those excellent Rights which cost their
Forefathers very dear; who were in some sense worse than Esau, for he sold his
Birthright, but they were willing to surrender, and to give theirs away for
nothing. It comforts us when from our low Ground we look up to your higher
Sphere, and see you so well to fill your Orbs with Light; And we daily pray
that you may long shine there for the Common Good, and that we may long be
refreshed with those Influences which have already been so comfortable to us.

You have now, through the Providence of God, an honorable Station, but before
that, you were most honorably descended: You derived your Birth not only from
Families that had done worthily in Ephratah, and were famous in Bethlehem, but
from such as were the Friends of God, of a strict Piety, and of an unblamable
Religion: some of which are now Citizens of a better Corporation, even of that
which is in Heaven. What a Comfort is it to the Children of good Parents, that
they can pray to their Fathers and their Mothers God? In Yours you have beheld
the Amiableness of Religion represented to the Life, in their good Example, and
the Holiness of their Conversation. You may fire your Souls (if at any time
they begin to cool) by the pleasant remembrance of that which they did for God.
You can remember with what Constancy and Fervor they prayed, with what
Reverence they read the Word, and heard it preached, with what Seriousness and
Frequency they spoke to you of heavenly Things, and of the Life to come, with
what watchfulness they managed their Prosperity, with what Patience they bore
Afflictions, with what Meekness they forgave their Enemies, with what Readiness
they entertained all those whom they judged sincerely to name the Name of
Christ. You see those who are yet alive, worshipping and serving God; and you
can (though not without sorrow for your own loss) remember those who are dead
and gone, with what Faith they lived, and with what Hope they died. Give me
leave humbly to desire you, to continue to set often before your Eyes their
heavenly Example, and to keep the same good Order in your Families that they
kept, and to read the Scriptures with as much Frequency and Seriousness as they
read them, to be as conscientious in all the Duties of Religion as they were,
that so They and You may meet with Joy in the Great Day.

The Thoughts of Death, as it is an Entrance into an Unalterable and Eternal
State, will very much promote all this. It will help us to have our most
delightful Conversation with those Persons with whom we desire and hope to be
found when our Lord comes. It will regulate our use of lawful Things, and guide
us in the management of our Pleasures and our Recreations; it will keep both
our Bodies and our Souls in a readiness for private Prayer, the serious, and
reverent, and lively performance of which will greatly promote our Growth in
Grace. We give to our Friends large Portions of our Time every day, and we
should devote some part of it to converse with God; and that not in a cold
manner, but endeavor to warm our Souls with a deep sense of our Wants, and
with some suitable foregoing Meditations. This is that Duty to which you are no
Strangers, and You and all others, that are in earnest for your Souls, will
preserve this as a strong Defense against all your spiritual Enemies, and the
manifold Snares and Temptations of the World; for it brings to our Assistance
the Help of God, and of our blessed Redeemer.

There is no Pleasure that we have in our Friends, or in our Diversions, that
is comparable to that Joy which an holy Soul finds in its humble and reverent
Approaches to the Throne of Grace, where God and the Soul meet together, where
God by his Spirit kindles heavenly Desires, and where the Soul, upon the Wings
of those Desires, takes its flight from this lower World; when the Soul
complains of the burden of Sin, and God by his free and gracious Pardon takes
the Burden off; when the Soul pants and breaths for the living God, and he is
pleased to meet and to satisfy the longing Soul. It is then upon the Mount, and
sees his smiling Face, and would fain always see it; it is loath to come down to
the meaner Employments of this World; and when the necessary Affairs of the
present Life call it away, it comes from the pleasant Work, shining with
brighter Grace and Holiness.

It is a thing of more Honor to You than a thousand honorable Titles, that
You keep up constantly the worshipping of God, and reading the Scriptures in
your Families Morning and Evening: and indeed it is an Arrogance in those to
call themselves Christians, who neglect so sacred and so considerable a part of
our holy Religion: And your good Example in the due practice of these excellent
Things will have a powerful Influence upon your Children; and what you now do,
they will also do, if they live to have Families; and the sight of Religion in
you will convey to them a greater Approbation, and a more easy practice of it.

God has blessed you with a numerous and an hopeful Offspring, whose present
and future Welfare I do with an undissembled Affection most heartily desire. By
their Seriousness, their Ingenuity, and their good Inclinations, they give us
cause to expect, that though they are now as Olive-plants round about your
Tables, yet that they will hereafter refresh the Hearts of many more besides
your own Families: And that, as it is expressed in Psalm. 144. 12. Your Sons may
be as Plants grown up in their Youth; that your Daughters may be as
Corner-Stones polished after the Similitude of a Palace. I question not but the
Prayers that you send up to Heaven for them, will procure the Blessing of the
Divine Providence, which is the richest and the best Inheritance. It is a
Blessing of God that you have so many living Images of your selves, in whom you
see your own Life renewed. And you are so happy as to have your Quivers full of
them. May they all live to be your Comfort, and to maintain Religion in the
World.

God has been pleased to give You several Instances of the Vanity of this
World, by the Deaths of several of your Relations, some of which Mr. Joseph,
and Mr. Benjamin Ashurst.
died in their most hopeful Youth, and in the Flower of their Age, whilst their
Friends promised themselves a long Comfort and Delight in their Conversation,
who had they lived might have been of great use to their Country, and to the
Church of God. And one Relation Alderman Cornish.
you lost, by a way that was very afflicting to you, but advantageous to him.
He died unseasonably as to us, for we needed his Prayers and his good Example;
but his Death was seasonable as to himself; for I do not doubt but he was
prepared for it. He died much beloved, and greatly bewailed. Those that knew
him could not but esteem and value him for the Assableness and Civility of his
Temper, the Conscientiousness of his Dealings, the Sincerity and Heartiness of
his Expressions, the good Order that he kept in his Family, and for that
Uprightness and unaffected Religion that appeared to all that observed his
Conversation. I may without any show of Flattery, say he was one of those good
Men for whom many would have died, could they have exchanged their meaner Lives
for his more serviceable Life. He died by a may somewhat terrible to Flesh and
Blood, but which by Faith he overcame. His Zeal for the Liberties of this City,
and which he showed whilst he was in an honor able Station, rendered him
obnoxious to those Persons then in Authority, who gave liberty to their Revenge
to fall upon those who knew not how to flatter, or commend, or promote their
Arbitrary Designs. It was a thing below him to use such sneaking and such
unchristian Arts for Honor or for Safety. There is nothing can satisfy his
Friends for the loss of so excellent a Citizen, so good a Man, and so sincere a
Friend, but the consideraon of that Providence, which tho it be mysterious and
severe for the present, yet will hereafter appear to have been very wise, and
very good to all those that love God. Tho the Loss his Friends sustained by his
removal from them be great, yet it cannot but be a Satisfaction to them to
consider that he was happy in his Death. He is gone to that God that (as he
said himself) knew his Innocence, and to a Place where there are no false
Accusations, and where he and his holy Friends shall never part again. This and
much more than what I have said, is due to the Memory of so great and so good a
Man, whom it is impossible for a true Lover of his Country ever to forget.

My Zeal to the remembrance of those Persons which I have mentioned, and whom I
honored and esteemed, together with the Respect that I ought to express to
them, has drawn me to a much greater Length than what I at first intended; and
tho when I consider the multitude of your Affairs both public and domestic I
am afraid I have too much presumed upon your Time in this Dedication, yet the
Experience that I have often had of your Candor, makes me to believe that you
will forgive even so criminal a Presumption.

God has given you plentiful Estates, and, which is as great a Mercy, Hearts to
use them. You have often been Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to the Lame. There
are many hundreds whom your Charities have refreshed; the Blessing of those
that were ready to perish, has often come upon you: And you have made the
Hearts of the Desolate to sing for Joy. And it is no small support of your
Prosperities to have many praying for you to God, and who are the more earnest
as having been greatly obliged by you.

I do now thank you for all the many Kindnesses that I have received from you
both in my former Health, and in my late sore Affliction. I thank you for
Visiting me in my low Estate, tho the greatness of my Pain, and the anguish of
my Thoughts allowed me not to take such notice of so great an Honor as
otherwise I should have done. I have often said when I was greatly afflicted,
That I should neither see you, nor any others of my Friends till the great Day,
and till the Heavens were no more: And God alone by his Sovereign Goodness has
brought me from the lowest Pit. It was to manifest my Thankfulness to my great
Deliverer, that I preached the following Sermons, in a Place where were many of
my Friends, many that had prayed for me, many that had continued their
Kindnesses to me, when I could no way be serviceable to them, and to whom I can
make no other Requital than by praying for them, and endeavoring to live to
the Glory of that God, for whose sake both you and they so kindly remembered me.

In these Discourses you will find a Relation of some part of my Affliction. It
is impossible to relate the whole of it, for my Sorrows were beyond expression.
I have not here insisted on that, which was the Trouble of my Trouble, my
spiritual Distress, my Anxieties and my Fears, which were vastly more
afflicting to me than my bodily Pains, which yet were both sharp and long. I do
purpose if these Discourses meet with Acceptance, to publish some others
hereafter, that shall both contain an account of the Distresses of my Soul, and
also some Directions to those that are long afflicted, and more especially to
melancholy People, to whose Case there is very little said by those that have
long been so themselves. Since I have been so long sick, I cannot look upon any
of my Fellow Creatures but with great pity, when I think how many thousand
Pains and Troubles may be their Portion before they die. I could not have
thought there had been in the World so many and so great Miseries as those are
which I my self have felt: Tho at the same time I cannot but adore the Wisdom
of God's Providence that conceals from the knowledge of Men those Evils to which
they are obnoxious; for if they foresaw them, it were impossible for them to
perform their present Duty, they would cause such troublesome Agitations in
their Spirits. I have been somewhat particular as to my own Case in the
following Sermons, that I may warn all People to walk humbly, and not to be
secure when they see what strange Miseries God has wherewith to correct our
Follies; to desire them to prepare for long Sickness and Pain; as also to
excite those that are delivered from the Grave, and so have received two Lives
from God, to be very thankful, and to improve so comfortable and so great a
Mercy.

That You may prosper in your Trades, and go on with the same Vigor and
Faithfulness to manage the Duties of your Public Station that You have
hitherto done; That You may long live to promote the Welfare and Happiness of
this City, and by the careful discharging of your Talents may afterward have
Authority over ten Cities, and exchange your Gowns for Robes of Glory; That the
Blessing of God may be upon You, your Ladies, your Children, and your whole
Families, is, and shall be the constant Prayer of,

Gentlemen, Your very much obliged Servant, TIMOTHY ROGERS.
London, Sept. 22. 1690.
Practical DISCOURSES OF Sickness and Recovery.
SERMON 1.
PSALM. 30. ver. 3, 4. O Lord, thou have brought up my Soul from the grave, thou
have kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit.

Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his, and give thanks at the remembrance of
his holiness.


IT has pleased that all-wise Providence that Governs, orders and directs all
things in this lower World, after a very long and terrible Sickness and
Calamity to give me an opportunity to appear in this Place at this time. It Is a
place where I am well assured there have been many prayers put up for me during
my sore and great Affliction. And seeing the Most High God, in whose power
alone it was to relieve me, has from his own Sovereign Goodness, not cast off
your prayers nor turned away his mercy from me; I am now come to thank him in
the midst of this Congregation, for remembering so mean a Creature and so vile a
sinner in his low Estate, for his mercy endures for ever. As also to thank
those of you here that had a sense of my sorrowful Condition, for your kind
Affection, and for the Requests which with so much pity and Compassion you
presented to the Throne of God in my behalf. I judge it equal, that in a place
where there have been offered up so many sacrifices of hearty prayer there
should be also offered up one common Sacrifice of as hearty Praise, and that a
great Cloud of Incense may go up from us toward Heaven with an united flame of
Love and Joy. For may you not say with me, Who is so great a God as our God,
who does mavelous things without number; who commands Salvation where there
seems to be no sign but of approaching Misery and Ruin; and, who is so good a
God as our God, that does not contend for ever; that Creates Light in the
thickest Darkness, and turns the shadow of death into the morning. It is this
Mighty and this Gracious God that I would praise my self, and that I would now
invite you to praise. It is no less than his all-powerful Voice, that has
asswag'd those Floods that overwhelmed me; after I have been like Jonas in the
very belly of Hell, swallowed up with amazement and fear, he has made those
Waves of Trouble which in a Continual Succession roul'd over my Head, to set me
now as on the dry Land. It was without doubt a surprising thing to Jonah after
so sad a Case as is mentioned in Chap. 2. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. wherein he thus
speaks, Thou had cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas, and the
floods compassed me about, and thy billows and thy waves passed over me. Then I
said, I am cast out of thy sight, yet I will look again toward thy holy temple,
the waters compassed me about even to the soul: the depth closed me round
about, the weeds were wrapped about my head. I went down to the bottoms of the
mountains; the earth with her bars was about me for ever, etc. I say after so
sad a Case as this, it was a surprising thing to the poor man to see himself in
this pleasant World again, and to find that the same Creature that had
swallowed him up should be the vessel that should Convey him to the shore. As
it is not easy to know after what manner he lived, for those three days and
three nights, how he breathed in the Sea, and in the belly of the Whale, and
with what he was nourish't and maintained, so his escape from a danger which
had actually overtaken him was no less miraculous. I am not in a less surprise
than he may be supposed to be in, nothing but that Almighty power to which
nothing is impossible could save either him or me. Methinks I begin to stand as
on the firm Land, and behold that stormy Sea, and those rough Winds that blew
so violently, and filled me with so great a fear, and which lasted more Months,
than his did Nights and Days. And though I was no way like to that Holy
Prophet, unless it were in his Impatience and Anger, yet I can say with him,
Jon(...) 2. 9. I will sacrifice unto the Lord with the voice of thanksgiving, I
will pay that that I have vowed, salvation is of the Lord Though I have such a
remaining pain as makes me not to know what a Total Ease is, yet I own it as an
effect of his Unsearchable Grace that I have now so much hope as to be able in
some measure to pray to him, and so much Ease, as to be able to speak to you,
neither of which I could have done whilst his heavy hand pressed me very sore.
Had it not been for some remaining indispositions, I had not so long delayed to
appear in this place. I have thought indeed sometimes that I would with Sampson
arise, and do as I did at other times, but that tedious and uncommon pain that
afflicted me, and the Consciousness that I have of mine inability to manage so
Honorable and so difficult a work as this, has long kept me back. Moreover, I
thought there was no need of my weaker Light, nor of my meaner Capacity whilst
in my absence you had others, whose understandings being better furnished could
communicate to you in larger measures from their more abounding store. But the
deliverance which God by his own Power and Goodness has already given me, is so
wonderful, so unexpected, and especially so undeserved, that I cannot but
thrust my Sickle into the Harvest, though it be with a very trembling hand. And
I promise my self that you will join your prayers with mine, that it may be for
the good of some Soul or other, nay if God so please, that it may be for the
good of many Souls that I come here this Evening; that it may be for the
preservation of others from so thick a darkness, and so woeful a Condition as
that, wherein I have been. I come to you as one from the dead, to say no more,
and though if you hear not Moses and the Prophets, and the well attested
Revelations and Discoveries which God has made by them, neither will any other
methods be successful to your good; yet one would think that the Words of one
that has dwelt so long as in the very Grave and in the nearest Confines of
Eternity, ought to carry more than ordinary weight with them. A peculiar
attention is usually afforded to dying Persons, and I think the same should not
be denied to such as in the Judgment of others and in their own opinion have
been no longer for this World, as I was for above a year; and upon that account
have Cause to say as in the Text. O Lord thou have brought up my Soul from the
Grave, etc.

From the Words we may raise these two Observations.

First, That God alone is the Sovereign disposer of Life and Death.

Secondly, To be brought up from the Grave is a Mercy greatly to be
acknowledged, and for which all such as are recovered ought to be very thankful.

First, God alone is the Sovereign disposer I. Obs.
of Life and Death. This great God concerns himself not only with the Nobler
parts of his Dominions, but with such as are more inconsiderable. He not only
preserves the vaster and the purer Orbs above, but also this little drossy
Globe. His Care extends its self not only to the Highest Angel, but to the
least and the meanest Man. And though Men are among us distinguished by several
Excellencies and Titles of Honor, yet before him all flesh is as grass. He
gives a Being to the meanest Pile in its ordinary Garb as well as fine Apparel
to the beautiful Lillies of the Field. It Is in him that we all live and move
and have our being, and if his Concourse be removed, all our operations will
immediately cease. We cannot act without him, for then we should be
self-sufficient, and Independent on him. He is the Author and the Preserver of
our Nature. He first tied our Bodies and our Souls together, and it is his care
that maintains this Incomprehensible Union that is between parts in themselves
so vastly different; and when he pleases to suspend his Influence, it is
dissolved and broken asunder. He is the strength of our Life, Psalm. 27. 1. From
him we have all our Healthfulness and Vigor. He is the Great Agent, the
principal Efficient Cause of All that Exists, and all second Causes in their
several Actions depend upon him. Though the manner of his Influx is very
Mysterious, and it becomes not the weakness of our Minds daringly to determine
which way it is, we that are extremely in the dark about many of the motions of
our own Faculties, ought not any way to Limit Him, whose Ways are
Unsearchable, and who is so far above us. But this we most certainly know that
our whole being, and the continuance of it depends on him alone. It Is his Sun
that does refresh our Spirits with his Temperate, and Comfortable beams, and
that by his Amiable shine renders this World a place of delight. For were it
always covered with darkness, it would be a place very undesirable and full of
horror. They are his Vapors that are drawn up to fill the bottles of Heaven,
and it is his hand that opens them again, and makes the Clouds dissolve to give
being to Grass and Corn, to feed the Beasts for us, and to be the staff of our
Life. It Is his Day in which we work, and his Night in which we sleep; it is his
Earth that bears us, his Air in which we breathe, and they are his Winds that
purisie and fan that Air to make it healthful, and serviceable to us. It was
this great and Gracious God that first breathed into us the breath of Life; he
formed our several parts with curious and inimitable Art, and his own skilful
hand brought us from the darkness in which we were enclosed safely to the Light
of Day. 'Twas by his Goodness alone, that we were not strangled in our Birth,
or smothered in the Cradle; and that we did not there by the Carelessness of
our Keepers, and by the many distempers that attend our Early Age find a Grave.
His Goodness saved us from the dangers which we our selves were unable to
apprehend, and which without his extraordinary Favor would have closed our
eyes as soon as we saw the Light; and have sent us into the other World, when
we were but newly entered into this. His Mercy delivered us from the unknown
dangers of our heedless Infancy, and from the unfear'd evils of our daring
Youth. It Is God alone that holds ou^ souls in life and suffers not our feet to
b moved, Psalm. 66. 9. It Is he that furnishes us out of his Stores wherewith to
repair the daily decays of Nature. He gives us the things that are absolutely
necessary to maintain our Life and those also that are necessary for
refreshment and delight. His corn his wine, and his oil. Hos. 2. 8. He causes
the grass to grow for the cattle and herb for the service of man that h^ may
bring forth food out of the earth, and wine that makes glad the heart of man
and oil to make his face to shine, and bread which strengthens man's heart,
Psalm. 104. 14, 15. It Is he that spreads our Table, and who fills our Cup, and
makes the things which we take for the support of Life to give us strength; for
we live not by bread alone, Mat. 4. 4. It Is he that gave and that maintains
that heat in our Stomaches, and those Acid juyces there, that alter and
attenuate and distribute the several parts of our Meat. It Is he that gave us
the desire of Food, and that drives away those diseases that would lessen and
abate our Appetite. And it is in the sense of his Providence that we ask his
Blessing before we eat and return him thanks afterward. For were it not for
his Gracious Influences, our Faculties would quickly lose their proper Virtues,
and we should notwithstanding all our Care quickly dye. All Sicknesses are at
his disposal, for it is he that kills, and that makes alive, he brings down
to the grave and brings up, 1 Samuel 2. 6. When he pleases to withdraw his most
Common Blessings, we droop and Languish and pine away. Thousands of Diseases
stand in a readiness waiting for his Command, and when our sins make him to
give the word, they fall upon us with a mighty Violence; and in a few restless
days and nights change our Countenances, break off our purposes and stain all
our Pride and glory. Fools because of their transgression, and because of their
iniquities, are afflicted. Their soul abhors all manner of meat, and they
draw nigh unto the gates of death, Psalm. 107. 17, 18. God has fixed the bounds
of our habitations, and the very time of our stay, and when it shall be that
they must know us no more, We are but Dust and Ashes, and how soon can the
mighty power of our great Creator blow away the most strong and healthful, with
more ease than we can our breath scatter a little dust. All things in this
lower World have their Rise, their Progress and Decay by the Decree of God, and
so have the Lives of men. There is a time wherein to be born and a time wherein
to dye, and both known to him though upon wise Reasons hid from our knowledge.
God does with great Wisdom cast a Veil of thick night upon all future Events,
that so we may without needless and diverting Curiosity perform our present
duty. He shows this Dominion that he has over the Lives of Men in these two
things.

First, In the large difference which his Providence makes amongst those
persons whose outward Circumstances seem to be much alike. One sick man by the
use of some mixtures or applications immediately recovers, and another that
with the most exact observance takes the same Physic, consumes his days in
tedious Sorrows, and in the floods of his own Tears, is carried Mourning to the
Grave.

Secondly, He shows his Sovereign disposal of the Lives of Men, in ordering the
different Seasons and times of their Death. One is cut down in his early
Spring, and in his blooming greener Youth, and his Sun is covered with
darkness, almost as soon as it begins to rise, whilst another weathers out the
Storms, and grows to a mature and full Age. One does but peep as it were into
the World, takes a short view of it, and is commanded out again, and is at his
Journeys end in the morning of his Life, and another is allowed to travel till
the shadows of the Evening are stretched out according to their most regular
advances, and till the Threescore and Ten that is the usual date of Long Life
is expired. One is quickly summoned to the Great Tribunal and judged, whilst
another has a longer space wherein to prepare for his Trial and his Final doom.
It Is the Divine Providence that sees and orders not only the larger portions
of the lives of Men such as Infancy and Childhood and Youth and Manhood, but as
God numbers the Hairs of our Heads, so known to him are all the minutes and
hours and days and particularities of our Life, and every moment of our Time.
He has set us our bounds that we cannot pass, and with respect to his
Appointment no man dies before his Time. Though a man that dies by an acute
Disease, or a violent Death, dies before that time which he might have reached
in an ordinary Course, and before old Age, which we reckon to be the most
seasonable time wherein to dye; Bloody and deceitful men are said not to live
out half their days; that is, according to the General Limit and Order of
Providence as to the Age of Man, viz. Seventy or Eighty years. And indeed every
Wicked Man in some sense dies before his time, because he is not sit to dye,
like Fruit that is gathered before it be fully ripe. I now proceed to some
Application: And from this Doctrine we may Infer.

First, If God be the Sovereign disposer Inf. 1.
of Life and Death, then the Friends of the Sick do them the greatest kindness
when they recommend their Case to him. And to this they are obliged by the
Communion which they have with them in the same Humane Nature, they are also in
the body; in such a body as is liable to as many pains as they see in others.
They may be plunged into the same distresses, and need the same favor to be
showed to them. Regard, I beseech you, your afflicted Friends with great
tenderness and pity, for whatsover their Case is, your sins may bring you as
Low; and you have no assurance that what has happened to them may not be your
own Lot before you come to the period of this miserable Life. It is also the
duty of the Sick themselves, in the first assaults of Pain, with great Humility
and Contrition of Spirit to betake themselves to God as their only helper,
and, with a fervor suitable to the sadness of their Case to request of him.
Faith and Patience, Repentance, and Mortification, and the pardon of sin; and
earnestly to pray (that if it may be) their sickness may not be very long, nor
very sharp. For long and sore afflictions are so great Trials of Humane Nature
that they may very well be prayed against; and I suppose no man thinks himself
obliged to desire an heavy Cross. As to what concerns the Sick Man himself, he
is to put his Affairs into the best order he can upon the first warning, the
first beginning of his Illness; for indeed in most Distempers those increasing
pains that attend them will not allow him to do it afterward. Thus Job
advises, Chap. 33. 26. that, When a man is chastened with pain upon his bed he
shall pray unto God and he will be favorable to him, and he shall see his face
with joy. But he that never begins to pray till he be almost at the last Gasp,
will not be able to make such a strong and fervent Prayer as is like to reach
to Heaven. As for them that try the Physician till he gives them over, and
never till then seek the Prayers of the Church, they have but little Reason to
hope for help from God, to whom they have no recourse till they are driven by
the last extremity. For they show that if they could have had Relief without
him, they cared not to be beholden to him for it. In which Case it is just with
God to suffer the Sickness to be mortal, which perhaps had not been so, if
Applications had been made to him with the first, by calling for the Elders, by
confessing their Sins, by promising Repentance, and by Prayers for good things
requisite, as well for the body as for the Soul. Discourse of Extreme Unction.
page 48. It is also the duty of those that are acquainted with the sick,
instead of vain and frivolous discourses of Common Affairs, which have no
relish with those that are in great pain, to Minister as far as they are able
to their Spiritual Wants; to direct, instruct, and any other way to help them;
to set their Souls in order, and to trim their Lamp. See what Care the Holy
Prophet used to his Enemies, Psalm. 35. 13, 14. When they were sick, my clothing
was sackcloth, I humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into my
own bosom, I behaved my self as though he had been my friend, or brother: I
bowed down heavily as one that mourns for his Mother. Those means which he
used for their Recovery were an argument of the sincerity of his own Religion,
as well as of his most affectionate Sympathy and tenderness to them. When you
visit the sick you see in them the prospect of your own Mortal Estate. You see
how soon their Complexion, their Temper, their Sociableness, and all that
agreeableness of Humor which was pleasing to you is gone and changed. In their
broken feeble expressions, in their wan and pale looks and in their fallen
Countenances, you behold that man in his best Estate is altogether vanity,
Psalm. 39. 5. and how when God with rebukes does correct man for Iniquity, he
makes his beauty to consume away like a moth, ver. II. then you see that all
flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field,
Isa. 40. 6. How many times do you see those whom you love, struggling with pains
strong and bitter even as death it self, and you cannot though you never so
earnestly desire it, afford to them the least Relief, not a moments ease, nor
the smallest interval of rest; but when your hearts have sunk within you with
the doleful and unintermitted accents of their Groans and Sighs, how often have
you prayed to God and he has appeared to your help and theirs? There may be
many Cases wherein much speaking may do your afflicted Friends no good at all,
but there is no Case wherein your prayers may not be of great advantage, either
to preserve them with you, or to obtain for them some Gracious discoveries of
the Love of God, or a more easy passage both which are very great Mercies.
What wonders have been wrought in all Ages by the power of the United
Intercession of Believers when they have carried their sick to Christ. What
numbers are there of perfect Souls in Heaven that can Witness to the Truth of
this; and how many delivered Captives are on Earth, that can now with joy set
their Seal to it, and say with Transport, truly God, is a God hearing prayers.
The continued prayers of the Church for Peter did procure his Enlargement and
an Angel was dispatched to break his Chains, and to send him to carry the welcome
news to the then praying Church, that their prayers were heard and he was
delivered. Many there are now alive that owe their Lives to this, whereof I am
one. The Mercy of God which alone could help me, and that was implored and
sought by your prayers has brought me from the very Grave. In all future
occasions try this method for you know it is available and successful. Is any
afflicted let him pray himself; is any so overwhelmed that he cannot well
perform it, Let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over
him, and the prayer of Faith shall save the sick. Jam. 5. 14, 15. He is to use
this course as a means for the recovery of his Health, for though we cannot
with any Modesty pretend to the prayer of Faith here mentioned, that is, of a
certain persuasion that the person for whom we pray shall be raised up; yet we
ought to pray in this Faith, that it is pleasing to God when we express our
dependence upon him by asking those things which we need; that every good thing
comes from him, and therefore health and deliverance from death; that though he
does not always, give that particular thing which we ask, yet it is sometimes
denied because we do not ask, and that as he never gives the greatest Blessings
of all, which are those of a good mind, but in answer to prayers. So sometimes
he does not send bodily good things, because he is not prayed to for them. And
there is no less Reason for Prayer, when God raises up the sick by Blessing
ordinary means, than when it was done by a supernatural Gift. Discourse of
Extreme Unction, page 46.

Inf. 2. There is great Reason to Fear and Reverence God. For as he presides
over all the Revolutions of Empires and Nations, their Original, their Growth,
their Prosperities and Decays, so he does likewise over particular persons in
their Life and Death. His knowledge and his Government reaches to all things;
for their Existence depends upon his Will. It is in his power to destroy or to
save. He is the God in whose hand our Life is. We lie at his Mercy, and
according as he Wills we must either be Healthful or Sick, Live or Dye. His are
our times, on his pleasure our present happiness and our future welfare
depends. He sits upon the floods, and orders with a steady and uniform design,
All that appears most uncertain and changeable to us. He can either make the
Waters of Affliction to drown us, or say unto them as unto the waves of the
Sea, hitherto shall you go and no further, even then, when their swelling Pride
threatens us with total desolation. He has appointed his Sun to measure out our
time, and knows when shall be the last concluding day. When those that are now
living shall dye, and by what sort of death, and where after that they shall be
placed, whether in Happiness or Woe. He knows when the last Trumpet shall sound,
and when the dead shall be raised. Of him therefore should we stand in Awe, as
having that voice continually in our ears, Deuteronomy. 32. 39, 40. See now that I,
even I am he, and there is no God with me: I kill and I make alive: I wound and
I heal: neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand, for I lift up my
hand to heaven and say I live for ever. What an abundance of diseases are at
his beck, what abundance of Arrows are in his Quiver, what abundance of sins do
we commit which cause him to bend his bow, and provoke him to set us up as
marks of his displeasure? He can strike the most consident and secure sinners
dead in a moment, or with long abiding pains fill them with so great anguish
and vexation that they shall choose strangling and death rather than Life. Alas
what are we to this Great God, but as Chafe before the Wind, but as Thorns and
Briars before a Consuming Fire; but by a reverential awe of him we may lay hold
of his Strength and be at Peace. Look up to his Heavens, and that vastly
extended Firmament that is above, and then reflect and think how great is he
that made all this Creation with a Word. Look to his Law and consider how holy
he is in his Precepts and Threatenings, and then look to your selves and
consider how Sinful and how Vile you are. Look upon the strange punishments and
miseries under which many of your Fellow Creatures groan, and be not
high-minded but fear, because the God that afflicts them may perhaps very
shortly do the same to you; and let it fill you with the most awful thoughts,
when you consider how great is his power, how severe his Justice, and how
unspotted is his Holiness. How easy is it for him to bring you to the Grave,
if he do but withdraw sleep from your eyes, so that you have no rest for three
or four nights or for one Week. Then there is a stop put to all your present
projects, and then all the Comfort of the World is gone. For all Affairs depend
upon Activity and Vigor, and this will cease when sleep does no longer refresh
your Spirits as it used to do. All your apprehensions will change when you have
lost this support of weak nature, this only prop of Comfortable Life. God can
make the strongest and most healthful persons quickly to feel Sickness and
Diseases. He can quickly turn a pleasant fruitful Land into barrenness and the
most beautiful Habitations into Dust and Ashes. We should greatly beware of
provoking him of whose Mercy we stand in need, and whose Wrath we cannot bear.
He can quickly change all our Joy into Mourning, and our Day into Night, and
our Light into the shadow of Death. When he frowns all the stateliness of
Buildings, all the Glory of Nations, all the Pomp and Splendor of the World is
gone. How soon can he lay waste a flourishing Country with War or Plague or
Famine, he can quickly turn the house of Joy into an house of Mourning, and
deprive us of what is most pleasant in our Eyes, and blast all our hopes You
have seen that by letting loose an unruly Element of Fire he turned this City
in two or three days into an heap of Ruins; and by filling the Air with
contagious Vapors sent many thousands in a very little time into the Grave, and
he can by letting loose any one Humor in your bodies make you a burden to your
selves, and to be weary of a World in which you can no longer live as you used
to do.

Inf. 3. There is great Reason that, Inf. 3.
under any Sickness or Distress that befalls us, we should submit our selves to
this God that brings even to death and back again. If you be plagued all the
day long, and chasten'd every morning, Psalm. 73. 14. whilst others are in no
trouble; and if you feel your strength decay, whilst theirs is firm; let no
murmuring thoughts fill your Minds, because you are the Creatures of God, and
he may do with you what he will. Keep a remembrance of his absolute Sovereignty
always imprinted on your Hearts. Job 33. 12, 13. God is greater than man, why
do thou strive against him, for he gives not account of any of his matters.
Whatever he does, is therefore good and holy because he does it. And when he
chastens us very sore, we should lay our Mouths in the dust, and bear with
Patience his Indignation, because we have sinned against him. We must not yield
our selves to our Miseries, but to him that sends them; and that you may submit
in Great and Heavy Trials, you must have recourse to the Promises of the
Gospel, the Mercy of God, and the Righteousness of Christ, the Merit of his
Sufferings, and the Efficacy of his Intercession, and if you believe you will
be established, for without Faith in Christ there is no Hope, and without Hope
no Submission. How can this be done if a man have no prospect of advantage by
it, either in this or the next World; for no man can possibly submit to be for
ever Miserable. It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for
the Salvation of the Lord, Lam. 3. 26. Inveigh not therefore against the Rod
though it smart very much, but look to the hand in which it is, to that Wisdom
that has the disposal of it, and to those sins that have deserved it. Look not
upon your Evils as the product of Chance or Fortune, but as the effect of an
Holy Providence, which though it is many times very severe, yet is always very
just. Adore this Providence with an humble Silence and Veneration. You do not
know which is better for you, Health or Sickness, Affliction or Deliverance, he
only knows that knows all things, and it will be very grateful to him if you
give a cheerful entertainment to his Order and Decree. If he please, who is
your Gracious Creator and your Father, he can therefore afflict you, that he
himself may be your Cordial, and revive your fainting spirits from the very
Grave; but if not, your Religion should teach you to approve of all the
messages he sends you, and by a quiet Resignation to put your Souls into his
hands, when he signifies by the Progress and Increase of your Distemper that
your Race is finished, and that it is now your time to die. And in order to
this, you must lay up a good store against that Evil day. For you may be warned
from the World with long Chronical Diseases, that by their Acuteness and
Violence, may be as so many several Deaths complicated together. And, then,
when you have no hope of bodily ease any more, then will be the great Trial of
your Faith. Several Men will with great hardiness and resolution bear very
great pains, so long as there is the least hope of Life; but to be patient and
submissive in the deepest Sorrows, and in the view of certain death, this is
what none can rightly attain to but those that Believe, and not all those
neither, but such whose Faith is deeply rooted; has for a long time flourisht,
and Conquered overwhelming doubts, and so is of more than an ordinary growth.
This is that which rendered the Patience of our Blessed Redeemer so very
remarkable, that when he was lead to the slaughter where he knew he was to
suffer violent and great pain from barbarous and cruel men, yet even then he
opened not his mouth, and when he knew there was unspeakable bitterness in that
Cup which he was going to drink yet notwithstanding all the Wormwood and the
Gall that was in it, and though his Innocent. Nature did recoil a little yet he
drank it off, saying with an entire freedom of Choice and a full Acquiescence,
Father, not my Will, but thine be done. And this was the fruit of a mighty
trust in God; for without it lingering and continued pains are not to be born.
For he that can submit for a Week may not have strength enough to submit for a
Month; and he that can submit for a single Month, may fail when his Pain and
Anguish is continued for Ten or Twelve Months together. We must prepare our
selves for Sufferings and beg of God, that we may be satisfied with his
pleasure when they come, and that we may wait for our Change, for we cannot dye
till he will, of which Job was sensible, Chap. 6. 8, 9. Oh that I might have my
request, and that God would grant me the thing that I long for! even that it
would please God to destroy me; that he would let loose his hand and cut me
off. All our strugglings, all our impatient and hasty wishes do not hasten our
Last Hour; not all the Enemies we have in the World, nor we our selves, can put
a period to this Life without the permission and the leave of God. Therefore in
all Cases we must submit our selves to him. Though to be stupid is as far from
our Duty as to be overwhelmed. He that would have us to be sensible of his
Bounties, would have us also to be sensible of his Corrections, and the Prophet
takes notice of the omission of this as of a very great fault. Thou have
stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they
have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder than a
rock they have refused to return, Jer. 5. 3. A Careless unconcerned frame in
Affliction is an Affront to his Justice and his Wisdom, and defeats, as far as
in us lies, the designs of his Providence; and to sink, and altogether to
dispond is as great a Crime. Our Tears are then just, when we look upon our
Sins, and see to what Miseries they have brought us, and how they have made
that Gracious God to punish us with severity who does not willingly grieve the
children of men. We then Act most like Christians when we answer our Holy
Calling by a Resignation to those Evils, which he is pleased to send; and when
we exercise those Graces which he requires from us. This is the only Cure of
all our Troubles, for it is no more in our power to thrust away a Disease by
force, than to support a falling Rock. Some indeed will advise you not to think
of the Evils you suffer, and then they will be less; whereas it may be through
the raging pain that you are under, your Disease is in your Thoughts; and then
it is no more than to advise you not to be diseased when you are diseased. But
alas! it is not in a Man's power not to think of Pain when he is in Pain; a Man
cannot avoid being sensible of what he feels, no more than he can avoid the
Sense it self; and it is somewhat hard when a Man feels exquisite Pains, to be
told that they are light enough of themselves, if he would not greaten them by
his own weakness. This is to upbraid a Man's Misery, not to relieve him; and to
add reproach to his Calamity by making his Infelicity his Folly. Demonstr. of
the Law of Nature. page 103. Patience tho it does not take away our Pain, yet
it may prevent new degrees of Trouble; and though at first we are unaccustomed
to the Yoke, yet by suffering we may learn to suffer.

Inf. 4. Seeing God alone brings to Inf. 4.
the Grave and raises up again, then put not too great Trust or Confidence in
Physicians. A Man indeed is under the Obligation of Self-preservation to have
recourse to them, and to keep up his Clay Cottage as long as he can with all
possible repaires; and when one is in very sharp pain, and knows not which way
to turn himself for Anguish and Trouble, then indeed he does most willingly
seek for help, and will take any thing though never so displeasing to the
Taste, if he have any hope of being better, or more at Ease. But upon the first
pain or sickness we must by serious Prayer go to God himself, and open our Case
to him who is a most Gracious Creator, and most able to help us, and this we
should do before we go to Men, who many times when they are most willing to
relieve us, cannot do it. It is a perpetual reproach upon Asa that in his
Disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians, 2 Chronicles. 16. 12. And
it is left upon Record to warn us from a practice that is unsafe for us as well
as dishonorable to God. It is God alone that has put healing Qualities into
Herbs, Plants and the Flowers of the Field, and who can discover the several
Virtues that are in them for our good. Place not too much trust in your
Physicians, and this Advice I think is not unnecessary because there are
several people that by manifold disorders and Excesses impair and ruin their
Health, of which they are less Careful, from a secret Opinion they have that
it is in the power of Physic, to give them certain, Relief, and they doubt not
but they will be able to rebuild those Walls which they have pulled down with
their own hands. But this is far from being true, for there are abundance of
secret and violent diseases into which they cannot penetrate with all their
Learned Art. And though you go to such as are Men of Knowledge and Fame in
their Profession, yet there are many things in this little World Man, that are
to the most knowing as a Terra Incognita, and there may be a Thousand Diseases
for which they want a name, and much more a Cure, and for which there is no
Receipt in all the Dispensatories in the World. Their Profession indeed is
Learned, but like all other Humane Sciences, full of Imperfection, and the
Light which has broke out by the Discoveries and Inquiries of Latter Ages even
as to many things in the very frame and Contexture of Humane Bodies, which were
not known before, shows the darkness and ignorance of former Ages, and when
this has done its best, the next will its like see more. Beware of leaving your
dependence on God to put your trust in Men. And though it is commonly said
every one is to be believed in his own Art, yet that belief very easily
degenerates into presumption. A Thousand things may hinder your having any
Relief from Physicians: You may be so pained as not to be able to give them an
account how you are, or what part is affected, or after what manner; or you may
as it frequently happens, have several complicated illnesses, and what they
prescribe for one, may be very prejudicial to another; or they may do it in
haste, or by a wrong Judgment, (which is very easy to fallible Men) take that
for your Disease which really is not so, or the Apothecary may fail in the
mixture, or those that attend you in the Administration, all which may betray
you to death or to long pain. Seek chiefly to the Sovereign disposer of all
things, who can either cure you without means, or make those that you try to be
available; knowing that without him not all the Cordials in the World can for
one moment stay the departing Life. Of which many Physicians are so sensible
that they frequently tell you that by the blessing of God they hope to do you
good. Indeed they had need be men of Prayer, that by their means Religio Medici
might be as famous in reallity as it has been in scorn. And though I pretend to
no great skill in these affairs, yet I have some Experience as to what I say. I
have often found the Insufficiency of all things that have been prescribed, and
that they have not given me the least Ease in my violent and sharp pain; and
how what I have taken with a design to help me has increased my Disease and
made it more painful. Therefore having severely smarted my self for my folly in
expecting too much from humane help, I may be allowed to warn others, that they
may not fall into the same snare; and to desire them to trust more in God and
less in Men. We may be as guilty of Idolatry in giving Men too much of our
Trust, as if we bowed before a Graven Image; and it is an evil to which Men are
as prone as to any other sin. An Instance whereof is that which Suidas says,
that the Book which Solomon wrote of Physic, was affixed upon the Gate into
the Entry of the Temple, and because the People boasted too much in it,
neglecting the Lord, Hezekiah caused them to pull away this Book and bury it*
and the Talmud says, that Hezekiah did two memorable things, first he hid the
Book of Physic which Solomon had written; and secondly, he brake the brazen
Serpent which Moses made. Weemes Exerc. div. page 120. Indeed men do as that
King said unto Hazael, 2 King. 8. 8. Take a present in thine hand, and go meet
the man of God, and enquire of the Lord by him, saying, shall I recover of this
disease. They seek for Recovery first of all as that which would bring them the
most acceptable News, which made the Prophet use such Ambiguity in his Speech,
Verse 10. For it is likely that 'twas no dissimulation, because his Sickness was
not in it self Mortal, yet he should surely dye, that is by the Treachery of
Hazael. The hope of Recovery is so grateful to the Patient, that Physicians are
not a little tempted to conceal the danger when it is visible to all but to the
Sick Man, and of how ill Consequence is this? I cannot better express it than
in the Words of an Honorable person, for whom men of all the Learned
professions have a just value. For my part (says he) who take the prognostics
of Phytians to be but Guesses, not Prophesies, and know how backward they are
to bid us Fear, till our condition leave them little hopes of us: I cannot but
think that Patient very ill advised, who thinks it not time to entertain
thoughts of death, as long as his Doctor allows him any hopes of Life; for in
case they should both be deceived, 'twould be much easier for the mistaken
Physician to save his Credit than for the unprepared Sinner to save his Soul.
Boil Occasional Reflections, Sect. 2. page 222. Our safest Course in all our
Troubles and Sicknesses is to Go to Jesus Christ, who has an Omnipotent Virtue
and Ability to help, as when he was on Earth he healed all manner of Diseases,
and among the rest a person that had suffered many things of many Physicians
and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse. Mark 5. 26. So he has still
the same power and Compassion, and though Thousands have shared in the Gracious
effects of his Bevenolence, yet he has still the same Charity, and the same
All-sufficient Fullness from whence to relieve us as the Sun after it has by its
Light and Quickening influences given Being and Refreshment to so many several
Creatures in the World, suffers no diminution of its own Light and Heat, and is
no less Communicative and Beneficial to this very day, then it was many hundred
years ago.

The whole of what I have spoken upon this Head is only to keep our spirits
from placing an undue reliance on the Creatures when our Trust is chiefly to be
fixed on our Glorious and powerful Creator. One would think it strange, and yet
so it is, that when God has by some sharp and severe stroke beaten off our hold
from those props whereon we used to lean in the time of our Careless Health,
when he has confined us to a solitary state, and we can no longer have our
Ancient Friendships, nor our former hope, yet even in distress it self (so
great is our adherence to Creatures) we substitute to Our selves new Reeds
whereon to lay some strength; and our vain trust does not expire but with our
latest breath.

I would not have any part of what I have said to reflect in the least upon
those worthy Physicians who in the time of my woeful Calamity gave me their
Charitable Visits; though God was not pleased to succeed the Endeavors they
used, yet I hope and pray that he may reward them for their labor and their
diligence: As also Those that gave me their kind help when I was not able to
help my self. I owe to them all great Respect and Thanks, and none can take it
ill if I say what to his Glory I ought to say, that God only was my Physician
and my Deliverer, and to him is all the praise due. He has torn, and he has
healed, he has smitten, and he has bound me up, he has revived me, and I
live in his sight. Hos. 6. 1. So that I may say with David, Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3,
4. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth all
thine Iniquities, and heals all thy diseases, who redeemeth thy Life from
destruction, who crowns thee with Loving Kindness and tender mercies. Who
satisfies thy mouth with good things so that thy Youth is renewed like the
Eagles.

Observe. 2. To be brought up from the Obs. 2.
Grave, and to be kept alive from going down to the Pit, is a Mercy greatly to
be acknowledged, and for which we ought to be very thankful And tha^ upon these
following Accounts.

Reason 1. Because Life is the dearest of all our present Blessings. All
Happiness Rea. 1.
is usually represented by the name of Life, and all Misery by the name of
Death. Other Evils take from us, each of them some part of our Comforts. Death
bereaves us of them all. Bondage deprives us of Liberty, Banishment of our
Country; Sickness afflicts our Bodies, shame or Infamy our Souls, pain
troubles our Senses, poverty incommodateth our Life; but there is no Calamity
so great, as not to leave us the use or enjoyment of some good, or at least of
our selves. Death extinguisheth our Life, and by this means overthrowing the
very Foundations of our Enjoyments, does at the same time despoil as of all
other good things altogether. Daille sur Coloss. 2. 13. Life is the most
excellent Gift of God, but Death is an Enemy to Nature and cannot be loved for
it self; it is the fruit of Sin, Romans 5. 12. It Is the wages thereof, Romans 6. 23.
For if Adam had persever'd in his Innocent Condition he had enjoyed a Glorious
Immortality without those pains, and that Death which is now our Lot. The
Philosophers indeed thought that death was natural to Man, and all the
discourses they grounded upon this false principle, are so vain and empty, that
they only serve to show in the General how weak Man is, seeing the greatest
productions of the wisest Men are so mean and Childish. Pascal, pensees. S. 30.
Death is the matter of the Threat, and therefore a punishment; though Believers
whose Faith is in exercise may quietly submit to it, as a passage to Eternal
Glory. We give it indeed many soft names, and seem to make nothing of it in our
ordinary discourse, we speak of nothing with more unconcernedness, and with
less Fear; but it ceases not to be an Enemy though we give it never so many
fair Characters. Men at a distance from it can make a slight matter of it, but
its nearer approaches, if attended with the due sense of Futurity will make the
boldest and the stoutest Man to tremble, it will strike a damp into his
Spirits, mingle Gall and Wormwood with his Wine, and Bitterness with his
sweetest Joys. Death is not the less formidable for being unavoidable, but
rather more so; as a certain Evil is more an Evil than that which is only
probable, and which may never happen, but do we consider what it is for the
Union that is between the body and the Soul to be dissolved, what it is to see
Corruption, what it is to have this Body turned into a Carcass without Life and
Motion, what it is to have this Body which we have tended with so long a Care,
which we have maintained at so vast a Charge of Meat and Drink and Time, to
have this Body in which we have slept and lived at Ease, laid into the cold
Grave, and there in a loathsome manner to putrify and consume away; it cannot
but occasion very great Commotions, when the day is come that the two Friends
who have been so long acquainted, and so dear to one another must part. Death
is an evil to be prayed against, for as such it cannot be the Object of desire:
And the old saying of Augustine is not unworthy of our Observation, That if
there were no bitterness in Death the Constancy of Martyrs would not be so
remarkable. Therefore says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 4. We would not be
uncloathed, but clothed upon. It is promised as a favor to Ebedmelech, that
though he sustained many other losses yet he should have his life for a prey,
Jer. 39. 18. and Paul, then whom none had a greater desire and esteem of Glory,
yet reckons it a Blessing for a good Man to be kept alive. For he says of
Epaphroditus, Phil. 2. 27. He was sick nigh unto death, but God had mercy on
him. And we find the Holy Men of Old very earnest for their Lives. Return, O
Lord, deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake. For in death there is no
remembrance of thee, in the Grave who shall give thee thanks, Psalm. 6. 4. 5.
Psalm. 39. 13. Oh spare me, that I may recover strength before I go hence and be
no more. Psalm. 102. 24. I said, O my God take me not away in the midst of my
days. And what doleful Expressions did Hezekiah use upon the news of his
approaching death, Isa. 38. 10. I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall
go to the gates of the Grave, I am deprived of the residue of my years. I said,
I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the living; I shall
behold man no more with the inhabitants of the Earth.

Reason 2. When a Man dies, it is Rea. 2.
to him as an end of all the World. He is no more considered as a Member of
that Community to which he did once belong. When his Eyes are once closed by
Death, he is no more to behold the Sun, Moon and Stars which he now sees; nor
his Fields and Gardens, his Shops and Houses, his Estate and Lands. As the
waters fail from the Sea, and the flood decays and dries up: So man lies
down and rises not till the heavens be no more, Job 14. 11, 12. He quits for
ever all those Earthly things on which he once set his Heart; and when he is
asleep in his Bed of dust, he will not awake to pursue secular Affairs and
Business, which took up so much of his time and labor. He must no more
frequent his Exchange, not read Books, nor discourse with his Relations and
Friends as he used to do among the Living here. The first sound that he will he
will hear, will be the Voice of the Last Trumpet, Arise ye dead and come to
judgment. The first sight that he will see, will be the Mighty Judge in the
Clouds, and the Heavens and the Earth all in one flame: All that little share
of the World which he called his own, will be undiscerned, and buried in the
vast ruins and desolations of the Great Day. When a Man dies, it is with him as
an End of the World; all the Affairs of Peace and War, of Trade and Commerce,
and Gain and Riches, all his projects and designs, his large reaches, his
forecast, his ^^^ughtfulness about News, or about providing for his own Name,
or for posterity, all these things are at an end with him for ever. It would
put a mighty Change upon the Face of things, and the Circumstances of
particular persons if they knew certainly the World would be at an end in four
or five years, or in so many Months, and no man knows but it may be so as to
him, because before or at that time Death may cut him off; and then he has no
more to do with this Earth, or with the Sons of Men. As the cloud is consumed
and vanishes away, so he that goes down to the grave shall come up no more.
He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know him any
more, Job 7. 9, 10.

Reason 3. Because when we dye our Rea. 3.
Everlasting state is to be determined l After Death the Judgment. The moment
of our departure hence will pass us over to the Righteous Tribunal of God. It
will make us either to shine with the Angels above, or to set with the Devils.
It will either fix us in a joyful Paradise, or in an intolerable state of Woe.
So that we may say with Nieremberg, how many things are to pass in that Moment.
In the same is our Life to finish, our Works to be examined, and we are then to
know how it will go with us for ever and ever? In that Moment I shall cease to
Live, in that Moment I shall behold my Judge, in that moment I must answer for
all my public and my secret Actions, for all that I have ever thought, or
spoke, or done; for all the Talents, the Time, the Mercies, the Health, the
Strength, the Opportunities and the Seasons and Days of Grace that I have ever
had, for all the Evil that I might have avoided, for all the good I might have
done and did not, and all this before that Judge, who has beheld my ways from
my Birth to the Grave; before that Judge who cannot be deceived, and who will
not be imposed upon. Little can he that has not been brought near to Death and
Judgment know what Thoughts the diseased have when they are so. Little, very
little does a Soul in Flesh know what it is to appear before the Great God.
This is so great and so strange a thing, that they only know it who have
received their final Sentence; but they are not suffered to return to tell us
how it is, or what passes then; and God sees it fit it should be concealed from
us who are yet on this side the Grave. But who does not tremble to think of
this mighty Change, and of this Moment that is the last of Time and the
beginning of Eternity; that includes Heaven and Hell, and all the Effects of
the Mercy and Justice of God. See Moral Essays, Vol. 4. Lib. 1. Chap. 9. Who
does not tremble when he Considers that Infinite and Holy Majesty before whom
the Angels cover their Faces; that Considers his Omniscience and his Greatness
and the mighty Consequences of that Sentence, how sudden it is, and how
irresistible, and that it is an irrevocable Decree, and by a Word of this
Mighty Judge we live or dye for ever. It is no wonder if the thoughts of it
make us shrink and quiver. It is a greater wonder that when some or other, whom
we know, are almost every week going to such a place and state as this, we who
are not yet cited to the Bar, are no more concerned, and use no more endeavors
to be ready for it; it is a wonder that we put no higher a value on that Gospel
that teaches us how we may avoid Condemnation; it is a wonder that we prize no
more that Gracious Redeemer, who alone can plead our Cause, and that we labor
and strive no more to be partakers of his Righteousness by which we may be
Justified. It is no wonder if this prospect throw men into strange Agonies, as
it frequently does those who are dying. Many people will say, when they hear
the Complaints of the Sick, and their Long Continued Groans, It were well if
God would take their souls away from their pained Languishing Bodies; it were
well indeed if that could put an end to their present and their future pain.
But do they not know that they must go into Eternity and be judged after death.
Oh my Friends when you come to the Borders of the Grave, when you are within an
Hour or two's distance from your Final Judgment, and your unalterable state,
what a mighty Change will it cause in your thoughts and your apprehensions. You
will then know and feel it, Then, when the Perspective is turned, and the other
World begins to appear very great, and this very little. This that I have
represented to you is a part of that which we call dying. Death is that which
the Philosophers have talked of with great. Contempt and with lofty Speeches,
but I believe they commonly talked so confidently when they thought themselves
far from it, and I am sure they did so because they had not a distinct,
knowledge of Futurity. For had they considered their own sins, and the nature
of their last Trial with the Consequents of it, this would have lowered all
their Pride and Glory, they would have changed their Language had they looked
upon Death as the Conclusion of Time, and the beginning of Eternity; and not
only as a going out of this, but as an entrance into a state that would never
Change. It is a great Mercy and greatly to be acknowledged that God allows us
so much time wherein to prepare our selves for this final and irrevocable doom.
It is an instance of his Patience that is truly Divine, that notwithstanding
our many repeated Sins he has not cut us off. It is his great Mercy that gives
us leave to appear in his Courts before we appear at his Tribunal, and that he
affords us such large notice and warning that so we may be ready for our Last
Trial, whereon so very much depends.

The Conclusion.
I May say to you this Evening as Christ to the People concerning John, Mat.
11. 7. What came you out to see. As for those who came hither out of a
Curiosity only to see one of whom they have, it may be, heard much discourse,
Let them know that though, by reason of my long and sore Affliction, I have
been a wonder unto many, yet now I can say with some hope that God is my strong
Refuge As for those that came with an expectation of hearing something new and
diverting, that might please their Fancies or gratify their Ears only, they
find themselves by this time mightily disappointed. But Those of you that came
with a more serious Intention, know, that you see a Person that has by his own
Sins and the Righteous Displeasure of God been for a long Season as in the very
Grave, and yet by the Power and Goodness of God brought from thence again. You
see a poor Reed that has been shaken indeed by the Wind, but which the Grace of
God has kept from being broken to pieces. It Is to you to whom I would
principally direct my Speech, it is your Prayers which I would beg, that so you
would desire of God that the Deliverance which he has so far advanced, may be
completed by the same Hand and Mercy that has hitherto revived me. You that
have Health, have cause to praise him for his Mercy; and I that have been long
sick, have cause to praise him who has been my Physician and my Helper. O
magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together, Psalm. 34. 3. Let
us as we join our Prayers, so unite our Praises to this mighty Lord. Do you
praise him for keeping you from violent overwhelming pains, and I will Praise
him for mitigating those that I labored under; and though he chastened me
sore, yet he has not delivered me over to death. And so by this means we shall
bring an acceptable Sacrifice to his Altar, and it may be that through Jesus
Christ he will receive as an odor of a sweet smell this our Evening Sacrifice.

The End of the First Sermon.
Practical DISCOURSES OF Sickness and Recovery.
SERMON II.
PSALM. 30. ver. 3, 4. O Lord, thou have brought up my Soul from the grave, thou
have kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit.

Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his, and give thanks at the remembrance of
his holiness.


Reason 4. DEliverance from the Rea. 4.
Grave is a great Mercy, and greatly to be acknowledged, because by that means
a man has a longer time in which to prepare for another World. And this is more
a Mercy because it must go with us for ever, according to what we have done in
these bodies, whether good or evil. This Life is our only state of Trial, and
so shall it fare with us hereafter as we now behave our selves. There is no
knowledge nor invention in the Grave whither we are going. None of those things
can be performed there, which to perform now is our most seasonable and
necessary Duty. If a man were to have a Trial for his Estate or Life, he would
take it for a favor to have leisure given him wherein to make ready for it,
and to put his Affairs into the best posture that he could, it ought to be
reckoned a much greater kindness to have notice and time afforded us wherein to
prepare for the Last determination of the State of our Souls which is vastly
more weighty and Considerable. It is a Mercy to have Sickness or some
tolerable Affliction sent to summon us before the Arrival of the King of
Terrors, and to bid us put our Houses, and our Minds in Order, lest by sensual
Enjoyments, or the pleasing Enjoyments of the Flesh, that Day come upon us
unawares; and left we be in a slumber when the Voice shall say, Behold the
Bridegroom eomes, go ye out to meet him. There is no question at all but that
it is very Lawful with submission to pray against Sudden Death; for though it be
a Mercy to those whose Grace is eminently strong and who are always ready, to
dye without Lingering Pains and a Complication of acute and violent Diseases,
which make Death much more a Death than it would be without them, yet to the
most the danger of Surprisal is so very great, and of being hurried to the Bar,
and judged to an Eternal Condition before we have done what we ought to do in
time, that we may esteem it none of the least Mercies of God that he does by
some shaking blows warn us before he give the last stroke and cut us down. It
is not only the practice of an Holy Life, and an Habitual Readiness which
Believers have by Faith, and the renewing Operations of the Spirit, by the
uprightness of their Carriage and the Constancy of their Prayers, but a more
particular preparation that they need. It Is necessary for them not only to
have Oil in their Lamps, but their Lamps burning; not only the Graces of the
Spirit, but those Graces in the fullest brightness and strength, to which they
can attain in this Mortal State. The best can never be so much prepared for
Death, but they may be more so. They never have proceeded so far in their
Mortification but they are sensible that they have still more sins to mortify;
they have never so much warmed their Hearts with the love of God, but that they
may still glow with a purer and an hotter Flame. It is very desirable to the
best to have their Faith more strong, their submission more calm, and their
hope more lively. It Is very desirable to have more Acquaintance and
Familiarity with God before they appear at his Tribunal to receive their final
Sentence. They know well that it is a great Work, impartially, seriously and
constantly to search their own Hearts, and to judge themselves aright that they
may not be judged of the Lord. As also to discharge all the duties that they
owe to God; to themselves, to their Neighbors and their Country, and they
cannot but be very thankful that they are allowed more time to do it in. That
they may purify their Consciences, raise their Affections, and review their
Lives with exactness and Care when they are shortly to be looked into by an
Omniscient and unerring Eye. They know it is a Mercy to be able to loosen their
Hearts from the World, which they are too much apt to love, and in a weanedness
from what is sensible to dye before they dye. The most Religious have the
clearest Apprehension that to appear before Christ is no slight or Common
thing; that they must be such in whom he may take delight, and be as a Bride
adorned for her Husband. They know that the Celebration of the Lords Supper,
and the hearing of the Word, and Fastdayes and extraordinary Seasons of Prayer,
are such duties as require the preparations of Humbling Sorrows, lively
Desires, awful Reverence, Meekness, and Self-denial, because God will be
sanctisied of all that draw nigh unto him. They dare scarcely go to the Lords
Table without Fear and Trembling much less dare they go to the Lord himself
without a most solemn Preparation. What Care do men use if they are but about
to Transplant themselves into some Foreign Country, what Inquiries do they
make about it? What laying in of all necessary Stores that they may not be
destitute of suitable accommodations when they come to the new place where they
design to fix. And it is not to be wondered at, that such as are to be removed
into another World, are very solicitous about it, and very thankful that their
season and their day of Grace is lengthned out. Whoever Considers the many
duties which the Scripture requires of those that believe, what obligations
they are under to their Savior, what, to their Fellow Christians, and to those
who are yet strangers to the Faith. How many Omissions and Commissions they are
guilty of, and what need there is of running, watching and striving with all
their might that they may not loose Heaven and Glory; whosoever thinks of this,
must account it a Mercy that they have opportunity wherein to do what is so
great and so indispensable. And as the Apostle speaking of the new Heavens and
new Earth inferrs, What manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
Conversation and Godliness, 2 Pet. 3. 11. So in this Case we may say what
manner of persons ought they to be who must quickly go into Eternity? How
should they labor to increase with all the increase of God, to have suitable
Promises laid up in their Hearts, from which in the sorest Distresses they may
fetch Relief? What need have they of manifold Expersences, and of the Complete
Armor of Righteousness, which may enable them to wrestle with, and to subdue,
the various and unknown difficulties and Tentations of a dying Hour; to have
their Evidences for Salvation clear and unquestionable; to know that they are
in a state of Grace, and that they have finished the work of their Generation.
Indeed the Careless part of Men think that the Prolongation of Life is not in
this respect so great a Mercy. For they think that it is a most easy thing to
be ready for Death and Judgment; they think that a few Prayers at last, a few
Tears and Cries to God, with a Confession of their Miscarriages, and a few
Resolutions against what they once did amiss, will put them into a good frame
and serve their turn; and so the time that was given them wherein to prepare
for another World is lost and unimproved, because they understand not the
greatness of their Work, nor the preciousness and value of that Time which is
given them to do it in. They ought to Remember if they have been near to death,
how that nearness changed their Thoughts, and that they then found by the hurry
and confusion of their Apprehensions, that Sickness was no proper season
wherein to begin an holy Course or to repair the disorders of an ill one. Of
all men in the World those who are recovered from a Sickness that found them in
their Impenitence have most Reason to be thankful because had they died in that
Condition they had died for ever, what thanks owe they to God that they are
under Hope in the use of Means, yet upon his Earth and not in Hell. And there
are two things with respect to our dying, which render the Continuance of our
Life a great Mercy.

First, The small Acquaintance 1.
which we have with the Future state, and the necessity we are under to get as
lively apprehensions of it as we can. There are many strange Vicissitudes in
this World, many changes that we see in Countries, when Kingdoms pass from one
to another; in Families, when the number is either increased or diminished; and
we suffer many changes in our Bodies from Sickness to Health, and from Health
to Sickness again, but there is no change that is so great as this by Death. It
is a thing of which we know but little, and none of the Millions of Souls that
have past into the invisible World have come again to tell us how it is. All
that go hence remain fixed in their own state, some expecting, and others
fearing the Resurrection and the Great Day. We have but very obscure
apprehensions of that separated state, we know but little of the Great
All-comprehending Spirit, and little with clearness and full satisfaction of
our own Souls. When we know something of Spirits by their effects and the
discoveries they make of themselves, and would more fully know their nature and
have adequate Conceptions of them; we are like little Children that see the
Image and Representation of some delightful object in a Glass, and then turn
the glass hoping to see it in its full dimensions but by that means lose the
sight of it altogether: so it is with us in our most Critical Inquiries into
Spiritual and Immaterial Substances. Nevertheless it is very desirable to know
in what condition our Souls will be when they leave the Body, and what is the
nature of that abode into which we must go but which we never saw. Into what
Regions we must then take our flight and after what manner this will be done.
When that Soul which touched and wrought by our hands, spoke by our tongue and
heard by our Ears, shall have her present Organs taken from her, and pass from
sensible objects on Earth to a spacious unseen World. When as in the twinkling
of an Eye our spirits will go from this lower state through the Aerie Region
and the visible Heavens soaring till they come to the Throne of God. All the
Animal Actions of Nourishment and Growth, all the Sensations that arise from
outward and Material objects will cease, and these spirits will be more
vigorous and Active than now they are. When Death comes it leaves the body
though far different from what it was yet still in our view. We see where it
is, and what Qualities it is invested with; how it is disposed of we know, and
are able to give some exact Account of its Condition, of this we have a more
distinct Apprehension, but none of a separated Soul but what is very imperfect.

It Is certain Vide M. Amyraut Disc. de Lestat des Fideles Apres La Mort. page
15. etc.
the Soul will then preserve the Faculties that are natural to it, viz. to
Understand, to Will, to Remember, as it is represented to us under the Parable
of Dives and Lazarus. So long as it is lodged here it sees and perceives
Corporal things by the Organs of the Senses, and reasons upon the Images that
are labored in the Fantasy; but there are in our Souls Idea's purely
intellectual, and which have in them nothing Material as the Contemplations of
the Nature of God and of his Attributes. We little know how the People of the
disembodied Societies Act, and Will, and Understand, and communicate their
Thoughts to one another. What Conception can we have of a separated Soul, but
that it is all thought, and that either in the Calmness of an elevated Joy, or
the bitterness of overwhelming Anguish, according to the state in which it is
and the sentence that is past upon it. When a Man's Body is taken from him by
Death, he is turned into all Thought and Spirit, either infinitely more pleased
or more amazed than he could be in this World. How great will be its thoughts,
when it is without any hinderance from these material Organs that now obstruct
its operations. In that Eternity (as one expresses it) the whole power of the
Soul runs together one and the same way. In this World the soul sends out
Parties of it self, diverse ways, or to several ends; the Judgment may be
pleased in the main, and yet the Affections disturbed; or these more still, and
yet the Judgment dissatisfied and disturbed: One thought goes out in high
discontent, another flies after it, recalls and reconciles it: On the other
side, one thought leaps out of the Soul with pleasure, another reproves daunts
and dejects it, with a correction of its haste. But in Eternity the soul is
united in its motions, which way one Faculty goes, all go; and the Thoughts are
all Concentred as in one whole Thought of Joy or Torment. Beverley Great Soul
of Man, page 292. These things cannot but occasion great variety of thoughts in
every Considering Man; and the soul especially when it looks toward that World
and thinks it self near it, can no more cease to be Inquisitive about it than
it can cease to be a soul. We may indeed be too curious in this matter, though
it seems to be a Curiosity that is most excuseable, because it concerns a man's
self, his own soul, and his own Eternity; and when we have searched as deep as
we can, we must confess our Ignorance, and say with the Prophet upon another
occasion, Lord thou know! In these Contemplations we must make the Word of
God our only Guide, and it is a Mercy greatly to be acknowledged that God
allows us time wherein to Converse with that Gospel that has brought life and
immortality to light; and with that Savior who is the great Prophet and
Teacher of the Church, who came from Heaven, and is now gone thither, and we
may fully rest and Acquiesce in the discoveries that he has given us of that
Country for he knew it very well, was very faithful in the discharging of his
office, and does not impose upon us any thing that is either false or
incredible; by our Holy Prayers we are to maintain a Commerce with him and with
that World, and by our frequent going thither in our Meditations we may gain a
clearer knowledge of it. Though there are no bounds on which our thoughts can
terminate, but only the Revelations which God has been pleased to make in his
own Word. What is above those Heavens, and that Firmament that we see, there is
none can tell us but God and our Savior who are there. For when Men have
abstracted their Thoughts with as much industry as they can from All that is
material and sensible, when they have refined their Understandings to the
greatest spirituality, and pored never so long upon the state of separation,
they will still remain in the dark about it. And he is the most happy Man who
in the sincere performance of the Duties of Religion can resign his Soul to
Christ in Death, and trust him though he is to be removed to a strange and a
new World. For immediately after he is loosed from the Body he will understand
more in an instant then all the most Learned in this World have ever understood
by the labor and diligence of many years.

Secondly, That which renders the 2.
continuance of Time to us wherein to prepare for Death, a great Mercy, is
because we are to dye but Once; and upon the well or ill doing of it depends
our future Happiness or Misery. It is a great Mercy that we have time wherein
to make ready for our last Combat, for if we lose the Battle once we are
overthrown for ever, it must not be fought over again. It is a Mercy that we
have leisure to complete our journey well, for we must never travel over the
same Road again. There will be no second Edition wherein to Correct our former
Errors, when a period is once put to the last Line of Life. Oh what Faith, what
Courage, what Strength is necessary to Conquer the Fears of Death, and Death it
self? If men fail in their Trades they may by the kindness of their Friends be
set up again, if they have suffered Losses by Shipwreck, by Fire or by Plunder,
they may be repaired, but a Soul once lost will remain so for ever. It Is a
long, long Eternity that succeeds our Time; if we should live on Earth as many
Hundred years as the most Aged live Months, it would bear no proportion with
that vast and endless duration. Whoever compares the shortness of our present
state with the continuance of that into which we enter when we are to dye,
cannot but esteem the being brought back from the Grave to be a great Mercy. If
you have been careless of hearing at one season you may hear the Word again at
another; if you have heretofore been cold in your Prayers, you may now excite
your Hearts, and pray with more fervor; but if you once dye ill, you must
never mend so concluding a Miscarriage. All the Tears we shed cannot give Life
to the Body from which the Soul is fled. All the Anguish of Miserable Souls
cannot procure for them another Trial. They that are once cut down must never
be planted by the Rivers side any more. There is hope of a tree, if it be cut
down that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not
cease. though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die
in the ground; yet through the scent of Water it will bud and bring forth
boughs like a plant. But man dies and wastes away, yea man gives up the
ghost, and where is he. Job 14. 7, 8, 9, 10.

Reason 5. Those who are brought up from the grave have cause to be thankful,
Rea. 5.
because by that means they have more opportunity to be serviceable to the
Glory of God, and to be useful in the World. Merely to live is not a thing very
desirable, considering how many Miseries there are in Life, to what Evils and
Inconveniences our Bodies are obnoxious, and that the pains which they may
suffer may be both very long, and so secret that none can understand either
what they are or how to remove them. But it is a most desirable thing to Live
when we can thereby obtain the Ends that are truly Great and Noble. For,

First, Hereby a man may do good 1.
to others. He may teach the Ignorant, reduce the wandering; and by the
sincerity of his Counsel, by the zeal of his Prayers, and the Luster and
Holiness of a good Example, advance the power of Religion. Our Lives are not
our own, they are Gods by a double, title both of Creation and Redemption; they
are to be used for him who preserves, or takes them away as he will. Not only
Ministers but every private Christian is obliged by the Name he bears, and by
the Relation that he has to the holy Society of Believers, and to the Kingdom
of Christ, whereof he is a Subject, to enlarge it by all good ways that he can;
and every man is the more obliged to this when God has bestowed a new Life upon
him. When we are near to the Gates of the Grave, and look back and see with how
little Zeal and Diligence we had spent our time, and how little we had done for
him who blessed us all our days, then we are inclined most earnestly to beseech
him that he would grant us another Trial, and that then we would improve it
much better than we did our former time, and when he does grant us what we have
asked, then it should be our great endeavor not to frustrate and disappoint the
designs of his Goodness and Mercy. Then must we teach transgressors his way,
telling them how dreadful thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God.
Then we may tell the Healthful what Sickness is, what we have found it to be by
our own Experience, then we may tell them how it makes very uneasy and
troublesome Companions of our now beloved Bodies. How it deprive us of all our
Pleasures and Recreations, in the day, and of our rest at night. That all their
Friendships, Conversations, and Merryments without true Religion are altogether
vain; and not only so, but they leave a sting of guilt behind when the
sweetness that once allured is gone away. We may warn them to provide for the
days of darkness, and for the many Miseries of Life that will sooner or latter
overtake them. When we are Recovered we can tell the Diseased, of the Goodness
and the Power of God, that they can never be so distressed, but that it is
still in his power to help them, and a Word of his Mouth can heal them when
other Physicians are of no value. We can then by what we felt our selves tell
them something of the Evil effects and bitterness of Sin. Though what we feel
in some Cases is far more then what we can express. We can after our Sickness
excite all our Acquaintance to Fear and to love God, to fear him who can in a
few days bring them very low, and to love him who can quickly raise the lowest
up again. A Man has much more to do on Earth than to secure his own Salvation:
The World, the Church, the Nation to which he belongs, do all claim a part in
him. The Converted and the Unconverted, his Relations and Friends, the good and
the bad do all need and require his help; and it is a Mercy greatly to be
acknowledged, that God renewes our strength and opportunity that we may do some
service for him before we dye. There are many Duties to be performed here,
which cannot be done in another World, Psalm. 88. 11. His loving kindness cannot
be declared in the Grave nor his Faithfulness in destruction. Psalm. 6. 5. In
death there is no remembrance of thee, in the grave who shall give thee thanks.
Psalm. 115. 17. The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into
silence. Now it is a blessed and a glorious privilege to praise him here on
Earth; for though he be praised among the glorified, it is without any
propogation of praise to the name of God, for that is the Privilege of the
Saints on Earth, where they make known his name to those that knew it not
before, or make it more known to those that knew it. As also to advance the
Kingdom of Christ in the World, to which the dead contribute nothing at all,
and to give good Examples by the sincerity and inoffensiveness of their
Carriage, for in heaven there is no need of good Examples. There is no Evil
Person to be reduced, and all there are possessed of their Happiness. Vid. Hook
's Privilege of the Saints on Earth beyond those in Heaven in regard of many
duties, page 12. Here it is that we may feed the Hungry, cloth the Naked,
visit the Sick, lodge the poor that have no dwelling place. Here it is by our
Sympathy that we may weep with those that weep, and in some respect imitate the
kind Incarnation of our Savior by putting on the Wants and Miseries of others.
But in Heaven there is no Miserable person to relieve, no opportunity to show
our Mercy and Compassion to the afflicted, and yet this Grace is one of the
fairest Lineaments of the new Creature, and which causes in us a near
resemblance of our Heavenly Father. Here we may pray for the Sick, the Tempted
and the Persecuted, but there is an happy freedom from Sickness and Temptation.
While we live we may by Intercession and Prayers for our Friends do them good,
but in that World for ought we know, such an Intercession ceases; and we are
sure there is neither Command, Example or Promise in all the Scripture to
encourage us to make our Application to the Saints departed for the Relief of
our wants; that Homage is alone due to Christ the Great and only Mediator,
whose Mediation is founded on the excellency of his Person, and the Ransom that
he gave to God. It Is here on Earth that the strong in Faith may assist the
weak; it is here they may speak words of Comfort and Refreshment to the weary
soul; whereas above they all rest from their Labors. It Is here they must
strengthen the weak hands, and Confirm the feeble knees, and say to them that
are of a fearful heart be strong, fear not; Isa. 35. 3, 4. It Is here that the
fathers to their children must make known his truth, Isa. 38. 19. and endeavor
that his name may be celebrated from Generation to Generation, and that the
people which shall be created may praise the Lord. Psalm. 102 18. It Is here that
in the midst of sore Trials we must exercise our Faith, for there it will be
turned into sight and full Assurance. It Is here that we must wait in hope for
there the good which we expect will be possessed. It Is here that we must love our
Enemies and bless them that Curse us. And this Faith and Hope and love are
greatly serviceable to the Propagation of the Gospel. It Is here on Earth that
we must acquire and use these Graces and exercise the Gifts which God has
given us for the common good. For whether there be prophesies they shall fail,
whether there be tongues they shall cease, whether there be knowledge it shall
vanish away, 1. Cor. 13. 8. What a Mercy is it to have Life and time wherein to
perform so many good Works for the advantage of our Neighbors? What a Mercy is
it for a Magistrate to live, that he may shine with more brightness and fill
his higher Orb with clearer Light: That he may by his own good Example and by
his discouraging of Profaneness and Irreligion, promote the Kingdom of Christ
as well as contrive for the Honor of his own Dominions? What a Mercy is it to
a Minister that he may live to speak in the name of God, to bring the glad
tidings of Salvation, and to be long employed in bringing home poor wandering
sinners to Jesus Christ? To unfold the Mysteries of the Gospel and the
unsearchable riches of Grace and Mercy that are therein, and to use the Talents
that are given him for his Masters Glory. How much more desirable is it to
such an one to be speaking in the Pulpit than to be silent in the Grave? and to
have all his knowledge that he acquired with painful Labor and waking Thoughts
to be as it were buried with him, or at least not to be of any further use to
the World? What a Mercy is it to a Parent that he may Live to educate his his
children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; that he may instruct and
Antidote them against the Contagions of this World, where Evil Examples are so
numerous and good ones so very rare to give them warning of the dangers which
he himself narrowly escaped, and to acquaint them betimes with the ways of
God? and by his conduct and prudent advice, and frequent Exhortations and
constant prayers to recommend them frequently to the blessing of Providence,
and to fortify them against the rashness, and haste, and folly of their
Careless Age. It Is easy indeed for those that are faithful in their several
stations to desire Death, as a Traveller desires the shadow of a Rock in a
weary land; and as a Labourer after a days hard labor is glad of the
approaching Night that he may go to bed. It Is a piece of self-denial for very
Holy Men to be content to Live and to stay on Earth when they have a
well-grounded hope of Heaven. To stay in the midst of hard service, Tentations
and Trials, and to endure the heat of the day when they might have their
Reward; especially if they be afflicted with tedious bodily pains, for to serve
God with cheerfulness in the midst of pain is a noble effect of Faith. It is a
very Generous thing to desire to Live when they have no pleasure in Life but as
it gives them an occasion to be serviceable to the Church. It is not altogether
so with those who are in full health and Ease. For as their strength is
greater, so their work on that account is more delightful, and may be done with
more vigor. There is not amore Remarkable Instance in History than that of our
Apostle, Phil. 1. 21, 22, 23. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
But if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labor: yet what I shall
choose I wot not. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart,
and to be with Christ which is far better. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh
is more needful for you. Vide Chrysostom. in Loc.
Was there ever seen any thing in the World greater then the frame and
behavior of this Apostle, this Holy Man of God; this Angel in Flesh we might
have called him but that he speaks of dying? It Is no great matter for a Man to
desire to Live and to be serviceable, who is under Doubts and Fears about his
Salvation; it is what he ought chiefly to desire, that he may renew his
Evidences and work out his Salvation with more diligence. But this was not the
case of Paul, he knew that to dye would be his gain. It was (as it were) put to
his choice whether he would go to Christ, to that dear Master who had loved him
and whom he had loved, or stay below in this World, a World that had given him
very coarse and rude Entertainment, that had afflicted and scorned and vilified
and persecuted him wherever he came. And yet this poor weary Traveller is
willing still to travel for the good of others when he might have been at home.
He is willing to stay amidst the reproaches and pains and sorrows of this
Earth, when he might have gone to Heaven where he would have had a Crown of
Glory and have been in the midst of Joys and Hallelujahs. He might have gone
to Triumph and Victory, but for the sake of his Neighbors and his Friends he
is willing to renew the Combat. He had been long tossed on a very stormy Sea, and
might now if he had so pleased have gone into the Port; but for their sakes he
is willing, from the very Harbors Mouth, to put to Sea, and to abide new
dangers and storms again. No Soul, excepting that of Christ, was ever sired
with a greater Zeal for God, and the Salvation of others, than this of Paul.
There is a different behavior visible in Hezekiah, who when it was told him by
the Prophet, Isa. 38. 1, 2. Thus says the Lord, Set thine house in order, for
thou shall die and not live. He turned his face to the wall and prayed, and
wept sore, ver. 3. One would have thought it should not have been an unwelcom
Message to a good man, especially to one who could reflect upon his Sincerity,
and appeal to God about it; to one that as we may Imagine might have been,
after so pure and so sincere a Life, accustomed to the Thoughts of so great a
Change; that knew that the setting of his Sun, was that it might rise again in
a glorious Immortality. It is a wonder to see those Cheeks bedewed with Tears
which one would have thought should have been adorned with smiles; as a Soldier
is glad to be discharged from long duty, or after having long maintained a
Place with great Hardships, to have the Siege raised, and to be set at Liberty.
But there are Three Reasons usually, assigned for it.

First, Though he was a very good Man, yet he was still but a Man, had those
Humors and Passions which are usually put into a great agitation upon the
thoughts of sudden Death. The Body and the Soul have been so long Acquainted
that they are loath to part.

Secondly, Because he had no Issue, he was descended from David, and in a
probability as he might think of having the Messiah come of him according to
the Flesh. And,

Thirdly, He desired to Live longer for the Reformation of the Church. For his
Age is reckoned to be then but 39, and that he dyed at Fuller 's Life out of
Death. p. 4.
54. We ought to be very thankful when God brings us from the Grave and will
use us in his service. He needs us not; if a thousand such as we are should
dye, how quickly can he supply our places with such as may be more faithful,
and on whom he will bestow more Grace and better Gifts. When he took away such
great Men as Moses, Aaron and Elias, he found others to put in their steeds,
and the Church and the Interest of Christ will not dye with us. Those that are
most devoted to the service of God, would not have the opportunities even of
difficult obedience taken from them too soon. Having often dishonored God in
the time of their Health, they would still serve him though it be in pain.
Indeed though Believers may sometimes earnestly desire to go to Heaven when
this World through their languishing Afflictions and sore Trials is become
uneasy to them, yet God will have them to serve him here on Earth though it be
with much trouble. Christ prays not that he would take his disciples out of the
World. Though they were presecuted and hated in it, Joh. 17. 15. And this may
give us some Light into one of the most mysterious parts of the Providence of
God, why he suffers his servants to conflict with violent pains when he could
ease them with a word; why he suffers them to make their Couches to swim with
Tears, when he could quickly wipe all their Tears away; why he suffers them to
groan long in Misery, when if he pleased he could translate them to Heaven
without a sigh. It Is, that they may live to serve him even in these
Afflictions, and by the Experiences which they have of his Faithfulness be
encouraged more and more to trust in him. He could at their first Conversion
give them the Reward, and as soon as they are adopted to be his Sons, make them
actual Possessors of that Inheritance to which they are Heirs. Or he could
strengthen their Sanctification and complete their Grace, that they should not
complain and mourn as they now do, for the hardness of their hearts, their
deadness and unbelief. It is not that he takes delight in their Grief, or that
he finds an Harmony in their Groans. It Is because even they shall feel the
bitterness of sin, they shall know the way to Life to be strait and narrow;
that so they may at length wonder more at the riches and freeness of his Grace,
that brings them to Glory even by such unlikely ways. He will have them to be
trained up with difficulties, to strive, and to wrestle with them, that so
their Fervor may shame the coldness and indifference of others who take no
pains for their Salvation. He will have them to go laden under the sense of
their Corruptions, that so finding their daily need of Christ, they may still
remember him who is their help, and finding so much guilt in themselves they
may apply themselves to his unspotted Righteousness for Justification, and to
his Word and Spirit for new degrees of Holiness; that they may have experience
of his Goodness and he of their Obedience and Love; that they may know the
Loving Kindness, the Care, and the Wisdom of that God that Pilots their Ship
when it is covered with waves and storms; for storms are the Triumph of his
Art and he steers even the sinking Vessel to the Port.

Secondly, By being brought from the Grave, a Man may be enabled to do 2.
much good to himself as well as to others; that so he may at last with joy
give an account of his Stewardship; that he may increase his own reward, and by
Gods Grace make his Crown of Happiness more sparkling and more full of weighty
Glory. As no man ought to be satisfied with the lowest degrees of grace, so
every one may and ought by an Innocent Ambition, and a multitude of good Works,
to endeavor to sit near to the Throne, and not only to save himself, but to
carry others with him to heaven that may be his Joy and his Crown in that Day.

Reason 6. and Lastly, There are several Rea. 6.
circumstances that may enlarge the kindness of being brought from the Grave,
and which ought to render us more thankful for it. Those that are good may
have their iniquities visited with stripes, and it cannot but be a terrible
thing to fear that they shall be snatched away whilst they are punished with the
rods which their own Sins have made. As the Prophet was devoured by a Lion for
his Disobedience to the command of God, 1 King. 13. 21. It is a great Mercy to
live to see the good of his Chosen, and it is a punishment to be taken away
just when some great deliverance is coming to the Church. It was a thing which
Moses greatly desired to see the Promised Land, and to go thither; to see it
indeed was granted him, but to enjoy it was denied him because of the
provocation at the Rock. It is a Misery to see Plenty for others, and not to
taste thereof our selves like that Lord of Samaria who perished for his
unbelief, 2 King. 7. 2. 17. 18. It is a great Mercy to be delivered after we
have been afflicted and ready to dye, when the terrors of God have amazed us
and his fierce wrath has gone over us, Psalm. 88. 15. How sad a thing is it to
dye under a sense of the weight of sin, and to have no prospect of a Pardon; to
feel as it were the very scorching flames of Hell, and to have no hope that
these will ever be cooled or removed, but rather grow more hot and scorching;
to have no Comfort from Heaven or Earth, no rest for the Body, no composure for
the Soul; to be sinking and to have nothing to lay hold upon, to stand
shivering on the brink of destruction and to see no way of escape, to be
compassed in with sin behind and with Miseries before, to be in darkness and to
see no light, not to know where our Lot will be fixed, not to know but that it
may be among the damned. To be near to the Judgment Seat of Christ, and to be
afraid of appearing there. This is a state in which no man would choose to dye
for it is inexpressably terrible; and it is a most wonderful mercy to be
delivered from a Case so sad as this. For how uncomfortable is it to a man's
self to be roaring in the disquietness of his soul, not to be able to live
because of the insupportableness of his Pain, nor to dare to dye because of the
greatness of his sins that are always before him, and that are like to lie down
with him in the dust. How uncomfortable is it to the Relations and Friends of
the sick and dying, that see him struggling and crying under pains which tear
him to pieces. How uncomfortable is it to them, to hear his doleful Expressions
about his Eternal state, to see the anguish of his soul and the arrows of the
Almighty sticking in it, which makes him a terror to himself, and to those that
are round about him. How woeful a thing is this! and if a man get to Heaven at
last by the mighty Grace of God, yet it is a thing very undesireable to go
thither as by the very gates of Hell* for a man to have his days shortened and
his strength weakened in the way, Psalm, 102. 23. and to have his Sun go down at
noon, looks like the displeasure of God; and no man would dye by the frown of
God. A man cannot be blamed who is loath to dye till he save some Hope that it
shall go well with him for ever. It Is a sore Evil to be thrown aside as a
broken vessel in which there is no pleasure, Jer. 22. 28. It is a great mercy
to be kept from raging violent distempers, and to be delivered from such, after
we have long groaned under them. It is a great Mercy to have such a sickness as
will allow us time to exhort, and direct and counsel others; and it is very
desirable that we may by a Christian Carriage set our Seal to Religion, and
show its Power and Reality. It Is a most glorious thing to dye in the Lord, i.
e. as one Paraphrases it, in the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Spirit
of Faith and Love, in a Spirit of Elevation toward God which makes the dying
believer to go toward Heaven with all his force, and like his Savior commit
his soul with joy into the hands of his heavenly Father. Du Bosc Sermons. p.
354. We ought to pray that we may not be like the wicked in our death, and that
we may be found of our Lord in peace; and that we may say with old Simeon, when
after long expectation he saw the Messiah and embraced him in his arms, Lord,
now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine
eyes have seen thy salvation, Luke 2. 29, 30. This we may beg of God, for it is
not only for our happiness but for his Glory, when we can trust him though we go
into a state which he has promised indeed, but which we never saw. What a
glorious thing is it, when we are drawing near to the end of Life to be able to
wait, and not only to wait, but to long; not only to believe and hope, but to
rejoice and triumph in the thought of seeing God? To give to those that live,
an Example of dying well, which is the most difficult thing in the World. What
a mercy is it when a man after many long and weary steps on Earth is going
stored with Experiences and a well-grown Faith to his Journeys end? When a man
arrives at Heaven like a vessel well fraighted and richly Laden, that after a
long and dangerous Voyage is coming home. To shine all his Life with the
beauties of Holiness, and when he dies to set like the Sun in beams, to rise
again. Oh what a pleasant thing is it to a Believer to have the sweet
foretastes of heaven here, and hereafter to enter into the joy of his Lord? To
be blown along with a full gale of assured and undaunted Hope. To be able to
say, I know whom I have believed, I have fought the good fight of faith, I am
going to that God whose I am and whom I serve; to that God who has loved me,
and whom I have loved, who will be my own God for ever and ever. What a
glorious thing is it when a Christian by the assistance of the blessed Spirit
has mortified all inordinate desires after any thing in this life; when he can
say, Let me arise and go hence to a better place; when the Affections and all
the powers of the Soul are on the wing to meet its Savior on the way; when it
is in an actual readiness, and as soon as ever it hears the voice saying, Come
up hither, will freely go and with such holy haste as if it would prevent
Christ in his coming to fetch it. It is a thing greatly to be desired and
prayed for, that when our last hour comes, we may not only in the General be
prepared to dye, but that we may be in a dying Frame; and a man is so when he
is very submissive to God and his blessed Will, when he is pleased with that
order of his Providence, that calls him hence. When by Faith he is entirely
loosened from the World and Worldly things, and in assurance of Salvation can
yield up his Life with this, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

Inf. 1. If being brought from the Grave be so great a mercy, and for which we
ought I^^.
to be thankful, then what cause have those to be thankful who are delivered so
as never to be in danger of dying any more. Happy are they who are delivered so
as ever to be delivered, never to feel the same bitterness which they once
felt, nor to groan under the same Miseries and Calamities. We praise God here
on Earth but alas how low and how weak are our Praises to what he deserves for
his own Excellencies, and for his Mercy to us? How cold are our warmest praises
to theirs above, who are all in admiration, Ecstasy and Love? And well may they
praise him in the most elevated manner, that certainly know that all their
diseases are healed and their Iniquities forgiven. That by their nearness to
God see his Face and how well-pleased he is with all they do, they praise the
riches of his Grace in pardoning so many sins and so great; they praise his
power and his Wisdom that guided their poor trembling Souls to his own Glory;
their hearts are full of Love, and it is that which produces Praise and Joy. Oh
what a cheerful Society is above in Heaven, where so many Milions of Angels,
and so many Saints join together in the same blessed work, and all their
several Anthems meet in one loud and pleasant Hallelujah, how vastly different
is their Assembly from such an one as this? Here we are with our unbelief, with
our fears, with our strong Corruptions, and with our many sins, whereas they
are all perfect and complete in Holiness. Here are we liable to manifold
Calamities, the very thoughts of which may be justly afflicting to us, but in
their World they have no change nor variation. They have one continued and
unalterable Felicity, after a long and doleful sickness, it is a pleasant thing
to behold this World again; it looks as a new World to me who have dwelt for so
many Months on the very borders of the Grave. But alas what is this World that
at the best is a Region and a state of death, to that above which is a Region
and a state of pure and undisturbed Life. The deliverance which God has been
pleased to give to Me is in many respects as a Resurrection, but it is such an
one as that of Lazarus; after which I must be sick again and dye, for Recovery
is but a delay of certain death. And indeed our praises for our escape from
death are very much damped and allayed by this thought, that we must for all
the deliverances we have at present, yet in a little while go into the Grave.
The remembrance of those fore and dreadful Calamities that surrounded me, and
this Consideration that I am, whilst in this body, obnoxious to many thousand
more distresses makes me to rejoice with trembling. It is a very sad
Consideration when a man looks upon such a number of people as is here this
Evening, to think, how many several sorts of miseries may be our Lot before we
dye. All of us are born to trouble as the sparks fly upward. We can no more
avoid affliction then we can run away from our selves. What vexations may you
Parents meet withal in disobedient Children, that may send you mourning to the
dust? What Curses may come to you who have careless Parents that suffer you to
wander in the way of death? What disappointments and losses and decays may you
that are Tradesmen meet withal, or if you avoid all these yet that which is
worse may come upon you. I mean sharp and violent diseases, and these I call
worse because a man will better bear any inconvenience without him, then that
which fills his body with uneasieness and pain, and his Soul by its sympathy
with its dear Companion with Anguish and Vexation. In how little a while will
all, who are now alive, be dead! In how little a time may the most strong and
healthful person here, be taken off by sickness from all Employment and
business! How does it trouble us many times to see the Tears and Sorrows of our
nearest Friends, and we cannot mitigate them; with what earnest looks do they
move our pity when they are in great pain but we cannot help them, their shrill
Cries, and their doleful groans may pierce our hearts but we know not how to
remove them. We stand by their Bedsides and see their Agonies, but by being
sorrowful we do but for the most part add new grief to theirs. We see their
Countenances change and how at length they pass away, and that shortly in such
a case shall we our selves be. But oh what a welcome and glorious day will that
be, when we shall see those very friends alive again whom we once saw in the
most dreadful Agonies of death? When though we parted with Tears, yet we shall
meet with Joy. It will be a welcome day indeed, when their Looks, their
Expressions, their Carriage, will all be changed for the better. There will be
no appearance of any thing that is dismal and grievous, and it will be more
welcome to us because we and our friends, so suitable, so loving and so perfect
shall never part again? Oh what a comfortable thought is this? Oh what will our
praises be when we are there, where there will be no more sickness, no more
death for ever. We shall behold what we were in our Mortal State, how vain and
how short-lived, and what we are when we are made Immortal. There will be no
more restless and weary days, nor nights as restless as the day, not a sigh
nor a groan will be heard in all the blessed place above. What would one that
is in great pain give for ease, most readily would he give all he has in the
World, but upon our first entrance into that Land of pleasure and of health,
all our Diseases will be cured, and so fully cured that we shall never Relapse
nor be diseased again. There will be no pain. This to those that are at ease
may seem a little part of Heaven but to those of us that have been in long and
terrible sickness, it is a very sweet and reviving Consideration. In this World
one affliction is scarce past till another comes, usually there is breach upon
breach, and a new sorrow treads upon the heels of the old one, as one wave upon
another. We have scarcely dried our eyes for one loss but another comes that
will make us weep again; but in the Heaven which we hope for, there is no
Language but that of Praise. Here we are always either bewailing our own
Miseries or those of our Friends and Neighbors; but there it will not be so.
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the
former things are passed away, Rev. 21. 4. Oh what a joy will it be to us, to
be past death, that is so terrible and to be for ever past it! The ransomed of
the Lord shall return and come to Zion with sons, and everlasting joy upon
their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness and sorrow and sighing shall
flee away, Isa. 35. 10. We praise God indeed here and we have Cause to praise
him, but our Victories are not so complete as to make a perfect Triumph, we
have one great Battle yet to fight, and one great Gulf to shoot, and a dark
and a solitary way to go. This is that which is grievous to our thoughts; but
oh what a joy will it be to us when we are past death and have dyed well, who
can express the mighty pleasure of it? When the delivered Soul can say, I that
have been so furiously tempted, so violently assaulted, so siercely shaken by
the blast of the terrible one, shall be so no more, all the Rage of Satan shall
not come near me nor give me an unquiet thought for ever. And I, that grieved
and was disconsolate with tedious and uncommon pain, shall never droop nor
languish any more. What a reviving prospect will it be when we stand on the
other side of the Grave, when the terrible forerunners of Death, and Death it
self shall be no more? Then we may say indeed, Oh death where is thy sting, oh
grave where is thy victory? What consternation, fear and perplexity filled the
hearts of the poor Israelites when they were going out of Egypt when they were
environed with rocks, with their Enemies behind, and with the Sea before? They
were in great trouble and knew not what to do. But how different were their
looks and Apprehensions when they beheld the Sea to give way, and by an unheard
of Miracle stand as a Wall on either hand till they past thorough! How
delightful was it to them, when they were on the firm Land, to see those very
Enemies, that Pharaoh and those Cruel Masters, that had for so many years kept
them in cruel bondage to find a grave in that Element which yielded and made a
way for them; Exodus 15. 1, 2. So will it be with us when we shall see all our
diseases, all our Fears, all our Temptations, all our sinking thoughts to be
destroyed for ever. The day of our death that will convey us to the blessed
State, will be better to us then the day of our birth that brought us into such
an evil World as this. Our Eyes will then no more behold grievous objects; our
Ears will no more hear any sad or doleful news. Here we have many National and
Personal Deliverances, but alas we sin again, and so bring upon our selves new
Judgments: But there, which every sincere Soul reckons to be a great part of
Heaven we shall sin no more for ever. I that am now speaking come to you as
from the Grave, and can give you an account of Pain and Sickness, but am not
able to give you so distinct an Account of the Holy and Cheerful Employment
that is above. But if one were to come to you from Heaven, if he were but
enabled to tell what he felt, and your Capacities enlarged to understand the
pleasing Narrative, how would your glad hearts melt with an Admiring Joy, and
your Souls be raised to Praise and Wonder! they will be much more raised and
more joyful when you have your complete and final Deliverance. Then you shall
say with those in Rev. 5. 12, 13. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive
power and riches and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and blessing. And
again, Blessing, honor, glory and power be unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

The End of the Second Sermon.
The Third SERMON.
PSALM. 30. ver. 3, 4. O Lord, thou have brought up my Soul from the Grave: thou
have kept me alive that I should not go down to the Pit.

Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his, and give Thanks at the remembrance of
his Holiness.


IF Deliverance from the Grave be so Infer. 2.
great a Mercy, and for which we ought to be very thankful: what cause have
they to be thankful that are delivered from a Death in Sin? As the Soul is much
better than the Body, so the Mercies that are bestowed upon it are much more
valuable: and without this spiritual Resurrection, temporal Deliverance and
Salvation would not be so great a Mercy. A Soul under the Dominion and reigning
Power of Sin, is in a far more deplorable Condition than a Body that is
consuming in the Grave: the one suffers under a sort of innocent Misery which
it cannot help, the other suffers under a wilful Obstinacy and Impotence
contracted by its own fault. How sad a prospect is it to see Men far from God,
in whom alone there is Life; and a Separation from whom is far more terrible
than the separation of the Body and the Soul, which yet is painful and sad
enough. They that are under the Power of this Spiritual Death, taste not the
Goodness of God, they hear not his loudest Calls, they tremble not at his most
dreadful Threats, they are not drawn with his Love, nor start at his
approaching Wrath. They are very sick indeed, but they feel not their Sickness;
their Ignorance has deprived their Souls of all knowledge of their own Miseries:
they are in a state of Death and Insensibility; and their Case is the more sad,
because they are like to fall under the Power of eternal Death: and tho their
temporal Life is prolonged for a Season, yet we may say of them, as of
Malefactors under the Sentence of the Law for their Crimes, they are dead Men,
though there be a Reprieve, or a delay of Execution for a little space. And if
any of you (as I hope there are many here) are delivered from a state so
dangerous and so miserable, what Thanks and Praise should you give to God, who
has quickened you, when you were dead in Trespasses and Sins? Ephesians. 2. 1.
especially considering that you had no Inclinations, no foregoing Dispositions
to this spiritua Life. You contributed nothing to your own Regeneration, no
more than a Carcass in the Grave can raise it self and live again; no more than
dry Bones can move of their own accord, or clothe themselves with Skin and
Flesh. When he passed by, and saw you in your Blood, Ezekiel. 16. 6. then he said
unto you, Live. The Hour is come, in which they that are in the Grave, shall
hear the Voice of the Son of God; and they that hear, shall live, Joh. 5. 25.
How many of your Friends, your Neighbors, and your Fellow-Citizens are there,
in whom there are no Signs of Life at all? that notwithstanding all their
Civility and fair Carriage, their Attendance upon the Word, and the performance
of several outward Duties, have only a likeness to the Living, but no real
Life. And why should God be so good to you, and not to the rest of Men? You
were once the Children of Wrath, and Enemies as well as they. Were there any
peculiar Excellencies in you more than in others to recommend you to his
Favor? No, he has been merciful to you, because he will be merciful: and you
may say as it is in Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. God who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love
wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in Sins, has quickened us
together with Christ. It Is a very great Mercy for those that have been sick to
be restored to Health; but you are delivered from a worse Death, and have
obtained a better Resurrection, in as much as the second Death, to which they
were obnoxious, is infinitely more painful and dreadful than the first. What a
Mercy do you enjoy to be brought from a state of Wrath and Condemnation, into a
state of Peace and Favor? from the Guilt of your Sins, which made you dead in
Law, you are freed in your Justification: and from the Power of Sin, which
would have kept you in continual Slavery, you are delivered by the sanctifying
Influences and Operations of the blessed Spirit; you have cause to be thankful
for your selves, and for your Relations too, if God has given the same Mercies
unto them: you may invite your Neighbors and your Friends to a Participation
of your Comforts, and say as the Father of the Prodigal, Come and rejoice with
me, for this my Son was lost, and is now found, was dead, and is now alive. To
raise your Thankfulness, consider what a condition you would have been in, had
not God blessed you with a part in the first Resurrection. You whose Eyes are
now fixed on Heaven and Glory, had been still slumbering as unconverted Sinners
are, on the very brink of Hell; you had then been without all relish of that
word which first produced, and which does every day maintain your Life, and
which is sweeter to you than Honey, or the Honeycomb, Psalm. 19. 10. You had
now been without all Esteem and Value of that dearest Redeemer, who purchased
for you this Happiness at a very dear price; and that you might live, was
himself content to die: you had then been without that reviving hope of seeing
him for ever, that smooths your way, and guides your Steps, and upholds your
Spirits, tho you meet with many a sharp and bitter Cross. You would now perhaps
have been profaning his Sabbaths, vilifying his Ordinances, tearing his Name
to pieces with execrable Oaths; you might not have known what is the Sweetness
of a sincere and hearty Prayer, what is the Blessedness of a Soul whose Sins
are pardoned, and how honorable is the Privilege of having the great God for a
Father, and Christ for a Mediator: You are delivered from spiritual Diseases,
which are worse than all bodily Distempers; for Pride and Envy, Impatience and
Discontent, and Ambition and Revenge, are worse than even the worst of Pains,
than the Stone, the Cholick, the Strangury, or the like. These cause a
momentany Trouble; but the evil Habits, the corrupt Inclinations, and the
disorderly Motions that bear sway in that poor Soul that is dead in Sin, tend
to an everlasting Misery. Continually adore and magnify the Power of your
Savior, that made your Hearts at length to yield to his own terms, though they
gave him a very great Opposition: Bless the Skill and Wisdom of your gracious
Physician, that cures all the Diseases of your old Nature, that is not in any
part of it sound and healthful. It is easy to kill and ruin and destroy, that
we can all do too well; but who can recover and save but he alone? And if he
was to be admired when on Earth, He healed the Sick, and made the Blind to see,
the Lame to walk, and the Dead to live: He is much more now to be adored, and
his Power is not less miraculous when it displays its virtue in Regeneration;
and when he makes all the boisterous unruly passions of Nature to be still and
quiet, than in commanding the Seas and the Winds. These things should be the
matter of your Praise and Wonder, as they will be the cause of Praise and
Wonder to his Saints for ever: and if David is thankful here, when he says, O
Lord, thou have brought my Soul from the Grave; what matter of greater
Thankfulness is it, when a Christian can say, O Lord, thou have brought up my
Soul from Hell, from the Power of Satan, from the House of Bondage, and from
the Neighborhood of the second Death.

Long Life is in it self a Blessing, Infer. 3.
and for which we may very lawfully pray. I say it is in it self a Blessing, for
it may be clogged with those Miseries that may make it to be as a Curse: As if a
Man were to live long only to row in Galleys, or to dig in Mines, or to pine in
a Dungeon, or to live in Pain and Torment, or to languish on a sick Bed for
many Years together, without help or ease. As we do not say a Ship that has
been in a Storm for many days has failed long, but the Ship has been long tossed:
So life attended with innumerable Vexations and heavy Crosses, were not so
truly to be called Life, as one continued Act of Dying. To live to see nothing
but Desolations, to hear nothing but ill Tidings, and to feel nothing but Pain;
these and many other things would make a long Life to be an Affliction; and
such as these made Jeremy to say, Why died I not from the Womb? To have Life
and to have no Comfort with it, to have such Diseases, it may be, as will not
allow us to take any Delight in what we eat and drink, in the Society of our
Friends and good People, or good Books; when we have no other Language but
Complaints, no other work but to sigh and to groan, and it may be Pains which
we cannot bear: Life with these Companions looks but as a poor and sorry thing:
but Life as it includes a Recovery from Sickness, a Recovery from Distempers
that hindered us either from the doing or the receiving good, so indeed it is a
Blessing, and may be prayed for, tho when we do so we must request it: 1 st,
With great Submission to the sovereign Disposer of Life and Death, to do with
us so as may serve most his Interest and Kingdom in the World. 2 dly, We must
in the desires of long Life, propose to our selves great and honorable ends:
Some desire to live long that they may with more Freedom indulge and gratify
their Appetites: Some that they may get great Estates, make some stately
Buildings and Houses that they design to call by their own Names, and hoping
thereby to perpetuate their Memory. These are the Desires of Men in whose
Hearts the World bears too great a Sway, and who are little acquainted with the
Nature of Religion; for this will teach us to make the Glory of God, the
Edification and Profit of our Neighbor, and the Welfare of our own Souls, the
only end in our Desires of long Life, and then we must inform our selves in the
right Notion of long Life. We commonly think that 70 or 80 is the duration of a
long Life; but it is not to be measured by the number of Years, so much as by
our Proficiency in Heavenly Wisdom: He has lived long and well too, that has
attained to the end of Living, that has got that Knowledge and those Graces
which enable him to live to the Glory of God here, and to enjoy him for ever;
and a Sinner that is an hundred Years old, will be accursed, Isai. 65. 20. if he
arrive not to this; he has been indeed a great while, but has not truly lived
at all. And though the best are but Loiterers, and have not that esteem of time
which its real Preciousness does require at their Hands; Yet he that has an
hundred Years time, and loses it all, lives not so long as he that has but
twenty and bestows it well: It is too soon to go to Hell at an hundred Years
old, and not too soon to go to Heaven at twenty. Baxter's Saints Rest, p. 613.
Barely to live, is a thing no way considerable; for Birds and Flies, and Gnats
and other Animals, live as well as we, nay, and many of them have a more
delicate Pleasure in Life, as wanting the Bitterness of our Griefs, and the
Fears of a sad Futurity; but we then desire long Life aright, when we beg it
for this reason, that we may live to God: it is what is very desirable in this
respect, though we ought not to promise it to our selves, for we must always
work with Zeal and Fervor, as not knowing but we may have only a little time
wherein to work. I believe there is scarcely one among us all, but hopes to
live long, and to attain to the Years of some of our old Progenitors, and does
not question but he shall do so. When we see very aged People, even in our
dangerous Youth, we hope that we shall live till our greener Heads be covered
with the Winter, and the Snow of Age. It Is indeed a thing greatly to be
desired, where one is planted in the Vineyard of God, not to be removed thence,
till the time of Harvest, and not to have our Fruit blasted with rude and
unseasonable Weather, but that we may come to the Grave in a full Age, Like as
a Shock of Corn comes in his season, Job 5. 26. It was indeed a Blessing more
insisted on, and more largely promised in the Old Testament than it is in the
New; for that Economy was chiefly managed with respect to temporal Advantages
and Prosperity. They had in many Promises the Discovery of another happy Life,
though not so clear and distinct as that which the Gospel gives to us, yet they
had the Belief of it, and their Belief was without doubt confirmed by the
Translation of Enoch, and the Rapture of Elias: for they might easily think
that God would not remove two Men, so very good, and so very useful, unless it
were to place them in a better State than that was which they had on Earth.
Long Life is a great Blessing, but not such an one as God is always pleased to
give to the best of Men: Good Josiah, the Glory of all the Kings in those Days,
did not live so long as many other worse than he: All Israel was forced to
lament his early Death, whom to have seen alive would have been their greatest
Joy. Our good King Edward the 6 th, that was in his tenderest Youth so great a
Scholar, so good a Christian, and so excellent a King, so hearty an Enemy to
the Pope, and so sincere and true Friend to the Reformation, and so great a
Promoter of it; he died (alas) very young. The Divine Providence is mysterious
in its Conduct, and far above our Thoughts. For what Good might two such great
and holy Men have done, the one in Israel, and the other in England? They did
much Good in the few years while they lived, and might have done abundance more
had they lived very long: these excellent Kings were soon taken away, whilst
many Tyrants have waxed gray amidst the Hatred and the Curses of the People.
When we think of two such excellent Men as Mr. Joseph Allein, and Mr. John
Janeway, and how soon they died, that were less in Degree, but as great in
Grace as the former two, we must needs be silent, and adore the Providence that
we do not understand: we must needs conclude that there is something much
better to be enjoyed in the next World, than long Life in this; otherwise, such
holy Men, so full of Self-denial, so very laborious for the Glory of God and
the Good of Souls, should have lived very long: They were taken away by
Sickness from that Work in which their Souls delighted, and which in their
Hands thrived very much: The Tears and Prayers of their Hearers and their
Friends that would have had them to flourish with perpetual Youth, and that
were very sorrowful to see Men that filled them with such great hopes taken
away, could not stay them here any longer: nor would God have them to stay
longer from their happiness. It is indeed a Mercy to those that are good and
fit for Heaven, to have an early Deliverance from such an evil World as this,
where there is so much Sorrow, and Disorder, and Temptations, and Sins; to be
taken away from the Evil to come, and from many sad Objects that such as live
longer may be troubled to see; to be fully assured that God is their God, and
Heaven their Home. Jesus Christ did leave the World, (as one says) and ascend
to Glory about the 33 d or 34 th year of his Age; to teach us in the prime of
our Years to despise this World, when we are best able to enjoy it, and to
reserve our full Vigor for Heaven and for his Love. Yet though this be a way
to promote a Man's own Happiness, yet it must be received as a Mercy from God,
when any one lives not only to promote his own Salvation, but the Good of
others also.

Some will say, What need we to Object.
pray for long Life? what need we solicit God to no purpose, or tire him with
our Prayers? for we shall not live a day beyond our time, nor die a moment
sooner.

Do you not think your selves concerned to eat and to drink, and to procure
Answ.
to your selves other Gratifications of Life notwithstanding this? And why
should you not think your selves under an equal Obligation to use those other
Means that are necessary to preserve Life, as Prayer to God for his Blessing?
seeing Man lives not by Bread alone, Mat. 4. 4. You find that Hezekiah by his
Prayers to God obtained fifteen years more after he had received the first
Summons of Death. And Paul by the Prayer of the Corinthians was delivered,
after he had received the Sentence of Death, 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10, 11. And
whatsoever may be in the Decrees of God, yet I am sure he may justly deny us
what we will not take the pains to beg; tho the longest Life that we can hope
to live will be some hundreds of years shorter than the Lives of Men before the
Flood: for their long Lives are rather to be ascribed to some extraordinary
Privilege than to the ordinary Course of Nature. The World was then to be
replenished with Inhabitants, which could not be so speedily done but by an
extraordinary multiplication of Mankind, neither could that be done but by the
long Lives of Men. Again, Arts and Sciences were then to be planted; for the
better effecting whereof it was requisite, that the same Men should have the
Experience and Observation of many Ages. As also the Food wherewith they were
nourished before the Flood, may well be thought to be more medicinal; and happily
the Influence of the Heavens was at that time, in that Climate where the
Patriarchs lived, more favorable and gracious. Hakewell Apol. p. 38.

If Deliverance from the Grave be a Infer. 4.
great Mercy, and greatly to be acknowledged, then it is a very evil thing in
haste and passion to wish for Death. There are several People, when any thing
falls out that crosses their Inclinations or Designs, will presently say, I
wish I were dead, I wish I were in the Grave, and out of such a troublesome
World as this. But do you know what it is to die? it is to appear before the
eternal God, and to render an Account of all that you have thought, or spoke,
or done: it is to be judged to Heaven or Hell, and that for ever. I cannot
forget here that sad Story that is mentioned by Bellarmine, and quoted from
him: He speaks of a Man notoriously worldlyminded, whom he went to visit on his
Deathbed; and when he did him duly to provide for another World, answered him,
Sir, I have much desired to speak with you, but it is not for my self, but in
behalf of my Wife and Children: for my self I am going to Hell, neither is
there any thing that I would desire in my own behalf. And this he spoke, says
he, with such Composedness, as if he had been but going to the next Town or
Village. The Ignorance of this miserable Person suffered him to be in no
Commotion nor Horror at all; but what a doleful Change did he feel in his
Thoughts and Apprehensions when he came to that real Hell, and to those Flames
of which he spoke in so cold a manner? People make very little of dying; and
those that are poor, usually die with the least concern; for they imagine that
having suffered so many Miseries in this World, they shall be very happy in the
next. Life is a very dear Enjoyment, and it is a wonder any should desire in
haste to be deprived of it, but it is usually then, when they are in very great
and almost insupportable Pain, or under the fear of Evils that seem to be
greater than what they are able to bear. Thus the Children of Israel being in
great straits, wished they had died in Egypt, Exodus 16. 3. Thus the meekest of
all other Men, pressed by the Calamities that he had in view, says, Numb. 11.
14, 15. I am not able to bear all this People alone, because it is too heavy
for me: and if thou deal thus with me, kill me I pray thee out of hand, if I
have found favor in thy sight, and let me not see my Wretchedness. Thus
Elijah, 1 King. 19. 4. and Job, chap. 6. 8, 9. and Jonah, the Sun beat upon his
Head, and he fainted, and he wished in himself to die, and said, It is better
for me to die than to live, chap. 4. 8. but by a Mercy of God not inferior to
his former Deliverance, he was reserved to another Repentance, and to more
peaceable Days. Thus even good Men have sinned through the pressure of some
very great Affliction and Calamity. In this they followed the Motions of their
sensitive Nature, and not those of Grace, the tediousness of their Trouble, and
the weight of the Cross that they groaned under, made them with too much
eagerness and haste to pray for Death; which is always reckoned to be the last
Refuge of the Miserable. But God is not used to grant these fretful and
passionate Desires; he will make them to know their own Folly, and the Justice
of his Sovereign Authority; he will have them not only to serve him, but to
wait till he dismiss them from their Service; and all their Haste shall not
make their Sun decline, till he see it is their time to die. And it is indeed a
piece of Arrogance unsuitable to the Condition of a Creature, to desire it just
at such a particular Season, as if we knew the most convenient time to depart,
and were not in this as in all our other Actions, to be regulated by the Will
of God, and not by our own. But indeed when a Man that has been very faithful
and laborious in his Generation, is by Pain rendered altogether unfit for
Service; when the Strength and Vigor which he laid out for God is wasted and
decayed by old Age, or a tedious Distemper; when his Candle that has long burnt
to enlighten others, burns with a feeble and almost undiscerned Light, he may
then desire to die, as a poor weary Man to go to Bed. But the Saints of God do
even then desire it with Calmness and Deliberation, if they be not in a raging
Disease, for then it is impossible: they have much ado to bring their Hearts to
be sincerely and freely willing to depart: Their Fears and Temptations and
remaining Inclinations to the Body, and their Friends on Earth render it a Work
of Difficulty: There are great Strugglings in that Moment between Nature and
Grace, between Faith and Sense, though at last their Grace gets the Victory,
and so they long to be with Christ.

If Deliverance from the Grave be Infer. 5.
so great a Mercy, then Self-murder is a very great Sin. The Law that forbids
us to kill, does extend to this as well as to the Murder of another Man; this
is a violating of that Sovereign Power that is in God, and a taking upon us to
dispose of our Life, which is not our own but his. It Is an usurping upon his
Providence, which has determined when, and after what manner we are to die: and
though it is very likely there are several Accidents of Life, that are worse
than Death it self; yet it is that Eternity that comes after Death, that is
most formidable, and into which no Man ought to throw himself; and when we are
reduced to such a condition, that to live seems to be far worse than to die,
yet even then the Unalterableness of our State afterward should be a most
powerful Restraint, especially if we are uncertain where we are then to go. It
is against that Patience and Trust, which we ought to repose in God: It is a
woeful sort of dying, to die in the doing of such a thing as this which he has
most severely prohibited, to tear our Souls from our Bodies, with our own
hands, in such an ignominious and shameful manner, and because of our Distress,
to pass Sentence upon our selves, as not fit to live, and then to be our own
Executioners: A Soul at Death should be in the Exercise of Grace, and in a
quiet and humble Resignation; but in this case it is in Fear and Horror and
Discontent; and what the Romans magnified so much for Gallantry, and an Heroic
Spirit was the real Effect of Weakness and Cowardice, as it is much more
Heroical to sustain and meet a coming Danger, than to retreat and fly from it.
It was from a Meanness of Spirit that Cato chose to kill himself, because he
could not see the Empire flourish under Caesar, whom he did not love: and
however such Acts may be extolled by Heathen Historians, they are not so by
that Scripture, which is the Rule of our Faith, and the Guide of our Actions,
and which furnishes us with no Examples of those that did this, Samson only
excepted, whose case had several things in it very singular) but such as were
very bad Men, as Saul, and Achitophel, and Judas: and as we would not have our
portion with them in the other World, so it is to be wished and endeavored,
that our end may not be like to them in this: But so great is the Love of Life,
and so strong the fear of Death in the most, so dark the Knowledge of Futurity,
and so great our Unwillingness to go from a World with which we are well
acquainted, to that which we never saw, that few Men are in danger of
Self-murder, till some great Affliction, and overwhelming Pain, and by the
means of that, some great Perplexity seize their Spirits: I think few are in
danger of it, till their Griefs are unspoakably great, or their Minds in that
Anguish that is as the sad Foretaste of Hell; till all their Thoughts are in
hurry and Confusion, and as then they are no way capable of being bettered by
those Advices that seem proper to restrain them; so it concerns you that are at
ease, and are able to pursue the Business and Affairs of Life, and of Religion;
to pray earnestly to God that he withdraw not his Protection, and the Guard of
his Providence from you, that he do not leave you to thick and gross Darkness,
nor to the Power of Satan, who will push you forward to things that are most
sinful and unwarrantable: Pray hard, that violent Tentations, and overwhelming
raging Pains may never overtake your for how evil soever Self-murder seem to
you now, you know not what you may be then pressed to do: pray earnestly that you
may never be without the sense or hope of the Divine Favor, for if (which God
forbid) you once lose that, woe unto you, then you will be like a Ship without
Sails or Rudder in a Storm, you may be swallowed up, or driven on the Rocks and
broken to pieces. It is Distress and violent Sorrow that exposes Men to the
Commission of this Sin: Saul fell not upon his Sword and killed himself, till
God had forsaken him, and till he knew not what to do, though it was his own
Sin that brought him so low. Cicero tells us indeed of one Cleombrotus, who
reading the Discourse of Plato, concerning another more happy Life after this,
which could not be attained but by Death, did thereupon kill himself to attain
that Happiness; but if that be true, it is a thing that most rarely happens,
that any that have either hope of Heaven or Assurance of going thither, are so
impatient of being absent from it, as to kill themselves to go thither. And it
may be you will be ready to ask me, If they have no hope of being better when
they die, why do they long for Death, or attempt to kill themselves? They
should rather strive to live, that they may be better prepared for another
World: It is a Question that has been asked me by some People; and seeing it is
perhaps what you seldom have met withal, I will give you an Answer to it, and
if it do not appear very rational, yet I am sure it will contain that which has
been the real Apprehensions of People under those Temptations. I say then, Men
may desire to destroy themselves, though they have no well grounded Expectation
of Happiness after Death. 1. Because of that Pain of Body, and that Anguish of
Soul which is intolerable to them; they have no natural, nor spiritual Rest,
nor Prospect of either, and this fills them with Amazement and Horror, and in
that Amazement there is nothing which they will not dare to do. 2. Because they
may reckon that they are already as in Hell, and that if they be dead, they can
but be in Hell, and so dare even to try the worst: They think the longer they
live, they aggravate their Guilt, and heighten their Punishment, and add new
Fuel to the Flame, which is already too too hot and scorching; the Burden
under which they groan is so heavy, that they do not desire to have more Weight
added to it. Or, 3. It may be they may have some little, very little hope, that
were they out of the Body, they would be better than now they are; and
therefore they will venture. As to living to be better prepared, they have usually
such dismal perplexed Thoughts, that they cannot think to any purpose at all,
nor find themselves by Living, to be any better: You Will say, these are desperate
Conclusions, and so they are, but that makes me think that none but in Despair,
or in very sad Diseases, for which the World has no Remedy, are under a
Temptation to take away their own Life. And if it be a Disease, there is room
for the more Charity as to those that die after this manner; for God will not
impute the Effects of Phrensy, and a decayed and disordered Reason, to the
Malice of the Will, nor judge the Disease to be a Sin, though he may have sent
upon them such woeful Distress for their former Sins. There is another way of a
Man's killing himself, which because it is very frequent, is less taken notice
off, and that is by Gluttony, and Excess in Drinking: When a Man continually
loads himself with vast Quantities of Meats and Drinks, and so suffocates and
strangles Life, and brings upon his own Body Diseases and Death; and tho this
is not an Evil punished by the Judges, yet it ceases not to be an Evil, and a
Man may by continued Intemperance and Riot, be as guilty of Selfmurther in the
Sight of God, as if he took a Knife and cut his own Throat. Some will say
indeed, that such live apace, and if their brutal Actions deserve the Name of
Life, it is very true, for they go with a swifter course into the Grave than
they need to do.

Infer. 6.
Seeing the being brought up from the Grave is a great Mercy, how great a Mercy
is Health, when the Restoration of it is so great a Mercy, and so greatly to be
acknowledged? Some think it a very needless Labor to speak of this, seeing it
is that which all People know; as it would be needless to praise the Sun which
gives us Light, or the Air in which we breath. But though these are very
common, yet they are nevertheless very great Mercies; like Gold which though it
were never so common, yet would continue still to be a very excellent and
valuable Metal: There is as much Difference between a Man in Health, and a Man
in Sickness, as between a Man at Liberty, and a Man in Chains. Sickness
whenever it comes, will give you great Subjects of Sadness and Disquietness;
and long before you die, you may see the Days wherein you will have no
Pleasure; you cannot then, (especially if it be violent) with any Freedom or
Clearness of Thought, express your selves either to God or Man, you will be
very ill able to manage the civil Affairs of Life, or with any vigor to perform
the Duties of Religion: and the Truth of this you would see, if you went often
to the Chambers of those that in long and grievous Pains languish away; if you
heard their doleful Groans, saw their pale and decaying Looks, it would give
you a new taste of Health; but there is such a nice Delicacy and Tenderness for
the most part in those that are well, that they care not for the Visitation of
the Sick, nor to be near to Persons when they are dying. It would affect them
if they saw more frequently their Faintings, their Convulsions, and their
Agonies; but they care not for it; and yet so to be sick, and so to die, may in
a very little while be their own Lot. Health is not less a Mercy for being
common. What is more common than Sleep, which is but a part of it, and yet in
all the World there is not a thing, the having of which is more sweet, or the
want of which is more terrible; for as I have observed in a former Discourse,
all Business and the Comforts of Life depend upon it, and the Refreshment that
it gives to our natural Spirits; for let but a Man be for one Week or two
without Sleep, and he will be fit for no Business; and if Health were not so usual
a thing, it would be a Miracle, considering to what Variety of Evil we are
every day exposed, by the Frailty and Weakness of our Nature. It would make a
Man tremble to read what others have endured, or how many several sorts of very
painful Diseases belong to almost every part of humane Bodies, how painful are
the Methods that must be used for a Cure, and how these painful Methods may be
used, and yet but increase our Pain, and be to no purpose; And indeed when I
consider, (says Mr. Boil in his Occasional Reflections:) how many outward
Accidents are able to destroy the Life, or at least the Health even of those
that are careful to preserve them, and how easily the Beams of a warm Sun, or
the Breath of a cold Wind, or too much or too little Exercise, a Dish of green
Fruit, or an infectious Vapor, or even a sudden Fright, or ill News, are able
to produce Sickness, and perhaps Death: and when I think too, how many
inevitable Mischiefs our own Appetites or Vices expose us to by Acts of
Intemperance, that necessitate the Creatures to offend us, and practices of Sin
whereby we necessitate our Creator to punish us; when we well consider this,
and consequently how many Mischiefs he must escape that arrives at gray Hairs;
the Commonness of the Sight cannot keep me from thinking it worth some Wonder,
to see an old Man, especially if he be any thing healthy. It is not to be
imagined but by those that feel it, what a damp the Pains and Indispositions of
our Bodies, put upon the motions of our Souls; their Faculties are straightened,
bound and fettered, that they cannot in their former manner perform their usual
Operations: When the Soul either in natural or spiritual Actions essays to do
as it used to do, it finds it self under a very great Weakness and Disability;
for the Body lies as an heavy Clog and Weight upon it, as you know it is in the
Headache, the Toothach, or other pains, which though they be of a short
Continuance, are very troublesome, and would be more so, were they to continue
for many Months together. How speedy an Alteration will the sharp sense of
Pain, make in the briskest and most merry Man: For as Doctor Harris describes
the sick Man, (Hezekiah's Recovery, p. 172.) He has Eyes, and scarcely sees;
Ears, and hears not; Mouth, and speaks not; Feet, and walks not. Those very
Senses which let in Comfort to the Healthful, are an occasion of a new Sadness
to him: The sight of his Medicines is ungrateful to his Eye; so is the smell of
his Meat, and the taste of his Drink, the least noise offends him, the least
Air pierces him. This turns his Comforts into Crosses, his Bed tires him, his
Chair troubles him, his Friends disquiet him, their Absence offends him, and so
does their Presence, their Silence, and their Discourse, their Mirth and their
Sorrow: Being uneasy himself, every thing is uneasy to him; poor Man, something
he would have, but he cannot tell what: he is not well, and therefore nothing
is well about him. Health is is the Repose of Life; it is that alone which gives
a relish to all the other Blessings of it: The poorest Clothing, the meanest
Fare, the sorriest Cottage that is blessed with Health, is more blessed than if
it were thronged with Gold and Silver, but with Sickness and Diseases. For if a
Man have never so vast an Estate, never so glorious a Reputation, never such
honorable Friends, never so well-surnish'd a Table, never so sine an House,
and yet be without Health, all these are dead Comforts, they are as nothing,
emptiness and vanity. Health, (as the forementioned Person expresses) it is the
poor Man's Sauce at his Table, his Cloak in his Journey, his Warming-pan in his
Bed, his Boots in the mire; and whatsoever else he is destitute of, he can
rejoice in this. What cause have we that are returned to some measure of
Health, to return Thanks to God for it? And you that have always been
healthful, have cause to prize it, lest you be taught the value of it, as the
Men of Succoth were, with the Briars and Thorns of the Wilderness. O what
Miseries belong to Men, which you have yet escaped, and for which you have
great cause to be very thankful? Do not attribute your longer Health to your
Temperance, to your own Prudence, or Forecast, or Recreations, or Exercise, or
Skill, but give the Glory of your Preservation to the Providence of God, that
alone gives you Ease and Health, whilst others are in Sickness. If you were to
survey the Hospitals, and to see but how many poor lame People are there, how
many dying by degrees with incurable Diseases; if you were to go to the
Chambers of the Sick, and see under what various Miseries they are groaning
there, you would see great cause to return and praise God, that has not brought
you so very low.

I come now in the next place to show what Improvement we are to make of our
Sickness, and of our Recovery from it; and so to close this Subject with an Use
of Exhortation.

First, That we may in a due manner improve our being brought from I.
the Grave, we must always remember so great a Mercy. We ought especially to
remember the more signal and eminent Mercies, and Afflictions of our Lives, our
great Straits, and our wonderful Deliverances: And we must also remember what
Condition we were in before we were delivered. It is commonly said, that
nothing makes us better understand the excellence of Liberty, than the
consideration of the Miseries of Bondage. The hideousness of Obscurity sets off
the beauty of Light; and the sweetness of Health is best represented by
considering the bitterness of Sickness. Seeing therefore I would desire to
praise God my self for his great Mercy in my Recovery, and also beg of you to
praise him in my behalf, I will give you a short Account of the deplorableness
of my Condition before I was delivered. I would indeed remember so much of it
as may enable me to glorify my great Deliverer: but the whole of it, as it
would be most astonishing to you, so it would be very overwhelming to me: The
consideration of the greatness of the Danger heightens the Mercy of Deliverance
and Salvation from it. It will be somewhat a melancholy Relation that I am
going to make, but it shall be very true; for I would not lie for God, nor make
the Danger from which he has saved me, greater than it was: It will not be a
very delightful Account; but yet as Solomon says, Eccl. 7. 2. It is better to
go to the House of Mourning than to the House of Feasting. It is better
sometimes to hear sad, than always pleasant Things. And in as much as Grief and
Mourning is in it self a very grave and homely thing, that requires not
Ornament or artificial setting off, I shall without affecting to be thought
eloquent, give You

A plain Relation of some part of my sore Distress.
AFter an ill habit of Body that had for some years attended me, together with
some little Illnesses now and then, which were but as drops to the greater
Storm that was to come upon me, and which I could not foresee, it pleased God
at length in his just and righteous Judgment, to suffer my growing Distemper to
arrive to a most formidable height: So that before I desisted from coming to
this Place, my Sleep departed quite away; and for several Nights in a week I
slept no more than I do at this time: upon which there immediately followed a
general Weakness and decay of Spirits, a general Listlessness, and a total
Indisposition; and by feeling of this I had a strong Impression in my Mind,
that I should very speedily die; as strongly fixed in my Apprehensions, as if
it had been said to me as to Hezekiah, Thou shall surely die. I thought I was
immediately to go to the Tribunal of God; and the Thoughts of immediate
appearance before him continued with me for about a year: there was not a Day
past wherein I did not think that I should be dead before Night, and at Night I
should be dead before the Morning. I thought my self just at the entrance into
the Grave: And what a strange prospect that is, and what a mighty Change it
causes in a Man's Thought, none know but those that have apprehended themselves
so near it; nor do they fully know it, unless they have been near it for many
Months together. Those Nights that were Nights of comfortable Rest to the most
of you, were tedious, and long, and doleful Nights to me. I could say with Job,
chap. 7. 3, 4. I am made to possess Months of Vanity, and wearisom Nights are
appointed to me. When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the Night be
gone? And I am full of tossings to and fro till the dawning of the Day. And
ver. 13, 14. I was all the day and all the night long in Pain and Trouble, and
in a Pain very singular and uncommon; so secret, and yet so violent, that as I
fully believe it was not known what it was, so I am sure none of the Methods
that were used to remove it, though painful enough, were of any value. I have
been sorely wearied with Anguish and Trouble. I have often said, though I have
had no Rest the Night before, yet perhaps in that which is to come I may; but I
have had no Rest at all then, nor the next, nor the next, scarce any
discernable Sleep, I am sure none that was refreshing, for above three quarters
of a year together: And if at any time I rested a little, that little Rest was
all the while disturbed with terrible and amazing Dreams; and when I awaked, I
always found my self in strange and unexpressible Pain, in Anguish and
Bitterness, such as nothing in this World is able to represent even as to its
lowest degrees. And judge you into what Confusions and Disorders this alone
would throw a Man if it were single. My Disease, and my Fears, and sad
Apprehensions came upon me as a Whirlwind, like the rushing of many mighty
Waters; strange and horrible Pains, and great Fears, so that it was as an
universal Storm, from which there was no retreat. I said with Hezekiah, Isa.
38. 12, 13. Mine Age is departed, and is removed from me as a Shepherd's Tent:
I have cut off, like a Weaver, my Life: He will cut me off with pining
Sickness: from day even to night will thou make an end of me. I reckoned till
morning, that as a Lion, so will he break all my Bones; from day even to night
will thou make an end of me. I was continually full of restless Pain and
amazing Thoughts. I often said, I am now cut off, I am come to the End of my
Journey; I am going to the Grave, there was but a Step, but a Minute, as it
were, between me and Death; nay, how often have I been by most terrible
Convulsions in the very Jaws of Death. They were to me as a Den of Lions, and
are as painful and as terrible as if a Man were actually torn to pieces. And in
all these not the least help nor prospect of Relief, and these returning every
day for many weeks, or rather one continued Convulsion-fit, and that always
with a very quick and cutting Pain; it never came upon me but as a Giant, or an
armed Man; and whenever that was, I thought my self in the very Moment of my
Separation from the Body: I thought my self very often just going to the Bar of
God: I was in Death often, often as in the very Agonies and Pangs of Death, but
I could not die: I seemed to have the strength of Brass; it seemed to me as if
I had been raised up by Almighty Power only, that I might be capable to suffer
Pains very strange and very terrible: I sunk as in the deep Mire, Psalm. 69. 2.
I saw indeed sometimes the Light of Day, but it was never refreshing nor
comfortable to me, for I was often saying with Job, chap. 3. 23, 24. Why is
Light given to a Man whose way is hid, and whom God has hedged in? For my
Sighing comes before I eat, and my Roarings are poured out like Water. I was
not in Safety, neither had I Rest, neither was I quiet: yet trouble came. For
the thing which I greatly feared, is come upon me, and that which I was afraid
of, is come unto me. I often said, I shall never see the World till it be in
Flames, never see my Friends or Acquaintance, nor they me, till the Heavens be
no more, and till the vast Appearance of the great Day: Thus* my Feet stumbled
on the dark Mountains, and all was hideous Darkness, Woe and Desolation with
me. Sometimes by the Greatness of my Trouble, I was even stifled with Grief,
that I could not for a great while speak a Word, and when I spoke, it was in a
mournful manner; for many Months I could not breath without a mighty Pain, and
as soon as with Difficulty I had breathed, every Breath was turned into a
Groan, and every Groan was big with a very deep Sorrow. I was weary with my
Groaning, Psalm. 6. 6. All the Night made I my Bed to swim, and watered my Couch
with Tears: Nay the Sadness and the stinging Particularities that I apprehended
in my afflicted Case, made me to weep even till I had no more power to weep.
Psalm. 88. 3. My Soul was full of Troubles, and my Life drew nigh to the Grave,
etc. I saw the Grave as beneath me continually opening to swallow me up: I
often said in my self, I shall no more see the Congregations or Assemblies of
God's-People; I shall never any more enter into his Court, nor sing his Praise;
I shall no more speak in his Name, nor experience his loving kindness in the
Land of the Living any more. These were some of my Thoughts, and this was my
inexcusable Infirmity and my Unbelief: Those that are in Health will scarcely
perhaps credit what I say, they will think I am a melancholy Man, and aggravate
my Trouble, and set it out more than needs, or than it was, and that in the
whole there was a great deal more of Fancy than of Reality; but I pray God they
may never taste one drop of that bitter Cup whereof I was made to drink, for if
they should, they will find it whatever Names they now give it, to be then full of
real Miseries. As I have spoke nothing but what I fully believe to be true, so
I have spoke the more of it, that it may be of some use to others, that though
Trouble and Distresses fall upon them which are very strange and very
perplexing, or such as rarely happen, that they would hope even in the Depths,
for they may see by me that nothing is too hard for God. There are few that
having been so near to Death, revive again; few that have been near it so long
together; and fewer that after they have recovered, are willing to speak of
what they then saw and felt: but methinks it is not unnecessary to show to what
woeful Miseries we are obnoxious in this World, and how many ways God has
wherewith to correct and punish the Sins of Men. Most People are unwilling to
speak of such things as these, because others are unwilling to hear such
doleful Relations; they invent some other Discourse to put it off, but their
hearing of it is better than to feel it, and this may help them to avoid
manifold Mischiefs before it be too late. You think it may be that I have spoke
a great deal, and your Attention may be wearied; but I'lassure it is many
hundred times below what I felt. Great Griefs, as well as mighty Joys, exceed
all our Words, and Bitterness is not to be described: Never was any, I believe,
nearer to Death, not to die, never was any compassed with a greater Danger;
never any had less hope of an Escape than I, and yet the Mercy of a God that is
Omnipotent, has relieved me. And as it is commonly said that Music sounds best
upon the Water; so by setting our Sorrows and our Mercies together, our Praise
may be more harmonious. You may in this behold the Severity and the Goodness of
God: his Severity in continuing on me so many smart Strokes for so long a
space; and his Goodness in giving me help, when no Power on Earth was able to
give me the least Relief: His Severity in continuing my Pain for so many long
and doleful Months, without any Mitigation; and his Goodness in bringing me
back when I was as in the Grave: His Severity, in withholding his Blessing from
all those innumerable Means that were used with a design to help me, so as that
nothing that was intended for my Cure, could any way promote it, and 'twas his
Goodness that he himself became my Physician, and that I did not continue to
groan under the same Miseries as many Years as I did Months: Remembering my
Asfliction and my Misery, the Wormwood and the Gall, my Soul has them still
in Remembrance, Lam. 3. 19, 20. The Storm indeed is in a great measure over,
blessed be God; but I cannot without trembling call it to mind, nor dare I
think very long upon it: I was brought very low, as low as Calamity and
Distress could make me, but the Lord has kept me, he has turned again my
Captivity; and I am really as in a Dream; though it is a more pleasant one than
any I ever had during my long Sickness and Calamity. I can scarce believe that
I am at so much ease as I now am, I can scarce believe that I am in this
Assembly, of which I confidently thought I had taken my leave for ever. When I
look back upon the rough Waves, and the stormy Seas, I am ready to say, Can it
be that God has brought me safe to Land? After I had conversed with the Dead,
am I now among the Living? am I now with People under Hope? blessed be the Name
of the Lord, I am? It is a great Mercy to me, and it is the more so, as it was
unexpected and above the Power of Nature, contrary to all my hopes, and above
all humane help: Those that have heard my Groans, and seen my Agonies, and
heard of my Affliction, cannot but wonder at it. I often said that I could not
be delivered without a Miracle, and God himself has wrought it. He has showed
Wonders to the dead, Psalm. 88. 3. For the raising them up is so, from a case
very sad and sadder than by any Words can be expressed, has the Lord delivered
me; and certainly so terrible a Visitation, so dreadful a Disease, and so heavy
a Judgment, and so gracious a Rescue from it, should never be forgotten: To be
rescued from Death, from so great a Death, is a very great Mercy: Psalm. 71. 19,
20. Psalm. 116. 3, 4, 5, 6. It was by the Sovereign Goodness and mere Mercy and
Grace of God, that I obtained this Deliverance; all this he did for a most
unworthy Sinner, for an impatient and fretful Sinner too; is not this
wonderful, Mercy with a witness, a Mercy never to be forgotten as long as I
have a Day to live; and I may say to you, Come and bless the Lord with me, come
and help me to praise his Holy Name: But on this I shall insist more when I
come to that place that we ought not only to praise God our selves, but to
exhort others also to give Thanks at the Remembrance of his Holiness. I have
cause to do so; for how many has he suffered to sink, when the Waves were not
so high against them, as those that rolled over me? the Storms and the Winds
that blew them down, not so fierce in some respect against them, as they were
against me, and yet they are covered in the Grave, whilst I, though sorely
weatherbeaten, have outlived the Storm. How many are there dead, since I was
ill? many excellent and Holy Men are now silent in the Dust, who were more
knowing, more useful, more zealous and better qualified than ever I am like to
be; and yet God has spared a poor Shrub, whilst he has torn up some of the
Cedars of our Lebanan by the Roots.

Therefore to quicken my self, and in some measure to excite others who have
been recovered after long and sore Affliction; O let us all agree to remember
such reviving Mercies as God is pleased to vouchsafe us, when he brings us from
the Grave: Let not a day pass wherein you do not call to Mind what he has done.
When you awake, then remember what a great Mercy your Sleep is, and what you
would once have given, even all the World if you had had it, for one Hour of
sound Rest: Never bow your Knees in Prayer, but call to mind his Mercy, that
has loosed your Bonds, mitigated your Distress, and enabled you to pray. When
you enter into such Assemblies as this, on his Holy Day, then remember what sad
Sabbaths those were, when you were confined to your sick Beds, and could do
nothing, but if you had so much hope, send your sorrowful Requests to beg the
Prayers of others; and when instead of singing his Praises as you now do, you
could only sigh and groan; when you are with others, speak of his excellent
Goodness; and when you are alone, delight to meditate upon it; let nothing, no
Tentations, no Diversions or Business, draw you to forget so merciful a God,
and so gracious a Benefactor. If you have any remaining Pains left, let these
make you thankful that you have no more, and that you are not as you once were.
It Is much easier to think of our Wounds, when they are in some measure healed,
than to bear their Smart when they are upon us; and when you see others seized
with Sickness and with manifold Calamities of this vain Life, then bless God
that you have a shining Sun whilst they are overtaken with a rainy Day. I speak
to those of you that have been sick, having been so my self; with what care and
Compassion did this good God remember us? He remembers his tender Mercies and
his loving-kindnesses, for they have been ever of old, Psalm. 25. 6. If we any
way help the meanest of his Servants in their Distress, he forgets not our Work
and Labor of Love, which we have showed to his Name, Heb. 6. 10. He remembers
the Service we have done him, so as to reward it; he remembers the Sincerity of
our Endeavors and Desires, so as to encourage us, and we should keep in our
Minds his Bounties and his Love to us, that we may serve him more, and
especially those that come to revive us after a long Misery, and to bring us
out of a State that seemed altogether helpless and unrelievable. There is not a
Moment of our time wherein he does not load us with his Benefits, and there
should scarce a Moment go from us without some Ejaculation or Breathing after
him: He has not been as a barren Wilderness to us, and we should give him
Thanks, whilst as with the Joy of Harvest we reap the Fruits of his Bonignity.
There is not any, the greatest or the least Deliverance that we obtain, but
it is first produced, and then carried on by his alone care. Let us that are
recovered, remember the Gift that he has given us, for there is none more
excellent among all natural things than the Gift of Life, and whilst we hug and
embrace this dear Enjoyment, let us not forget the Donor of it: Let us remember
God who is the Fountain of our Life, and lets us also remember that gracious
Mediator, by whose Death this and all other Mercies were purchased for us, and
by whose effectual Intercession they are bestowed and made our own. Could they
that were cured of Fevers, Palsies, Blindness, Lameness, and other Distempers,
by Christ here on Earth, ever forget so skilful and so tender a Phisician?
doubtless wherever they came, they spoke of him; wherever they met him, they
gave him Thanks: and we should be no less thankful than they, seeing his
Goodness, his Power, and his Compassion, has been the same to us that it was to
them: for (as one says) he shows his Power in the Greatness, his Wisdom in the
Seasonableness, his Truth in the Constancy, his Grace in the Freeness, the
Riches of his Mercy in the Fullness of his Blessings and Deliverances: How
great is the sum of all his Thoughts and his Benefits to us? they are
altogether innumerable, and too many for us to remember: but however, we ought
to suffer nothing to make us forget such as are greater and more eminent. There
are two great Changes that we ought always to remember, when we are changed
from a Death of Sin to a Life of Grace, and when we are brought from the Grave
to the Health and comfortable Enjoyment of this natural Life; for in the
Beginning and in the Consummation of our Deliverances, there is nothing on
which we should with more delight fix our Thoughts, than on the Goodness and
the Power of God, who alone is able to save us from our Distresses, and who is
most willing to do so when we call upon him.

The End of the Third Sermon.
The Fourth SERMON.
PSALM. 30. ver. 3, 4. O Lord, thou have brought up my Soul from the Grave: thou
have kept me alive that I should not go down to the Pit.

Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his, and give Thanks at the remembrance of
his Holiness.


I Now proceed to enquire after what manner we must remember our Deliverance
from Sickness and Death. And this we may do three ways.

1. Remember them with an Admiration of God, that he should be so good to you.
Admiration is the first of all the Passions next to Pleasure and Pain. When an
Object is perceived that has nothing new in it, we consider it indifferently,
and without any commotion of the Soul: but the Mercies that we have from above
are new to us every Morning, and to be admired for their being so, Lam. 3. 23.
When we are intent upon the Creature, we may be guilty of an excess of
Admiration, which by immoderate fixing of the animal Spirits in the Brain, may
hinder their usual Influx into other parts of the Body, and be very hurtful to
the Health (Natural History of the Passions, p. 90.) But when God is our
Object, and Things Divine raise this Motion in our Souls, there is no danger of
Excess. There are two things that may cause us to admire the Goodness of God,
that he will bestow any of his Mercies upon us.

(1.) The vast and immense Distance that is between him and us; his unspeakably
glorious Majesty and Greatness, and our own poor mean being, that is in it self
very low, and does appear much more so, when compared with him. When we
consider the large extent of his Dominions, the splendour of his Court, the
numerousness of his Attendants, the glory of his Heaven, the brightness of his
Sun, the beauty of his Earth, and the largeness of the whole Creation; and then
from the sight of these behold our little selves, have we not cause to say.
Lord, what is Man, that thou art mindful of him? or the Son of Man, that thou
visitest him? Psalm. 8. 4. Is it not a wonderful thing that so great a God will
take care of us when he needs not our Services, nor all the Duties we are able
to perform? If we were to set in Darkness for ever, he would shine with a Light
as bright and clear as he he now does. It is a mighty Condescension in him to
pity our Distress, to help our Weakness, to cure our Wounds, to solace our
Hearts, to pacify our Souls, and refresh our Bodies; and when we are dying, to
revive us, and to bring us from the Grave: So that we may say with David, 2 Samuel 7. 18. Who am I, O Lord God? and what is my House, that thou have brought
me hitherto? Ver. 19. Is this the manner of Man, O Lord God? How freely dos he
do us good when we could lay no Obligation at all upon him?

(2.) Another thing that causes us to admire him for the Mercies that he
bestows upon us, is, Not only that we are inconsiderable Creatures, but guilty
too, and have deserved the contrary at his Hands. We are not only, as Jacob
says, less than the least of all his Mercies, but we are worthy of his greatest
and most severe Punishments. We not only deserve to be plagued all the day
long, and to be chastned every morning, Psalm. 73. 14. but we deserve to be the
Objects of his Fury for evermore. We murmur and think it hard to be laid upon a
Sickbed; but alas, we have all deserved to be laid on a Bed of Flames. We
groan, and with impatient Complaints express our Sorrows, when he for holy and
gracious Ends casts us into a fiery Furnace. Whereas, were not the Lord
infinitely merciful to us, our milder Sufferings might have been our Hell.
Every medicinal and gentle Stroke of our Heavenly Father might have been the
Lash of Devils that would have showed us no Mercy. Alas, where had you and I
been long ago, had God dealt with us according to our Sins? I should not have
been speaking to you, nor you hearing me in this Place with hope: We should
have been all silent in the Grave, or all in Torments in a worse Place. It Is
our Self-love and our heinous Pride that makes us to be so impatient in our
Sickness, and so unthankful when we are recovered: We think we are injured when
we are afflicted; and that we have but what we merit when we are delivered. But
what Miseries and Desolations have our Sins deserved, our Original Corruption
and all that impure Offspring that has descended from it? How many thousand
times do we sin every day? How much Evil do we commit that we ought to forbear?
and how much Good that we ought to perform, do we let alone? Who is there among
us that has those serious and abiding and lively Thoughts of God that he ought
to have? Who is there that in his Trade and worldly Business maintains his
Commerce with Heaven, and with spiritual and pious Ejaculations? Who is it that
by constant Exercises of Religion makes his Family as a Little Church when he
is at home? and that by an unintermitting Diligence and Watchfulness antidotes
himself against the Contagions of bad Examples and vain Company, and the
Temptations of an evil World, when he is abroad? Who is it that walks so
circumspectly, as to be unblameable, and without Offense? Who is it that is so
courageous in his Reproofs, so zealous of good Works, so tender of his own
Salvation, and of the Salvation of others, as he ought to be? Our neglect of
many thousand Duties, calls for long and severe Punishments at the Hands of
God. And it is a Subject of great Wonder that he will be gracious even to any
of the Sons of Men. And what reason has every one that is delivered from
Sickness, and Pain, and Death, to bless his holy Name, and to say, What am I, O
Lord God, that thou should visit, and uphold, and refresh so great, so
inexcusable, so wilful a Sinner as I have been? What am I, a poor Worm of the
Earth, that thou should so mercifully regard me? What am I that I should live
by thy Goodness, when I have so often deserved to die by thy Justice? What am
I, that when I had spent so much of my Time to little purpose, thou should
give me still more time? that he should again put me into his Vineyard, when I
had loiter'd in it for so long a space, and when I had misimproved many
thousand Talents, and knew not what to answer for them, he should pass by and
remit my former Debts, and put into my Hands a new Stock? What am I, that his
Dew should remain upon my Branches, when he might have said of me, as of the
barren Fig Tree, Cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground any longer? O what
Grace is this! that a God whom I had so frequently and so heinously provoked,
should spare me to recover Strength? That when I had mocked him with so many
cold and lazy Prayers, he should give me opportunity to pray again? when I had
so often misimproved his Sabbaths and his Gospel, and the Offers of his Son,
that he should continue to me the Blessings of his holy Day, the Invitations of
his Word, and the Calls of Christ? that so I may repent of my careless Hearing,
my Lukewarmness and my Unbelief? In the humble sense of our own Unworthiness,
let us contemplate and admire that God that brings us from the Grave. Many
People will say, If we were humbled, and if we did repent, God would soon help
us. This is very true: but if God should never be merciful to us till we are
prepared for Mercy, his Mercy and his Help, I am afraid, would come very late.
For as we may say, It is of the Lord's Mercies that we are not consumed,
because his Compassions fail not; so it is of the Lord's Mercy that we are
delivered; and he is gracious because he will be so.

2. When we are delivered from Sickness, and from the Grave, we must remember
that Deliverance so as to excite our selves to more Fervor and Affection.
Before all our Duties we should stir up our selves; and that is to be done by
an intense and serious application of our Minds to that particular thing which
we go about, by considering aright the Nature and Consequence of a
wellperformed Duty. Thus when we are going to pray, we should say, Remember, O
my Soul, to what a glorious God thou do approach; and with what humble
Self-abhorrence thou should look unto his Majestic Throne: Remember thy own
Vileness, thy Sins, thy Miseries and thy Wants, and what need thou have of a
Mediator, to make thy poor and thy mean Oblation to be an acceptable Sacrifice;
what need thou have of wrestling and striving, that thou may obtain a
Blessing. Thus when we give Thanks, we may say, Remember, O my Soul, the
excellent Perfections of God, and the Benefits which thou have received, their
Seasonableness, their Worth, and all the wonderful Particulars they are
attended with. This excitation of our selves is not acquirable by a few cold
and transient Thoughts; it is not one Sally of Religious Meditations now and
then, but a continuance of these Acts, arguing and pleading the Case with our
own Souls, till the Fire of our Love and Thankfulness begin to burn. We should
think of the Mercies of God till our Hearts, under the sense of his Goodness,
begin to melt and warm; till all that is within us move and stir with holy
Elevations toward him. Then will the Holy Spirit cherish our Endeavors: And
when we are, with all the Skill we can, tuning our Harps, he will come in to
our Assistance, and make the Music more harmonious, and our Praise more sweet,
and by his vital Influences banish all that Coldness that does usually damp and
clog our Hearts in the Duties of Religion. There is a great advantage in
Soliloquies, and a Man may in this Work talk to himself without the reproach of
folly. This is a means to quiet and appease a rising Storm, Psalm. 42. 5. and
this is the way to make us look upon it with Delight and Thankfulness when it is
past and gone. We know that those Sermons which do but explain Truths to us,
and present them only in their native Excellency and Reasonableness, do not
equally affect us, as those do that are pressed with a fervent and lively
Application: Nor do those Mercies which we only remember, make so much
impression as those which we often call to mind, and as often urge upon our
Hearts. When we come before God, we must make his Altar smoke with burning
Frankincense: we must cover it with our cheerful Praises, and a flaming Love.
Our knowledge of his Persections is obscure and weak, but our Sense causes us
very distinctly to feel his Benefits; and therefore all our Affections should
ascend toward him. When his Sun shines full upon us, our Hearts should open at
his Coming, smell with a sweeter Savor upon the being visited with his
comfortable Beams. As upon our being brought from the Grave, and restored to
Health, there is a new Strength in our Bodies; so there must be a new Vigor in
our Souls: and as we discover a very great Earnestness in our Petitions when we
want a Mercy, so there ought to be as much Fervor in Acknowledgment and return
of Thanks when we have received it.

3. After we are delivered from the Grave, we ought to remember such a Mercy
with very great Sincerity, i. e. there ought to be a Correspondence between our
outward Expressions and the more undiscernable Motions of our Hearts. There
must be in our Understandings an high Esteem of him who is the Author of all
our Good, a most deliberate and free choice of him as our Happiness; and this
Esteem and this Choice is the genuine Product of a real Admiration. There is
nothing indeed more common than for People on the smallest occasions to say, I
thank God for this or that; but the manner in which they speak it, plainly
discovers that the sense which they have of the Divine Goodness is but light
and superficial. Their Air, their Countenance, their Gestures, and their whole
Carriage shows that they are not fully thankful: They many times, by the
formality of their Expressions, take that Name in vain, which they ought to
magnify and bless. But when we bless God, there must be a very deep Reverence
and sense of him upon our Hearts; and we must sacrifice our dearest Lusts at
his Command as well as the Calves of our Lips. We must not remember in the
general that God has been merciful to us, but frequently let our Thoughts dwell
upon those particular Mercies which we have received. For as he is seldom truly
penitent that makes a Confession of Sin only in the gross, and descends not to
the particular Transgressions which have stained his Life: so neither is he
sincerely thankful that contents himself with a cold Acknowledgment of God's
Mercies, without a distinct Enumeration of those which were bestowed upon him
by a more than ordinary Power and Goodness, and which upon that account should
make a more particular and lively Impression upon his own Soul.

Secondly, Another way by which we may improve our Recovery, is, II.
in constantly praying to this God that has delivered us from the Grave. He has
pulled our Feet out of the Snare; but if he leave us, we shall soon be as much
entangled and as much in Danger as we ever were; for it is not in Man that
walks, to direct his own Steps. His Wisdom is as necessary to guide our Feet in
the right way, as his Power was to draw us out of the Pit. We need (as one
says) not only to be cured, but to be preserved: We need not only a Cordial to
recover us, but an Antidote to preserve us against an after-Poison. Whilst we
were hedged up with Thorns, as Hos. 2. 6, 7. we are not so liable to wander as
we shall be now. The most of us that God has recovered from the Grave, have
some little Pains or Indispositions left, that now and then attack us, like the
scattered Soldiers of a defeated Army, which though they are not so strong as
entirely to ruin us, yet give us a considerable Molestation. Some Mercies God
bestows that we may not altogether faint; and some Evils he continues, that we
may not be too secure and careless. He gives us something to encourage us; and
all that we would have he denies, that we may still wait upon him: We must join
our Praises and our Prayers together. Psalm. 116. 13. I will take the Cup of
Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. We must praise him for the
Deliverances that we have had, and pray to him to secure us from the Dangers
that may without his Care come upon us. We must praise him, that so we may give
him the Glory of his Goodness in helping us in our low Estate; and pray for his
Blessings that can only make our Life comfortable and easy to us. In the
greatest of our Triumphs there is need of Humility, as in the greatest of our
earthly Joys there will be some mixtures of Sorrow; nor will our Day be so
clear as to have no Cloud. In the highest of our Praises there will be need of
Prayer; and this Duty is the very Pulse and vital Motion of the Soul when it is
renewed; and by our Fervor, or deadness in the Performance of it, we may very
much discern the Advances or Decays, the Strength or the Weakness of the
spiritual Life. We that have been near to Death, should with a more exact care
maintain our Communion with God: for we have more sensibly felt the need of him
than others have: What would have become of us, had not he appeared for our
Relief, when all the Help of Man was vain? And shall we not delight to draw
nigh to so good a God, to whom is an easy Access through the Mediation of
Christ? who heard us out of the Depths, and will still hear us if we call upon
him. It may be in our Affliction we sought him early, and the violence of our
Distress made us restless and importunate; let our many Wants, that none but he
can supply, make us still to be so. We have a very convincing Experience of the
benefit and the use of Prayer; how by the Prayers of others our Chains have
been struck off, and how it has opened the Doors of our Prison. Let a Duty
which has brought us such a Crowd of reviving Mercies, be for ever a welcome
and acceptable Duty to us. It Is an Act of Homage that we owe him as our
Sovereign Lord, as Praise is that which we owe him as our gracious Benefactor.
Besides, God alone can teach us to profit by the Cross; and make the Rod to
blossom and to yield us Fruit when the Smart is gone. Unless he uphold us, we
shall soon be diseased again. Every Day of our mortal Life is pregnant with new
Changes and Alterations, with new Dangers and Vicissitudes: and innumerable are
the Miseries which may yet overwhelm us, if he be not our Sun and our Shield.
Let us humbly beg of him that as he has been our Deliverer, so he would please
to be our Guide. This is a Posture and an Action suitable to us as we are
Creatures, who cannot be, nor live, nor move without him. And such an Address
to his Throne will be graciously received, because it is an Evidence of our
Gratitude, and testifies that we are sensible of the Blessings of his
Providence. And what Mercies we obtain by this method, will be throughout
Mercies; and the Goods that are bestowed upon our humble Petitions, we shall
possess by a more lasting Title, and with more Satisfaction than they do that
never pray. And if we should omit this Duty, God may withdraw his Protection,
and then our Sins will quickly betray us to new Distresses and Calamities.

Thirdly, Another Improvement III.
that we ought to make of the being delivered from the Grave, is, To yield
Obedience to that God that has delivered us. And he gives us seasonable Mercies
in the time of our sorest Distress, to this very purpose, That his Name may be
magnified, Psalm. 50. 15. The Showers of his Mercy should render our Lives more
fruitful; and the Beams of his Favor are to make us shine with Holiness. We
must (to use the words of Mr. Claude on another occasion) give our Hearts
entirely to him, making a good use of our Afflictions. We must call upon him
with Humility, serve him with Zeal, love him with Fervor, and have a horror
for all that which may offend him. He is gracious both to our Bodies and our
Souls, and we must employ both in his Service, and consecrate and devote that
Life to his Honor, which he has so wonderfully preserved. His Benefits by
their usefulness, and by their seasonable approach, must kindle the Flames of
Love in our Hearts; and that Love will produce the most sincere and constant
Obedience. For that which is the sole effect of a slavish Fear, as it will be
forced, so it will continue but a little while. We are his own by a double
Title, by that of Creation, and by his innumerable Preservations. We are his by
the common Care of his Providence that maintains our Life; and more his, by the
manifestations of his extraordinary Power and Kindness when he brings us from
the Grave. What can we poor Creatures give to so good a God for all his
Mercies? we are below the possibility of a Recompense. But however, we must
give him our most earnest Desires, our most painful diligent Endeavors, our
frequent Meditations, our highest Praises, our very Souls, and all that is
within us, seeing he is pleased to require nothing else. His, must be all the
Motion, all the Being, all the Strengh that we have: and to divert any part of
these from his Use, is both Ingratitude and Sacriledg. We must not be like the
greatest part of Seamen, that are very devout whilst the Storm lasts, but when
it is over they return to the same Sins. At his Command we must part with our
dearest Sins, with our earthly and our sensual Inclinations, with our Pride and
our Follies, and deny our selves. And there is more true Thankfulness expressed
in one Act of Self-denial, than in twenty Thanks, giving-Days without it.
Leaving of Sin is not only the way to Thankfulness, but the proof of it: So
many Sins as the Love of God constrains us to leave, so many Songs are, as it
were, presented to God. For every slain Lust is a gratulatory Sacrifice. And
Men will rather than do this, run to all the toilsom Pomps of a ceremonious
Gratitude, and outward Ostentations: for it is much easier to perform a thousand
external Duties, than to kill one Sin. A Man will more easily part with all his
Goods and Substance, than he will cut off a right Hand, or pull out a right
Eye. What can a miserable Beggar add unto a Prince that gives him an Alms? What
can we by our mean Acknowledgments return to the Mighty God? But they are such
things as he requires, and which we are bound to give. It Is usually, after some
very great and remarkable Deliverance, the next Enquiry of a Soul that is under
the Power of Religion, What shall I render to the Lord for all his Benefits?
What shall I do that may bear some proportion with so great a Mercy? What
Thing, what Service is there, that I may set about, to testify my Thanks to my
gracious Benefactor? O, can I ever do too much for that God that has done so
much for me? I have born Chastisement, I will not offend any more: That which I
see not, teach thou me: If I have done Iniquity, I will do no more, Job 34. 31,
32. And we must expostulate with our selves, as he in Ezra 9. 13. And after all
that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, and for our great Trespass, seeing
that thou our God have punished us less than our Iniquities deserve, and have
given us such Deliverance as this, should we again break thy Commandments? It
is a very great Blot that is left upon the Memory of so good a Man as Hezekiah,
though in that far unlike himself, that 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. he rendered not again
according to the Benefit done unto him: for his Heart was lifted up. Let us
often set before our selves that most earnest Exhortation of our Apostle, Romans
12. 1.

There are two things that should render our Obedience after the Receipt of
very great Mercies, such as is this of being brought from the Grave, more
sincere and uniform: for if we do it not;

(1.) It will greatly aggravate our after-Sins, and make them more sinful; as
it was with Solomon after the Lord had appeared to him twice, 1 Kings 11. 9.
Not to use that Life and Strength for God, which he has given us, is to fight
against him with his own Weapons, to affront him with his own Royal Bounties.
There is no Contempt of which he will be so sensible, and at which he will be
more displeased, than when we despise the Riches of his Goodness which should
lead us to Repentance, Romans 2. 4. To sin against a patient and a loving God is
inexcusable; against a God that has helped us in our Troubles, that by the
wonderfulness of his Mercy has been vastly better to us than our feeble Hopes
and our unbelieving Fears. How often have we said, that we should one day fall
by this or that Distress, and he has held us up from our Birth to this very
time? How often has his Justice seized us for our Sins, and called upon him to
cut us off, and his Mercy has interposed and saved our Lives? How often has
the Idleness and Unfruitfulness of our former Health, and the base Impatiencies
and Murmurings of our later Sickness provoked him to destroy us, but he has not
done it? he has spared no Pains, he has tried us both by Affliction and
Prosperity, by his gentle and his louder Voice, by Judgments and by Mercies, to
do us Good. How often have our Iniquities made him to draw his glittering
Sword, and yet his Compassions have sheathed it again, when we have been in all
appearance very near to the killing Blow? How many others has his Displeasure
struck dead, whilst he suffers us that were as great Sinners as they were, to
live? He has waited upon us from Sabbath to Sabbath, from Year to Year. He has
stayed many long Years to see if we would repent. He has beseech'd and
entreated us to forsake our Sin, crying to every one of us, Will thou not be
made clean? when shall it once be? We have wanted nothing, God has maintained
us all our days, and shall we sin against Goodness and Love it self, such
great, such undeserved Love? Shall we affront his mildest and most tender
Attribute? Shall we trample on his Forbearance, and on his very Bowels? God
forbid. When he has tried so many several Dispensations with us, when he has
tried us both by gentle Usage and severe Strokes, by his Frowns and by his
Smiles, shall we be no better? The Day is coming when our sore Calamities will
force us to cry, Mercy, Mercy, Lord. Let us now prize that, whereof we shall
then stand so much in need. If we abuse his Mercy, what Plea can we hope to
make? It will sink and overwhelm us, and no Reflections will be so terrible as
those that cause us to remember how we did forsake, and sin against a good and
a patient God: this will wound and cut us to the Heart; and we shall be
continually upbraided with that stinging Question, Deuter. 32. 6. Do ye thus
requite the Lord, O foolish People and unwise? and give him cause to say of us
as in Isaiah 5. 3, 4.

(2.) Our not yielding Obedience to God after he has brought us from the Grave,
may bring upon us more heavy Punishments than what we have yet felt. The
Miseries that some of us have undergone, have been such as the very remembrance
of them is amazing, and their Terror inexpressible. But how terrible soever
they have been, yet God has more Arrows in his Quiver, more Thunder in his
Clouds, more Judgments under his Command. Let us therefore take that Advice of
our Lord, John 5. 14. Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse
thing come unto thee. There are those here that would not for the enjoyment of
all the Greatness of the World, undergo that Anguish and Tribulation for one
Week which distressed them for many Weeks and Months together. O, let us sin no
more, lest the Clouds return after the Rain; lest after one Storm is ceased,
another begin to blow. Let us improve our present Calm to the Glory of our
Helper, lest another Earthquake come. The best Security from future Miseries,
is to profit by the former: We cannot take a better Medicine to sortify us
against Evils to come, than by remembering and improving such as are already
past. We are escaped with our Lives; O let us not for the Lord's Sake look back
with Affection upon our old Sins, lest we that are now Monuments of Mercy, be
made Monuments of Justice. Let us sin no more, lest the Bones be broken again
that are but newly set; and lest the Wounds that seem to he healed, bleed
afresh; and lest that Almighty and loving Physician that has once helped us,
depart and help us no more. Let us sin no more, for after such a deep distress,
and such a miraculous deliverance how hateful will our Sins be? and if we knew
not what to do in our former trouble, what shall we do in the next and more
terrible Visitation? Woe unto us if we should provoke him to let us fall into
longer and more violent, and more irrecoverable troubles. What a dreadful place
is that, Josh. 24. 20. If ye forsake the Lord, then he will turn and do you
hurt, and consume you after that he has done you good. We that are now alive
may set up our Ebenezer, and say, Hitherto the Lord has helped us, in his
wrath he has remembered mercy. Oh let us not force him to do as Gideon with the
Men of Succoth, Judge. 8. 7. To tear us with thorns and briars of the
wilderness. In other storms we have been like the Passengers that were in the
Ship with Paul, Act. 27. 44. Tho we have suffered Shipwreck yet in one way or
other our Lives have been saved and with much difficulty we have escaped to
Land. Oh let us beware, lest in the next storm that comes he suffer us to be
cast away: the Furnace into which we have been thrown has been very hot. Let us
desire God to purge us from our dross lest he cause one to be made for us that
is seven times hotter. Surely some of us have felt enough of the bitterness of
Sin: Oh let us not force him that does not willingly grieve the Children of
Men, to mingle for us another bitter Cup; have the strokes that made us to
groan in the perplexity of our Souls been so very small that we should force
him by our disobedience to send many more, and to turn his Rods into Scorpions?
Lev. 26. 23, 24. If ye will not be reformed by these things, but will walk
contrary to me, then will I also walk contrary to you and will punish you yet
seven times for your sins. Jer. 7 8, 9, 10. Will you come and stand before me
and say you are delivered to do all these abominations? I even tremble at the
mentioning of these things; and God grant that neither you nor I may ever know
any thing of them by our own experience. If we will not for the love of him,
yet for the love of our selves our own, Souls and Bodies, Let us sin no more.

Fourthly, Another way whereby IV.
we ought to improve the Mercy of Gods having brought us from the Grave, is by
trusting in him for the time to come. We have greatly dishonored him in our
former straits by our own unbelief: Let us in all future occasions give glory
to him by our Faith: Let us remember in the most violent and pressing troubles,
the years of the right hand of the Most High: Let us after the wonderful
experience of the great things that he has done for us, such as our Forefathers
could hardly tell us of; but which we have seen in our days with respect both
to the Nation and our selves; let us never question his Goodness, nor dispute
his Power, saying, Can God provide for us, can he deliver us? Let us never
murmur nor repine or despair again. Having tasted how good the Lord is, and
being fortified with the sweet experiences of his Lovingkindness, let us meet
every new strait and danger with a greater Courage, and never admit the least
doubt of Gods Ability, or of his Willingness tohelp us. He that has delivered
us from the paw of the Lion and of the Bear, from the Pains of Hell and from
the Agonies of Death, can still save us, tho in outward appearance we be like
to perish. His Faithfulness and Truth, his gracious Nature and his promise will
yield us in all our troubles a most comfortable and strong Support. 2 Cor. 1.
9. We had the sentence of death in our selves that we should not trust in our
selves but in God, which raises the dead, who delivered us from so great a
death and does deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us. When our
Sense and Reason can discern nothing but Miseries and Desolation, let our Faith
lead us to that Rock that is higher than us, to that God whose Wisdom is never
at a loss, and whose Hand can with ease and speed accomplish that which our
Flesh and our Blood will tell us is impossible to be done. Do not affront your
great Deliverer by thinking that he who has wrought such great Miracles for us
by his own Power, will not complete what he has so magnificently begun and so
far advanced, or that he will not perfect that which concerns us, or that he
will forget the Work of his own Hands. We place a trust in those persons of
whom we have had a trial in matters of difficulty; and much more do we owe to
God, whose Mercy and Faithfulness we have experienced when none was able to
give us the least relief, but he alone: He is a sure and a tried Friend, we our
selves have found him to be so. Let us not be jealous of his future Care, nor
grieve him with unreasonable suspicions of his Love; and this is a more needful
caution, because our base and corrupt Hearts upon every sudden and approaching
danger are apt to resume new distrusts and doubts, and we then feel the
stirring of our old unbelief; and when the Waves begin to rise we question the
Care of our Master, and give him cause to upbraid us as he did his Disciples,
Why are ye afraid O ye of little Faith? But this will be most inexcusable in us
whom God has brought to the very grave and back again: The remembrance and
experience of so great a Mercy should for ever preserve us from the least
distrust of our Benefactor. Psalm. 56. 13. Thou have delivered my Soul from
Death, wilt not thou deliver my feet from falling, that I may walk before thee
in the Land of the Living? Psalm. 23. 6. Surely Goodness and Mercy shall follow
me all the days of my Life. Psalm. 63. 7. Because thou have been my help,
therefore in the shadow of thy Wings will I rejoice. Psalm. 71. 20.

Fifthly, Preserve those serious Thoughts now which you then had V.
when you were near unto the Grave. What a cold damp did the sight of death
bring upon all our former joys? What a low and contemptible thing did this so
much adored World seem to be when we were just about to leave it? How little
charming then were all its gayest Smiles, and how little terrible all its
frowning Threats? There did not appear then to be any thing that was enticing
in a great Name and Reputation, in pompous Honors or in vast Treasures: We saw
then that all our fellow Creatures, and all that we our selves are apt to dote
upon, was very vanity. All the Contentments and Satisfactions of our Appetites
and all the Pleasures that we had ever taken in eating or drinking, in our
Travels or in our Recreations, did all pass away like a Vision in the night.
Then we saw indeed the great worth of Faith and Patience, and Self-denial, and
a Conquest of this World. Then we could heartily wish that instead of all the
vain Books we read, we had more delighted in the Book of God: That instead of
all our unprofitable knowledge, we had known Christ and him crucified: That
instead of all our Contrivances for this Body and the present state, we had
spent all our strength and our whole vigor to get Heaven and Eternal Life. Then
we were apt to say, Oh that we had heard his Word with more attention whilst we
had our day, and whilst the joyful voice was sounding in our ears! Oh that we
had prayed in our Closets with more fervor whilst God called us to seek his
Face! Oh that we had bewailed our Sins with a more sincere and hearty Sorrow
when we were called to the Duties of Repentance and Humiliation! Let us do all
those things now, which we then wished we had done. Let it for ever dash all our
confident and foolish Projects for this World, remembering how by a sudden
stroke all our Purposes were broke asunder. Let us not trust too much in mortal
Men, for we can remember the time when as to us all the help of Man was vain.
Let us now prize all those divine Truths, embrace those Promises, and fear
those threats which we then saw to be very true. What did we then think of
time, when our glass was even running out, and our day covered with the shadows
of the night? There was nothing in all the World that did appear to be of so
great a value, let us now prize it at the rate we then did. What Company was it
which we then most admired? Whom did we esteem the most excellent and happy
People? Were they those that trample on the Laws of God, that profane his
Sabbaoths, that scorn his Word, that defy his Threats and dare venture to go
to an Eternal Hell? or those that are afraid to sin, that season their
Entertainments with Spiritual Discourse, that are sober in their Lives, fervent
in their Prayers, conscientious in all their Dealings, and that are going to
Sion with their faces thither? Surely these were the Men that we called
Blessed, and these are the Persons to whom we should now join our selves, and
have the most delightful Conversation, and the greatest Familiarity.

Sixthly, Perform all those things VI.
now, which in your Distress you you resolved to do, if God would but bring you
from the Grave. Psalm. 116, 13, 14. I will take the cup of salvation, and call
upon the name of the Lord; I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the presence
of all his people. When a Man seems to be just entering into Eternity, then it is
a common thing to say, If God would but give me another Trial, if he will but
save my Life, and give me another year and another day of Grace, I will amend
my ways, and serve him more, and be better than ever I was? When we have not
enjoyed those opportunities that we now do, have we not said within our selves,
If God will trust us again with his Gospel, and the privileges of his open
Sanctuary, we will acknowledge his Goodness, and be more fruitful? It concerns
us to see that the Resolutions that were formed in our Hearts in the day of our
distress, do not expire with our departing Trouble. In Sickness and the
Neighborhood of Death Sin does appear to be quite another thing than we took
it to be in the time of our careless Health; its Aspect then is very
formidable, and its Wounds very deep. In whatsoever disguise it may come to us
hereafter, let us in the fear of God, and by his Grace courageously resist it,
for it is the worst of Enemies; and when it wraps it self in false and alluring
colors, let us remember what an hideous and frightful Look it had when
Sickness took the mask away: Let it still appear as an odious and abominable
thing to us. When we were near to Death, what Seriousness, what Zeal, what
Holiness did we then vow to God? Was not this our Language, If I may have but a
few more Talents bestowed upon me, I will improve them better than I did
before? I will hear his Word with more Reverence, and read it with more Care? I
will with more frequency and impartiality it search and try my own Soul? Now
the time is come that you wished for! Let it appear that your serious
resolutions were not the fruits of Fear, but of Love. Let not our sense of God
and of Eternity decline as our Troubles wear away. God will not be mocked: He
will observe and punish our hypocritical Intentions, if all that we promise him
in our Distresses prove but as Chaff before the Wind, and as the Dew of Morning
which is exhaled and scattered with the Rising Sun. God has losed our Bonds,
but it is that we may be tied faster to himself: Let us shine with as great a
brightness as we hoped to do, and said we would, if God would but recruit our
dying Lamp, and pour in fresh Oil again. Oh let us now improve our Time as we
then intended to improve it! and let us, among our other expenses, remember
that we are then most prodigal when we waste this Treasure; and that we give
our Friends and Companions too much, when we give them a great deal of our
Time, which they are not able to return us back again: Let us neither suffer it
to lie upon our hands as an useless Commodity, nor put it off to every coming
Chapman, to every Friend or Diversion, who can give us nothing for it, that is
equally valuable. Let us work hard, for we have known such a night wherein we
were not able to work; and such an one may come the second time. Can we so soon
forget what Thoughts and Apprehensions we then had? Can we so soon forget those
dismal Hours when our Hearts beat with Fear, and we thought every Minute would
be the last? What shall we do for that God, who is the God of our Lives; who
has taught us what we are to do by a very sharp and terrible Visitation? Let us
have a warm sense of his Love preserved upon our Heart, and an high esteem of
that Savior, by the purchase of whose Blood we have obtained our Recovery from
Death, and all our other Mercies. Tho we are by the Providence of God placed at
a further distance from the Grave, yet we ought to retain the same serious
Thoughts that we then had; for we have still the same Wants and Necessities to
be supplied; that Religion which was then our Object, is still as excellent and
amiable; our Constitutions are still frail and perishable: Why do we not then
stir up and excite our selves to put in Execution what we then resolved to do?
In our Sickness we think that if we were delivered, we would be more than
ordinary Persons. But I know not how it is, that the various Objects and
Business, the Diversions and Conversations of this World, hinder us, that we
have not the same Thoughts when we dwell in it, as we usually have when we are
about to leave it: But it ought not to be so.

Seventhly, After you are brought VII.
up from the Grave, let the new Life, which God has given you, shine with all
those good things of which your former Life was destitute. We that have
recovered from Sickness that was almost unto death, have received two Lives
from God, two states of Trial. We first received our Lives at the hand of God
as others do when they enter into this World; we have now received them a
second time, when they were even gone from us, God has saved them from
destruction and restored them as so many new Talents to us. After we have been
long near to the Grave, the World looks as a new World to us, all things in it
seem to have a new appearance. Let us among so many new things which the
Providence of God bestows upon us, quit our old Sins, those Sins into which we
most frequently fell before our Sickness came, and those more indiscernable
ones, which our Consciences presented to our view in the time of our Distress
and Tribulation; and indeed our own doleful Experience, one would think, might
powerfully persuade us to have no more to do with those guests, which after we
had entertained them, left us nothing but Miseries and Vexation; they are such
sort of Companions as we may very well spare; they have now sure lost all that
amiableness which our Ignorance and Folly made us believe they once had; they
have cheated us with vain Promises: Let us be no more cheated and imposed upon;
let us not embrace the Vipers that have stung us, nor run into the fires that
have scorched us, nor drink that Poison again, which a little while ago had
like to have cost us our Lives. We did then live many days and years in ease,
but how few of all those did we really spend for the Glory of God and our own
Salvation? Let us not do so for the time to come; let us live to nobler and
higher purposes than we did before: Where we did but creep before, let us now
run with all our force and speed; where we did but wish before, let us now
strive and wrestle. Let us not be guilty of a cold Prayer, or a misimproved
Sabbath any more; nor make by a sinful silence and omission, the sins of
others to become our own sins; but labor to obtain that Wisdom, Prudence and
Courage whereby we may boldly reprove Sin wheresoever we see it, whether it be
in those that are high or low. Let our Conversations be as an Ointment which
cannot be hid, but spreads it pleasant scent round about. Let our Actions
preach Righteousness, that the Seriousness that is so eminent in us may cause
others to be serious by the sight of our good Example, that there may be
abundance who may have reason to bless God for us. Let our Closets no more be
Witnesses against us for the shortness and haste and luke-warmness of our
Prayers to God. Let not these public Places of our Worship be Witnesses that
we have been here careless and irreverent and vain, and have gone away from
them no better than when we came hither. Let all the Company we are in be no
more a Witness against us, that we have there forgot our Creator; and whilst we
have been unmindful of him, have discoursed with too much eagerness and delight
of trivial and unnecessary things. Let our Tables no more be Witnesses against
us for our Intemperance and Gluttony; nor our Bibles have reason to complain
that they have been slighted, whilst we have with delight read other vain and
unprofitable Books. Let us beware of abusing our Liberty in lawful things, and
of running too near the borders of a Precipice. Let us beware of that Company
and those occasions that once tempted us to sin. Let us remember where we fell,
and walk with a more even step and a more watchful Eye. Let all People that
knew us before, see that our Sickness and Affliction has been a Mercy and
Advantage to us, to teach us those things which we could not learn by more
gentle and easy Methods: Let the great troubles we have met withal be a
warning to us, that we run not again into any of those Sins for which we have
paid so very dear. Our Deliverance is indeed a Resurrection to us: Let it be so
like the Last, that we may rise from our Graves pure and free from all that
Ordure, Filth and Pollution that was upon us. As it is a life from the dead,
let us not have our Consciences any more filled with dead Works: Let us be in
some measure, like the Angels of God, as we shall be in the great and final
Resurrection; and tho our eating and drinking, and the many petty cares which
we are to take for our Food and Raiment and many other things that concern our
present poor Life, hinder us from being very like them; yet nevertheless this
should not discourage us from endeavoring to be as conformable to them as we
can even now, and then to long for that day, when we shall have a more exact
similitude. Some indeed when they recover, fall to all their old Intemperance
and Excesses again; the first Visit they make is to their old Good-fellows, as
they call them, and they are welcomed into the jolly Company with full Bowls
and with loud Huzzaes; but let us go to such as will entertain us with Praises
to God for our deliverance, and not drink our healths, but seriously pray for
them.

Eighthly, When God has brought us VIII.
from the Grave, let us by all means see that so sore an Affliction, and so
great a Deliverance may be sanctified to us: And we may know that they are so
when they produce these following effects. First, When they take off our hearts
from the World and the Creatures, and drive us more to God. Secondly, When they
make us more frequent and fervent in our Prayers. Thirdly, When they produce
those holy ends for which they were sent upon us. Fourthly, When they make us
to acknowledge God, and to see his disposal and his hand in all that is come
upon us, Ruth 1. 20. The Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me. Ver. 21.
The Lord has testified against me, and the Allmighty has afflicted me.
Fifthly, When they make us to humble our selves, and to lay our Mouths in the
dust, knowing that tho our troubles were very severe, yet they were very just,
Ezekiel. 16. 63. That thou may remember and be confounded, and never open thy
mouth any more, because of thy shame when I am pacified toward thee for all
that thou have done, says the Lord God. And Job 42. 5. When they fill our
Hearts with Admiration and our Mouths with his Praise. Seventhly, When the
Mercies we receive carry our Affections with more flame toward the Benefactor
from whence they came: As the warmth of the shining Sun causes a new fragancy
and a sweeter smell among all the Flowers of the Garden. Eighthly, When they
bring us to more knowledge of God, and to more true calmness and joy in him.
These are glorious Effects of a sanctified affliction and of a sanctified
escape from it, and a sign that they came not by a common, but by a special
Providence; and by a right of the Covenant of Grace by which all things are
ours. I might add in the ninth place, when we taste his Fatherly Goodness and
Love in all that we enjoy; if we find these things within us, it is a sign we
have both heard the Rod and him that did appoint it, Mich. 6. 9. Oh how happy
are we if God by taking away our health has given us himself; and if by sending
sharp sickness and pain upon us, he has prepared us for a sweeter relish of his
Love? Happy are we if our Temporary Sickness tend to an Eternal Health, and our
short Sorrows to an Everlasting Joy: Happy yet again are we, if he have not
only Commanded us to take up our beds and walk, but also said unto us, that our
Sins are forgiven; if we can say with Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 17. Behold, for Peace
I had great Bitterness, but thou have in Love to my Soul delivered it from the
Pit of Corruption, for thou have cast all my Sins behind thy Back. It must be
our great endeavor, that after we have been tried we may come forth like Gold;
and that we do not as the three Children in another case, come out with our old
Garments, and with the same Sins upon us. Let us earnestly beg of God that we
may have a complete Salvation and a total Recovery: That as our Bodies are
supplied with new strength, so our Souls may prosper also. For to be diseased
in our Souls whilst our Bodies thrive, is as if the House in which one lives,
were very well repaired and adorned to all advantage, and the Man that dwells
in so fair an Habitation were forced to go in rags; so fine a dwelling and so
ordinary an Inhabitant would not agree well together. Oh let us take care, that
whilst God has healed our Diseases, we be not inwardly distempered with the
Plague of our own Hearts: That Man is not to be called healthful, that let him
look never so well has a Disease in his Vitals, that by slow Degrees preys upon
his Life: Neither can that Man be truly said to be recovered, whose Soul is
either void of Grace, or that having had it in some measure, languishes and
decays. He is composed of Contradictions, of Life and Death; at the same time
he is alive and well as to his Body, but his Soul is dead in Trepasses and
Sins: The most excellent and valuable part of himself does remain under the
power of Death; and whilst it is so, is an Object more unpleasing to God, than
a dissolving Carcass in the Grave would be to us. The Welfare and Recovery of
our Souls is what we ought more to seek than the Welfare of our Bodies: Both
indeed are Mercies, but the former is much the greater of the two. What is
Purple and fine Linen and soft Raiment that sets off a Man, to the Eyes of
others, to that Faith and Love, and Patience, and Hope and those other Graces
of the Spirit that beautify the Soul, and render it amiable in the Eye of God?
What is all the Meat and Drink that refresh our Bodies, to that Heavenly Manna,
that Celestial Nourishment that an healthful holy Soul feeds upon? The
prosperity of our Bodies, their ease and capacity of performing their several
Actions, is one of the greatest Ternporal Mercies; but alas this will signify
nothing at all, if we do not prosper in our Souls. There is a way indeed
whereby we may gather Grapes of Thorns and Figs of Thistles, i. e. Refreshment
and Comfort from those Afflictions that peirct us to the quick; and that Sorrow
which was at first unwelcom to us, may prove an Angel of Light, and strike off
our Chains; if we can say with David, It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes, Psalm. 119. 71. Ver. 67. Before I
was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy Word. His was a very
blessed Cross that flourisht into such fruit as this. I think I should not say
amiss should I say that God has as it were brought every person here from the
Grave, and saved him from going down into the Pit, from a Grave and a Pit which
has been often dug for us by the Plots and Designs of our Enemies, and into
which we had long ago fallen, had not God mercifully saved and helped us. God
has very lately done great things for our Brethren in Ireland, whereof I do
believe your Hearts are glad; for as you mourned with them in their Sorrows, so
it is fit you participate with them in the Joys that they now have by the quick
advances of their increasing Deliverance, and from the dangers that so nearly
threatened them. And God has not after the mighty wonders of his Providence left
us here in England; when destruction has been coming toward us with hasty
paces; when it has from the proud Fleet of our Enemies threatened us at our
Coasts, and at our own Doors, this gracious God has kept it off: And if we
repent, we shall not perish. You in London have seen your Civil Liberties
rescued from the Grave, in which they might have laid very long, had not he
raised up our present Protestant King to be that glorious Instrument that
should give them a Resurrection. Our Country after a long Sickness and
Indisposition, under which a few years ago, we were afraid it would have
languisht quite away, has begun to recover; and it is our Wish and Prayer, that
by the same Goodness and Power of God that has turned our Captivity; it may at
length flourish with a perfect and complete Recovery: For indeed it is not so,
as long as there are still so many Blasphemies and execrable Oaths to be heard
in our Streets; as long as there is so much heedlesness and irreverence in our
Assemblies; so much Injustice and Deceit in our Shops; so much Omission of
Prayer in our Families; so much Luxury and Riot at our Tables; so much
Profanation of this Holy day: But to this we hope the Zeal and the Care of our
Magistrates will at length put a stop. But whilst these things continue, tho
blessed be God we are much better than we once were, yet still these will be
ill Symptoms upon us. What cause of Joy should we have, if the Mercies we have
already received were sanctified and improved? Oh what a Joy would it be, if
God would save England with a Spiritual Deliverance; if he would save us from
those Sins that expose us to his Wrath? And if we would in our particular
stations do all we can to promote such a Salvation which would be much more
glorious than what we have yet seen: Then indeed we should have cause to turn
our days of Humiliation into days of Praise. If we would forsake our strange
Sins we need not fear in the least to be punished by People of a strange
Language and which we understand not. We need not fear all the powers of the
World nor all our Enemies, if we did not cherish the worst Enemy of all in our
own bosoms, I mean our Sins; and (if which God avert) we should still continue
to cherish these, they will rout us without another Enemy. Let us obey and love
that God that has so wonderfully preserved and continued our Peace, that so
there is no crying out nor complaining in our Streets: That has made all things
to be still with us, while the Nations round abound have heard the Voice of
Spoilers, and the Noise of bloody Wars. Let us take heed lest we forget our
Deliverer, lest we abuse his Goodness, lest we forsake our own Mercies. There
are no Judgments so severe which we have not all deserved, and which we may not
fear; but yet there are no Mercies so great, for which we may not hope; if the
large Experience that we have of the Goodness of God in our frequent
Deliverances, have their due influence upon us; and if he be for us as he will
then be, who can be against us? Jer. 3. 22, 23. Return ye backsliding Children,
and I will heal your backslidings: Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art the
Lord our God. Truly in vain is salvation hoped from the Hills, and from the
multitude of Mountains; truly in the Lord our God is the Salvation of Israel.

The Fifth SERMON.
Psalm. 30. ver. 3, 4. O Lord, thou have brought up my Soul from the Grave: thou
have kept me alive that I should not go down into the Pit.

Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his, and give thanks at the Remembrance of
his Holiness.


ANOTHER Way whereby you IX.
are to improve your Recovery from Sickness, is, to take heed that you do not
overmuch value your Bodies: Look upon them as still obnoxious to great Pains,
and let that abate your too great Indulgence to them. This I know is not a very
pleasant direction, because as there is nothing for which our sensible Nature
has a greater abhorrence than Pain, so there is nothing of which we are more
unwilling to think; and when by any ways it is brought to our remembrance we
endeavor to turn it off, by turning to some other Discourse, or avoiding those
places, where by the Groans or Tears of the Sick we shall be forced to remember
it whether we will or not. Few People care to talk of Sickness, till they are
sick; or of dying till they come to dye: They make much shorter Visits to the
diseased than to those in health; not only because they are afraid of troubling
their Friends by their Discourse, which is likely enough; but principally
because this is more unpleasant than their other Visits. It is very advisable
therefore that we render those Evils which we cannot avoid, familiar to us by
frequent Meditations; and this will diminish their formidableness and violence;
tho indeed when a Man has thought never so long, pain will be pain still; a
thing that whenever it comes will cause indelightful sensations in our Spirits.
The Body by its near alliance will communicate to the Soul a perception of all
the Meseries it suffers; and when the one half of a Man is ill, the other half
cannot fare very well. It was the peculiar Vanity of the Stoics, as some
observe, That they would be philosophizing after the rate of Angels, and
discourse without considering that their Bodies are one half of their Natures,
and that their Souls are not disengaged from Matter, and by consequence have
sensual Appetites too gross to be satisfied by bare Thoughts and Reflections;
and sensitive Pains too sharp to be allayed with Words and Subtilties. When we
consider what Evils our Sickness brought upon these poor frail Bodies of ours,
surely we should never too much dote upon them, when all the Care we can use
will not preserve them from the Grave. He that is proud of his Body, is as
foolish, as if he should dote upon a Flower, which an unseen Storm may deprive
of all its Glory; or which, if it be let alone, and meet with no accident, will
of its self wither and deay. Or as if he should admire a Stream of Water and
the Bubbles that are upon it, which in the very moment of our Admiration, slide
away and stay not for our Praise or our Love. Or as if he should fall in Love
with some of those brighter Clouds which roll above our Heads, and which, for
all their taking Brightness, will quickly disappear. It would abate that
tenderness and delicacy, wherewith we treat our Bodies, if we did but leisurely
consider what strange Miseries may afflict them before the period of this
mortal Life. It is a sad Reflection (as one says) to consider, that when Life
is so short and so fading, so much of so little should be worn away in Misery
and Torment. Some indeed by a particular Dispensation, and a most favorable
Providence, are allowed to pass into the other World without much pain in this;
but this is not the common Lot. You know that the poor Man at the Pool of
Bethesda, had an Infirmity thirty eight years, Jahn 5. 5. You are told in Luke
13. 16. of a Woman that was a Daughter of Abraham, whom Satan had bound
eighteen years; and when so malicious and cruel a Spirit had the management of
her Bonds, no doubt but he made them very strong. It was without doubt a
painful Distemper, as appears verse. 11. she was bound down and could in no wise
lift up her self. If you enquire of those that usually attend the Dying; or if
you look upon the Weekly Bills, you will find there by what painful Diseases Men
go to the Grave: By the Stone or the Gout, raging Fevers or Cholick, or which
is of all others most formidable, and which more generally die of every Week
than of any other Distemper, i. e. Convulsions: Or if they die not by these,
yet by others, that by their length are as grievous and as uneasy. Your bodily
Pains may be protracted to a very long duration; for it is a most false Maxim,
that if your Pain be long, it will not be sharp, and that if it be sharp, it
will not be long. It is a saying to which daily Experience gives a Confutation:
For how many are there that are groaning under Pains both very long, and very
sharp? Fevers burn us, Agues shatter us, Dropsies drown us, Phrensies unman us,
the Gout tortures us, Convulsions rack us, Epilepsies fell us, Collicks tear
us, and there is no considerable Disease which is not very troublesome in it
self, however Religion may sanctify and sweeten it. Boil, occas. Refl. Sect.
2. Med. 3. What a vain thing is our Body, and how vain are the Projects of Men
for the preservation of it? How many are their Cares and Designs about it? It
is for this, that Commerce and Navigation is maintained to bring home Foreign
Drugs for Physic, and Sawces of other Countries to raise our Appetites; Pearls
and Jewels for Ornament and Splendour. The greatest part of Men are employed
merely for the service of the Body: Physicians by profession are obliged to
study what may repair its defects, and contribute to our ease and health; the
Husbandman labors all the year that the Ground may yield us Corn and Bread and
Fruit: Some build us Houses, others beautify and furnish them: Butchers are
employed to kill the Creatures for us, and Cooks to dress them; and yet these
Bodies are liable all the while to pains, which none of all these can remove:
To sicknesses, of which no Perfumes, no costly Raiment, no pleasant Relishes
can make us to lose the bitter Sense; and the Thoughts of them ought to lessen
greatly all that inordinate Concern, which we have for what is only mortal; for
its being so, makes it to be very vain. We must use our selves to hardship, and
relinquish our too great tenderness and delicacy. For he is the wisest Man, who
knowing he is once to suffer, as we all are, does learn betimes to do it: Let
us therefore keep our Bodies pure and clean and chaste.

First, Let us use a great Moderation in all those Accommodations, that 1.
relate only to them: Such as Houses, Gardens, Estates or the like, that they
be not too expensive or take up too much of our time, or of our delight. That
they be not designed as the Trophies of our Pride, or the means of Vainglory,
or to get a Name. We that have Souls to save, have something else to do than to
follow needless Superfluities. When we were sick, we knew that we were too much
unwilling to leave the World. Let us not paint it with more alluring colors,
lest we be still more in love with it, and more loath to leave it. For shall we
more easily part with things sumptuous and splendid, than with things that are
meaner and less suited to a fleshly Mind and Life? We are Pilgrims and shall we
be so industrious to plant and build, and sow in a strange Country, when we
confess we are distant from our home? What Man would set himself to adorn his
Inn, from which he may dislodge the next morning, and it may be, never see it
any more?

Secondly, Let us use a great Moderation 2.
in our Apparel. When you dress your selves, remember that you dress a Body
that will shortly be a Carcass without Beauty, Life and Motion. Consider how
soon all the Sprightliness of your Eyes, all the Pleasure of your Looks will be
gone; the Cold of Death will quickly freeze that Blood which now circulates
with so brisk a motion in your Veins; and Sickness in a few days may so change
you, even you, that are most curious about your Body, that you will not desire
even to look upon your self: When pain and trouble has sunk your Eyes, and
hollowed your Cheeks, and turned your once delightful red into a decaying pale;
how seldom then will you visit that Glass, to which you now go so often, and at
which you stay so very long? What will your softest Raiment and your finest
Clothes avail a decaying Body, which God has clothed with the Garment of
Heaviness? Let the Consideration of this be a powerful Motive to excite you,
not to go to the highest Excesses of a luxurious Age; but after the Fashion of
the grave, the modest and the religious part of People; that allow to
themselves some large portions of their Time to adorn their Souls with those
Graces that make them shine with real worth, and do not spend it all to set the
Body off. What is this Body but a Lump of animated Clay, a poor ruinous
Habitation that has a thousand decays ready to come upon it, and whilst we are
contriving how to repair it for many years, it may be, we have not then a Month
to live? And what is it when the Soul that gave it all its pleasant sensations,
all its comlyness and luster, is fled away? If we look but upon a Friend an
hour after he is dead, how is his Countenance changed? There is nothing then to
be seen in him that did attract our Eyes before: You then no more see any
Smiles in that Face, where you have before seen the signs of Cheerfulness and
Joy. Where is his former Comeliness and Beauty, his ancient Grace or his lovely
Features? You can then take no delight in being with him, you have then no mind
to look upon that very person that it may be a while ago, was the Delight of
your Heart, and the Comfort of your Life. Will all the Finery in the World
procure for us a sweeter slumber in the Dust? Why should we set our selves with
so much application to regard our Bodies? Is it to much purpose to paint a
little Dust and Ashes? Those light impressions that we make upon it, the next
Wind blows away. Think but how vain and short your Life is, and this will
greatly suppress your inclination to Vanity: Look upon your Watches, and
consider how they give you notice of the haste of Time; and to this purpose
your Clocks may be of excellent use, if (as one says) you design them not only
as Civil Servants, but as Militant Sentinels to advertise you every hour, that
your Enemy is advanced a step nearer to you; for as every toling Bell may be
said to be the Clock of Death, so every Clock may not unfitly be called the
Passing Bell of Time.

Thirdly, Our Sickness should also teach us to be moderate in all those
Pleasures that relate only to the Body. Such we may use indeed as are necessary
to divert our Minds, when we are wearied with Study or the Duties of our
Calling. Such as are (...)east expensive and take up the least me, such as are
no way scandalous, and such as are both lawful and (...)onvenient; but we must
especial(...)y avoid all those things that minister to Temptation, to
Sensuality, to Covetousness, to rash Angers, and whatsoever else it is that
indisposes us for Prayer, for Self-Examination and all the other serious Acts
of Religion, for which we must be in a constant readiness: We must enrich our
Souls with nobler and higher Joys; in communion with God, in meditating on his
Works and Attributes, the Wonders of his Grace in Christ, the mighty
Preparations that he has made for our Happyness and Glory, and these will be a
good improvement of our Sickness and Recovery: Nor will they be followed with
such gloomy sorrows that eclipse all that which the World calls a brisk and a
merry Life. After this manner should our Sickness teach us to regard our
Bodies, not to be over-fond of them, not to glory in our Strength, in our
Health, in our Riches, or any thing that is but of a short Continuance: For
wherein are all these things, or wherein is Man himself, whose Breath is in his
Nostrils, to be accounted of? Jer. 9. 23, 24.

Secondly, Do not provoke God to II.
cut off your Life. Your Life is an excellent Gift, which those of us that have
recovered, have but newly received; let us not by any means abuse it, lest it
be taken from us again, which God will do if we make no suitable returns to the
Kindness of him our Benefactor, Eccl. 7. 17. Be not overmuch wicked, neither
be thou foolish; why should thou die before the time? i. e. If we continue in
a course of sin, the Divine Vengeance will overtake us and make us to feel the
sharp Effects of his just Severity and of our own Transgression. To this end,
we must, First, Beware of all gluttonous Excesses in what we eat and drink: For
though by going beyond the bounds of what is lawful, we discern no great hurt
for the present; yet we shall lay the foundation of manyfold Diseases which may
break out afterward, and vitiate our Blood, and waste our Spirits; and when
the pleasure of our Appetites is past, we shall have a remaining Bitterness,
and Wounds and Sorrow. Many wise and observing Men believe that of those that
outlive their Childhood, there is scarce one of twenty, yea or of an hundred,
that dies, but Gluttony is the principal Cause, tho not the most immediate:
There is nothing that makes a Disease more insupportable than the thought of
having brought it upon our selves by our own Carelessness and Security: How many
by this Method are withered in the Flower of their Age, when they thought their
Evening and Decay at a mighty distance? What Havoc and Murder, and Desolation
is made in the World by the force of the Sword and the violence of unjust Wars?
and yet more perish by their own Intemperance; and all Diseases even those that
are Epidemical, Natural or Casual, are by this and other Vices that attend it,
rendered far more sharp, lasting, malignant and incurable, by that stock of
corrupted Matter that they lodge in the Body to feed those Diseases, and that
Impotency that these Vices bring upon Nature to resist them. Hale's Letter to
his Son, p. 17. Tho it be very true, That let a Man be never so Religious he
must both be sick and dye; yet the prevailing sense of a Deity will sweeten
these Evils when they come, and also keep them longer off: As it is said of
Wisdom, Length of Days are in her right Hand, Prove. 3. 16. And it is said by the
Fear of the Lord, Prove. 3. 11. By me thy days shall be multipled, and the years
of thy Life shall be increased. And Chap. 10. 27. The Fear of the Lord
prolongeth days, but the years of the wicked shall be shortened. But if our
Belly be our God, our end will be destruction even in this World, Phil. 3. 19.
When Men are gratifying their Appetites in all that they desire, they are
undermining their own Prosperity, and giving fire to that Train which will
certainly blow them up; and at the rate they live, they may well say, Come let
us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye: For indeed their Excess to day may
cause their Death to morrow. How many are now in their Graves, over whom it may
be truly writ, This Man killed himself with drinking? And how odious must the
Memory of such an one be that so made himself away? But let us remember, Life
is so great a Blessing, that it is not for the sake of a few merry Companions,
or to gratify their humor, to be parted with: There are a sort of People that
through the Power of their Ignorance are very apt to quarrel with the
Providence of God for making their Lives so short, and yet they will make them
shorter than otherwise they might be: and truly such sort of men have the least
reason, because their chief happiness lies in this World, and not in that which
is to come; and their action is as foolish, as if one would make haste to pull
down the House he lives in, and yet when he has done it, knows not where to get
another.

Secondly, We must avoid all anxious Fears, all inward fretting and 2.
discontent, all foolish Anger, Envy, and the like passions; for these are
great enemies to Life: As also all uncommunicated sadness and lasting griefs;
for any of those troublesome Accidents will unavoidably molest our present
state: And no less prejudicial are all uncertain hopes, all immoderate cares,
and over-eager Studies; for the mind by too vehement an intention, will
communicate its trouble to the Body, and this will pine and languish by its
sympathy and nearness to that; and the Body cannot conceal the displeasure that
arises to it from the more inward and spiritual troubles of the Soul. There
will be a Cloud of Sorrow in the Forehead, when there is an abiding sadness in
the heart: whereas the Right Government of our Affections will spread a
cheerfulness both over the Body and the Mind. It Is said of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 7.
That he was an hundred and twenty years old when he dyed; his Eyes were not
dim, nor his natural Force abated; and to this the constant meekness and
quietness of his Spirit contributed very much.

It was Mr. Buroughs his Opinion, that Mr. Dod was the meekest Man upon the
Earth in his time, and speaking of him as then alive, he says, He is about
fourscore and ten years old, and lately preached twice every Lord's Day; and the
constant health of his Body was such, that he was able to continue heavenly
discourse till midnight from day to day, and to Preach all the day long, his
Spirit not failing at all. And thus by keeping the constant frame of his
Spirit, he was hardly known to be in any Distemper of Spirit. See Buroughs
Sermon. on Matthew. xi. l. 2. p. 358.

Thirdly, That we may not provoke God to cut us off, our Lives must be 3.
laid out for his Glory. If we live to our selves, he may well throw us aside
as a broken Vessel wherein he has no pleasure. Which of us would suffer a
barren and unfruitful Tree to Cumber the Ground for many years? And do we think
that his Patience will always let us alone, and not, after it has been the
witness of our Idleness, turn to Fury, and cut us down? If we do nothing for
him and his Glory, how can we expect that his Creatures should give us
nourishment and strength, that his Earth should bear us, and his Sun shine upon
us? How can we ask our daily Bread from our most gracious Master, if we lay not
out the refreshment we receive from it in his own Service? Which of you would
keep a Servant in your Family, and give him all necessary Accommodations, and
yet be content to see none of your Work done? Would you not with Anger turn him
off? And do we deserve better usage at the hands of God? Would we have him to
spread our Table, and to fill our Cup, that we may sin against him? What Prince
is there that would give money from his Treasures to carry on a War against his
own Crown, or to support a Rebel? If we oppose our Creator, or forget him, it is
no wonder if he throw us out of the c^re of his Providence, it is no wonder if
his Justice deprive us of a Life which we so vainly spend: And indeed when we
consider how little we do for that God who has done so much for us, every one
of us may lay his hand upon his breast and say, Lord be merciful to me a
sinner, for I deserve to dye. Whatever care and temperance we use in our Diet,
our Exercises, or our Recreations, yet if we be unprofitable Servants, he may
be provoked to give us our last Summons, and say, Give an account of thy
Stewardship, for thou shall be no longer Steward. With what face can we pray to
God to keep us from sudden Death, and to prolong our Lives, when the Language
of our former Actions will declare this to be the sense of our prayers, Lord
give me a longer Life, and I will sin against thee more? And is that a frame
that becomes a Creature and a Sinner, to his great Creator and final Judge? It
may cause God to say, It repent's me that I have made such a man whole, and
that I have brought him from the Grave.

Thirdly, Live much in a little time It Is no great matter if we arrive safe III.
to Heaven, tho we do not live so many years in the Body as others may attain
to; tho we lose the sight of the Sun, Moon and Stars, yet the first sight of
the Face of God, will make amends for that, and all our other losses. Let us
therefore rouse up our selves, let us cast off all our former sloth, let us
contend and strive with all our force, with all the powers of our Souls, that
we may enter in at the strait gate, and lay hold on Eternal Lise. It is for
Heaven and Salvation; and methinks the very name of such a place and state
should set our Souls on fire, it should inflame our desires, and quicken our
diligence, and raise our hopes. Let us run with as hasty a pace as ever we can,
let us not stay to listen to the charms or pleasures of the World. Let no
Frowns discourage us, no Difficulties startle us, no Dangers keep us back; it is
for a Crown of Glory. Let us keep that in our Eye; and let us consider, who are
the Spectators of our Race. God looks on to help us here, and to reward us at
the last. Angels applaud us, the Saints on Earth pray for us, and the World
will admire us, though our Diligence will condemn their Sloth. How busy and
how unwearied is the Devil for our Ruin? and shall we shrink at any Labor, when
we have the advantage of that evil Spirit? What he does is with Envy against us
and with rage against God. But we have hope; and tho we toil to the very
Evening and Conclusion of our Day, we have a Master that will reward us very
well: How solicitous and how careful are Men for the Affairs of this present
Life; and shall not we be as much solicitous for those of the Life to come? How
will they rise early and sit up late for a good Bargain, or a little Profit;
and shall not we do as much to save our Souls for ever? Oh let us suffer no day
to go over our Heads, wherein we are not more watchful and circumspect in our
Actions, more fervent in our Prayers, more concerned for the Welfare of our
Neighbor and our own, than we were the day before. Let us now do as much in a
Week as we did before in a Month, and as much in a Day as we have done in a
Week before. Let us endeavor to have more Light in our Understandings, more
Love in our Wills, and a greater and more universal Warmth in our Affections.
Let us that have been sick, consider what an interruption that Sickness has
made in our Life? When our sorrowful Months were upon the account of those
Sorrows, to us Months of Vanity, wherein we were not able to pursue the true
ends and business of Life; Let us fill up the vacant space with an after
Diligence: And seeing our great Work in the World has had so long a stand; Let
us now fall upon it with a fresh Vigor; and we may by running faster, and by
the Grace of God, overtake some of our Fellow Christians that are at present, a
great way before us, and who are many Paces before us on the way to Glory: We
have, it may be, formerly done some small service for Christ, but now we must
do more than we ever did: When we have obtained so many Blessings at his Hands,
it would be inexcusable, if we had not a Mouth to acknowledge his Goodness, and
an Heart to love him; a Mouth to speak for him and for his Glory upon all
occasions, and an Heart to admire and depend upon his Promise: We have done too
little for him that has done so much for us. Let the consideration of this
humble us for our former Sins, and direct us what to do for the time to come;
that our Speech, our Conversation may be more profitable than it has been, 1
Cor. 15. 58. Eccl. 9. 10.

Fourthly, Let us live so that our Examples may do good whilst we live, and
when we are dead: For every Man that has the Spirit of Christianity, i. e. a
generous and a public Spirit, will not only be concerned for himself; but for
others, and not only for the present, but for the future Generation: And as in
this luxurious and most wicked Age of ours, there is like to be transmitted to
Posterity a great number of very bad Examples; so it should be the Care and
Endeavor of every good Man to prevent their mischievous influence, by doing
what in him lies to mend the World. We live indeed in a time wherein the most
part of People can talk very well, but never was there any time in which there
was less Practice. It is a most easy thing to discourse well, but none, but a
true Believer, can live as he ought to do according to the Gospel, which
requires an universal and a shining Holiness. Our Actions and Examples will
have a more powerful efficacy than our Words; and whilst the one does but touch
the Ear, the other will penetrate into the very Souls of those that observe us;
and render themselves Masters of their Approbation, even almost whether they
will or not. We are obliged to have a great regard to the Salvation of our
Neighbors, and there is no course more likely to succeed than this: They will
easily follow us when we take them by the hand, and advise them to go in no
other way, but in that where we go our selves: When we are fervent in our
Prayers, it will shame their Coldness; when we are serious in our attending on
the Word, the sight of our seriousness will make them more attentive, and our
Heat of Affection may kindle some Sparks of Love to God in their colder Hearts;
and the necessity of a good Example seems to be greater in Cities than in other
places; for as one observes, Du-bose Sermon. p. 495. It is certain that great
Towns are ordinarily great Theaters of Vices; as the Multitude is more
numerous, so wicked Examples are more frequent. Sin hardens it self by the
number, and authorizes it self by the quantity of Accomplices: And as the Fire
burns more by a great heap of wood or coals put together, so the Ardour of Sin
warms and inflames it self by a great Throng of Persons that communicate to one
another their criminal Affections: Besides, in vast and populous Cities, they
have more Liberty to sin, because it is less observed and taken notice of; as a
Serpent conceals it self among a multitude of Bushes: Whereas in little
Villages the least faults are soon minded; many times in greater places very
great Enormities are not discerned; and it concerns us also whom God has raised
from the Grave, to be more exact in our Course; for People will look with a
more curious Eye upon us that are recovered, to see what we do, when they will
not, it may be, look so much to the hand that healed us: As the People come
more to see Lazarus that was risen, than Jesus that revived him from the Grave;
much people of the Jews came, not for Jesus sake only, but that they might see
Lazarus also whom he had raised from the dead, Joh. 12. 9. Wicked men are
punished in Hell for all the Evil they have done (...) the World, and for all
that they have been the cause of; it is a new addition to their torments, to
think how many are going to the same miserable place, whose damnation will lie
at their door: As it is commonly said, that Dives requested of Abraham, that
some messenger might be sent to warn his Brethren, lest they came to the same
place; not from any Love to their Souls, for there is no such Charity in Hell;
but from a fear, that if they came to the same torment, his own misery would be
the greater, for having been in a great measure the cause of theirs by his bad
Example. And on the contrary, it is a great pleasure to those in Heaven to
think, that they have been any way instrumental to the Glory of their great
Lord; and that the Seeds that by good Instructions and holy Example they threw
upon the World, flourish into Fruit when they are dead. Thus they blossom in
the dust, and their Actions, as it is fabulously reported of some of the Bodies
of the Popish Saints, send forth a sweet perfume after Death, to all the places
round about. The Saints of God do good indeed to the World when they are gone,
not by Intercession as Mediators for us, but by the good Works which they
performed here below; and tho their Works follow them to increase their reward,
yet the remembrance of them stays behind. It is hardly to be imagined how far
the power of a good Example does diffuse its self, when the person that gave
it, is removed from the World: It does encourage others to Religion, and to a
perseverance in it, seeing it has no new difficulties, but only those which
others have conquered, who are now at rest with God. Therefore are we commanded
to be followers of them who through Faith and Patience have inherited the
Promises, Heb. 6. 6. We are to follow their Faith, considering the end of their
Conversation, Heb. 13. 7. Those of us that have been so happy as to have had a
Religious Education, tho we are deprived of our Parents, yet we full well
remember their serious pathetical Exhortations, how they did earnestly entreat
us to fear God and keep his Commandments: We can remember how they set some
portion of their time apart every day for Reading the Word, and secret Prayer,
and the other Duties of Religion; and when we are gone, if we have been truly
sincere, others cannot but remember our Example. Your Children and Servants
will greatly mind what you do that are the Master of the Family, and you either
very much promote or hinder their Salvation, for which you must be answerable
to God in the approaching day of Judgment. Is it not a Credit to your
Reputation, when your Servant and Apprentice shall thus remember your Example,
and say, Oh how Conscientious was my Master in his Buying and Selling! how
afraid was he of imposing upon others, or of cheating them with many good
words, whilst he had deceitful intentions in his heart? How afraid was he lest
the business of his Trade should Justle out Religion, or the Shop be an
hindrance to the Duties of his Closet, or of Family Prayer? How careful was he
to set aside some of his Gains for the Charitable Relieving of the Poor? As to
you that are Parents, your Children will certainly mind more what you do than
what you say. If you Sanctify the Sabbath, and are serious in your Service to
God, you may have good hope that they will be so; but if you are immoderate in
your Recreations, your Eating, Drinking, or your Apparel, it is very likely they
will be so; and what flames will it add to your misery, to think that you were
the Cause of their Everlasting destruction? And how will you bear it, to hear
their Cries and bitter Expressions; when they shall Curse you for not having
given to them good Instructions and seasonable Warnings, and an holy Example,
by which they might have been enabled to fly from the Wrath to come? You may
now do much more good by practicing one Command, than by causing to learn all
the Ten: And though you be so poor that you have no Riches or Estate to leave
them, yet you may leave your Prayers and your good Example to the next
Generation. We commonly say of a rich covetous Miser, That he will never do any
good whilst he lives; and we may say of him and all others, that are not true
Christians, That they will never do any good when they are dead; for when they
dye, they are like Nero, they leave abundance of poison behind them; they
infected the Air with their Oaths and Blasphemies, when they lived; and when
they are gone the Contagion spreads, and their ill President meeting with
corrupt Nature, which inclines all Men to what is bad, does convey its Venom
to several others that they left behind. What an Impression many times does an
unbecoming Word leave upon the Hearer for many years after? Much more does the
Remembrance of an ill Example. Thus their evil Works prove Factors for the
Devil, and enlarge his Kingdom, when they are rotting in the Grave: Whereas if
you be zealous for God, the remaining Flames of your Zeal may awaken some
lukewarm and slothful Christian to do what you have done: For he may thus
argue, If that holy Man prayed so hard and strove so much, what cause have I to
pray and strive, for I have a Soul to save as well as he? And as the Gate was
strait to him, so will it be to me; and as it is impossible to handle Perfumes
without bearing away part of the scent; so it should be to converse with you,
without savouring of your Goodness: You should so live, that others may reap
the benefit of your holy Life, when you are gone: As the Earth does not lose
the Virtue of its Beams, when the Sun is set; that Heat and Warmth and
Vegetation, which it has given to Herbs and Plants does remain, and its
Influence is felt, when it is no longer to be seen; thus you will be as Herbs
and Flowers, which when they are gathered are medicinal, and yield juices
healthful and necessary to the Body; or as the Corn which when it is cut down,
is serviceable for Food and Nourishment: Thus every Man may so contrive it,
that he may be serviceable to the World, when he does not live in it any more:
Thus the Apostles spread a most diffusive Light by their Holiness and Doctrine,
which all the Malice of Hell and all the Rage of Tyrants has not been able to
extinguish; but though they shone with an extraordinary Brightness, yet every
Believer is a Child of Light, every Believer is a Star of great use and
benefit, tho one Star differs from another Star in Glory; tho he be never so
obscure, yet he may be beneficial; as a Pearl or a Diamond, tho it be set in
Lead, does not cease to be of great Value: Thus your Name will be as sweet
Ointment delightful and dear to others: Whereas if we be wicked, we shall have
the same Fate with Jehoram, who died without being desired, 2 Chronicles. 21. 20.
Thus I say, our Examples will do more good than many bare Instructions: As
Soldiers will be more animated and forward, when they see one Example of
courageous Fighting before their Eyes, than by a thousand Rules that teach them
the Policies and Designs of War. Thus I have showed you what Improvement those
that are recovered and brought from the Grave ought to make of it; and what
mischief will ensue, if they do it not; and indeed it is a Mercy to the World,
that the Lives of ill Men are so short; (for as one has lately observed) the
World is very bad as it is, so bad that good Men scarce know how to spend fifty
or sixty years in it; but how bad would it probably be, were the Life of Man
extended to six, seven or eight hundred years? If so near a prospect of the
other World as forty or fifty years cannot restrain Men from the greatest
Villainies, what would they do if they could as reasonably suppose Death to be
at three or four hundred years off? If Men make such Improvements in Wickedness
in twenty or thirty years, what would they do in hundreds, and then what a
blessed place would this World be?

And to excite you to be the more careful in the improving of your Sickness:
Let me add these three following Considerations.

Cons. 1. How many are dead since you were first ill? How many excellent
Ministers whom you must never hear again? How many of your dearest Friends are
now in the cold Grave, with whom you cannot now discourse, and whose Faces you
shall never see till the Great Day? Many have sunk in a Calm, and several among
us have outlived a Storm: Many have perished with less pain and less violent
diseases than those which some of us have had: This should engage us to make
suitable returns to that God who has spared us when he has taken them away.

Cons. 2. This Improvement of our Sickness and Recovery will exempt us from the
Number of those hateful People, that are not only no better, but a great deal
worse when they are brought out of Distress, than they were before; and it is
generally thought that of a thousand People that make large Promises in their
Sickness, there are scarce fifty that keep their Word and perform their Vows,
when they are recovered: Those good Purposes which they had were the Product of
their Fears, and when those are over, their intended Goodness does also vanish
away.

Cons. 3. This good Improvement of your new Life may engage God to prolong your
time to an honorable old Age. For though we can merit nothing at his Hands,
yet if we labor hard in his Service, it may be, he will not cause our Sun to
go down at Noon, but continue us in his Vineyard, till the Evening of the Day.

I now proceed briefly to consider the fourth Verse.

Ver. 4.

Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his, and give thanks at the Remembrance of
his Holiness. From these Words I shall insist on this Proposition:

That Person that has received wonderful Obs.
Deliverance from Death, ought not only to praise God himself; but to excite
and call upon others to praise God with him: And all the Servants of God should
be most willing to join in the return of thanks for any Mercy that they see
bestowed on others. It is not enough that we have an inward and a silent
Gratatitude, we must publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all
his wondrous Works, Psalm. 26. 7. I shall not die, but live and declare the work
of the Lord, Psalm. 118. 17. And the grateful Leper, Luke 17. 15. when he saw
that he was healed, turned back, and with a loud voice glorified God. The poor
Man was so full of Joy in the sense of the newly received benefit, that he
could not forbear telling others what Mercies he had received. So says the
Prophet, Psalm. 116. 14. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the presence
of all his People. And there are these several things, that should cause our
mutual Praise to God upon any great Deliverances.

First, Our mutual Praises will warm 1.
our Hearts better than if they were single. When many Beams of the Sun are
united, they give a stronger Light and burn with a greater force; and many
small Rivers united run with a swifter Course to pay their common Tribute to
the Sea. When many join together in the same Prayers, the Cry is more loud, and
the Flame of our Desires ascends with a quicker and a more speedy motion; and
when many Voices join in the same Psalms of Praise, then as in a Consort of
Music our Praise is more harmonious and moer sweet; and then it is that we
find our Love and our Joy much moer kindled, than when we are alone. The
praising of God for our Mercies in public, will make others call to mind their
own Mercies, and they and we shall both agree to yield our common Thanks to
this Mighty Lord. Let all the people praise thee, O God, yea let all the people
praise thee. And greatly to blame are those, who do not openly manifest their
Sense of Gods Goodness, but are as silent as to any public acknowledment of
it, as if they were in the very Grave.

Secondly, This mutual giving thanks will greatly encourage others to trust II.
and hope in God. The Experience that we have had of his Goodness may be of
great use to them; that when they come to be in straits they may wait upon him,
and strengthen their Patience by remembering how gracious he has been to us; and
that seeing he is ever faithful and unchangeable, he will be so to them; for
his Arm is not shortened that it cannot save. The Righteous, Psalm. 14. 27. shall
compass me about, for thou have dealt bountifully with me. They that fear thee
will be glad when they see me, Psalm. 119. 74. Glad to see that God has
compassion for the desolate and the miserable: Glad to see that he does not
shut up his Bowels in a perpetual Displeasure, nor forget the Work of his own
Hands: What Encouragement have they still to pray, when they see in our
Deliverance, that their Prayers are heard; and when they are very low, to
consider, That this or that poor man cried, and the Lord heard him and saved
him out of all his troubles, Psalm. 34. 6? They have the same promises to plead,
and late Examples before their Eyes of his Goodness and his Readiness to save.
It is a very merciful dispensation of God, that he will not have all his
Servants under Troubles and Afflictions at the same time: Some will he suffer
to be at ease that they by their advice, their prayers, and their seasonable
pity and their love, they may minister to the wants of others whom he has bound
with the cords of Afflictions: All Churches are not persecuted at the same
time, nor all in the same Churches; that so those who are whole may bind up the
wounds of others. Thus when the poor Protestants in Germany were under low
Circumstances, it pleased God to set Edward the Sixth upon the Throne in
England, under whose most excellent Government many Ministers and People, that
were forced to leave their own Country, found a secure shelter and retreat: And
when the Massacre was in Ireland, God was pleased to save this Land from so
terrible a Judgment: And whilst France is at this day groaning under a most
cruel and barbarous Persecution, we, by a wonderful Providence, have Ease and
Liberty, and are in a capacity to give relief to our distressed Brethren. He
does not fail to give us now and then some instances of his Wrath for our Sin
in long and severe Trials; yet neither does he fail to raise up some wonderful
Monuments of his Mercy after such Severities: That the Consideration of the
former may teach us to walk with an holy Fear, and the Consideration of the
latter may keep us from being overwheml'd in the greatest straits: Our being
publicly thankful for our deliverance from great dangers may fortify the
hearts of others against all unreasonable fears and dispondence.

Thirdly, Because they are by the III.
Profession of Christianity, to have a Communion with one another in all their
Prosperities and in all their Troubles; to grieve in their Afflictions, and to
rejoice in all their Mercies. They are all of the same Body, and one part
cannot be at case, whilst another in is pain; nor can one mourn whilst another
does rejoice; they participate in their mutual Sorrows and their Joys; they
cannot see one of their Brethren sitting alone and keeping silence, but they
condole with him for his sadness; and when they see him watering his Couch with
tears, their Eye does affect their Heart and mingle their tears with his; they
cannot laugh whilst another groans, nor be sad when another is exalted and
delivered. For as you cannot touch one string of an Instrument, but all the
rest sound; so no part of the Body of Jesus Christ, can be well or ill
affected, but the rest discover their sense either of its joy or grief. The
Saints of God have a similitude of Nature and inclinations of the same kind all
the World over; they have a Conformity to their blessed Lord, who has a great
tenderness and pity for the whole Body of the Church: The Wicked that are not
of the Family, are no way troubled when Sion is in the dust, nor have they any
pleasure when it is rebuilt. A private Spirit does but relish its own joys, and
weep for its own griefs; but those that are good Christians are glad to hear
that it fares well with the Servants of God, tho such as they never saw; and
when others are affflicted, tho in Foreign Countries, yet their Groans, tho at
a great distance, do reach their Hearts. Thus it was with our Apostle, Col. 2.
1. For I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you, and for them at
Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh. Tho he was in
dangers himself, yet he was full of fear and solicitude for them; neither the
Prison in which he was at Rome, nor the death he had in prospect did abate his
Care; in this like, to Christ himself, who in the night that he was betrayed,
was providing a Feast of Comfort for his poor Followers.

Fourthly, It Is very delightful to God IV.
when his Servants after the receipt of Mercies, join their praises together.
If we had no experiences of his Goodness to us, yet so excellent are the
Perfections of his Nature, that we ought even then to praise him much more when
he is so kind to us, who have deserved nothing: He is pleased with with that
homage which we give him by our Prayers and our hearing of the Word, and when
two or three are gathered together he is there: It will also please him to see
our Hearts and our Mouths full of Thanks; for to this very purpose he gives his
Blessings to us, and it is grateful to him to see that they are not lost upon
us. As it is pleasant to an Husbandman to see a seasonable Harvest, and that
his Labor and Pains have not been in vain: When there is a Consort of Music,
there is the greatest Harmony, and when a whole Assembly of sincere Christians
join their Voices and their Hearts together, with what a delightful sound do
they go up before the Throne of God? For (as one observes) the blessing and
acceptance that Religion receives from the Divine Majesty, is much greater for
the publickness of it; even in this sense two are better than one, for they
have a good reward for their labor: In this sense their complicated services
are more forcible, their threefold Cord is not easily broken: Not that God is
prevailed upon to any change in himself or his Government by the services of
his Creatures, though in a multitude; but he is pleased to found the occasions
and opportunities of his most bountiful recompenses, in the drawing near of
their greater numbers: For as when God was pleased to communicate himself more
freely, he did it to a multitude of Creatures; so he delights in receiving back
the glory of having thus communicated himself from a multitude also; and as
there is more of himself in more of his Creatures, whether of several sorts or
of the same; so there is more of his blessing in their approaches to him, Whole
Duty of Nations, p. 9. What does the Great God obtain by all his Acts of Bounty
to his Creatures, but a Revenue of praise? what other end does he design in all
his Mercies? therefore we should be most willing to pay him this easy Tribute.
Oh how pleasant is it to come into the house of God with the voice of joy and
praise, and with a multitude that keep holy day, Psalm. 42. 4. Private prayer
does not honor him so much as public; this therefore, as the now mentioned
person expresses it, it was the Policy of Nineveh's natural Religion to unite
their Force in Humiliation, Fasting and Prayer, and to take advantage of
joining the mute desires of the Beasts, that have a voice in the Ears of God.
Abraham's Servant made the Camels kneel down while he prayed to God: And it
was, as he further observes, David's Art to gather up all the Praises even of
the lowest of the Creatures that could so meanly give them; and inspiring them
with his own Reason, made them as it were to follow his Harp, and to unite in
his own Halleluiahs. Thus he served himself of them, that making by them a
greater Present of glory to God, he might receive the greater Blessing from
him. We ought to be as eloquent in the numbering of our Mercies as we are in the
compution of our Sorrows; and our Praises ought to be as loud or rather louder
than our Groans. And yet alas! how rare a thing is this mutual praise? And it
may be as a sign of it, that so many desire Funeral Sermons to be preached for
their departed Friends, and few desire any Sermons for their own Recovery from
Sickness and Death, or for their Friends upon the like occasions. It Is strange
that we should be more ready to mourn than to rejoice; and that our Sorrows
should be more passionate and fluent than our joys; that we are more inclined
to bewail our Losses than to be glad for our Mercies; especially when one has
the advantage of pleasure on its side which the other has not; we always meet
and mingle our Tears together when our Friends are to be laid into the Grave,
and we should as solemnly meet when any of our Friends have been nigh unto
Death, and have escaped it, that for so great a Mercy we may return to God our
Common Praise.

Fifthly, This mutual praising of God V.
is a resemblance of Heaven. In doing this we are beginning that blessed Work
which we hope to be employed in for ever. We poor Sinners here below are then
something like to those Holy Souls that are above. Will it not be a great part
of Heaven to admire, and adore, and praise God for all his Deliverances granted
to us, to his Church, and our fellow Saints? There will be a common Joy and an
Union of Praises for all his Mercies, from the beginning to the conclusion of
the World. And then all the Myriads of his Elect being safely gathered into his
own Kingdom, shall keep a Thanksgiving-day, and that Day shall be for ever. It
is to that pleasant and cheerful Country that we at length hope to go. Let us
use our selves now to the Language of the Place, and learn betimes to Sing the
Songs of Sion. Let us raise our Voices as high as ever we can, in the Praises
of our God; and then knowing how unsuitable our highest Elevations are to his
Excellent and Glorious Majesty, let us long to join with Glorified Spirits in
their louder and sweeter Hymns; and being sensible of our own Weakness, we may
call to the blessed Angels, to all Beings that are in Heaven or on the Earth,
in the Air or in the Seas, to help us to praise the Lord. As we have the
Example of David in several Psalms, and in the 103. 20, 21, 22. Bless the Lord,
ye his Angels, that excel in strength, that do his Commandments, hearkening
unto the voice of his word. Bless ye the Lord, all ye his Hosts, ye Ministers
of his that do his pleasure. Bless the Lord all his Works in all places of his
Dominions: bless the Lord, O my Soul.

The Conclusion of the Whole.
AND now to finish what I design to say from these Words. Having been delivered
from a long and severe Sickness, I would most earnestly beg of you all to help
me to praise the Lord for his great Goodness and Mercy to me. Long I was upon
the very brink of the Grave, and nothing in this World could ease my Pain, or
mitigate my Sorrows. God himself has wrought Salvation for me: And it is for
your sakes as well as mine own, that you may see an instance of his mighty
Power and Goodness, who as he has delivered me, can also deliver you when you
come to Straits and Difficulties: I heartily wish that seeing my Sickness has
not been unto Death, it may be for the Glory of God. I am as it were risen from
the Grave, very near to which I was for many long and doleful Months together;
I wish that my Resurrection may have the same effect with that of Lazarus, for
by reason of him many of the Jews believed in Jesus, John 12. 11. There are
several Persons here, that wept with me when I wept, and that prayed for me
when I was in trouble; to these and to others that had a tender Concern for me
I now speak. Come, and let us now rejoice together; Oh come, and let us exalt
and praise the Name of God together. Praise is pleasant and comely, Psalm. 147.
1. It is pleasant as it is the Exercise of our Souls in the noblest Work which
they are capable of here on Earth, and it is comely as it is an acknowledgment of
those Mercies that we receive from God our Benefactor. Oh how much more
pleasant is Deliverance than Danger, and Health than Sickness! How much better
is the voice of Gladness than the voice of Sorrow? How much more pleasant is it
to spend a day, yea many days, in cheerful Praises, than to spend one hour in
Sighs and painful Groans? How much better is it to come to the Courts of the
Lord, to see him in the Sanctuary, and to join with his Servants in the Solemn
Parts of his Worship, than to be confined to a sick Bed, and to dwell as in the
Dust? My kind Brother and Companion in this Lecture, Mr. Thomas Kentish.
when I was overwhelmed with deep Sorrows, did often pray with me, that God
would bring me again to this Congregation, that I might here publish the
Wonders of his Love: His Prayers and yours are heard, and I desire at this time
to declare the Works of the Lord. Come and see what God has done: Come ye poor
afflicted People that are even sinking with your many troubles: Come and see
how God has helped and saved me from my violent and sore Distress. He has
pulled my feet out of the deep mire, and the thick clay: and has helped me, tho
the sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of Hell got hold upon me.
Learn to wait for his Mercies, and to put your trust in him. Come ye poor
Mourners, whose way is bid, and whom the Wrath of God presses very sore. Come
and encourage your selves by looking upon the Goodness and the Mercy of God to
me. I also am the Man that has seen affliction by the rod of his Wrath. I was
not long ago compassed with Gall and Travel, and my Chain was heavy; he caused
the Arrows of his Quiver to enter into one, and filled me with bitterness, and
made me durnken with Wormwood. My Soul was removed far off from peace, and I
forgot prosperity, and I said, my strength and my hope is perished from the
Lord. And yet he has graciously helped me after all this. Therefore let your
Souls be in as much Darkness, and your Case be as Low and Miserable as it can
be supposed to be ye, yet never despair of help from such a God as this. Come
ye poor dejected Christians; Wipe away your Tears a little, and let it be
something reviving to you to behold what after long Afflictions God has done
for me, though I was lower than you can think or I express. Come you that are
sadned with frequent and continued pains, and encourage your selves from my
deliverance; I also had sharp and long pains for many months together; My
Complaint was bitter, but my Stroke was heavier than Groaning; yet after all
this God himself has healed me, when all the Endeavors of my Friends were to
no purpose. Say not that your wound is incurable, for that Almighty Physician
that has with so much kindness afforded relief to me, can also speedily give a
cure to you: Do not mistrust his power nor question his willingness to do it:
Though you be never so sinful and unworthy, let not that overwhelm you when you
see the riches of his Grace to me, displayed before your Eyes. O taste and see
that the Lord is good; blessed is the man that trusts in him, Psalm. 34. 8.
And you may say thus in Prayer, Lord thou have been very gracious to such an
one after his desolate and low condition; Oh be thou so to me, that being
brought out of the depths, I may with him and others bless thy Name! Come, ye
Servants of the Most High, and let us praise our God together; let our minds be
filled with the most admiring thoughts of him; let our tongues speak of his
Goodness; let our hearts burn with the purest flames of Love, and then let us
join our thoughts, our voices and our hearts to give him with delight a common
Song of Praise: Come all you faithful People and help me to praise the Lord,
for my single praises are too deficient. Surely our Souls may now soar higher,
and take a nimbler flight than they were able to do when they were clogged and
weighed down with Heaviness and Sorrow: Help me to praise him, that, after such
a long and terrible sickness, I am not in the silent Grave. The Grave cannot
praise thee, Death cannot celebrate thee: they that go down into the Pit cannot
hope for thy truth. The living, the living, he shall praise thee as I do this
day, Isa. 38. 18, 19. I call you all to witness, that I praise the God of my
deliverance; I call you to help me to do it better; seeing you prayed for me in
my Affliction, I may claim your praises as a debt that is due to God for the
hearing of your Prayers; and I know it is such a debt as you are most willing
to pay: As I was helped by the Prayers of many, so I desire that thanks may be
given by many on my behalf, 2 Cor. 1. 11. I desire all those Ministers, those
Congregations and Christian Friends that showed so much Compassion and
Kindness, as to pray for me, that they would all praise God for having given to
me such a late miraculous deliverance, and for having given to them such a late
Experience of the succesfulness and power of Prayer; Let us provoke one another
to good Works. When will our hearts glow with Love to God, if not when his Sun
shines upon us with such comfortable and reviving Beams? When shall we all be
thankful if not now, when he has cast our Lot in an Age of Wonders and of
Mercies? What would our Forefathers that lived in a darker season, and in times
of Persecution have given to see such a bright and peaceful day as that is
which we are blessed with? What would the poor People in Hungary and in the
Palatinate, give to have so much peace and quiet, as we now enjoy? What would
our poor Protestant Brethren in France, that are groaning under a cruel and
blody Persecution, give to have the Protection and the Favor of so mild a
Government as that is, which we are now living under; and to have the Bread of
Life, and their Ministers, and their Gospel in the same manner they once had
them? Those poor Churches are not yet delivered, their Beauty and their Glory
is departed, and their Sion is mourning in the dust; but they send their Sighs
over to us; we have heard their Groans, the Language of which is, Come and help
us with your Prayers. Let us pray for them as we would for our selves in the
like case; who knows but God will hear our Prayers for them also? And when
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, and Piedmont, and all other places that
have been in distress shall lift up their heads with joy, and congratulate one
another, for the Salvations and Deliverances which God has wrought for them,
what a glorious time will that be? Happy shall be the day and the year that
shall accomplish so great a Work; happy shall the Messenger be that brings us
such welcome tidings; happy will be the Ears that hear so delightful a thing as
this, and happy the Eyes that see it; and happy will those Countries be that
shall flourish with Prosperity and Peace, when these present Commotions and
Wars that disturb the World, are past and gone; and happy yet again will be
those Instruments, whom God will honor to bring about so excellent a State of
things: Then shall it be said as in Isa. 66. 10, 11. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem,
and be glad with her, all ye that love her; rejoice for joy with her all ye
that mourn for her: That ye may suck and be satisfied with the Breasts of her
Consolations, that ye may milk out and be delighted with the abundance of her
Glory. May we not hope that so pleasant a day as this has begun to dawn; may
we not hope, and have we not encouragement to beg of God, that the Light which
is broken out in so wonderful a manner may shine more and more to a perfect
day? That we may still say with the delivered Israelites, Who is like unto
thee, O Lord, amongst the gods, who is like unto thee, glorious in Holiness,
fearful in Praises, doing Wonders? Exodus 15. 11. It will greatly heighten the
Mercy of our being brought from the Grave, if we should live to see such a
sight as this: But however it be, the Mercies we have already received in our
deliverance from Sickness, contain Motives powerful enough to persuade us to
love and praise God; and the doing of this may procure us many more Mercies.
There are two things which after our Recovery we have cause always to remember.

First, That we must live as those that know though we have escaped the Grave
hitherto, yet we must one day take up our dwelling there. Tho we are reprieved
for a while, yet the sentence of death that is past upon all Mankind, will one
day be executed upon us, and we must die as well as others; and if we improve
this Consideration, tho death it self be not past, yet the bitterness of it
will be so.

Secondly, That we ought most earnestly to pray that (if God please so to order
it) we may not have very long nor very sharp pains before we die; and that when
he calls us from the World, he would give us an humble and a quiet Resignation
to his Will, that we may be found of him in peace, and in a temper suitable to
the greatness of our Change; and that before he warn us to appear before him,
we may have all that work on Earth finished, which he gave us to do; and so
being assured that the Mediator is our Friend, we may every one of us say with
Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

The Song of HEZEKIAH Paraphrased by Dr. Woodford.
I.
REVOLVING the sharp Sentence past,
And how an end, e're thought was on me come;
How soon said I, have I approacht my last,
And unawares reatcht Natures farthest Home?
Ah! now I to the Grave must go,
No more, or Life, or Pleasure know,
But a long doleful Night, in darkness deep below.
II.
No more, my God, shall I see Thee,
Nor the great Works of Thy Almighty Hand;
No more a Votary at Thy Altar be,
Nor in the crowds of them, who praise Thee, stand:
Mankind no more shall I behold,
Nor tell, nor of Thy Love be told,
Eve'n mine to Thee, shall like my ashes, Lord, be cold.
III.
Lo! as a Tent am I removed,
And my life's thread, which I thought wondrous strong,
Too weak to bear the Looms extension proved,
In The the midst broke off, too sleasie to run long:
With Sickness I am pined away,
And feel each moment some decay,
All Night in Terrors, and in Grief die all the Day.
IV.
For as a Lion hasts to 'his Prey,
And having gripped it, breaks the yielding Bones;
So on me came the Almighty, whilst I lay
In vain expecting help, but from my Groans:
O take, said I, Thy Hand away,
See how I feel my Loins decay,
All Night in Terrors, and in Grief die all the Day!
V.
Then like a Swallow, or a Crane,
I chatt'red over my Fears, his Heart to move;
The widowed Turtle does not more complain,
When in the Woods she has lost her faithful Love:
My Eyes, O God, with waiting fail,
Why should Thou thus a Worm assail?
I Am Thine, O let for once the Almighty not prevail!
VI.
Yet do Thy Will: I must confess,
Worse Plagues than these, my Sins deserve from Thee;
The Sentence past is than my Crimes far less,
And only Hell a sit Reward can be:
Ah! let my Prayers that Doom prevent!
My age in Mournings shall be spent,
And all the Years Thou giv'st, shall be, but to repent.
VII.
On Thy great Pleasure all depend,
During which only, I and Mandkind live;
To teach us this Thou do Diseases send,
And daily claim'st the Life, which Thou did give:
Yet such is Thy resistless Power,
That when our age is quite past over,
What Thou at first did give, Thou can our Life restore.
VIII.
And thus with me, Lord, have thou dealt,
Tho I for peace had only bitterness;
The effects of mighty Goodness thus have felt,
Beyond what words, or numbers can express:
For from the Pit Thou drew'st me back,
And that I might no pleasures lack,
Upon Thy self the burden of my Sins did take.
IX.
Triumphant Savior! the still Grave,
For so great Love, Thy Name can never praise;
Nor in the Pit can Thou Memorial have,
Thy Truth, or hoped for, or adored Thy Ways;
The Living, Lord, the Living are
The Men, who must Thy Power declare,
And of them chiefly such, whom Thou like me, shall spare.
X.
They to their Children shall make known,
As I do now, the Wonders of Thy Hand;
How when we even to Hell did headlong run,
To stop our passage, Thou in the way did stand:
Lord, since Thou have thus delivr'd me,
Thus made me Thy Salvation see,
My Life, and Harp and Song, I Will consecrate to Thee.
FINIS.
Books printed for, and are to be sold by T. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside.
SErmons on the whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians, by Mr. J. Dailee,
translated into English by F. S. with Dr. Tho. Goodwin's and Dr. John Owen's
Epistles Recommendatory. Fol.

Dr. Horton's 100 Select Sermons. Fol. Baxter's Catholic Theology. Fol. Dr.
Littleton's Sermons. Fol.

A Treatise of Knowledge and Love compared. In two Parts: 1. Of falsely
pretended Knowledge. 2. Of true saving Knowledge and Love. First, Against hasty
Judging, and false Conceits of Knowledge, and for necessary Suspension.
Secondly, The Excellency of Divine Love, and the Happiness of being Known and
Loved of God.

The English Nonconformity, as under King Charles II. and King James 11. truly
stated and argued.

The Scripture Gospel defended, and Christ, Grace and Free Justification
vindicated against the Libertines, who use the Names of Christ, Free Grace and
Justification, to subvert the Gospel and Christianity, and that Christ, Grace
and Justification, which they in zealous Ignorance think they plead for, to the
injury of Christ, the danger of Souls, and the scandalizing of the weak, the
insulting of Adversaries, and the dividing of the Churches

Cain and Abel Malignity, that is Enmity to Serious Godliness, that is, To an
holy and heavenly state of Heart and Life: Lamented, described, detected and
unanswerably proved to be the Devilish Nature, and the Militia of the Devil
against God, and Christ, and the Church, and Kingdoms, and the surest sign of a
state of damnation.

Hymns in Six Centuries. All five by Richard Baxter.

Man's whole Duty, and God's wonderful Entreaty of him thereunto: Set forth
from 2 Cor. 5. 20. and published at the Request of some Hearers.

Advice to Parents and Children. The sum of few Sermons contracted, and
published at the request of may pious Hearers. Both by Daniel Burgess.

A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Esther Sampson, the late Wife of Henry Sampson, Dr.
of Physic, who died Nov. 24. 1689. By John How Minister of the Gospel.

Two Funeral Sermons of the Use and Happiness of Humane Bodies. Preached on 1
Cor. 6. 13. By Edw: Lawrence.

The Believers Daily Exercise: Or, The Scripture Precept of being in the Fear
of the Lord all the day long, explained and urged in Four Sermons. By John
Billingsley Minister of the Gospel.

Books printed for, and sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul 's Churchyard.
THE Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament and the New: with Annotations and
Parallel Scriptures. To which is annexed, the Harmony of the Gospels. As also
the Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures to our English
Standard: And a Table to the Promises in Scripture, by Mr. Samuel Clark.

-- His Holy History in brief: Or, an Abridgment of the Historical Parts of the
Old and New Testament.

Dr. Thomas Goodwin's Works: In two Volumes, in Folio, Viz. on the Ephesians,
Revelations, The Knowledge of God the Father, Election, etc.

-- His Treatise of the Punishment of Sin in Hell: In 8 vo.

Dr. Thomas Manton's Works; in two Volumes, in Folio. Viz. On the 25 th of St.
Matthew. The 17 th of St. John. On the 6 th and 8 th Chapters of the Epistle to
the Romans. On the 5 th Chapter of the 2 d to the Corinthians: And on the 11 th
to the Hebrews. With a Treatise of the Life of Faith and Self-Denial. With
several other Sermons.

-- His Treatise on the Lord's Pray Dr. in 8 vo.

Dr. Bates's Works. Viz. The Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the
Contrivance and Accomplishment of our Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ. Or
Discourses, wherein is showed how the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power,
and Truth of God are glorified in that Great and Blessed Work.

-- His three Sermons, at the Funerals of Dr. Jacomb, Mr. Clarkson and Mr.
Ashurst

-- His Sure Trial of Uprightness, etc.

Mr. Pearse's Preparation for Death.

-- His Best Match: Or, The Soul's Espousal to Christ.

-- Last Legacy: Or Beam of Divine Glory, etc. 12 v^s.

An Explanation of the Assembly's shorter Catechism. Price 6 d.

Mr. Case's Treatise of Afflictions.

The Epitome of the Bible in English Verse, useful for Children; Price 6 d.
Bound.

A Presont for Children. Being a brief, but faithful Account of many Remarkable
and Excellent Things uttered by three young Children, to the wonder of all that
heard them. To which is added, A Seasonable Exhortation to Parents for the
Education of their Children. Published by William Bidbanck, M. A. Price 6 d.
Bound.

The Barren Fig Tree: Or, The Doom and Downfall of the Fruitless Professor. By
John Bunyan.

Books printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry.
MR. Rogers's Sermon, Preached upon the Death of a young Gentleman, Entitled,
Early Religion, or, the way for a young Man to remember his Creator.

Mr. Shower's Sermon at Madam Anne Barnadistons Funeral.

Mr. Lee's Joy of Truth.

The Character of a Williamite; Written by a Divine.

Dr. Robert's Key to the whole Bible. In Folio.

A Continuation of Morning Exercises, Questions and Cases of Conscience
practically resolved by sundry Divines in the City of London, in October 1682.

Casuistical Morning Exercises, the 4th Volumn, by several Ministers in and
about London, Preached in October, 1689.

The Vanity and Impiety of Judicial Astrology, whereby Men undertake to foretell
future Contingencies, especially the particular Fates of Mankind, by the
Knowledge of the Stars, by Francis Crow M. A.

A New Martrology: Or, The Bloody Assizes now exactly methodiz'd in one Volume
comprehending a complete History of the Lives, Actions, Trials, Sufferings,
Dying Speeches, Letters and Prayers of all those eminent Protestants, who fell
in the West of England, and else where from the year 1678 to 1689. the Third
Edition with large Additions.

Early Piety exemplified in the Life and Death of Mr. Nathaniel Mather, who
having become at the age of 19. an instance of more than common Learning and
Virtue changed, Earth for Heaven, October 17. 1688. The second Edition, with a
prefatory Epistle by Mr. Matthew Mead.

Mr. Oake's Funeral Sermon.

Mr. Kent's Funeral Sermon: both Preached by Mr. Samuel Slater.

An Antidote against Lust: Or, A a Discourse of Uncleaness showing its various
kinds, great Evil, the temptations to it, and most effectual cure by Robert
Carr Minister of the Gospel.

Poetical Fragments by Richard Baxter, Published for the use of the Afflicted.
The Second Edition.

Reformed Religion: Or Right Christianity, described in 'its Excellency and
Usefulness in the whole Life of Man, written by M. Barker Minister of the
Gospel.

Daniel in the Den by Stephen Jay Rector of Chinner in Oxfordshire.

The Trajedies of Sin, together with Remarks upon the Life of the Great
Abraham, by the same Author.


