A Renunciation OF SEVERAL Popish Doctrines, BECAUSE Contrary to the Doctrine
of Faith of the Church of ENGLAND.

By R. R. B. D.

Babylon's Brats must not be dandled, but dashed against the wall. Phinehas his
Zeal, Jehu's March, Josiah's Resolution, Luther's Heroical Spirit, have ever
best prevailed against the mystery of iniquity.

Bishop Prideaux his Sermon upon Revel. 2. 4. Page 25. Whosoever denies this
Doctrine [That Faith alone justifieth] is not to be accounted a Christian man,
nor for a setter forth of Gods glory, but for an adversary to Christ and his
Gospel, and for a setter forth of man's vain glory.

Homily of Salvation of mankind, Page 16, 17. Bona opera non praecedunt
justificandum sed sequuntur justificatum.

S. August. l. de fide and operibus. c. 4, and 14. The Pope is Antichrist, and
Popery is the loosing of Satan; for, blasphemeth he not, in denying us to be
saved by the imputation of Christ's righteousness?

King James his Godly Meditations upon certain Verses of Revel. 20. Earnestly
contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints.

Jude verse. 3. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Cockeril at the Three Legs in the
Poultry, over against the Stocks-Market, 1680.

CHRISTIAN READERS,
THough I confess I have long had it in my thoughts, to prove, That the
Doctrine of the Laudensian faction is not the Doctrine of faith of the Church
of England; and that the greatest Conformists to the Ceremonies, are the
greatest Nonconformists in deed and in truth, to the Doctrine of faith, or the
articles of Religion of the Church of England, concerning the Confession of the
true Christian faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments; yet I sat still,
earnestly expecting that some one Orthodox Conformist, or other (whom it most
concerned to maintain it) would appear to prove the former, or some learned
Nonconformist to the Ceremonies, would do the latter: but neither seeing nor
hearing of any one of them to attempt either the one or the other, being
encouraged by the Parliaments late Act for renouncing Transubstantiation, I
have (though the unfittest of a thousand) adventured to renounce not only that
blasphemous Doctrine, but many more of the Papists erroneous and Antichristian
Doctrines; and in doing of this, may possibly be thought* obliquely, if not
directly, to do them both. And I begin with renouncing their abominable
Transubstantiation, partly because the Parliament did so, and also because it is
not only destructive of the humane nature of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
but also inductive of adoration of the Lord's Supper, and the Tables or Altars
whereon it is celebrated; Several of our high Conformists having so beld (and
it is feared that some do so now) the presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament
of the Altar, (as they have been pleased to call it) that they might well be
thought to hold it after* the Papists or Lutherans Doctrine; for it is clear,
that they have not only been against Orthodox men's discovery of the way that
Christ's body is not in Bp. Forb's de Eucharist. l. 1. c. 1. par. 7. A. B. Laud
in his Star-Chamb. Speech. Dr. Heyl. Hist. of Presbytery p. 2.
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, but they have plainly held, that he is
more, and some other way in that Sacrament, than in that other of Baptism; and
that he is there truly, really, substantially, as it is in the 18th Article of
the Popes Creed; to be seen in this Renunciation Article 14th. yea essentially,
as Dr. Lawrence speaks in his Court-sermon, p. 18.

And in the second place, I have renounced Adoration or bowing to Altars, or
Communion-Tables, purposely and upon the Religious account of more relig^ou^
excel^^n^^, etc. because that Doctrine and practice being ^dmitted, worshipping
of the Sacrament of Images, of the Cross, of Relics, etc. may easily be
introduced and maintained.

And thirdly, I have renounced their Heretical Doctrine of Justification of
men's persons before God by their own good works, because it overthrows the
Gospel, and in effect denies Christ to be come in the flesh, and is most
dangerously Antichristian, and very commonly br^^ched among^^ us, and the sound
Doctrine of the Church of England against it, called Antinomianism, and the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness, vilified and denied; and Faith as an act,
habit, or work, or as it includes sincere obedience, set up in its room; and
the Papists Justification of our persons before God by our own actual or
habitual righteousness, re-introduced.

I have also renounced the sufficiency of the natural active power of man's
Free Will while in the state of nature, to turn of it self to God; to believe,
etc. and there by the ground and foundation of the Old and New Pelagian, long
since condemned, though of late too much revived and affected Doctrine, and
those that usually flow from or are companions of it; as also the lawfulness of
setting up and suffering of Images in places of public worship, because they
have been, are, and will be occasions of Idolatry, Superstition, and much
mischief in Church and State, where they have been and are tolerated, as may be
seen in that excellent Homily against the peril of Idolatry.

I have also proved by the Doctrine of the Church of England, and our own
learned men's approved works, That the Pope of Rome is the Antichrist, and that
therefore he is not supreme Head of the Church; and that therefore his humane
inventions should not be imposed upon, nor followed by the Churches of Jesus
Christ; but that Christ himself the supreme Head of his Church, should be only
so acknowledged, his word duty and constantly consulted and followed in all
matters which concern his Church; ^is pure Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship,
and Truths, countenanced and maintained, and not suppressed or disgraced; and
also that Antichrists erroneous and Antichristian doctrines, usurpations,
superstitious and scandalous ceremonies, and other Worships, should be
detested* Vide, the Confession of Faith made the 28 of Jan. 1581, in the 14
year of K. James, his Reign there, and subscribed and sworn to by K. James, his
Household, and whole Kingdom of Scotland, set down in the latter end of the
Harmony of Confessions.
and renounced, and suppressed. 'Twas once a sad and great complaint made to a
Sub-Committee in which were many eminent Bishops, and three Doctors of
Divinity, That all the tenants of the Council of Trent, (except only such
points of State Policy against the Kings Supremacy, as were made Treason by the
Statute) as good works co-causes with Faith in Justification, private
Confession by particular enumeration of sins, needful, necessitate medii, to
Salvation; that the obla^ion, or as others, the consumption of the Elements in
the Lord's Supper, holds the nature of a true Sacrifice; Prayers for the Dead,
lawfulness of Monastical Vows, the gross substance of Arminianism, and some
dangerous points of Socinianism, had been preached, or printed by some amongst
us, says Dr. Fuller in his Ecclesiastical History.

Dr. Heylin' s Cypr. Anglicus, l. 5. p. 472, 473. mentions many good things
that that Committee were preparing, but being obstructed by A. B. Laud (though
then in the Tower) and some other Bishops, the Commons laid the ax to the root
of all evil (as Tindal of the Obedien^^ of Christian Magist. p. 114.
Tindal of old called the Bishops) looking upon them as the ^inderers of all
good, as Martin Martin Bucer, de regn^ Christ. l. 2. c. 1.
Bucer told King Edward the Sixth; and so instead of mending things, they grew
worse. Heylin confesses, nay braggeth, that Books against Arminianism, (which
he says is Cypr. Anglic. Introduct. p. 36.
agreeable to the Council of Trent, cap. de fructu Justificationis, Can. 3, 4)
were suppressed. Sure I am, that Dr. Prideaux his Sermons which he had preached
at Court, were not permitted to be reprinted at Oxford, because he would not
yield to the obliterating of some passages in them against Arminianism; yet
several passages which he, as Doctor of the Chair, rased out of Mr.
Chillingworth' s Book, were inserted and printed after the good old Doctor had
put his hand to the license for its printing, which Book is now highly
commended,) though the Doctor openly disowned it in the Chair, saying, That he
had been abused in that Book, Mr. Cheynell being opponent upon this Socinian
question, An ratio sit fundamentum fidei? But what are these things to the
purpose now? I answer, 1. The Author of the Friendly Debate, often printed* and
its continuation, has raked up things against some Nonconformists which were
of longer standing. 2. If some Clergymen of these times preach or print, or
act as they did in those days, it is directly to the purpose. Let any judicious
indifferent man read the Book entitled, The causes of the decay of Piety, and
he will find much of the Sovereign drug planted here (as the Jesuit said in A.
B. Laud' s time) to purge the Protestants of their Heresy, as they call our
true Religion. Let him read Mr. Fowler' s two Books, viz. his Free Discourse,
and his Design of Christianity, and he will see (whatsoever he pretends to the
contrary) that his endeavor, if not prime design, is to promote that most
Antichristian Doctrine of the Papists, viz. Justification of our persons before
God by our own good works or inherent holiness, and overthrow the true Doctrine
of Faith of the Church of England, to which ('it is believed) he has subscribed,
denying the Free Discourse, p. 126, 128, 129, 130, 145.
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, in the sound sense of the Church of
England, sometimes calling it a false, yea a grossly false notion thereof; and
sometimes a Ibi. p. 141.
sottish and mischievous Doctrine, abusing those that hold it, by branding them
with the ignominious name of Ibi. page 141, 143. and Design of Christianity, c.
19. p. 223.
Antinomians; affirming, That our persons are justified before God by our own
inherent holiness, and good works; and that faith, Free Discourse 159. Design
of Christianity, c. 19. p. 221.
as it includes sincere obedience, justifies our persons before God: and to
this end using and improving Bellarmine' s arguments to the utmost. And lest
any should charge him with the Doctrine of the Church of England, which he
cannot but know is contrary to his Doctrine, he endeavors to prevent it,
saying, That those Divines of his opinion, do heartily subscribe to the 39
Articles of our Church, taking Free Discourse, Edit 2. p. 2. p. 191.
that liberty in the interpretation of them that is allowed But where does the
Church allow this liberty? what do you mean by the Church? it is contrary to the
end of the Law of 13. of Elizabeth, and of the fifth Canon.
by the Church her self; though it is most reasonable to presume, that she
requires subscription to them, as to an instrument of peace only. And again,
p. 2. p. 305. he says further thus, What was said of General Councils, we also
most heartily acknowledge concerning our own particular Church, viz. that we are
bound by no means to oppose the determinations of the Governors and
Representatives in disputable matters; nor do they (as has been showed)
require our internal assent to their Articles, but enjoin our submission to
them, as to an instrument of peace only. Lo here you may see what these
Latitudinarians are ^a name which some (I know not who) have given them, but
whether they deserve it, let others judge; but such is the latitude of these
men, that they would have liberty for themselves to preach and print what
Doctrine they please, but would have none allowed to dissenters in points of
Church Government and Ceremonies, as may be evidently seen in his Free
Discourse, by which we may see what Broth and Beef his palate relisheth best.
But what, is there no internal assent required to the Doctrine of faith of the
Church of England, and yet an unfeigned assent and consent to the use of the
Liturgy, and the Ceremonies and Rites thereof? Are these more essential to the
being of the Church of England, than those? Are the Ceremonies, Rites and
Liturgy, more surely and certainly, and indisputably grounded upon the
Canonical Scriptures, than the doctrine of Faith, which concerns the Trinity,
justification of a sinner, Christ's satisfaction? etc. Have not all our 39
Articles been disputed; nay, do not some amongst us question whether there be a
God, and whether the Canonical Scriptures of the Old and New Testament be the
Word of God, and of divine authority? and have not the Ceremonies of the Church
of Rome, which our Rulers have retained, been from the first beginning of the
Reformation here, disputed and opposed by godly and learned Bishop Hooper, and
Mr. John Rogers, and denied and detested even to the death by many godly
Martyrs? Do not all the Calvinistical Churches abroad join with the Church of
England in maintaining the Articles of Religion, which concern the confession
of the true Christian Faith and the Sacraments, and yet reject the Liturgy,
Ceremonies, and Church Government of the Church of England? and if only
indisputable matters may not be opposed, and all disputable ones may be
opposed, I pray what Article of our Creed and Religion may not be opposed by
these men of the long name? It is ^^ear, that though these men heartily
subscribe to the 20, the 34, and the 36 Articles, Whatsoever is not read in the
holy Scripture, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man
that it should be believed as an article of Faith. Art* 6* Church of England.
which are not Articles of Religion of the true Christian Faith, because not
contained in, or proveable by the Word of God in their sense, yet they give not
an unfeigned assent and consent to the Articles of Religion, concerning the
Doctrine of Faith, and the Sacraments; for they take liberty (they say it is
allowed them by the Church) to interpret them (as they please, and as
experience shows, oppose them too) against the determination of the Church;
which allowance I hope I may have to defend them. But do not these men lay a
foul aspersion upon the Church, who say, They do allow those men that will give
an hearty assent, and subscribe to their authority, ceremonies, and traditions,
and injunctions, to interpret and secretly undermine and openly oppose the
Doctrines of Faith of the true Christian Religion? I profess I do not believe
it of the whole Church-representative of England, (of which I should believe he
speaks) though I have not heard of one of them, or of any Conformist that has
appeared against these men's false interpretations, yea open contradictions of
the articles of Religion, concerning the true Christian faith. But what
security of peace and truth the Magistrate (whom like their elder brethren in
Holland they claw, while he will suffer them to carry on their destructive
design^) can have by these men's subscriptions, declarations, yea oaths, I know
not. Would not all the Jesuits of Rome subscribe, declare, and swear too, upon
these conditions? I have heard of one Minister that would subscribe, assent,
consent and declare, if they would hate him but one syllable, un. And so it may
be would others too, if they might do as they do, not perform what they
promise, and write against what they subscribe, assent, and consent to, too, as
these men say they are allowed by the Church. But I know not well what Church
the man means, by our Church; for I do not know well of what church he is,
though I hear he is in the Church of England, and promoted; so was the Bishop
of Spalato, till King James found out his Knavery; and so was Dr. Jews, who
returned to Winchester, and when he had received some thousands of pounds of
current English money, he returned to his Church of Rome; who therein followed
not the cunning advice of Thuanus, a learned and cunning Papist, to Casaubon,
Wedderbornes Book, p 23 vid. Supplement to Laudensium, autocatacrifis, p. 18.
not to come away to them, but stay here, seeing he had and might have more
means here than he could or would have there, and might do them more service
here than he could do them, if there.

I have dwelt too long upon this large man, else I could set before your eyes
many more of his erroneous and dangerous Doctrines, but I must leave him. What
I have said in my following Renunciation, will I hope sufficiently confute Dr.
Patrick's Doctrine of Justification by our own good works, and by faith, as it
works by love, and some Friendly Debate, page 13, (...) 14.
other of his false Doctrines. I meddle not with some others, because better
heads and pens have undertaken them. Though the Arminian, etc. faction he (they
say) much increased, yet that it was greater and more Popish before the late
Civil Wars; and that there was more danger of bringing in Popery then, than
there is now, I could offer many reasons; as I. That the body of Popery (except
the Popes Supremacy) was then preached and printed, as Dr. Fuller shows was
complained of; and so much Dr. Heylin confesses, as was showed before, and may
in a very great part he seen gathered to your hands in Laudensium
Autocatacrisis, and the Supplement thereunto; and Laudensium Apostasia; which I
believe cannot be proved now.

2. Then there were the High Commission, and the Star Chamber Courts, which are
not now, wherein A. B. Laud and his party used to crush whosoever appeared in
the least against their Arminian Doctrines, and Popish Innovations. It Is true
we have some disadvantages, we want a Dr. Humphrie, Abbot, Holland, and
Prideaux, in the Chair in Oxford; a Cartwright, Whitakers, Davenant and Ward,
at Cambridge; a Dr. Ames, Twisse, Kendal, and a Mr. Jeanes. who are gone to
their Rests, and we lack liberty and encouragement for our thousands of
Orthodox Nonconforming Ministers freely to preach and print against Popish,
Arminian, and Socinian Innovations in Doctrine, Discipline and Worship.

If orthodox, and learned, and godly Divines (Nonconformists indeed to the
Ceremonies, but real Conformists to the Doctrine of Faith of the Church of
England) who did not only preach the truth to the elder, but taught it to the
younger sort of people, had not been turned and kept out of the Ministry, and
silenced, and cast out of their Freeholds and Corporations, except they would
do such things as they judged unlawful, or at least inexpedi^^, and put into
their places, either ignorant or erroneous, or scandalous persons, men either
unapt or unfit to teach; (though I acknowledge there are many learned sober men,
sound in the faith, (...), apt to teach, in the Ministry, whose persons (God
knows) I love, and whose learning I honor and admire; yet I say there are many
as selfish, malicious, covetous, ambitious; some as erroneous, if not
idolatrous men, as many that are of the Church of Rome, and so would openly
profess themselves to be, if time should serve them) it is very probable and
verily believed, that neither Popery, nor Arminianism (that cunning way to
bring in Popery) nor Profaneness and Atheism, would have gotten that head;
which some say they have. Where the fault is, is not for me to determine, not
suggest. But verily I think his Gracious Majesty cannot be so much as
suspected, much less accused of it, for he was graciously pleased to issue out
a Declaration for liberty for tender Consciences from Bredah, and another soon
after his return home, which was turned into a Bill by a worthy Gentleman, and
offered to the Parliament then called healing. Since that, his Majesty made
another Gracious Declaration for liberty of Conscience, but that it is known was
cried down by the Episcopal party; and now at last his Majesty upon pious and
politic accounts, has given forth another and more Gracious Declaration for
liberty of Conscience, and licensed several sound Protestant Divines, (who have
lost their livings, and suffered the spoiling of their goods, and refused
dignities rather than comply with our Bishops, and their Latitudinarian party,
in things they judged unlawful, inexpedient and inductive to Popery, etc.) to
preach and teach the word of God truly, and worship God purely as he has
commanded in his Word, without humane additions and inventions, etc. But this
also the Episcopal party under the specious pretense of being against bringing
in Popery, (which many of them preach and practice, and love more than the
truth, and the pure worship of God, as God and their own consciences well know;
though they have formerly extolled the Kings Supremacy and Prerogative above
Law, Right, Reason, and Religion, and these thirteen years last past scarce
ever executed one Law of those many that are made against Popish Recusants, no
nor mentioned publicly any fear of Popery, till his Majesty granted his most
loyal Protestant Subjects liberty to serve God purely, as he has commanded in
his Word, which ought to be the rule of all men's religious actions) declaim
against, and thereby condemn his Majesty's piety and prudence, and suppress in
many places the Whosoever forbids us to do what God commands, or commands
us to do what God forbids, is accursed unto all them that love the Lord.
Basilius Moral. c. 14. quoted by Bishop Jewel in his Reply to Harding, a. 14.
d5. p 373.
most pure worship and service of God, the preaching up the real interests of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and the preaching down the Errors, Heresies, Idolatries,
and Su^^^stitions, and Antichristian inventions of the Apostatized Church of
Rome, with whom the Laudensian party long labored a reconciliation. Let any
unprejudiced man that is judicious, seriously. read Dr. Heylin's Cyprianus
Anglicus, and his Introduction thereunto, and he will see much more than I do
but hint, and also what a mongrel Religion he would make ours, and have
established here, and what principles of Tyranny and Popery he therein lays
down, and commends.

But though these things might be true in some heretofore, yet now they see the
error their selfishness and passion has led themselves, and (it may be)
others, inconsiderately into, that they may fear they shall be put besides the
saddle, it may be beaten with those rods which they made for other men, that
earnestly desired the Churches peace, and the Kingdoms welfare, by any powerful
ill-minded and ill-principled Prince (as Heylin most falsely says King Edward
the sixth was of) that will but make use of those weapons which they have made
to subvert their dissenting brethren: they are well content, at least some of
them, to tolerate Protestant dissenters, as may be seen in and about the Cities
of London and Westminster, and they preach against Popery very much. Very good,
it is well their eyes begin to be opened, if they be not shut again before
they will see and forsake the true causes, and sin no more. Old Bishop Bonner told
them long since, That liking of the Popes Broth would incline men to like in
time their Beef too. I wish their moderation might be known to all men. But is
a toleration of the pure Worship of God, and preaching his truth, all the fruit
the sight of their error has brought them to? no question they (I mean the
Episcopal party) would grant as much to home-born Papists. It Is granted to
foreign Protestants, though it is true their great Father in God, A. B. Laud
overthrew that liberty of the Protestant Religion which King Edward the sixth,
Queen Elizabeth and King James granted them under hand and seal, as Dr. Heylin
largely shows in his Cyprianus Anglicus; and thereby he made such an evil
president, as ('it is believed) did his present Majesty much mischief in his late
Wars, and rendered his gracious offers to the Netherlanders of protection and
liberty of their Religion if they would come under his Government, ineffectual,
lest such Bishops as A. B. Laud was, should in time have, though not his, yet
some succeeding Princes ears; and thereby, as he, make void all grants and
promises unto them. What, is no more to be granted to home-born Protestants,
who adhere to our doctrine of Faith and the Sacramants, than to Foreigners? Is
granting a bare and uncertain toleration of the pure Worship of God to those
godly Protestants that adhere most firmly to the pure Protestant Religion in
Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, and a full comprehension, with rewards and
great promotions, allowed and given to those that hold Popish Doctrines, not
only contrary to the Word of God, but also to the sound Doctrine of the Church
of England, well becoming those Bishops that are in profession Protestant? Is
this a sufficient and the right way to keep out Popery? is it proper for the
chaste Spouse of Christ to take upon her the badges of the great Whore of Rome?
Is it proper for the Israel of God to s^mbolize with her who is spiritually
called Sodom and Egypt? Is it proper for those that profess themselves the
Saints and servants of the most high God, and the followers of Jesus Christ, to
impose and contend for the proper marks of the Beast, spoken of in Revelations
the 1^, and 17 Chapters?

Does not learned and religious Peter * Et nos si vere Christiani sumus, non
decet ritus and caeremonias vel a Judoeis, vel a nationibus aliis accipere, sed
tantum debem is usurpare quae nobis mandata sunt in literis divinis. P. Martyr,
loc. com. clas. 2 ae. c. 5. S. 16. P. 220.
Martyr say, That if we be Christians indeed, it becomes us not to receive
Rites and Ceremonies from the Jews, or other Nations, but that we ought to use
those things only which are commanded in the Divine Writings a Should we
believe that those men Aquin. 12 ae. q. 103. a 2. Pet. Mart. loc. Com. cl. 2 ae
p. 197. Pareus and Beza in 1 Cor. 10. 18.
those Jews, who after pretense of sight of their errors are sound Christians,
and intend really to keep out and root out Judaism, yet command and rigorously
enjoin the use of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Jewish Religion, which are
the proper badges and real professions thereof, as Papists themselves say, and
our men prove? Can any rational sound Protestant be so silly as to think and
say, that if the Ceremonies be left in their use (as the Bishops themselves say
they are in their own nature) indifferent, that then farewell the Church of
England? For what? is the Church of England like the Church of Rome, built upon
such sandy, weak or unnecessary foundations? or must the Kingdom be said to be
so much in love with the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, as to give 400000 l.
per Annum to the Bishops and their agents and dependants to uphold them?

Does not the Church of England say, Homily against peril of Idolatry, Part 3.
p. 69.
That the Church of Rome Knowing her self to be a foul, filthy, old, withered
Harlot, understanding her lack of natural and true beauty, and great
lothsomeness, which of her self she has, does after the custom of such Harlots
paint her self, and deck and attire her self with gold, pearl, stone, and all
kind of precious jewels, that she shining with the outward beauty and glory of
them, may please the foolish phantacy of some lovers, and so entice them to
spiritual fornication with her, who if they saw her but in simple apparel
would abhor her, as the foulest and filthiest Harlot that ever was seen? Are
not Ministers bound, and do they not subscribe and give assent to this very
Doctrine? how can we then without great shame and suspicion wear her apparel,
and call her a true Church, carry her name, as it were in our foreheads, comply
with her in such unnecessary things, except we have a months-mind to return to
her ugly bosom, and base dr^^gery?

Are not the Lords people forbidden Mark the word Unnecessary.
to do any unnecessary thing that Idolaters do, in Exodus 23. 24. Levit. 18. 13.
Levit. 19. 27, 28. Deuteronomy. 12. 30, 31, 32. Deuteronomy. 14. 1, 2. and this reason given
them for it, For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord
has chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself above all the Nations
that are upon the earth. And are we not commanded to come out of Babylon (the
Church of Rome) that we partake not of her sins, and receive not of her
plagues, Revel. 18. 4. Are we not as dear children to follow Christ^^ Mat. 16.
24. Ephesians. 5. 1. And are not his modes of Worship better and freer from
scandal, suspicion, and appearance of evil, than Antichrists? If not, let us
speak out plainly in words at length, and not in figures. But they preach much
against Popery: Well, blessed be God for it. I am glad with St. Paul, that
Christ is preached, though it should be out of envy, and strife, and
contention, supposing to add affliction to his bonds. I am glad that Popery is
preached down in sincerity and hatred thereof, or only in design, pretense, or
on purpose to add affliction to Nonconformists bonds, which is verily
suspected. For when his Gracious Majesty declared liberty for Nonconformists,
before this last time, it is well known that a man of the long Name was up at
Oxford with Non fuit sic ab initio, and others elsewhere; and now presently
after his Majesty's last Declaration with Licenses, was not the Kingdom filled
with their sound of Popery, Popery, Popery; as if to license sound Protestant
Divines to preach, who are most against Popery, were to tolerate Popery!
Papists had the same liberty before it, that they had after it, but not a word
of complaint against Popery before Nonconforming Protestants to ^eremo^ie^,
and^* had liberty granted to preach the Truth, and worship God without their
ceremonies and rites; not one new Law made, nor one old one executed against
Papists and Popery these twelve or thirteen years last past, but new Laws made,
and old ones never intended, against Nonconformists, and the pure Worship of
God, their Religious meetings made rioters and riotous; and men, yea the vilest
of men hired to inform against them for doing good; and Justices of the Peace
severely censured for not punishing Gods people for serving of him, as he has
commanded them; That it is strongly suspected that Presbytery, and purity, and
verity hat^ been more hated and feared than Popery; and that the Pope and his
power is more feared, than real and most Antichristian Popery. But however, and
by whomsoever Popery is preached down, I rejoice, yea and I will rejoice. But
who are the men that preach it down? what parts of Popery do they preach down?
how many dignified Clergymen do preach it down? Are there not more aspiring
men do preach and print much of it up, and those promoted; and many deserving
men that preach it down, neglected, if not discountenanced? was not Dr. Cozens
twice indicted, and the Indictmens found and complained of in Parliament for
uttering these words, That the King was no more supreme Head of the Church of
Vide, Articles against him, and the Parliaments Censure of him.
England than the boy that rubs his Horse-heels? And it is said he got off by
flying; of which necessity he has since made a virtue, and gotten to be Bishop
of Durham. Was there not a Book called Dr. Cozens his Devotions, in which Mr.
Prin says, There were twenty Popish Errors printed; and that the Reformers
Prin' s Quench-coal, Epist. to King Charl. 1. p. 10.
of our Church took away all Religion and the whole service of God, when they
took away the Mass.

Has not another written a Book for the observation of Holy Lent as a See
Bishop Sparrow's Rationale, p. 143, 144, 145. 5 Eliz. c. 5. vide Rastal
Titleship, p. 378.
Religious Faest, contrary ('it is said) to the intent, if not to the express
words of the Law? Let any judicious and impartial man read Bishop Sparrow's
Rationale upon the Common Prayer Book, and judge what Popery he writes against
therein; P. 273. he says, It Is the duty of people to receive the Sacrament
kneeling, for it is a sin not to adore when we receive this Sacrament. And p.
391. he says, It is a dangerous deceit to say that creatures may be adored,
and is contrary to Exodus 20. 5. Thou shall not bow down to them. Them as Rogers
calls the Sacraof the Lord's Supper an Thomas Rogers upon Article 31 says, that
it is a Fable to say that the Mass is a Sacrifice. The Sacrament is not a
Sacrifice but only a Commemoration of that Sacrifice offered on the Cross, Art.
31.
unbloody Sacrifice, a Commemorative Sacrifice of the Death of Christ. And p.
395, 396: he says, That this Sacrament should be received fasting (though
Christ instituted it immediately after Supper); for which he gives this reason,
It is for the honor of so high a Saerament, that the precious Is this for or
against Transubstantiation?
body of Christ should first enter into the Christians mouth before any other
meat. And p. 89. he says, That by Curates here (i. e. In the prayer for
Bishops and Curates) are not meant Stipendiaries, as now it is used to signify,
but all those Parsons or Vicars to whom the Bishop who is the chief Pastor
under Christ, has committed So Dr. Heylin speaks in his Introduction to his
Cyprianus Anglicus, p. 9. s. 10.
the Cure of Souls of some part of his Flock, and so are the Bishops Curates.
The Bishop with these Curates, a flock or congregation committed to their
charge, make up a Church. By which words I humbly conceive the To hold Bishops
Jure Divino, and especially essential to the being of a Church, as A. B. Laud
did Cypr. Anglic. p.
Divine right of Diocaesan Episcopacy is asserted, and thereby the Kings
Supremacy impreached, (for if the Bishops be the chief Pastors under Christ,
Adam Contzen, 1. 2. Pol. c. 18. Rastal. Title-crown, p. 17. Sir Edward Cooks de
jure Regis Ecclesiast. fol. 8. Dr. Heylin says that there are 26 Cathedral
Churches or Episcopal Sees in England, Cypr. Anglic. l. 4. p. 291. and the A B.
of Canterbury is accounted Primate and Metropolitan of all England, Heylin
Cypr. Anglic. l. 4. p. 249.
to whom the Cure of Souls is by Christ committed, the King cannot place and
displace them as he pleases, and grant their authority for so long or so
little while as he pleases, as the Law and Lawgivers say he may. And this will
follow, that the right Reverend Father in God the Lord Primate of all England,
is the Head-pastor, and the other 25 Reverend Bishops (the A. B. of York being
in respect of him but as one of the other) are the chief Pastors, and all the
rest of the Ministers of the Church of England are but their Curates. And then
also it will follow, that not only nominally, but also really and essentially,
there may be Bishop* Qu^^dams without Bishoprics, and that they have not their
authority granted them only from the King, but from Christ, or some other
power. But I had thought that his Majesty had been yielded by Episcopalians to
be supreme Pastor or Head-shepherd under Christ over the Church within his
Dominions, and might, as well as Bishops, (seeing they are but his Curates or
Commissioners, to see that all Ecclesiastical matters be ordered according to
the will of Christ revealed in his Word) commit as much as in him lies, not
only the power of Ordination, but the care of part of the flock committed to
him, to ordained Ministers, that is, ordained Presbyters by other ordained
preaching Presbyters, and institute them Pastors of that little part of his
great flock; but it seems the Bishops will be chief under Christ here, as the
Pope of Rome would be of all the World, but indeed neither he nor they, as
such, are of Christ's institution, but only of man's, as might be proved by the
Bishops acknowledgment in King Henry the Eighth his time, to be seen in the
Bishops Book, in Fox his Acts and Monuments, p. 1037. in one Volume.

But to go on; against what points of Popery do they preach? Papists
themselves, it is well known, write very zealously and learnedly against some
points of Popery, as do the Dominicans against the Franciscans and Jesuits, yea
even in some of those points of Popery wherein some long-named men agree-with
them, I find learned Dr. Abbot * (afterward made Bishop by learned King James)
in a Dr. Heylin in his Cyp^* Anglic* l. 1. p. ^^
Sermon before the University of Oxford, preached at (...). Peter's upon
Easter Day 1615, saying thus, Some are partly He aimed at Laud, as Heylin says
in his Cypr. Anglic. l. 1. p. 66, 67.
Romish, and partly English, as occasion serves them, that a man may say unto
them noster ^s, an adversariorum? who under pretense of truth and preaching
against the Puritans, strike at the heart and root of faith and Religion now
established among us. This preaching against the Puritans was but the practice
of Parsons and Campians counsel, when they came into England to seduce young
Students; when many of them were afraid to lose their places, if they should
professedly be thus, the counsel they then gave them was, That they should
speak freely against the Those that do so now, do the Jesu^^ an^ the Devils
work*
Puritans, and that should suffice; and they cannot pretend that they are
accounted Papists, because they speak against the Puritans, but because they
are Papists indeed, they speak against them; if they do at any time speak
against the Papists, they do but beat a ^^tt^e about the bush, and that softly
too, for fear of troubling or disquieting the birds which are in it. They speak
of nothing but that of which one Papist will speak against another, as against
Equivocation, the Popes As Bishop Buckridg, A. B. Laud's Tutor did, Heylin's
Cypr. Angl. l. 1. p. 48.
Temporal Authority, and the like, and perhaps against some of their
blasphemous speeches; but in the point of Free Will, Justification,
Conoupiscence being sin after Baptism, inherent righteousness, certainty of
Salvation, the Papists beyond the Seas can say they are wholly theirs; and the
Recusants at home make their As they did of Dr. Cozens and some others, as it is
said in the Epistle to Mr. Prin's Quench-coal, p. 40.
brags of them, and in all things they keep themselves so near the brink, that
upon all occasions they may step over to them. Now for this speech, that the
Presbyterians Which was Laud' s in his Sermon at St. Mary's, preached about
seven weeks before; as Heylin ^stews ubi supra.
are as bad as the Papists; there is a sting in the speech, which I wish had
been left out; for there are many Churches beyond the Seas, which contend for
the Religion established amongst us, and yet have approved and admitted the
Presbytery.

And after which, says Heylin, having spoken something in justification of
Presbyteries, he proceeded thus. Might not Christ say, what art thou Romish or
English, Papist or Protestant? or what art thou a Mungrel or compound of both?
a Protestant by Ordination, a Papist in point of Free Will, inherent
righteousness, and the like. A Protestant in receiving the Sacrament, a Papist
in the Doctrine of the Sacrament. What do ye think there are two Heavens? if
there be, get you to the other, place your selves there, for into this where I
am, ye shall not come.

The Learned and Loyal Lord Faulkland, who lost his life in his late Majesty's
service at Newberry, made a speech in the beginning of the old long Parliament
much to the same purpose, p. 3. Mr. Speaker, He is a great stranger in our
Israel, who knows not that this Kingdom has long labored under many and great
oppressions, both in Religion and liberty; and his acquaintance here is not
great, or his ingenuity less, who does not both know and acknowledge that a
great, if not the principal cause of both these, has been some Bishops and
their adherents. Master Speaker, a little search will serve to find them to
have been the destruction of unity under the pretense of Uniformity; to have
brought in superstition and scandal under the titles of reverence and decency,
to have defiled our Church by adorning our Churches; to have flackned the
strictness of that union which was formerly between us and those of our
Religion beyond the Sea; an action as unpolitick as ungodly!

And Page 7. of the same speech, he says further thus: As Sir Thomas Moor says
of the Casuists, their business was not to keep men from sinning, but to inform
them, Quam prope ad peccatum si^e pecc^to liceat accedere; so it seemed their
work was to try how much of a Papist might be brought in without Popery, and to
destroy as much as they could of the Gospel, without bringing themselves into
danger of being destroyed by the Law. Mr. Speaker, to go yet further, some of
them have so industriously labored to As Dr. Pocklington do^^ in his Altar
Christianum, page 50.
deduce themselves from Rome, that they have given great suspicion, that in
gratitude they desire to return thither, or at least to Vide Heylins Cyp.
Anglicus,
meet it half way; some have evidently labored to bring in an English, though
not a Romish Popery. I mean not the outside only, and dr^ss of it, but equally
absolute, a blind Vide Kellets Tricennium. p. 330. Supplement to Laudensium
Autocatacrisis, p. 65.
dependence of the people upon the Clergy, and of the Clergy upon themselves;
and have opposed a Papacy beyond the Sea, that they might settle one beyond the
water. Nay common fame is more than ordinarily false, if none of them have
found a way to reconcile the opinions of Rome to the preferments of Godfry
Goodman Bishop of Gloucester was accused of it in Court and Convocation, and
declared and professed it by his last Will and Testament, as Dr. Heylin shows
in his Cypr. Angl. l. 4. p. 416. It Is said of Dr. Theodore Price Bishop of --
that though he lived like an Atheist, yet he died like a Papist, Prin' s
Epistle to K. Ch^r. I before his Quench-coal, p. 42.
England; be so absolutely, directly and cordially Papists, that it is all that
1500 l. per Ann can do to keep them from confessing it. This and much more may
be seen in Dr. Heylin's Cypr. Angl. l. 4. p 392, 408.

Does not A. B. Laud, p. 36. of his commended Relation of his Conference with
Fisher, say thus: The Church of Rome and Protestants set not up a different
Religion. And does not Dean Potter i^ Charity mistaken, p 62, say thus: That
the most necessary and fundamental Truths which constitute a Church, are on
both sides unquestioned: by fundamental points of faith we understand these
prime and capital Doctrines of Religion which But what are those? a Bishop and
a people, or a Pope and the multitude of Professors of Christianity, as Bishop
Sparrow intimates in his Rationale upon the Commonprayer Book, p. 89. Bishops,
Curates and people committed to their charge, make up a Church.
make up the holy Catholic Church. But did not the Church of England before A.
B. Laud altered the Prayer for the Fifth of November say, That Papists Religion
is Rebellion, and A. B. Laud held that Bishops are essential to the being of a
Church, as Heylin shows in his Cypr. Anglic. l. 1. p. 54. and l. 4. p. 400 401.
their faith is faction? Which cannot be said of Protestants Religion or Faith,
truly, without great slander; though Dr. Heylin (as they say) most wickedly
standers all the first restorers of the Reformed Religion with it: Does not the
Church of Rome hold such points of faith as do destroy the foundation, and
those not only questioned, but denied by real Protestants? Does not the Church
of Rome hold this Doctrine as a point of faith, for denying or not believing of
which they have put many thousands of Protestants to death: viz. That the body
and blood, together with the soul of the Lord Jesus Christ, is truly, really,
and substantially in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and that there is made a
turning of the whole substance of the bread into his body, and of the whole
substance of the wine into his blood, which turning the Catholic Church (as
they falsely call themselves) does call Transubstantiation. If this be denied,
see the 18th Article of their Religion set down in the 14th. Article of this
Book. And does not our Vide Bull Pii 4, bound up with the Council of Trent,
super forma juramenti professionis sidei.
Church of England hold the truth in this point against the Church of Rome,
that this their Doctrine is false, and does destroy the humane Nature of
Christ, and consequently destroy all the Articles of our Creed, which concern
Jesus Christ's humane nature, and consequently our Salvation? And is not this a
fundamental point of faith, that true believers persons are justified before
God by the righteousness of Christ imputed to them, and applied by faith alone?
Is it not the main drift of the Apostle to prove and settle the Romans and
Galatians in this truth, That believers persons are not justified before God by
their own good works, even of that Law of which c^meth the knowledge of sin,
Romans 3. 20, Therefore by the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified
in his sight; for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. Yea, does not the Apostle
say, that if he shall teach justification of our persons before God, by our own
good works, he should frustrate the grace of God, that is, overthrow the Gos^el
of Jesus Christ? for if righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in
vain, Gal. 2. 21. And could these great Grandees who imposed and took
subscription to the Book of Homilies upon and from others, be ignorant of what
the Church of England holds therein, especially this, Whosoever denies this
Doctrine, THAT FAITH ALONE JUSTIFIES is not to be accounted a Christian man,
nor a setter forth of Gods glory, but for an adversary to Christ and his
Gospel, and for a setter forth of man's vain glory; that 'twere the greatest
arrogance and presumption of man, that Antichrist could set up against God, to
affirm, that a man might by his own works take away and purge his own sin, and
justify himself: Homily of Salvation of Mankind, p. 16, 17. Now because some
of our English conforming Divines have by their Preachings and Writings, said,
that most of these ensuing false Doctrines I Heylin in his Introduction to his
Cypr. Angl. p. 36. S. 36.
have renounced (all which the Church of Rome holds and maintains) are the
Doctrines of the Church of England; and thereby induced many persons to believe
and allow them: I have to prevent the growing mischief of this grand deceit,
and to vindicate the Church of England from these calumnies, and to inform the
ignorant and inconsiderate, that have subscribed, assented and consented to the
Articles of Religion, and Homilies of the Church of England, but never
thoroughly read and considered them, spent as much of my time with my pen as
could be spared from my fork and rake this Harvest, whiles many great
Conformists to the Ceremonies and Government enjoy their Plurality of
Benefices, besides their great dignities, but labor not in the Word and
Doctrine, much less preach or write against these gross Popish Doctrines, but
rather preach or print them, to the great dishonor of God, especially of Jesus
Christ, the increase of Popery and Atheism, and the great grief of those godly
Christians that are Protestants indeed and in truth, as well as in profession.
Antichrist professes the Creed as well as these men, yet by his superinduced
Doctrines and practices, he overtbrows it. So these men of long Name, may
profess, subscribe and assent to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and yet
by superinduced Doctrines, contradict and destroy it; for they give not an
internal assent to it, as was observed before out of Mr. Fowler' s Free
Discourse, p. 305. And whether those men do not play the Hypocrites, let the
world judge.

The Pope of Rome in div^ding Rome unto 25 Priests (the fatal squar^-root of
the number of the Beast 666) laid the foundation of his I^olatrous and
tyrannous Kingdom, long before his Supremacy was perfected, yea claimed. He
arose out of the earth, as grass by little and little, insensibly; so possibly
may a Pontifex Maximus with such a number of such Priests in time ^o elsewhere;
especially if rulers and ruled are willing to be ridden by them. Of all Beasts
the two horned Beast is the most dangerous to be ridden by; next, that which is
most like him, as may be seen by comparing the 13 and the 17 Chapters of the
Revelation^, but especially by Revel. 14. 9, If any man worship the Beast and
his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into
the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone,
in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb; and the
smoke of their torment ascended up for ever and ever, and they have no rest day
nor night, who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives the
mark of his name. They that follow Christ bear the name of the Lamb, and his
Fathers, in their foreheads, which break not their faith; whereby they have
bound themselves in Baptism to the Lamb as their General, and to his Father;
and do not backslide to the worship and pomps of Satan and his Angels, his
works, his world, and inventions, that is, to his Idolatrous worship, and the
furniture thereof; and all they which have received the mark of the Beast, have
refused the mark of Christ and his Father, they have forsaken it, and made it
void, and are accounted as if they had not received it; only these 144000 which
had not fled over to the camps of the Beast, but did closely stick to the Lamb,
do show the Lords mark as yet in their foreheads; As Mr. Mede shows out of the
ancient Fathers in his Comment upon Revel. 14. Christ's followers are they which
have not defiled themselves with women, for they are Virgins, That is, says
Mr. Mede, They converse not with unchaste women; but what manner of women are
these? surely not such as are commonly called such, but cities (according to
the usual phrase of the Prophets) and those indeed Christian in name, but
addicted to Idols, whose Queen is great Babylon, called the mother of harlots,
with whom the Kings and inhabitants of the earth commit fornication; with such,
those who are the company of Christ, have not conversed; that is, they have not
defiled themselves with Idolatry* for they are Virgins, that is, free from all
spot of Idolaty: For the reason of the Analogy does altogether require that
these be called Virgins in the same sense wherein the rest, the Kings and the
people, are said to play the Harlots with Babylon. Furthermore, since Babylon
is called the mother of harlots, it follows that her daughters, the other
cities, be likewise petty-harlots, with whom the inhabitants subject to each of
them, may be defiled with spiritual Idolatry. Now Bellar. de effec.
Sacramentorum, l 2. c. 31. a. 20.
Bellarmine (the great Champion for Papists) says, That their Ceremonies are
chief characters and badges of their Religion; and he will have Catholics to
be discerned from Heretics, and other Sects of all sorts, even by Ceremonies.

And Thomas Aquin. Sum. 12ae. q. 103. a. 4. Omnes ceremoniae sunt
protestationes fidei, in qua consistit interior Dei cultus, etc.
Aquinas (their Angelical Doctor, as they call him) says, That all Ceremonies
are Protestations of faith, in which the inward worship of God does consist,
and that profession of faith or Religion, may be made by deeds as well as by
words; and therefore Baldum de casibus conscientiae communio rituum est
symbolum communionis in religione. l. 2. c. 14. cas. 7. Adhuc dico Episcopis
and Presbyteris in Domino quicunque cum Judaeis Pascha egerit aut solemnia
dieri^ festorum eorum susciperit, comporticipabit eis, qui Dominum and
apostolos ejus occiderunt. Ignatius ad Philadelph. Epist.
(as he concludes) they that use the Ceremonies of the Jews, thereby profess
themselves to be of their Religion; and Communion in Rites, is a sign of
Communion in Religion* Says Baldwin, they that did eat of the Jewish
Sacrifices, were partakers of the Altar, 1 Cor. 10. 18. That is, says Pareus,
Socios Judaicae religionis and cultus se profitebantur: that is, they professed
themselves to be companions with them of their Religion. For the Jews by their
Sacrifices did establish a mutual union in one and the same Religion. And hence
Dr. Fulk notes, That the Apostle in that place does compare Sacraments, with
the Altars, Hosts and Sacrifices of the Jews and Gentiles in that point, which
is common to all Ceremonies. viz. to declare them that use them, to be
partakers of that Religion whereof they be Ceremonies. And upon this account
have professed Papists. as Harding in his Epistle before the Preface to his
Confutation of the Apology; and Martial in his Epistle before his Tract of the
Cross, and the Author of the Apologetical Epistle for the English Papists,
Sect. 7. very boldly professed, That they believed that Queen Elizabeth liked
well of their Religion, because she retained and maintained their Ceremonies.
And Gretzer a Jesuit calls Conformists in Gretzer de Festis, l. 1 c. 2. quoted
by ^^r. Collier a Conformist, in his Appendix to his Vindiciae Thesium de
Sabbatho.
England, Calvino-Papistae upon this account: Calvino-Papistae Angli, ut in
aliis quae ad ritus and ^eremonias pertinent long liberaliores sunt quam
Puritani in Gallia, Germania, Belgia, ita and in festis retinendis long
^argiores. That is the English Calvin-Papists as they are more free in other
things which belong to rites and ceremonies, than the Puritans in France,
Germany, and the Netherlands; so they are much more large in retaining Feasts.

And Mr. Parker of the Cross, c. 9. Sure our Church was then more Calvinistical
than Arminian or Melanctonean, though Dr. Heylin would make us believe the
latter; else Papists would not have called our Conformists Calvino-Papistae,
but rather Lutherano-Papistae, or Melanctono-Papistae.
shows out of a Book entitled, Concertatio Ecclesiae Catholicae in Anglia
contra, Calvino-Papistatas and Puritanos: That the Papists did daily invite
them to an association against the Puritans. And Mr. Prin in his Quench-coal
informed King Charles the First, that Bishop White in a Dedicatory Epistle of
one of his Books of the Sabbath, finds fault with those men that repute or call
us Schismatics from the Roman Church at this day, because most (as he says)
but Puritans and Presbyterians are perfectly reconciled to it. And it is
reported to be the judgment of Spalato, (one of the reconcilers of the Church
of England to Vid. the Bishop of Durham's Narration, p. 32.
Rome,) That the Churches of Rome and England (excluding Puritans) were
radically the same. Dr. Antichrist demonstrated, c. 11. ^^ct. 26.
Abbot (afterward Bishop) calls all the Priests garments, whereby they are
distinguished from the rest of the Church, a special part of the Character of
the Beast. Pareus upon the place approves Dr. Abbots Exposition of the place,
and places the common mark of the Beast to be in the observation of
Antichrists Festival days, and the rest of his Ceremonies, which are not
commanded by God. Mr. Cartwright upon the place refers the sigh of the Cross
to the mark of the Beast. Dionis. Carthusianus Upon Revel. 13. 13.
says, That conformity to the Doctrine and life of Antichrist, is the mark of
the Beast; and upon this account did Vid. General Confession of Faith of the
Church and Kingdom of Scotland, to be seen at the end of the Harmony of
Confessions.
King James renounce and detest the Bishop of Rome's five bastard Sacraments
with all his rites, ceremonies, and false doctrine, added to the administration
of the true Sacraments, without the word of God. It Is observed by Mr. Mede,
that one may receive the number of the name of the Beast, that is, his
impieties, and yet not receive the mark of his name; that is, not subject
himself to his authority. Which is exemplified in the Greek Church, who embrace
the same form of impiety derived from the Dragon, or the Idolatry of the
Latins, and yet refuse to be subject to the Latin Bishop, or to bear his name.
So may others refuse to subject themselves to the supreme authority of
Antichrist, and to be called Papists, and yet they may embrace his Altars,
Images, Fasts, Feasts, Ceremonies, forms of Worship, Government, Laws* Number,
yea and many of his Antichristian Doctrines, and like well of much, if not of
almost all of that he holds and does, and yet will be called Protestants; and
take it very ill at the Papists hands, when they call them Calvino-Papistae,
Calvin-Papists, that is partly Papists, and partly Protestants, such as hold
with the Papists, and yet profess with the Protestants; Mungrels, as Bishop
Abb^t called them in his Sermon above; have great charity for professed (...),
but cr^el hatred for real Protestants; account true Calvinism heresy, yea
little less than Treason, (as Knot the Jesuit told some of our Mungrels) but
gross Popery, yea blasphemy in doctrine, to be but error, and more tolerable
than Presbytery; and Popery in practice to be indifferent, and therefore lawful
and commendable. Many of these Heresies and errors I have renounced, are by
some of our Mungrels called the Doctrines of the Heylin's Introd. to his
Cyprianus Anglic.
Church of England; and Books have been printed, if not licensed to confirm it,
but very falsely and slanderously; except by Church of England they understand
a faction; for sure I am, that the true and whole Church of England ^olds
soundly against all these ensuing false Doctrines renounced. Only her doctrine,
at least practice, about Apocriphal Scriptures, is not (I fear so full and
clear, as (I believe) it might be. Some men's plausible Sermons are abroad,
which are by too many persons swallowed down, without due examination: It Is
said by one, a learned man, That God does only Dr. Till. Ser.
offer grace in his Gospel, but he forces none to receive it. To prevent
mistakes, I say and acknowledge, 1. That God does not force men against their
wills to accept of the grace and assistance that he does offer them; but I deny
that Quo minus tolerabilis est eorum inscitia* qui Evangelium communiter ita
Offer^i fingunt, ut promiscu^ liberum sit omnibus salutem fide amplecti. Calvin
in 1 Cor. 2. 14.
God does only offer assistance or grace to his children; for, though he do not
convert them against their wills, whether they will or no; yet he takes away
their hearts of stone, and gives them hearts of flesh, and makes them of
unwilling to become willing in the day of his power, Psalm. 110. 3. He works
in them to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. 2. I acknowledge
that Reprobates may finally resist the ineffectual grace of God. 3. I affirm,
that the elect of God to Salvation, shall not, cannot finally withstand the
effectual grace of God, but that they shall at one time or other be effectually
called, converted, and eternally saved. And 4. That God who has from all
eternity elected them to the end, everlasting Salvation, has also appointed
them to the means conducing to the attainment of it; as Faith in Christ,
Repentance for sin, sincere obedience to the Law of God, and perseverance in
the same to the end.

Though I have not used many Arguments to confute every particular Error (that
would have been Voluminous) yet I have sufficiently confuted them, and proved
that Papists and Protestants Religion differ; or, that the Church of Rome and
Protestants hold a different Religion, which was the main design of my
undertaking; and in alleging the Doctrine of the Church of England, I should
(I conceive) if I had done no more, he thought to have done enough, to
convince, if not professed Papists, yet those that pretend to be the most
dutiful Sons of the Church of England, that these Doctrines are not Protestant,
but rather Popish, and at least contrary to their Professions, Subscriptions,
and Declarations, as well as to Gods word, and keep others from embracing, and
imbibing, and spreading of them.

If by alleging the Sermons, Speeches and Writings of any learned Conformist
heretofore, I have displeased any of our great Conformists now, I hope they
will excuse and pardon me, and blame them that printed and licensed them, or
themselves, or others that have traduced or suffered the Truth to be
bespattered or gainsayed, or undermined by any Pelagian, Arminian, Socinian or
Popish writer, upon any pretense whatsoever.

And now my prayer to the God of Peace and Truth for England is, That Gods true
Religion may be settled here, in its power and purity; and that all Popery in
Doctrine and Discipline, and Worship, may be burned with fire, Revel. 17. 16.
that is (as learned Dr. Moor expounds the place) utterly consumed; and to this
end, that God who has the hearts of Kings and all men in his hands, would
incline the heart of our King and Parliament, and all sorts of people, to deny
themselves, and resign up themselves wholly to be guided by the will of God
revealed in the Canonical Scriptures, which ought to be the rule of all men's
actions, as our Book of Homil. for Rogat on Week* Part 3. p 230* Homil against
Wilful Rebellion, Part 6. p. 318.
Homilies plainly declares, which says thus, In Gods word Princes must learn
how to obey God, and to govern men; in Gods word Subjects must learn obedience
both to God, and their Princes. Is our reverend Fathers of the Church would
stick close to the sound and necessary Articles of Religion established, which
concern the Doctrine of the true Christian Faith, and the Sacraments, to Anno 3
Edw. 6. c. 11.
which only all Ministers were bound to subscribe and give their assent, and
countenance men that do so, and discountenance all those that hold or vent any
Doctrine against the same, and not stand too much upon those things which they
have devised to uphold their own worldly power and interests, and abate those
things that are not of themselves, or by Divine institution, necessary and
edificative of the whole flock of Christ, but are only made or said to be so by
the will of man, carrying a real appearance of evil, and are scandalous to
Papists and Protestants, and establish such modes of Religious worship as are
most conformable to the Gospel-rule, and primo-primitive practice, and not too
like to, and inductive of the Government and form of worship of the Apostatical
and Antichristian Church of Rome; I verily believe they would have more dutiful
Sons, and good Friends, than now they have; and the Church and Kingdom would
have more peace and prosperity; to which God of his great mercy incline their
hearts. However, I beseech them to let their moderation be known to all men.
And I entreat all people without making any tumults upon any pretense
whatsoever, in their own places and callings quietly to endeavor, and
earnestly expect and pray for an amendment of what is amiss in Church and
State; to fear God, and honor the King, and submit to those that are in
authority under him. And so God keep you all.

September. 29. 1673. R. R. B. D.

The particular Doctrines renounced are these.
I. THat the Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper, after the Priests pronouncing
these words, with intention, [This is my Body, and this is my Blood] are turned
or transubstantiated into the substance of Christ's Body and Blood. II. That
Christ is really more present on the high Altar or Communion Table, as on his
Throne or Chair of State, than in the Pulpit or Font, etc. and that therefore
more corporal bowing, or more bodily reverence is due to the Altar or
Communion Table, than to the Pulpit or Font. III. That men's persons are
justified or accounted righteous before God for their own good works that
follow Faith, either in part or in whole, and not for the merits of Jesus
Christ alone. IV. That Faith that does justify Believers persons before God,
is a bare and naked assent to the truth; and that so, and as an act, habit, or
work in us, it justifies. V. That the persons of true Believers in Christ are
not justified before God by the righteousness of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ imputed to them on Gods part, and apprehended and applied by Faith alone
on their part. VI. That men's foreseen faith, repentance, good works, etc. were
the true causes moving God to elect them to eternal Salvation. VII. That men
unregenetate or in the state of nature, have by their own free will power
sufficient of themselves to turn themselves to God, to believe in Jesus Christ,
repent, and do good work^ acceptable to God, when they will; and also finally
to resist the efficacious grace of God in converting an elected sinner to
himself. VIII. That truly regenerated persons cannot be certain of their
eternal Salvation, but may totally and finally fall away from the acts and
habits of saving Grace, before they die, and be eternally damned. IX. That the
corruption of our nature, commonly called Original sin, which remains in
truly regenerated persons after Baptism, is not properly sin. X. That mere men
in this life, since Adams fall, can perfectly fulfill Gods whole Moral Law, and
also voluntarily do good works besides and above Gods Commandments, which they
call works of Supererogation, which are (as they say) greater and holier than
the works of the Moral Law, and do merit remission of sin, and eternal life,
not only for themselves, but also for others. XI. That unregenerated men's own
good works, do make them meet to receive grace from God, or (as the School
Doctors say) deserve grace of congruity. XII. That the good works of
^^regenerated men do, ex condigno, merit at Gods hands, eternal life. XIII.
That there is a place after this life called Purgatory, wherein the souls of
believers dying since Christ's Resurrection, are purged from sins by penal
satisfaction, which were not purged in this life so fully as they ought, that
they may enter into Heaven. XIV. That the Pope of Rome successively, or the
Papacy, is not the Antichrist of which the Scripture writes. XV. That it is
lawful to set up and suffer Images of the Sacred Trinity, of God the Father, of
God the Son, or Crucifixes, Of God the Holy Ghost, or of Saints departed this
life, which have been worshipped in Temples or Churches, where Gods people do
usually meet to worship God. XVI. That those Books which are commonly called
Apocryphal Scriptures, as Tobit, Judith, etc. are the pure word of God, and in
all things agreeable thereunto. XVII. That the Pope or Bishop of Rome is the
supreme Head of the Universal Church of Christ, above all Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Pastors, People and Churches. The Articles of Lambeth. The Doctrine of
the Churches of England and Ireland. Arminianism is not the Doctrine of the
Church of England. Notes taken out of King James his Declaration against
Vorstius King James no friend to Arminianism.

A Renunciation OF SEVERAL Popish Doctrines, BECAUSE Contrary to the Doctrine
of the Church of ENGLAND.
IN general, I renounce and detest all Popish false Doctrine, and all Popish,
Superstitious and Idolatrous Worship, and practices, and the real appearances
thereof; and in particular I renounce and detest these that follow:

ARTICLE I.
That the Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper, after the Priests pronouncing
these words with intention, This is my Body, and this is my Blood, are turned
or transubstantiated into the substance of Christ's Body and Blood. This I
renounce, because it is contray to the Doctrine of the Church of England;
which, Article 28th. faith thus, Transubstantiation, or the change of the
substance of bread and wine in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by holy
Writ, but is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture; overthrows the Nature
of the Sacrament, and has given occasion to many Superstitions. The Body of
Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper only after an heavenly and
spiritual manner: and the mean whereby the Body of Christ is received and eaten
in the Supper, is faith. And Homily of the worthy receiving the Sacrament, it
says thus: It is well known that the meat we seek for in the Supper, is
spiritual food, the nourishment of our souls, an heavenly refection, and not
earthly; invisible meat, and not bodily; a ghostly substance, and not carnal.
p. 200. It Is also contrary to the Church of England's declaration concerning
kneeling at the end of the Communion-service: The Sacramental bread and wine
remain still in their very natural substances, therefore may not be adored (for
that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians) and the natural
body and blood of our Savior Christ are in heaven, and not here, it being
against the truth of Christ's natural body to be at one time in more places than
one.

This declaration is not only against the Papists Transubstantiation, but also
fully against the Lutherans Consubstantiation, viz. That Christ's body and blood
is really and corporally in the bread and wine: Both which erroneous opinions
destroy the humane nature of Christ, and consequently all those Articles of our
Creed which concern the bodily part of his humane nature, and depend upon the
verity thereof. Besides, Transubstantiation is also contrary to Canonical
Scripture, Mat. 26. 29, But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this
fruit of the Vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers
Kingdom. Where it is clear, that the wine which he drank and gave to his
Disciples, and which they did drink, was naturally the fruit of the Vine, and
not the natural blood of Christ, but called his blood Sacramentally, because it
did by the institution of Christ, signify or represent the blood of Christ; as
Circumcision by a like Sacramental phrase, is called the Covenant, Genesis 17. 10,
11, This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed
after thee; every man-child among you shall be circumcised, and ye shall
circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the Covenant
betwixt me and you. Lo here, Circumcision, which is properly but a sign of the
Covenant, that was made between God and Abraham, and his seed, as it is called
in the 11th. verse, is yet in the 10th. verse figurative, or if you will,
Tropically called the Covenant, because 'twas a sign of it by Gods special
appointment; and so these words, This is my body, and this is my blood, Mat.
26. 26, 28. are to be understood. If the bread which he did eat, and the wine
which he drank and gave to his Disciples, and that they did eat and drink, had
been Christ's body and blood corporally and naturally, then Christ and his
Disciples did eat his natural humane body, and drink his natural humane blood;
which is not only blasphemous to be spoken against Christ, and slanderous
against his holy Apostles; but also improbable to be done, and directly against
Gods word, Genesis 9. 4. But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood
thereof, shall ye not eat; and if not of beasts, then sure not of man. And it is
contrary (as well as Consubstantiation) to Act. 3. 21. The Heavens must contain
him (that is Christ) until the times of restitution of all things. If Christ be
corporally according to his humane nature in Heaven, than he is not corporally
present in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; for his body is not, cannot be in
two The Papists Decrees; Decr. p. 3. Did. 2. c. 44. say thus, Corpus Domini in
quo resurrexit uno loco esse oportet. The body of our Lord, wherein he rose,
must be in one place.
proper places; distant the one from the other (as Heaven and that Sacrament
are) at one and the same instant of time. That he was not in two places at one
time while he was here on earth, read Mat. 28. 5, 6, And the Angel answered and
said unto the women, Fear not ye, for I know that ye seek Jesus which was
crucified, he is not here; for he is risen; and he said, come, see the place
where the lord lay. Read also Mark* 16. 5, 6, They went into the Sepulcher,
etc. And Luke 24. 6. is the same relation and demonstration; and verse. 12. is
one circumstance more: Peter ran unto the Sepulcher, and stooping down he
beheld the linen clothes laid by themselves, but found not Jesus there. And
verse. 23, The women found not his body in the Sepulcher. And verse. the 24th.
Certain men went to the Sepulcher and found it as the women had related, but
him they saw not. Read also Joh. 20, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and there you will see
more of Christ's Resurrection, and that his body was not in the grave. Tha^ his
body cannot be in two proper places at once, is also evident, because every
body is circumscribed with his own proper place. Christ's body is a true humane
body, as our bodies are, and therefore cannot be in two proper places at one
and the same time; and the proper place of Christ's proper body cannot be a
little bit o^ bread or wafer, but his proper place is and must be
proportionable to the quantity or extension of the parts of his body; and to
affirm, that Christ's natural humane body is in Heaven, and in the Sacrament
too, properly and circumscriptively, is to affirm, that his body is properly in
a thousand places at once. To affirm that Christ's body* is essentially,
substantially, and truly present in the Elements of the Sacrament of the Supper
(as Dr. Laurence, with Papists, does) does necessarily imply a contradiction,
to wit, Court-Sermon, p. 18.
that his body is a true humane body, and that it is not a true humane body;
which two Propositions cannot be true of the same subject at the same time.
Idem non potest esse and non esse: God has absolute power (as Thomas Aquinas
speaks truly) over the whole nature of the creature, but not so as that he
should cause it to be, and not to be, at once. The object of Gods power (as the
Jesuits confess) is whatsoever implies not a contradiction in it self; now that
the self-same body should sit down, and not fit down, should be visible and not
visible, should be divisible, and not divisible, should be here and yet
elsewhere, should be one, and yet many, are manifest contradictions, says
Bishop Hall in his no peace with Rome, Sec. 18. p. 658. of his Works.

Moreover, it is contrary to 1 Cor. 11. 26. As often as ye shall eat this bread,
(not Christ's real body) and drink this wine, (not Christ's real blood of his
body) ye show forth the Lords death till he come: and therefore he is not come
corporally, which he is and must be, if he be in that Sacrament corporally
under the forms of bread and wine. And besides, this Doctrine of
Transubstantiation overthrows the nature of the Sacrament, as the Church of
England says truly; for where there is no Element or sign, there can be no
Sacrament; and there is no Element if the bread and wine be turned into the
substance of Christ's body and blood. Ergo, it is false.

Finally, It has been the occasion of much Superstition and Idolatry, as the
Church of England says in her 28th. Article; for from hence proceeded the
reservation of the transubstantiated bread for sundry There is a Minister in
place that I know, who uses to keep some of the Sacr mental bread, and gives
it to sick persons to cure them.
superstitious purposes; hence the adoration of the bread injoined, even as God
himself; hence carrying the Wafer-god about in pompous Processions; hence the
Popish Feast called Corpus-Christi day. Yea hence, I mean from Christ's real or
corpor^l presence in the Sacrament, came kneeling, or adoration at receiving
the bread and wine at the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as may be gathered
from Dr. Heylin's words, who says thus, That both the Lutherans as well as the
Catholics knew, that if Christ be not really present in the Sacrament, there
is no reverence due to the Elements or Sacrament, History of Presbytery, p. 2.
He must mean by his real presence a corporal presence, as Papists Fox Acts and
Monuments, p. 1416. in one Volume.
our godly Martyrs, learned Scottish Oath or Confession of Faith commanded by
King James.
King James, and many others understood, and do so understand the phrase; else
he speaks not ad rem to the purpose: For if he mean a spiritual presence, so
Christ is in the Sacrament of Baptism, and in all his Ordinances; and yet he
says not that there is such a bodily reverence due to it or them, as he and
his party plead, is due unto the Elements in the Sacrament of the Lords*
Supper. And what he means by his Reverence, Bishop Prideaux knew right well he
meant kneeling, in his former Books put forth in his time, who in his
Fasciculus Controversiarum, loc. 4. Sec. 3. q. 6. p. 241. says thus, That
kneeling is Godfry Goodman Bishop of Gloucester preached at Court the 5. Sunday
in Lent for the real corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the
Supper, which made no small stir; but that was taken up, as Heylin says, Cypr.
Anglic. l 2. Yet whatsoever he was taught to say by Bishop Andrews and Laud, he
was, and lived, and died a Papist, and so declared himself, as Heylin himself
confesses in his Cypr. Anglic. l. 4. p. 446.
injoined only as a thing indifferent, and is received of our men as a gesture
of the highest reverence due to so great a mystery. Mark it, he says it is
received of our men as a gesture to so great a mystery, and a gesture of the
highest reverence; he spoke or wrote not his own, but their sense. And that
which they call reverence, Bishop Sparrow plainly calls adoration. For in his
Rationale, p. 273. he says, That it is the duty of people to receive kneeling,
for it is a sin not to adore when we receive this Sacramen. And Dr. Kellet in
his allowed Tricennium, p. 637. 654, 655, 620. says, That the presence of
Christ in the Sacrament is such, as the Eucharist it self must be adored; and
that if any desire proof that the Eucharist is to (...) adored* he advises him
to read ^ taken with the peoples ^ in for^ of ^ form of the Crucifix may ^ in
the eating or handling ^ and that the people* ^ of the cup of a silver pipe;
and that sitting, ^^ Communion, (...) of the But did the Apostles and the
Primitive Christians, who kneeled not, profane the Sacrament, and sin against
God by so doing? or was the Sacrament then not so worthy as it is now? or rather
were not men then more Christian than now?
Lord's Supper; and that not only the Eucharist it self, but also the very Altar
upon which it lies, must be adored. What Laud thought of this matter, you will
see in the next particular; and I doubt not but you will find him of the same
judgment, and as superstitious as they, and one of those whom Bishop Prideaux
meant by our men. And Dr. Sutton Dr. Sutton' s Godly Meditations, c. 33. p.
179, and p. 182
, a Prebend of Westminster, pleads for kneeling at receiving the Sacrament upon
such a moral account, as if God our Maker were more present in the bread and
wine, than in the water in Baptism, and in any other Ordinance; for he urges
Psalm. 95. 6, O come let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our
Maker; as if God by the Prophet in that place of Scripture did call upon all
the members of his Church to worship, fall down, and kneel before him in the
bread and wine at the Sacrament, in a religious state put before them in the
act of receiving, and so make Christ and his holy Apos^les, and all others that
use not that gesture, transgressors. And the learned Papists holds, That if the
Elements, bread and wine in the Sacrament, be not turned really into Christ's
body and blood, kneeling at receiving them is not lawful; but that it is
Idolatry, if any created substance remain there, So Aquinas 3. q. 75. Hardings
Answer to Bishop Jewels Challenge, fol. 111. a. Bellarmine de Sacramento
Eucharistia, l. 2. c. 8. (...) ^. and cap. 13. a 5. and cap. 24. q. 6. Of the
same mind were Scotus, and Durand, and therefore they removed the bread out of
the Sacrament, as Bishop Jewel shows in his Sermon upon 1 Cor. 11. 23. p. 52.
What many of our men have written in favor of Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation, may be seen in Laudensium Autocatacrisis, p. 107, 108. and
the Supplement thereunto, c. 3. p. 34, 35.

ART. II.
That Christ is really more present on the high Altar or Communion Table, as on
his Dr. Pocklington, Altar Christianum, c. 24. p. 175. vide p. 8. hujus.
Throne or Chair of State, than in the Pulpit or Font, etc. and that therefore
more corporal bowing, or more bodily reverence is due to the Altar, or
Communion Table, than to the Pulpit or Font. THis I renounce, because it is
contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, contained in the declaration
after the Communion-service concerning kneeling, which says, That by kneeling
no adoration is intended, or ought to be done, either unto the Sacramental
bread and wine there bodily received, or unto any corporal presence of Christ's
natural flesh and blood; for the Sacramental bread and wine remain still in
their very natural substances, and therefore may not be adored, (for that were
Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians) and the natural body and
blood of our Savior Christ are in heaven, and not here, it being against the
truth of Christ's natural body to be at one time in more places than one. For if
bodily reverence or adoration be not due to the Elements, which are signs of
Christ's body and blood, as broken and shed for us, then certainly they are not
due to the Table or Altar on which they are but set; and if it be Idolatry to
be abhorred of all faithful Christians to adore the Sacramental bread and wine,
then much more it is Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians, to
adore or bodily to bow purposely to the high Altar, or Communion Table on which
they are but set. Now that this corporal bowing purposely to the Altar or
Communion Table, is religious, and adoration, I prove thus by our own men. Aris
Dei ad^eniculari est adorare sacrosanctum altar, To bow to Gods altars, is to
adore the holy altar, says Dr. Kellet in his Tricennium, p. 644. Papists say
there is a Worship due to the Cross, ratione contactus, because Christ's body
touched it; and therefore they adore it, but they call it (...), reverence or
honor. So A B. Aquin. 3a. part q 25. a. 4. c. A. B. Laud in his Star Chamber
Speech, p. 47. A B. Laud's Injunctions to Merton-Colledg, Habeant debitam
reverentiam ad mensam Domini. Heylin's Cypr. Anglic. l. 4. p. 403. Altar
Christianum, cap. 24. p. 175. A. B. Laud's Star Chamber Speech, page 48. l. 18.
Laud, and Dr. Pocklington argue for bodily reverence to the holy Altar, or
Gods board, as they call it. The Altar is the greatest place of Christ's
residence upon earth, yea greater than the Pulpit; for there it is hoc est
corpus meum, this is my body; but in the Pulpit, it is at most but hoc est
verbum meum, this is my word. And a greater reverence (no doubt) is due to the
body than to the word of our Lord: and so in relation answerably to the throne
where his body is usually present, than to the seat where his word uses to be
proclaimed. Yea, the Archbishop expressly calls this corporal bowing to, or
toward the Altar, true Divine worship: and he pleads for it upon a moral
account in his Star Chamber Speech, p. 44, 45. O come let us worship and fall
down and kneel before the Lord, Psalm. 95. 6. And in the 49 page of that Speech
he says, That the Knights of the Garter are bound by their Order and Oath to
give due honor and reverence, Domino Deo and Altari ejus in modum virorum
Ecclesiasticorum, to the Lord God, and to his Altar, and this in the manner, as
Ecclesiastical persons both worship and do reverence. That is in plain English,
as 'twas done in the time of King Henry the fifth, by Idolatrous Priests in
time of Popery, which without doubt was worship, not mere civil, but as he
calls it, divine worship. And Dr Pocklington in his Altar Christianum, c. 24.
p. 175. says thus, For as much as God has put it into the hearts of the
Governors of our Church to restore the Lords-Table to the ancient and true
place it had in the Primitive Church, and also to the honor and reverence
which of right belongs to it, in regard of the presence of our Savior, whose
chair of state it is upon earth. Which honor and reverence he necessarily
implies was adoration; for chap. 21. p. 144. of the same Book he says, they
honor, reverence, and adore toward it for his sake, whose Sacrament is
consecrated thereon. And chap. 16. p 107. he says, the Archbishop of
Constantinople (whose example he brings and pleads for it) did beseech his
people to be quiet, ut adoremus sanctum altar; that is, that we may worship or
adore the holy Altar: Religious reverence, it is and must be, that he says is
due to the holy Altar. Where it is observable that he makes, to adore, and to do
reverence, the same thing.

If bodily rev^rence purpos^ly performed to a religious thing, called the most
Pocklington's Alt^re Christ. p. 157.
holy place under the cope of heaven, set purposely in a religious place, or
most holy place, according to him, and upon religious accounts of Gods most
special presence, or Christ's true and real presence thereon, (Hoc est corpus
meum) be not religious or divine reverence, which is worship, I do acknowledge I
do not know what it is. But A. B. Laud says, That there is a reverence due to
the Altar, but such as comes far short of divine worship, Star Chamber Speech,
p. 49. But he does not plainly say what it is; mere civil worship he cannot
mean, for the reasons before given: a mere negative reverence (which is readily
yielded, is due) he cannot mean neither, for he pleads for a positive reverence
expressed by bowing Incurvation, is by consent of Nations an appropriate sign
of religious worship in a Temple, says Dr. H. More in his Mystery of Iniquity,
c. 11. p. 36. see more in him hereafter quoted, Art. 14. of this Book.
the body to the Altar, it must therefore be a religious reverence, which how
it does come far short of divine worship, I do not yet see; his Grace does not
tell us how to distinguish his reverence from divine worship. I think that A.
B. Laud's and his parties distinction between divine positive bodily worship,
and outward bodily positive reverence, expressed by incurvation or bowing of
the body to the holy Altar, for it is divine excellency, is not much unlike that
which the Papists make between their (...) and (...); they give outward divine
worship to their Images, but they call it only (...), reverence. And do not, A.
B. Laud, Dr. Heylin, and others of his party give the same divine bodily
reverence, bowing the body to the holy Altar as such, that they give God? but
they will not have it called divine worship, but only reverence. Which
distinction, says Bishop Jewel, is much like that of the Physicians wife* who
said, Pepper is cold in working, but hot in operation; for their distinction is
not in difference of matter, but only words* Cicero says to one, Bonum esse
negas, praepositum esse dicis, Thou will not have worldly wealth called bonum,
but only praepositum, do thou thereby any thing abate avarice? even so we
say; Mr. Harding, ye will not have adoration of Images called (...), but only
(...), but, Sir, do ye by this any thing abate Idolatry? So Bishop Jewel in his
Reply to Harding, Art. 14. D. 12. p. 381, 382. there ye may find Harding using
almost the same words for reverence to his Images, that our men use for
reverence to their Altars. It Is clear it is not a mere civil, nor mere negative
reverence that is by Papists and some of our men given to the holy and high
Altar; and it is as positive and as much external reverence as is given to God
himself, or would be given to Christ himself, if he were corporally present on
the Table; and it is the same for substance that Idolaters give to their
Altars, Images and Idols: and it is divine adoration when we bow the body upon
some divine cause, as Mr. Perkins says in his Idolatry of the last times, p.
824. Now yielding obeisance or outward reverence to, or toward the Altar, is
done upon a divine cause, viz. Gods special presence, and therefore it is called
by them, Gods Throne, Gods chair of State, and Gods mercy-seat. And the same
Mr. Perkins in the same Treatise, p. 828. says, That Images themselves,
Relics of Christ and Saints, holy things, as Temples, Altars, and such like,
are made Idols, when they are adored and worshipped with religious worship; for
when we bow to them, it is more than civil worship. And p. 830. of the same
Treatise, he says, That if we will keep our selves from Idols, we must take
heed of keeping of Idols, thas is Images that have been abused to Idolatry, and
are in likelihood still to be abused, especially if they stand in public
places. The commandment of God is to destroy the Idols of the heathen, their
altars, and their high places, Exodus 34. 13. Now it is acknowledged by A. B.
Laud and his party, That in the time of our first reforming this Church * Canon
7th. made Anno 1640.
from the gross superstition of the Papists, it was carefully provided, that
all means should be used to root out of the minds of people both the
inclination thereto, and the memory thereof, especially of the Idolatry
committed in the Mass, for which cause ell Popish altars were demolished. Now I
pray is it an effectual means to do these two things, to set up altars of wood
in their places, or tables of wood altarwise, as the Laudensians would have,
and bow to or toward them, as Papists did and do? is this according to Gods
Commandment.

But before I go further, to prevent mistakes, I say, that it is one thing for
men to kneel or bow before or toward a place, merely as a place, and another
thing to bow or kneel toward or to a place or thing, purposely and upon a
religious reason or respect, for some religious excellency or holiness that is
in it, or conceived to be in it more than in another place or thing. To kneel
or bow toward or before a place or thing the former way, is necessary or
unavoidable as to the action, it cannot be done without it: for a man cannot
kneel or bow, but some place or thing will be before him, as is to be seen in
prayer in the Church or field, or private house; but as to the person kneeling
or bowing, it is accidental and besides his intention: he kneels not, he bows
not purposely before or toward his feat, the Pultpit, Pew, East or West, North
or South, out of any religious respect to the seat or place, or because he
thinks there is more religious excellency or holiness in it, or because God is
more present there, or that way, than in another place or thing, or way; but
only because his seat or Pew is so placed, that he cannot conveniently stand or
kneel otherwise so well as that way. Now in this or this way there is no
Idolatry or superstition to bow toward or before the Communion Table, or East,
in time of Religious worship. But now your bowing once or twice, or three
times, at your entrance into the Church, and so often when you come in sight of
the holy Altar, and three times when you come near it, and three times when ye
go out of, or pass through the Church or Chancel, or by the holy Altar, and
this too when the Sacrament is not administered, is not casual, accidental, or
necessary, but purposed and intended in a religious respect to that place or
thing, not simply as toward a place, but as to an holy place, yea more holy
than other places; because you conceive Christ to be most specially prosent
there, and upon religious reasons which are not found to be in it by any
institution of God; which renders your worship superstitious, making it an
image or means of worship, against the second Commandment. Ye make it a
relative object and motive of worship, as Papists do their Images and
Crucifixes, and the Cross, Papists say they give no religious respect unto the
Tree or Cross whereon Christ was crucified, or to the Garments he wore, or
Manger in which he lay, or Spear that was thrust into his side, as materially
considered in themselves, but only quantum ad rationem contactus Aquin. 3a.
part, q. 25. a. 4. c. And Bellarmine says, that Imago non est capax, honor is
propter se, sed relative ad prototypum. Dr. Ames. Bell. Ener. l. 6. c. 5. p.
261.
membrorum Christi, in relation to and by reason of their touching the members
of Christ: (and then it will follow that Judas his lips ought to be worshipped)
and so says Shelford in his Sermon, p. 19. and so says A. B. Laud in his
Star Chamber Speech, p. 47. for he says, There it is hoc est corpus meum, and a
greater reverence (no doubt) is due to the body than to the word of our Lord;
and so in relation answerably to the Throne, where his body is usually present,
than to the seat whence his word uses to be proclaimed. And the Table or holy
Altar has some part of your divine worship imparted to it, making it an object
mediate, though not ultimate of your worship, and a motive to excite your
worship from some conceived excellency in it, though but relative, as Papists
make their A. B. Laud by statute made the Dean and Prebends of Canterbury to
swear that at their coming in and going out of the Choire, and all approaches
to the Altar, they would by bowing toward it, make due reverence to Almighty
God: as Dr. Heylin says, Cyp. Angl. l 4. p. 291, 292. where it is in the
Margent thus, Summa reverentia adorare Deum versus Altar.
Images, and are judged by your Divines to be therefore Idolatrous. You say
(says a reverend Divine) that you worship God before or toward the holy
Altar, yet without do^b^ some part of your worship sticks to the Altar
transiently and relatively. 1. Transiently, as making the Altar the objec^ of
your worship mediately, though no^ ultimately. 2. Relatively, as a motiv^ to
excite your worship for its more holiness than in any other part of the Church
(or Church-houshold-stuff, a^ Dr. Duncomb speaks in his Cambrid^
Determination.) Sure we are, Papists are more than suspected, even charged with
Idolatry by Protestant Divines for bowing before or toward Images, a^ ours do
before or toward the holy Table. For A. B. Laud's statute above.
though they do not directly and ultimately worship the Altar, yet they do
worship God, not only before or toward the Altar of their own devising, but
through and by the Altar, as much as Papists do by and through an Image, and (I
may add) as much as the Israelites did worship God by or through the Golden
Calf; they make it a mediate object and a relative motive of the^^ worship, and
so a devised medium of worship, contrary to the second Commandment. I cannot
see how they can acquit themselves o^ Altar-worship, but they must also acquit
Papists of Image Worship.

I have proved already that Christ's body is not corporally present in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, it must therefore be said, that his body is
there Sacramentally significatively. Sacramentum Bishop Jewel's Def of Apol c.
1. d. 3 p. 316.
vocatur corpus Christi id est significa^ corpus Christi: that is, the
Sacrament is called Christ's body, that is, it signifies Christ's body. But to
this I answer then, that the Sacramental presence of Christ's body on the holy
Altar, is no sufficient reason to prove that the said holy table or altar
whereon some times the Sacrament of his body is set or consecrated, (as Dr.
Pocklington speaks) is therefore to be adored, or religiously reverenced or
bowed corporally unto. For,

1. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper or signs of Christ's body and blood, are
not God, but are the good creatures of God; and therefore are not corporally to
be adored or religiously worshipped, or reverenced. For not only Dr. Om^^s
cultus religiosus Deo debetur. Bell. Enter. T. 2. l. 6. c. 5. p. 263.
Ames, but also A. B. A. B. Usher Sum of Chapter Relig. upon 2d Com. p. 229.
Usher informs us, That all religious worship and reverence is to be given to
God alone, and not imparted to those things which are not God at all. And
Bishop Ser. upon 1 Cor. 11. 23. p. 50.
Jewel says, that adoration belongs only to God, but is given to the Sacrament
without any warrant from Gods word. Christ that best knew what ought to be done
therein, when he ordained and delivered the Sacrament, appointed not that any
man should fall down to it, or worship it. St. Paul that took the Sacrament at
Christ's hands, and as he had taken it, delivered it to the Corinthians, yet
never willed adoration, Nor kneeling at receiving it.
or godly honor to be given to it. The old Doctors, St. Cyprian, Chrysostom,
Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine, and others that received the Sacrament at the
Apostles hands; and as it may be thought continued the same in such sort, as
they had received it, never made mention in any of their Books, of adoring or
worshipping of the Sacrament. It is a very new device, and as is well known,
came but lately into the Cburch, about 400 years past, Honorius being then
Bishop of Rome commanded the Sacrament to be lifted up, and the people
reverently to bow down to it. If the Sacrament for which you say the Altar or
Table is to be reverenced, be not adorable or religiously to be reverenced,
then certainly the Altar or Table is not religiously to be bowed to, as you do;
but the Sacrament I have proved above, is not religiously to be adored,
worshipped or reverenced; Ergo, the Table or Altar is not so religiously to be
adored, worshipped or reverenced.

2. If the holy Table set Altarwise be therefore religiously to be reverenced,
because Christ's body and blood is thereon Sacramentally, (corporally I have
proved above, he is not thereon) then I say, 1. That the Font should be so
reverenced, adored, and bowed to, because therein his body and blood is
Sacramentally present too, as Bishop Bishop Jewel's Reply to Harding, art. 5.
d. 10. p. 21.
Jewel shows out of St. Augustine and others: No man may doubt (says
Augustine) but that every faithful creature is then made partaker of Christ's
body and blood, when in Baptism he is made the member of Christ, And if A* B.
Laud's reason be good, the Star Chamber Speech, p 47. and so in relation to the
Throne where his body is usually present.
Font is more to be reverenced than the holy Table, because Christ is more
usually present there than on the Table; for the Sacrament o^ Baptism is there
more often administered than the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is on the Table,
and is for any thing I see, as holy as the Table, yea more holy by his reason.
2. If the Archbishops reason in the Margen be good; then should we much more
bodily bow to, or do reverence to the Pulpit, for there Christ's body and blood
is mostly. Quando St. Jerome in Psalm. ^47.
audimus Sermonem Domini, caro Christi and sanguis ej^^ in auribus nostris
funditur; that is, when we hea^^ the word of God, the flesh and the blood of
Christ i^ poured into our ears, says St. Jerome upon Psalm 147. quoted by
Bishop Jewel in his Reply to Harding, Art. 12. D. 5. p. 337. and St. Quest 1.
Interrogo p. 7.
Augustine says, Interrogo vos, etc. I demand of you this question, my
brethren, answe^ me, Whether think you is He means in dignity.
greater, the body of Christ (meaning thereby the Sacrament, says Bishop
Jewel) or the word of Christ? if ye will answer truly, this must we say, that
the word of God is no le^^ than the body of Christ. Which is directly contrary
to A. B. Laud's assertion and reason of it. And St. Jerome upon Psalm. 147.
says, Ego corp^^ Basilius says, Christ called his flesh and blood the whole
mystical Doctrine of his Gospel, which he published in his dispensation in the
flesh. Epist. ad Caesarienses, quoted by Bishop Jewel, Reply to Harding, a. 14.
d. 8. p. 375. Credere in eum est manducare panem vivum. August. Tract. 26. in
Johan.
Jesu Evangelium puto, and quamvis quol Christus dicit; qui non manducat mean
carnem, etc. possit intelligi de mysterio^ tamen verius corpus Christi and
sanguis ej^^ sermo scripturarum est. Joh. 6. 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of God, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you* That is, except ye
spiritually feed on Christ by faith (which may be done as well in hearing and
receiving the wor^ preached, as in receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
administered) ye have no spiritual life in you. That is, I take the body of
Jes^^ to be the Gospel. Although these words of Christ [he that eats not my
flesh, etc] may be taken of the Sacrament; yet in truer sense, the word of the
Scripture is the body of Christ. And In Exodus Hom. 13.
Origin says, Quod si corpus Christi ut^ inimitanta cautela, quomodo putatis
minoris esse periculi verbum Dei neglexisse, quam corpus ejus? If ye take such
heed in keeping the Sacrament, which is called his body, how can ye think there
is less danger in neglecting the word of God, than there is in neglecting the
Sacrament, which is called his body? If (says Bishop Jewel) the Sacrament were
in deed and really the body of Christ, and so our very Lord and God, thus to
compare it with the creature, and to make it inferior unto the same, as St.
Augustine, St. Jerome, Origin, and other godly Fathers do, it were great
blasphemy. This also is directly contrary to A. B. Laud's Doctrine; these
things, and many more Quotations, ye may see in Bishop Jewel's Reply to
Harding, Art. 21. D. 10. p. 451, 452. Besides, the bread and wine are
consecrated by the word of God and prayer, and therefore cannot be more eminent
than the word of God. The less is blessed of the better, Heb. 7. 7. 3. If the
Altar or holy Table be to be bowed to, more than the Pulpit, because it is
Christ's Throne, his Mercy-seat, and Chair of State; then it will follow, that
the Pulpit is as adorable, or to be bowed to as much as, if not more, than the
holy Table: For, 1. the Pulpit is called the Tribunal of the Church. 2. Though
I find not in any ancient orthodox Author, that the Communion Table is called a
Throne, either of God or man; Cyprian. l. 4. Epist. 5. quoted by Dr.
Pocklington, Altar Christianum c. 8. p. 44.
yet I find in Athanas. in Epist. ad Vitam solitariam agentes.
Athanasius, that the Pulpit is called Thronum, a Throne; and that which you
call Altar, is called mensam ligneam, a wooden board; for so learned Jewel.
Def. of Apol. 3 d. part, c. 1. d. 3. p. 315.
Bishop Jewel Englisheth Athanasius his words. 2. The Pulpit is more like a
Throne than the holy Table is; for a Throne is an higher and more eminent seat
than others; a Pulpit is a Chair on high, with a Canopy over it. And such Dr.
Pocklington Altar Christianum, page 44, 46.
tells us, was the Pulpit, and the Chair that St. John sat in when he ordained
Bishops, which he calls a Throne; and that Bishops did sit in their Throne in
the Presbytery, and that there was the holy Altar. Be-like then the Bishop sat
cheek by jole, as in commission with God Almighty; as your Dr. Sutton
scoffingly speaks in his Dr. Sutton' s Meditat. upon the Sacram. c. 33. p. 179.
Meditations upon the Sacrament, against those persons that sit, and d^ not
kneel at receiving the Sacrament. Yea, he si^ above God Almighty, if what
Bishop Rationale, page 378, 379.
Sparro^ says, be true; for he says, That the Bishop (...), Throne or seat,
was higher tha^ others, and right under it stood the Altar o^ holy Table, the
Propitiatory, Christ's Monument, and the Tabernacle of his Glory, the shop of
the great Sacrifice. 2. The Pulpit may more properly be called Gods Merc^ seat,
than the Communion Table or Altar is: 1. Because in the Pulpit God usually
proclaims his mercy to all penitent and believing sinners, and induces them to
accept of mercy in Christ. 2. Fait^ comes by hearing the Word preached
ordinarily, and by it also i^ Faith confirmed and increased; but on the
Lords-table the mercy o^ God is not first given, or wrought, but only signed,
sealed and confirmed, as it is also at the Font in Baptism.

3. The Pulpit is more like a Chair of State than the Altar is: For

1. The Pulpit is like a Chair of State with a seat in it, and Canop^ over it,
and therein Christ by his Ambassadors sits, or stands an^ speaks to his people,
and declares his Law and Gospel; but on the Table or Altar Christ is
represented, not as sitting in his Chair o^ State and Exaltation, but as in his
low estate (...) Humiliation, as crucified, or dead, as on his Cross, rather 1
Cor. 11. 26.
than as on his Chair of State.

2. There is no similitude in the Table or Altar, to a Chair o^ State.

3. Though Subjects use to give civil worship to the Chair o^ State of their
Prince, yet 'twill not follow that men should, o^ lawfully may give religious
worship, honor, or bodily reverence to Christ's Chair of State, be it Pulpit,
Font, Pew, Table, Heaven, or believers in whom he reigns. For all religion
reverence of the creature is forbidden in the secon^ Dr. Ames Bellar. Enar. T.
2. l. 6. c. 7. p. 273.
Commandment, say Mr. Perkins, A. B. Usher, D^ Mayer, Dr. Aries, and many
others.

4. Dr. Ames says, That God is not more in (...) Temple made with hands
separated from the company of Believers, than he is elsewhere, since the Legal
Temple was taken away.

5. Mr. Hildersham says, There is no holiness inherent in, o^ adherent to the
places of public Worship, that by the Hildersham upon Joh. 4. Lect. 33. p.
139, 142, 143.
death of Christ all religious difference of places is taken away; no one place
is holier than another; and that it is Bishop Sparrow makes the Church like the
Temple, part of worship, and will have people that pray in private, to look
toward the Temple. Rationale, 386, 387.
Judaism, and a denial of Christ to be come, to hold that one place is holier
than another, as is evident by Joh. 4. 21. and that our houses and chambers are
as holy places as the Churches are. I pray read the whole Lecture, it shows the
superstition of the Papists, and of our men that follow them; it may enable you
to answer their arguments, and avoid their sin.

6. No place is made so holy by the Ordinances or services of God therein or
thereon celebrated or performed, as therefore to make them the objects of
religious adoration or reverence.

1. Because the Ordinances and services of God cannot make the place where they
are performed, God.

2. Because the Ordinances or services of God themselves, are not, cannot be
the objects of religious adoration, or divine reverence, without the special
command of God. And though we do show outward religious reverence when we pray
to God, and when God by his word, and by his Ambassadors speaks to us in
public and private, yet we do it not to them, but immediately to God. And
therefore I conclude, that the holy Table or Altar, though separated to an holy
use, cannot be made so holy by reason of the Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood being consecrated or standing thereon, as to deserve to be religiously
adored or reverenced with godly honor; and therefore the Archbishop's reason
to prove that the Altar is the greatest place of Gods residence upon earth;
namely, because it is there hoc est corpus meum, that is Sacramentally, (for to
hold that it is there transubstantially or consubstantially, I have proved is
directly contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and to the truth of
Christ's humane body), this is my body, is an insufficient and weak one. And if
it should have been good, it would prove, that the Paten in which the
Sacramental bread, and the bowl in which the Sacramental wine is put, yea and
the Priests fingers that break and deliver the bread, are to be bodily and
religiously reverenced as the greatest places of Christ's residence here on
earth: for there it is more nearly said, Hoc est corpus meum, they immediately
touch the Sacramental body of Christ, the holy Table, or your Altar does not,
for there is the cloth betwixt them. And besides, it would follow that the
Font, the reading-Pew, and the Pulpit, yea the whole Church, yea every private
house in which either of Gods Sacraments or other of his Ordinances are used
(for Christ is there spiritually present) should be religiously reverence^ with
godly bowing to them; because there it is, this is my body, or th^^ is my blood,
or this is my word. Moreover, this seems to justify Papist^ in their calling
the Cross on which Christ was crucified, the holy Cross if not in their adoring
it and Christ before a Crucifix, ratione co^tactus, by reason of its touching
Christ's body, or resembling it. Bu^ this I do but hint by the way.

7. It Is forbidden to worship God in or by, or through an Image for the
Israelites in Aaron's time, and Jeroboam's, and Ahab's times, are condemned,
not for worshipping the Golden Calf, or Calves, (...) a God, but for
worshipping the true God in, by, or through the Calf, or Calves. And this is
the judgment of not only Divine right of Churchgovernment, cap. 1. q. 5. S. 2.
Con. 2. page 150, 151, 152. Perkin's Order of causes, on 2d. Command. p. 30.
Cases of Conscience, l. 2. c. 11. p. 206. Usher' s Sum of Chr. Relig. p. 332.
Andrew' s upon 2d. Com. p. 279. Prideaux Sermon. upon 1 Cor. 10. 7. p. 7. Willet
Synopsis Papis of Images, q 5. a. 3. p. 462. Elton upon 2d. Com. p. 30, 31.
Downham' s Divinity, l. 1. c. 6 pap. 161. Bishop Ridley says, That it is
against the second Commandment to bow down or do worship unto any Image of
God, or of any other thing. Fox Acts and Mon. in one Vo* p. 1675.
learned Rutherford but also of reverend Mr. William Perkins, A. B. Usher,
Bishop Andrews, Bishop Prideaux, Dr. Willet, and other of our learned Divines,
that the Israelites did not intentionally worship the Golden Calf, or Calves,
so as to terminate their worship in it, or them; b^^ the true God Jehovah,
represented by it an^ them; for which they give many goo^ reasons. Perkins
says, the Israelite^ worshipped not the Calf itself, but God i^ the Calf. And
so say A. B. Usher, an^ Bishop Andrews. Bishop Prideaux quotes 1 King. 16. 31.
where Ahab is chronicled to have outstript in Idolatry his Predecessors, for
that he made it but a ligh^ thing to retain Jeroboam's Calves, wherein they
worshipped the true God after a^ Idolatrous manner. Mr. Hildersham says, Aaron
and the Israelites intended to worship the true God in the similitud^ of the
Golden Calf, as is plain, Psalm. 106. 20. They changed their glory into the
similitude of an ox that eats grass. A. B. Usher to this question, But though
we do not reverence the Images themselves, may we not worship A. B. Usher
condemns as a breach of the second Commandment, men^ and women^ making
courtesy to the Chancel where the High Altar stood. Sum of Christ. Relig. p
232.
God in or by the Image? gives this answer: No, we may not, for the Israelites
are condemned, not for worshipping the Golden Calf as a god, but for
worshipping God in the Calf; which appears, 1. In that they said, Let us make a
feast to morrow to Jehovah, Exodus 32. 5. 2. In tbat Moses otherwise might seem
not to have done wel^ ^^ to drink that against their conscience which they
judged to be God, Exodus 32. 20. To which I add, 3. That we cannot in reason or
charity think that the Jews were so mad as to think that that Calf which they
knew to be made of their own golden Earrings, was essentially that God that
brought them so miraculously out of the land of Egypt. 4. Aaron who fashioned
the Calf, made Proclamation and said, To morrow is a feast unto the Lord; that
is, unto Jehovah, which is a name they gave only to the true God, as Dr. Willet
observes. And 5. Rutherford gives this reason more: They believed not the Calf
to be really and essentially Jehovah, because they believed not Moses to be
essentially God, but their guide and leader under God; for this Calf they made
to supply Moses absence, Exodus 32. 1, The people gathered themselves together
against Aaron, and said unto him, Up, make us gods which shall go before us;
for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we
know not what is become of him. They made then a Calf, only a visible god under
Jehovah to lead them in Moses his place. 6. They knew that Jehovah brought them
out of Egypt before this Calf was framed, and yet notwithstanding these
Israelites are charged with corruption, with Idolatry, Exodus 32. 7, 8. and sin,
v. 21. yea, it is called a great sin, v. 30. and they are said, notwithstanding
their intention, to worship the molten Calf, Psalm. 106. 19. which is called an
Idol, Act. 7. 40^ for it they are called Idolaters, 1 Cor. 10. 7. and about
three thousand of them lost their lives for it, Exodus 32. 28. And moreover, let
me tell you, that learned Ainsworth proves upon Exodus 20. 5. That to worship
God before an Image (that is put in a religious state, o^ state of worship
before a man) is to worship an Image in sacred Scripture sense; hence Amaziah
who bowed down before the gods of the Edomites, is judged to have committed
Idolatry, for which the Lord was angry with him, 2 Chr. 25. 14, 15. Mark it,
that which is called falling down before the gods of the Edomites in the 14
verse. is in the 15 verse. called seeking, that is serving the gods of the
people. Idem est adorant coram Domino and Domino, as Mr. Pool has it out of
Ainsworth upon Exodus 20. 5. it is the same thing to pray before God, and to pray
to God: to pray before God, in 1 Chronicles. 17. 25. is 2 Samuel 7. 27. called praying
to God. And idem^est procumbere coram diabolo and diabolo; it is the same thing
to pray before the Devil, and to pray to the Devil. For that which in Mat. 49.
is called falling down before the Devil, is in Luke 4. 7. called worshipping of
the Devil. How you that pretend to worship God with the highest reverence
toward the holy altar, that is, by corporal bowing to or toward it, can
escape from guilt and punishment, except ye repent, I know not. Dr. Henry More
says plainly Dr. More his Mystery of Iniquity, c 10 p. 33.
thus: Idolatry is committed when we perform some ri^e or ceremony, that is to^
some external religious action appropriate to the signifying our acknowledgment
of the divine eminency, before, or rather unto that which is not God, where by
(before) I understand an intended direction (by our selves or others, or at
least of custom) of the religious action as to an object we would honor
thereby. And a little before he says thus: To give the appropriate signs
significative of our agnition Dr. More Mystery of Iniquity, c. 10. p 32.
of divine excellency to any thing that is not God, is Idolatry. Yea, the using
the appropriate signs of the acknowledgment of divine excellency to that which
is not God, though the assent go not along, is notwithstanding the
acknowledgment of that to be God which is not, and therefore cannot choose but
be flat Idolatry; and if Idolatry be committed without the parties devotion
toward the undue object, then let a man fancy this external religious worship
accompanied with as small degrees of devotion or inward intention as h^
pleases, it will not fail to be Idolatry still. Yea, he says further, Tha^
Incurvation toward an Image erected to any creature, especially in a Temple,
or on an Altar, yea though removed from both, were a sign of religiou^ worship
or service by infallible definition, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor serve
them; that is to say, thou shall not do the service of Incurvation, nor any
other religio is service to them. For service is cultus religiosus, of which,
incurvation in such circumstances is assuredly one kind, I mean exhibited to
either an invisible power, or to its visible representation in an Image. And
consent of Nations Dr. More Mystery of Iniquity, c. 11. p. 36.
has made it an appropriate sign of religious worship^ especially in a Temple.
Yea c. 5. p. 14. of the same learned Book, he says thus: To do religious
worship to the picture or image of any creature, of any Person of the holy
Tr^nity, or of all three, or particularly to the image of Christ, though this
religious worship is intended to pass through the representation to God
himself, Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, is notwithstanding Idolatry according to
the second instance; where worshipping the true God by an image is proved to be
Idolatry: and every thing that is not God, that has religious worship given to
it, thereby becomes an Idol. And c. 14. p. 46. of the same Book, he says, That
an Idol and Images in religious worship are all one; one is a Latin, and the
other is a Greek word, they both signify the likeness of some thing; and the
worshipping of the true God by an Idol is Idolatry. And p. 50. of the same
Book, he says, That whatsoever is interposed betwixt God and us by way of God
in our worshipping, is not an help but an hinderance to the perfection of that
worship. You may read much more to this purpose in that useful and learned
Book, but I forbear.

Now apply this to your Altars, and corporal bowing to them upon your religious
accounts of divine excellency, and then I believe you will be forced either to
acquit the Papists, yea the Jews of Idolatry in worshipping the true God by
Images or representations, or else you must condemn your selves of Idolatry,
and will I hope renounce it. But lest this should not suffice, consider what
other of our learned Divines say, To worship God in, at, or before an image
purposely, is Idolatry and superstition, and God so worshipped is made an Idol;
which is forbidden Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. So Perkins in his Cases of
Conscience, l. 2. c. 11. S. 2. p. 206. A. B. Usher upon the second Commandment,
says, 1. That such are Sum of Christ. Religion, p. 229. 230.
guilty of Idolatry as worship those things that are not God. 2. Such as
countenance them, or do any thing to the furtherance of Idolatry, and that
outward religious adoration of those things that are not God, is forbidden in
the second Commandment; and that this worship be denied to every thing that is
not God: as the Sun and Moon, Angels, Saints, Relics, Images, and such trash
as Rome allows, Deuteronomy. 4. 17, 19. Col. 2. 18. Revel. 19. 10. and 22. 8, 9.
Act. 10. 25, 26. That Idem ibidem, p. 232.
we must not give the least token of reverence either in body or soul, unto any
religious Images, Psalm. 97. 7. Hab. 2. 18. Isa. 44. 15. Exodus 32. 4. for that
is a further degree of Idotry, as to shrine, clothe, or cover them with
precious things; to light candles before them, to kneel and creep to them, or
to use any gestures of religious adoration unto them, 1 King. 19. 18. wherein,
although the gross Idolatry of Popery be taken away from amongst us, yet the
corruption cleaves still to the hearts of many; as may be seen in them that
make courtesy to the Chancel where the high Altar stood, and give the right
hand unto standing Crosses and Crucifixes, etc. Now upon this account do our
learned Divines condemn the Papists as guilty of Idolaty, for their worshipping
(as they say) Bishop Andrews upon 2 d. Comm. p. 279.
the true God before, or in, or by Images or Crucifixes, as some amongst us do
before, in, or by, or through their Altars. And indeed I think, they are as
much Idolaters as the Heathens were; who, as the Ancients say, and prove out of
the Heathen Authors, that they intended not the worship of their Images of
Jupiter, Bishop Andrews ubi supra. A. B. Usher upon 2 d. Comm. in Sum of
Christ. Religion, p. 232.
Mars, but those Deities (as they called them) whom they represented; as the
Papists pretend they worship not the Image, but the thing represented by it. 8.
That is an abuse of Gods Ordinance to use any thing that God has commanded for
his Worship, otherwise than he himself has appointed, forbidden in the second
Commandment, as to hang pieces of St. John' s Gospel about men's necks, etc. 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. 2 King. 18. 4. 2 Samuel 6. 3, 7, 8. So says reverend A. B. Usher.
Now though it be Sum of Christ. Relig. p. 226.
granted, that God has appointed the Communiontable, as an help or mean for
the decent, comely, and orderly celebration of the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, viz. To be consecrated and set thereon, to show forth the Lords
death till he come, 1 Cor. 11, 24, 25. yet he has not appointed it to be used
in his worship, as a mean, motive, or memorative object to mind men of, and
move them to adoring him or worshipping God before, toward, in, or by it. Good
King Hezekiah's breaking the Brazen Serpent set up by Moses at Gods command.
when 'twas abused to Idolatry, is a good president for good Magistrates to
destroy Altars. and restore Communion-tables, when set up altarwise against the
East-wall of the Chancel, and abused to Idolatry, to their ancient place, the
body of the Church, and forbid their subjects purposely and upon any religious
accounts whatsoever, to bow, or adore, or do bodily reverence to or toward
them. 9. If to bow corporally versus altar, or worship God toward the
Communion Table purposely and upon religious accounts, it being will worship,
be not flat Idolatry. yet it is a manifest appearance of Popish Idolatry, which
should be carefully avoided, 1 These. 5. 22. Abstain from all appearance of
evil. Upon which place Bishop Exposition in locum.
Jewel says thus, Be not Idolaters, leave off to do any thing that may bring
you into suspicion of Idolatry: give not that honor unto any creature which is
proper unto God. Have no fellowship with their works, bear no appearance of
liking their evil. Abstain from appearance of evil in word and deed; it is an
appearance of evil needlessly to use Idolaters words, as Priest, Altar,
Sacrifice, as they do; it is a greater appearance of evil, and the more to be
avoided, to set our Communion-tables altarwise; it is a preparation to make them
Altars, and to bowing to them; and it is the greatest appearance of evil, and
the more to be abstained from, when any Crucifix or Image is set upon the
altar, or on the wall or glass window, over or near it, as was in times of
professed Popery, and in some places in A. B. Laud's time, directly contrary to
the drift of the Homily against the peril of Idolatry, and Queen Elizabeth's
Injunctions so much pleaded, Who commanded that all Monuments and occasions of
Idolatry should be pulled down, and that the ten Commandments should be set
upon the east-wall over the Table: vid. Collection of Orders, p. 124. I pray
read and consider what Dr. Rise and growth of Socinianism, c. 5. p. 36.
Cheynell says of this matter: Crucifixes must be had and set up at the
east end, that was too plain; next, the Communion table, to color this design,
or at least to add varnish to it, must be advanced into an altar, and men must
by a tacit consent (as we were informed at the Visitation of Merton- College)
express some outward reverence by bowing toward the East, the Altar, the
Crucifix, choose which you please, all, if you will; but in no case must we be
commanded to bow, and yet we must be censured as disobedient if we refuse to
bow; this (says he) was interpreted by rational men, an asking of our consent
to bring in Popery; it was now high time to make protestations, that we would
bow neither to East, nor Host, nor Altar. Mr. Hildersham says. That if any
part of Upon Joh. 4. Lect. 33. p. 143.
heaven be more unfit for us to turn our faces toward in prayer, than other,
the East is the unfittest, because we find Idolaters blamed for doing so, Ezekiel.
8. 16. which we cannot find noted in any other part. And he brought, me into
the inward Court of the Lords house, and behold at the door of the Temple of
the Lord, between the Porch and the Altar, were about twenty-five men with
their backs toward the Temple, and they worshipped the Sun toward the East.
The Temple of God was so built, that the Sanctum Sanctorum was in the western
part of it; the entrance into it was in the Eastern part of it, and when any
service was done by the people or Priests in prayer or sacrifice, they
performed it with their faces westward toward the ark and boliest of holies,
and their backs were eastward, which the Lord in wisdom purposely ordered to be
so, that he might prevent Eastern and Sunworship, and the Dr. Heylin says,
That worshipping toward the East was so common, that it drew the Primitive
Christians into suspicion of being worshippers of the Sun. Cyp. Angl.
Introduct. S. 18. p. 17. and has been so common among us.
appearance thereof, which was the practice of the Gentiles then. Now if God in
wisdom purposely ordered his house so, and placed his Ark and Mercy-seat (the
Types of his special presence) that the Priest and people might look Westward,
and not Eastward, to avoid Eastern Sun-worship, and the appearance thereof,
which was the worship of the Gentiles that lived about them; sure there is as
much reason for us Protestants to avoid purposely worshipping God toward the
East or Altar, which our learned Divines have judged to be Will Worship, or
Idolatry in the Papists, who live not only about us, but amongst us. And this,
learned King James (of famous memory) thought a good reason to be seen in the
Conference at Hampton Court, p. 74. who there speaking to the objection against
the Surplice, That 'twas a kind of garment which the Priests of Isis used to
wear: surely, said his Majesty, till of late I di^ not think that it had been
borrowed from the Heathen, because it is commonly termed a rag of Popery in
scorn; but were it so, yet neither did we now border upon the heathenish
Nations, neither art any of them commorant amongst us, wh^ thereby might take
This is a good argument against our using the Surplice, because we live amongst
Papists, who do thereby take occasion to be confirmed in Papism, and in their
superstitious using of it.
occasion to be strengthened or confirmed in Paganism: For the^ THERE WERE JUST
CAUSE TO SUPPRESS THE WEARING of it. But now we have bowing to Altars from the
Papists, who are our neighbors, and live amongst us, who may (and no doubt but
they will) take occasion to strengthen themselves in their Superstition and
Idol^try, hearing us call our Ministers Priests, and our Communion-tables,
Altars; and seeing us turning and setting them altarwise, and setting Dr.
Pocklington pleads for a^ Altar with a ^r^ss upon it, in his ^un^ay ^o (...) p.
48, 50. and in his (...) Christ. c. 21. ^. ^^3.
of Candlesticks and Tapers on them and Crucifixes and Images on or ove^ them,
and bowing to them, it may make them believe that they have been and are in the
right, That Christ's body is corporally present in the Sacrament, and on the
Table, and that Divine honor is due to a thing ratione contactus, as they say,
there is divine honor due to the Cross, because Christ's body touched it; and
that the Sacrament is an unbloody and propitiatory Sacrifice, which they offer
up to God upon the holy Altar, and therefore they need not make one step
toward us, seeing we are coming so fast toward of them as knot the Jesuit,
and others of them observed. Men use Dr. Heylin's Cyprianus Anglicus, l 4. p.
252, 253. Dr. Cheynells rise and growth of Socinianism, c. 6. p 70. and 64.
willingly the once fearful names of Priests and Altars, etc.

Object. But it is objected, That David, Daniel, and the Jews worshipped toward
Gods Ark, Mercy-seat, Temple and Jerusalem; therefore men may do so now toward
the holy Altar.

Answ. To this I answer: 1. That these places were holy by the special
institution and presence of God; and hence is Jerusalem called the holy city,
Mat. 4. 5. Mat. 27. 53. and so the Temple of God in Jerusalem is called the
holy Temple, Psalm. 5. 7. And the Temple was called holy, because God had chosen
and sanctified it, to put his name there for ever, and in which he promised
that his eyes and his heart should be perpetually, 2 Chronicles 7* 16. And hence
it is said that Hannah who prayed in the Temple at Shiloh, prayed before the
Lord; and that Elkanah and his wives worshipped before the Lord, 1 Samuel 1. 12,
19. because the Lord was specially present there; and hence it was, that when
the Jews could not go up to the Temple, that they looked toward it, and Daniel
opened his windows toward Jerusalem, where the Temple was, when he prayed,
Dan. 6. 10. 1 King. 8. 48. And in the Temple one place was more holy than
another, for there was the Holy of Holies, Heb. 9. 2, 3.

2. That they were commanded so to do, Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

3. Jerusalem as comprehending the Temple, was a Hom. for repairing of
Churches, T. 2. p 78.
Type of Christ, and therefore were they to look toward it when they prayed.
And Solomon prayed, that God would be present there, and that he would hear the
prayers of his people, when they pray toward the city which he had chosen, 1
King 8. 44. 45. and in 1 King. 9. 3. you may read, That God heard Solomon's
prayers which he made before him; and God said, I have hallowed this place
which thou have built to put my name there for ^ver, and mine eyes and mine
heart shall be there perpetually.

4. Because in the Temple were the Ark, the Mercy-seat, where God was specially
and immediately present, and there God promised to be, and to meet them, Exodus
25. 22. And in them did God immediately manifest his presence; the Ark was a
sign of Gods special presence, and thence it is said, that God did dwell between
the Cherubims, 2 King. 19. 15. and that Israel enquired of the Lord, for the
Ark of the Covenant of God was there in those days, Judge. 20. 27, 28. and there
God promised to be and meet his people, Exodus 29. 42, 43. Exodus 30. 6. yea, God
is said therefore to dwell there, 1 King. 19. 15. Psalm. 80. 1. And Bishop
Babington in his comfortable Notes upon Exodus 27. In novo autem testamento
altaria erigi ulla praeceptum non est, quod si erigantur, Judaismus revocatur,
quum altaria jussu Dei, erecta, typi fuerunt Christi, etc. Polan. Syntag. l. 9.
c. 36. p. 647.
speaking of the Altar, says thus:

1. That it was a figure of Christ, as the Apostle expounds it, Heb. 13. 10.

2. That the Altars used in Popery are not warranted by this example, but that
the Primitive Church used Communion-tables (as we now do) of boards and wood,
not Altars (as they do) of stone. But now to, apply this, you can show neither,
1. Command from God for your bowing to your Altars in time of the Gospel; for
Ark, Mercy-seat, and Altars are abolished, Joh. 4. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. And we
have now no Altar but Christ, Heb. 13. 10. Nor 2. have you any promise of
Christ's presence with or at your Altars, when his Ordinance is not administered;
and when his Ordinance is celebrated upon the holy Table, he is not there
corporally, but only spiritually and sacramentally. And you have no promise of
God at all to your bowing to your Altars; what you have from men, I know not.
Nor 3. have any president or example of Christ, or of any of his Apostles,
either instituting your Altars, or bowing to or toward them. Volateranus and
Vernerius testify, that Altars were first erected by the command of Sixtus, as
Bishop Jewel informs us, but he does not tell us which Sixtus, Bishop of Rome,
it was. Sixtus the first lived, Anno 130. Sixtus the second lived A. D. 261.
Sixtus the third lived A. D. 432. as Bishop Prideaux informs in his
Introduction to History. Now it could be neither of the two first of these; for
Origin who was born A. D. 289. and could not be a writer till after the year
300, assures us, that the Christians had no altars then, as Origin. contra
Celsum, l 4.
the same Bishop Jewel alleges him in his Reply to Harding, Art 3. D. 26. p.
145. Objicit nobis quod non habeamus imagines aut ar as aut Templa. Celsus
charge our religion with this, that we have neither Images, nor Altars, nor
Churches. Likewise says Arnobius, that lived somewhat after Origin, Accusatio
nos, etc. Arnobius, Lib. 20
Ye accuse us that we have neither Temples, nor Images, nor Altars. And the
same Bishop Jewel (if our Homily against peril of Idolatry, part 3. p. 66.
says, There were no Churches in Tertullians time, a hundred and sixty years
after Christ.
Book of Homilies were silent) does also assure us, That there were no
Christian Churches built in the Apostles times; for the faithful, for fear of
Tyrants, were fain to meet together in private houses, and in vacant places, in
Woods and Forests, and Caves under the ground; and may we think that Altars
were built before the Churches? and when they were built, he says, they were
not set in the upper end of the Quire, but in the midst of the Church among the
people; Which he there proves out of Eujebius, Augustine, and others. The
Church being ended, and comely furnished with high Thrones for the honor of
the Rulers, and with Stalls beneath set in order; and last of all, the Holy of
Holies, I mean the Altar* being placed in the midst: These are Eusebius his
words in English, so translated by Bishop Babington in his Comfortable Notes
upon Exodus 29. p. 279. says, That Altars were set in the midst of the people,
and not against a wall.
Bishop Jewel. Mark, Eusebius says not the Altar was set in the Quire, but in
the midst of the Church amongst the people; this is Bishop Jewel's own
observation, not mine, I pray observe it. And in page 146. he says thus: To
leave further Allegations, we see by these few, that the Quire was then in the
body of the Church, divided with Rails from the rest, whereof it was called
Cancelli, a Chancel, and commonly of the Greeks. Presbyterium, because it was a
place appointed for the Priests and Ministers. I pray read him fully and
deliberately, it will serve to consute that vile Book of Dr. Pocklington's,
called, Altar Christianum.

Thus you may see that there were no Christian^ Altars in the Apostles times,
no nor in the first three hundred years, yea not till after four hundred years
after Christ's Ascension. I wonder what Church that was that A. B. Laud meant
Can. 7. Ann. Dom. 1640.
by the Primitive Church in the purest times, whose example he proposes for
our imitation; he cannot mean the Christian Primitive Church; in this his
alleged Bishop Jewel will be against him as well as others; he must then mean
the Jewish Church. But if this was his Primitive Church, I know not how to make
a good Orthodox construction of these words, a little before in the same Canon,
That the holy Table may be called an Altar by us, in that sense in which the
Primitive Church called that an Altar, and in no other. But in what sense did
the Jewish Church call the Communion Table an Altar? if by his Primitive Church
he means the Church of Rome, four hundred years after Christ's Ascension into
Heaven, his latter words will be against his former, [in the purest times,] for
sure they were not the purest times; that Church calls it an Altar, or an high
place to offer Christ an unbloody sacrifice, propitiatory for the sins of hi^
people to the Father. This possibly might be his meaning. For I find Dr. Heylin
his Chaplain, and Cyp. Anglic. Introd. S. 24. p. 22.
a member of that illegal Convocation, pleading, That the Sacrament is and may
be called a commemorative Sacrifice. And Bishop Sparrow calls it, An unbloody
sacrifice, a commemorative Rationale, p. 280, 391. and p. 378, 379. And Giles
Widows says, The Communiontable is Christ's Chair of State, where his Priests
sacrifice the Lord's Supper, to reconcile us to God; in his kneezless Puritan.
p. 34, 89.
Sacrifice of the death of Christ. And so write many more of that Tribe. If by
a Sacrifice be meant Thanksgiving for Christ's death, and the benefits thereof,
then I say, the Font and Reading-pew may be called Altars as well the
Communion Table; and the Pulpit may more properly be called an Alt^r than the
Table; for there Thanks, or the sacrifice of Praise, is more frequently given
or offered to God for Christ's death, and the benefits we receive thereby, than
on the Communion Table, and that therefore they should be so called, if not
bowed to, by your reasons.

But A. B. Laud is pleased to alledg Reverend Bishop Jewel, as approving his
bowing to Communion-tables set Altarwise at the East End of the Quire or
Jewel's Reply to Harding, Art. 3. p. 29, 151.
Chancel. Bishop Jewel speaking against Ministers praying before their people
in an unknown Tongue, to whom Harding says, That the people cannot indeed say
Amen to the blessing or thanksgiving of the Priest, so well as if they
understood the Latin Tongue perfectly, yet they give assent unto it, etc. and
this they declare by sundry outward tokens and gestures, as by standing up at
the Gospel, and at the Preface to the Mass, and by bowing themselves down, and
adoring at the Sacrament, by kneeling at other times, as when pardon and mercy
is humbly asked; and by other like signs of Devotion in other parts of the
Service. To which Bishop Jewel gives a short Answer, and shows, That 1
Harding's words contradict St. Paul's, 1 Cor. 14. 16, 17, 18. 2. He commends
devotion and affection in people at the service of God. 3. He acknowledges in
the general (not in those particulars that H^rding speaks of,) that kneeling,
bowing, standing up, and other like, are commendable gestures and tokens of
Devotion, so long as the people understand what they mean, and apply them unto
That is rightly, and according to his word^; the next words, to whom they be
due, the Archbishop left out, as being against bowing to his altars.
God, to whom they be due; otherwise they may well make them hypocrites, but
holy and godly they cannot make them. There may be adoring at the Sacrament
when people confess their sins, pray for pardon of them, and give thanks to God
for mercies received; but here is not a word in Hardings answer, or in Bishop
Jewel's reply of bowing to or toward the holy Table or Altar, especially upon
your religious account of Christ's corporal or sacramental presence, hoc est
corpus meum. And that Bishop Jewel was not for bowing to or toward the holy
Table or Altar, as you call it, especially upon your accounts, his works do
evidently declare. For he was (as I have showed) against bowing to or adoring
of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which is the Ordinance of God; and
therefore is more worthy than the Table whereon it stands; which is but an
instrument or help to the orderly and decent celebration of that Ordinance, as
was showed above. And there ye may find him saying, That religious Bishop
Jewel's Ssr. upon 1 Cor. 11. 23. p. 50.
adoration belongs not to any creature, but only to God. And concerning Altars
he proves out of Origin and Arnobius, that there were none in the Apostles
times, nor in many years after, as was showed before. And in the 30th. Division
of that third Article of his Reply to Harding, he declares himself for the
Apostles times as the best and truest standard for Doctrine and practice, in
which times they had Communion-tables, and not altars. And in his works you may
find him stiff and zealous against Bishop Jewel' s Reply to Harding, art. 14.
D. 1. page 367, 368, 369, etc. and D. 12. p. 380, 381, 382.
worshipping of Images, yea of worshipping God in, by, or through them; yea, I
find him in his works not forward to follow, much less to commend the
degenerate Church of Rome's works, which first set up Altars, which Church he
says out of St. Ambrose, is Caput superstitionis, the head of superstition,
and the great Whore and mother of harlots and, abominations of the earth. Of
whom Nicholas Iyra in 2 These. 2. (quoted by him too) says, Ab Ecclesia Romona
jam diu^ est, quod recessit gratia: It is long since the Grace of God departed
from the Church of Rome, from which Grace whosoever is departed, he is departed
from Christ Bishop Jewel' s D. of Apol. p. 2. c. 5. p. 139.
The other arguments used for bowing to Altars, or worshipping of God toward
them, by Doctor Pocklington and A. B. Laud, drawn from the practice of Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and the Knights of the Order of the Garter, are so weak,
that they will deny them if I should return them upon themselves, as thus:
Queen Elizabeth abetted and helped the Scotch Subjects in taking up arms
against their Queen, and the Hollanders in taking up, arms against their King;
Ergo, it is lawful, and not rebellious so to do. For I presume if it had been
unlawful and rebellious, Queen Elizabeth* would not have abetted and helped
them therein; which is A. B. Laud's argument in his Star Chamber This argument
of the A B. is pitiful weak, and so is mine that is made in imitation of it,
only to show the invalidity of his for bowing to altars.
Speech, p. 48. for bowing to Altars, yet he denies my parallel in one of his
illegal and condemned Canons, made Anno 1640, after the Parliament was
dissolved. Queen Elizabeth sequestered the Revenues of the Bishopric of Oxford
Dr. Heylin' s Cypr. Anglicus, p. 49.
for eleven years together, and gave them to the Earl of Essex, from which I
infer, as the Archbishop does, that 'twas lawful so to do. For I presume (as he
does) that if it had been sacriledg and unlawful, she would not have done it.
Thus ad hominem. I might alledg many more authorities, and produce many more
arguments against bowing to Altars, upon the account of divine excellency, or
worshipping God in, through, by, or toward them; but I forbear. Only this I
pray remember, that all W^ll-worship is forbidden in the second Commendment;
but to worship God by, in, through or toward the holy Altar or Communion Table
purposely upon your accounts of divine excellency, is Will Worship; Ergo, it is
unlawful: and it is Willworship, because it is no where commanded in the New
Testament, or in the Moral Law; for the Ceremonial Law i^ abrogated.

ART. III.
That men's persons are justified or Bell. T. 4. l 6. c. 1. de formali causa
justificationis. Et c. 9. de operum justificatione. So Bishop Montague, Gag. p.
141, 142, 143.
accounted righteous before God for their own good works, that follow faith,
either in part or in whole, and not for the merits of Jesus Christ alone. THis
I renounce, because it is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England,
which says thus in her Book of Homilies.

1. No man by his own acts, works or deeds (seem they never so good) can be
justified and made righteous before God; but every man is of necessity
constrained to seek for another righteousness or justification to be received
at Gods own hands; that is to say, the forgiveness of his sins; and this
justification or righteousness which we so receive of Gods mercy, and Christ's
merits embraced by faith, is taken, accepted, and allowed by God for our
perfect and full justification. We are justified freely by faith without the
works of the Law.

Homily of Salvation of Mankind, page 13. there it is further said, That on our
part we are justified by faith in the merits of Christ, which is not ours, but
by Gods working it in us. There it is said also, That the justice of man is shut
out of Justification; and yet that faith shuts not out repentance, hope,
love, fear of God, to be joined with faith in every man that is justified, but
it shuts them out from the office of justifying; so it shuts not out good
works which are necessary to be done afterward of duty to God; but it
excludes them so, that we may not do them to this intent to be made just by
doing of them. Whosoever denies this Doctrine, [that faith alone justifieth]
is not to be accounted a Christian man, nor for a setter forth of Gods glory,
but for an adversary (...) Christ and his Gospel, and for a setter forth of
man's vain glory Man's righteousness cannot make himself righteous by his ow^
works, neither in part, nor in whol^ That we are justified only by faith (...)
* We are not justified by our own good works, either in part, or in whole.
Christ. So speak all the Fathers bot^ Greek and Latin, Hilary, Basil, A^brose.
Hilary says these words plai^ly, Faith only justifies. Canon 9th. upon
Matthew. Ambr^ says thus, This is the ordinance of God, that they which
belie^^ in Christ should be saved without works, by faith only, freely
receiving remission of their sins. Consider diligently these word^ [without
works, by faith, only freely we receive remission of o^ sins.] Ibi. p 14, 15,
16, 17. The true meaning of this Doctrine we be freely justified by faith
without works, or that we be just^fied by faith in Christ only, is not, that
this is our own act to b^lieve in Christ. or this faith in Christ does justify
us, and deser^ our justification unto us, (for that were to count our selves to
(...) justified by some act or virtue that is within our selves): but t^^ true
understanding and meaning thereof, is, that although we he^ Gods word and
believe it, although we have Faith, Hope, Chari^^ Repentance, and fear of God
within us, and do add never so man works thereunto, yet we must renounce the
merit of all our sa^^ virtues of Faith, Hope, Charity, and all other virtues
and goo^ deeds, which we either have done, shall do, or can do, as thing that
be far too weak, insufficient and imperfect to deserve remission of our sins,
and our justification; and therefore we must trust only in Gods mercy, and that
Sacrifice which our high Which shows that faith justifies as it receives
Christ as an high Priest or Savior, not as a King, (as Mr. Fowler would have
in the first place, in his free Discourse p. 161.) I receive Christ as my
Prophet, but he does not justify m^ as he is my Prophet, or my King.
Priest, an^ Savior Jesus Christ the Son of Go^ once offered thereby Gods
grace. I^^ p. 17. Faith as great a virtue as it is yet it puts us from it
self, and remitteth or appoints us unto Christ for to have only by him
remission o^ our sins, or justification; so the our faith does as it were say
to u^ it is not I that take away your sins BUT IT IS CHRIST ONLY, to him only I
send you for tha^ purpose, forsaking therein all your good virtues, words,
thoughts and works, and only putting your trust in Christ, Ibid. page 18.

2. It Is not only contrary to her Homilies, but also to her Articles of
Religion: Article 11th. We are counted righteous before God only for the merits
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own good works.
That we are justified by faith alone, is a must wholesome Doctrine, as more
largely is expressed in the Homily of Justification. To which for further proof
I refer you. And Article the twelfth it is said thus: Albeit that good works,
which are the fruits of faith, and follow after justification, cannot put away
our sins.

Now Mr Fowler or any of his party cannot put off the Doctrine of the Church of
England, to which he has subscribed, as he does our learned men's arguments
against the Papists, by saying as they do, that the Apostle meant, [when he
said, That we are not justified by works,] works of the Ceremonial * Mr.
Fowler's Free Discourse, p. 186.
Law, but not the works of the Moral Law; or if them, Those only which are done
by the strength of nature, but not those which proceed from faith. For the
Church of England excludes all our works, even those that proceed from Faith.
And they intended in their Homilies and Articles of Religion Dr. Field of the
Church, 2d. part, p 861. We teach that he excludes all these, that is, that
St. Paul excluded from Justification all the works of Moses Law, Ceremonial and
Moral.
to overthrow the false Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and to establish the
Doctrine of Justification according to the Doctrine of the Gospel, in
opposition to Popery: For it says expressly, That whosoever denies this
Doctrine, [that Faith alone justifieth] is not to be accounted a CHRISTIAN MAN,
nor for a setter forth of Gods glory, but for an ADVERSARY to Christ and his
Gospel, and for a setter forth of man's vain glory. Homily for Salvation of
Mankind, p. 16, 17. And again, That were the greatest arrogance and presumption
of man, that Antichrist could set up against God, to affirm, that a man might
by his own works take away, and purge his own sins, and so justify himself.
Ibid. page 17.

By which you may see, that to deny this Doctrine, That we are justified by
faith alone; and to affirm, that we are justified by our own good works, is not
a Christian, but a proud, presumptuo^^, antichristian Doctrine. And to affirm
or insinuate that our persons are justified before God, partly by our faith,
and partly by our own good works, is also clea^ly against the express Doctrine
of the Church of England; for (...) says, that faith shuteth out good works,
yea it self, as it is an act, habi^ or work, from our justification, and
remitteth and directs us to Christ merits for our justification: as may be
seen above.

3. It Is contrary also to Canonical Scripture. Gal. 2. 16, Knowing that a man
is not justified by the works of the Law; but by the faith (...) Jesus Christ;
even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be j^stified by the faith
of Jesus Christ, and not by the works of the Law: (...) by the works of the Law
shall no flesh be justified. So Gal. 2. 21, For righteousness come by the Law,
then christ is dead vain. Dr. Fearley gives this Note: Although the * Notes in
loc.
be many uses and benefits of Christ's death, besid^ our justification; yet the
Apostles argument is very strong, that the would have been no necessity for
(...) Salvation, that Christ should have di^^ Luther upon the place says, That
to seek to be justified by the works of the Law* is to reject the Grace of God,
which he says, is blasphemy, more horrible than can be expressed; it is to
deny Christ, to spit in his face, to tread him under foot. We despise Grace
when we observe the Law, that we may be justified through it. We constantly
affirm, that either Christ died in vain, or else the Law justifies not: but
Christ died not it vain; Ergo, the Law justifies not.
and by his blood expiated our sins, (...) men might have been justified by
(...) works of the Law, either Ceremonial (...) Moral. Romans 3. 28, Therefore we
conclude, that a man is justified by faith with out the deeds of the Law. And
v. 3^ seeing it is one God which shall justif^ the circumcision by faith, and
the unc^^cumcision through faith. That is, Je^. called the Circumcision, and
Gentil^ called the Uncircumcision, are justify by one God, by and through
Faith (...) Jesus Christ. Read further, Romans 4. 2. (...) 4, 5, 10 11. but Romans
3. 20. which I ha^ almost forgotten, is very considerabl^ as to this point,
Therefore by the de^d of the Law there shall no flesh be justify in his sight:
for by the Law is the know ledg of sin.

Where observe, 1. That he speaks of a Justification of men's persons before God
[in his sight] and not of says, and before men, as Sai^ James. Chap. 2. 17,
18, 20, 21, 22, 24, 26. is to be understood.

2. He says, That a man is not justified by the works of the Law, (...) which
is the knowledge of sin, which is the Moral Law; for by the Moral Law all men
are convinced of sin, and that there is sin in their best works, even in those
that proceed from Faith. Papists and their followers amongst us, say, that men's
persons are not justified in the sight of God by doing the works of the
Ceremonial Law; but they say they are Mr. Fowler's free Discourse, p. 186.
justified by the works of the Moral Law, which proceed from faith: which is
directly contrary to the Doctrine delivered by St. Paul, which is, That by the
deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight. For by the Law
is the knowledge of sin: by the Moral, not by the Ceremonial Law is the knowledge
of sin. And so the word Law is taken in Romans 2. 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 21, 22, 25,
26. as not only Protestants, but also Papists themselves expound Dr. Fea^ley,
Dr. Willet, Mr. Calvin, Pareus, and Cornelius a Lapide in Loc.
the word. And that men's persons are not justified by their own good works of
the Moral Law which spring from Faith, as Papists affirm Mr. Fowler's free
Discourse, page 187.
they are, I prove thus.

1. If any mere man since the Fall was ever justified by the works of the Moral
Law, which proceeded from Faith, then certainly Abraham (the Father of the
Faithful) was so justified; but Abraham was not so justified: therefore no mere
man's person since the Fall was so justified. The sequel of the Major is evident,

1. Because Abraham's Personal works which proceeded from his Faith, were as
good as any mere man's works: For by faith Abraham left his own Country, and
went when he was called of God into a strange Country, which he should after
receive in his posterity; and be went out not knowing whither he went, and
there sojourned, Heb* 11. 9. And by faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up
Isaac: and he that had received the promises, offered up his only begotten Son*
of whom it was said, that in Isaac shall thy seed be called, Hebr. 11. 17, 18.

2. Because he being the Father of the Faithful, there is the same reason and
way of all faithful men's Justification, that was of his, as the Apostle shows,
Romans 4. 12, 13, 24, 25. Now the Minor, viz. That Abraham was not justified
before God by his own personal good works, which proceeded from his faith, I
prove by the Apostles own arguments:

1. If Abraham was justified before God by his own personal good works, which
proceeded from his Faith, then he had some matter to glory or boast of before
God; but Abraham had no matter to glory or boast of before God; therefore he
was not justified before God by his own Personal good works which proceeded
from his faith. Both the Promises are in Romans 4. 2. for if Abraham were
justified by works of his own, he had whereof to glory, there is the Major; but
not before God, there is the Minor: That is, he had no matter to glory of
before God Romans 3. 27.
in the point of his Justification; he brought nothing of his own to justify
his person before God; for God wrough his Faith and his works in him. True, he
might have somewhat (...) glory or boast of before men, but not before God, for
the reason alleged, and also because what he had was imperfect, and due.

2. To him that is justified before God by his works, there is a reward due of
debt, not of grace; but to Abraham there was a rewar^ due, not of debt, but of
grace, therefore he was not justified before God by his works. The Major is in
Romans 4. 4, Now to him that works is the reward reckoned, not of grace, but of
debt. The Minor (...) proved thus:

1. Because he was justified by faith, Romans 4. 3. For what says the Scripture?
Abraham believed, and it was counted to him for righteousnes^ Genesis 15. 6.

2. Because he was not justified by his works, Romans 4. 5. For to h^^ that
works not (that is, seeks not righteousness or justification (...) his
works) but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith (...)
counted for righteousness.

3. Abraham believed and was justified before God, before he performed those
eminent acts of faith mentioned Romans 4. 18. as may be seen Ge^ Pererius and
Pareus in Genesis 15. 6. and Romans 4. 3. D^b. 2.
12. 3, 4, 7. Genesis 13. 16, 18. Genesis 14. 14 18, 19. and which is urged by
Papists, and yielded by Protestants. But the Apostle, as Moses before him puts
his justification upon that eminent act of faith, because then he mos^
manifested his faith, even when he was or had been under a great affliction,
and not upon any eminent act of Fait^ before or after this, that no man might
Willet in Romans 4. 3.
impute (...) justification to his works; and then he did more firm^ believe
the promise than he did before; and then he had more sense and feeling of it
than he had at the first making of it; the^ he did more sensibly and firmly
rest upon God for the performance of his promise to him.

2. If men's persons are justified before God by their own personal good works,
then they are so justified either by those good works they do before their
faith, or by those that follow after their faith; but they are not justified
before God by their own personal good works which they do before their Faith,
nor by those which they do after their Faith, or after they believe in Christ:
therefore they are not justified before God by their own personal works.

1. Their persons are not justified before God by their works which they do
before they believe in Christ, because they are not formally good, they are not
pleasing unto God, for as much as they spring not from faith in Jesus Christ;
neither do they make men meet to receive grace, (and so do not dispositive
justify, as Papists hold) or, (as the School-Authors say) deserve grace of
congruity; yea, rather for that they are not done as God has commanded them to
be done, we doubt not but that they have the nature of sin. So says the Church
of England in her 13th. Article of Religion. Works done before faith in Christ,
though they may be materially good, yet they are not formally good, but are
perfectly evil, yea are Virtutes E^hnicorum sunt splendida peccata. Romans 1. 17.
sins; for whatsoever is not of faith is sin, says St. Paul and the Church of
England, Romans 14. 23. Homily of good Works, T. 1. p. 30.

2. Their persons are not justified before God by those good works which they
do after they believe in Christ, and which proceed from Faith in Christ; which
I prove thus:

1. By the twelfth Article of Religion of the Church of England: Albeit that
good works which are the fruits of faith, and follow after justification,
cannot put away our sins, and endure the severity of Gods judgment.

2. Because they are imperfectly good, and so stand in need of the perfect
righteousness of Christ to cover their infirmities; as may be proved by our
Homily for Good Friday. T. 2. p. 177. Our acts and deeds be full of
imperfectness and infirmity, and therefore nothing worthy of themselves to stir
God to any favor, much less to challenge that glory that is due to Christ acts
and merits.

3. Because they follow the justified, and are done after their justification;
and this argument the Church of England teaches out of Saint Augustine, in her
Homily of good works, T. 2. p. 82. Good Bona opera non praecedunt
justificandum, sed sequntur justificatum. S. August. de fide and operibus, c.
4. and 14. And this Doctrine John Lambert Martyr sealed with his blood. Fox
Book of Martyrs, p. 1091.
works go not before in him, which shall afterward be justified; but good works
do follow after, when a man is justified.

4. Because it was confessed on all hands, that no men's persons were ever
justified before God by doing of evil works; and therefore the Apostle had no
need to prove that men were not justified by them, but the works of unbelievers
are If an Heathen may cloth the naked, feed the hungry, and do such other like
works, yet because he does them not in faith, for the honor and love of God,
they be but dead, vain and fruitless works to him. Hom. of Faith, p. 31. See
there also p 30. all the life of them that lack true faith, is sin. Ibi. p. 31.
evil works; for an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, Mat 7. 17. And
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14. 23. And without faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. Therefore it follows that the Apostle
Paul did intend to prove, that the good works of men which proceed from faith,
do not justify menspersons in Gods sight.

5. And lastly, Papists themselves distinguishing of a twofold Justification,
first and second, confess that all works are excluded from the first
Justification, (which only is properly Justification, their second is
Sanctification properly.) Bellarmine himself, Lib. 4 c. 15. de Justificatione,
confesses that the Apostle Paul does in the Epistle to the Romans, dispute of
the first Justification; therefore he excludes all our works from the
Justification of our persons before God.

4. It is contrary to the Confession of Faith of the Reformed Churches of
Christ, as may clearly be seen in the Harmony of Confessions, Sect. 9. To give
you a sight of some things they declare at large; the latter Confession of
Helvetia; c. 15. says thus: To justify, in the Apostles disputation touching
Justification, does signify to remit sins, to absolve from the fault, and the
punishment thereof; to receive into favor, to pronounce a man just: for the
Apostle says to the Romans, God is he that justifies, who is he that can
condemn? where to justify and condemn, are opposed; and in the Acts of the
Apostles, Act. 13. the Apostle says, Through Christ is preached unto you
forgiveness of sins, and from all things (from which ye could not be justified
by the Law of Moses) by him, every one that believes is justified. For in the
law also, and in the Prophets we real, Deuteronomy. 25. 1. That if a controversy were
risen amongst any, and they came to judgment, the judge shall judge them, that
is, justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked. And in the fifth Chapter of
Isaiah, Woe to them that justify the wicked for rewards. Now it is most certain
that we are all by nature sinners, and before the judgment seat of God
convicted of ungodliness, and guilty of death; but we are justified, that is,
acquitted from sin and death by God the Judge, through the grace of Christ
alone, and not by any respect or merit of ours. For what is more plain than
that which Paul says, All have sinned, and are destitute of the glory of God,
and are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption which is in
Christ Jesus; for Christ took upon himself, and bare the sins of the world, and
did satisfy the justice of God. God therefore is merciful unto our sins for
Christ alone, that suffered and rose again, and does not impute them to us; but
he imputes the justice of Christ unto us for our own; so that now we are not
only cleansed from sin, and purged, and holy, but also endued with the
righteousness of Christ, yea and acquitted from sin, death and condemnation;
finally we are righteous, and heirs of eternal life. To speak properly then, it
is God alone that justifies us, and that only for Christ, by not imputing to
us our sins, but imputing Christ's righteousness unto us. But because we do
receive this Justification, not by any works, but by faith in the mercy of God,
and in Christ: therefore we teach and believe with the Apostle, that sinful man
is justified only by faith in Christ, not by the Law, or by any works. For the
Apostle says, Romans 3. We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the
works of the Law. To which they add, Romans 4. 2, 3. and Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. and say
further, Therefore because faith does apprehend Christ our righteousness, and
does attribute all to the praise of God in Christ, in this respect
Justification is attributed to faith, chiefly because of Christ, whom it
receives, and not because it is a work of ours; for it is the gift of God. Now
that we do receive Christ by faith, the Lord shows at large, Joh. 6. where he
puts eating for believing, But it is most clear in Joh. 1. 12.
and believing for eating; for as by eating we receive meat, so by believing we
are made partakers of Christ; therefore we do not part the benefit of
justification, giving part to the grace of God or to Christ, and a part to our
selves, our charity, works or merit; but we do attribute it wholly to the
praise of God in Christ, and that through faith. And moreover, our charity and
our works cannot please God, if they be done of such as are not just; wherefore
we must first be just, before we can love or do any just works. We are made
just (as we said) through faith in Christ, by the mere grace of God, who does
not impute unto us our sins, but imputes unto us the righteousness of Christ,
yea and our says in Christ is imputed for righteousness unto us.

The Church of Basil says thus: We confess the remission of si^^ through faith
in Christ crucified; and though this faith does without intermission exercise
and show forth it self in the works of charity, and by this means is tried; yet
we do not attribute righteousness and satisfaction for our sins unto works,
which are fruits of faith, but only to a true confidence and faith in the blood
of the Lamb of God shed for us.

There may be seen the Confessions of Faith of the Churches of Bohemia, France,
Belgia or Holland, Ausburg, Saxony, Wirtemberg, Scotland; to which might be
added the Confession of Faith of the Church of Ireland, agreed upon Ann. 1615.
in Articles 34, 35, 36, 37. but they being almost the same verbatim with the
Articles and Homilies of the Church of England, for brevities sake I forbear.
But I pray take and consider the Confession of Faith of England and Scotland
made by the late learned and orthodox Assembly of Divines, Chapter the
eleventh, of Justification: Those whom God effectually calls, he also freely
justifies; not by infusing righteousness into them, but by pardoning their
sins, and by accounting and accepting their persons as righteous; not for any
thing wrought in them, or done by them, but for Christ's sake alone; nor by
imputing faith it self, the act of believing, or any other Evangelical
obedience to them as their righteousness; but by imputing the obedience and
satisfaction of Christ unto them, they receiving and resting on him and his
righteousness by faith, which faith they have not of themselves, it is the gift
of God. Faith thus receiving and resting on Christ and his righteousness, is
the alone instrument of Justification; yet it is not alone in the person
justified, but is ever accompanied with all other saving graces, and is no dead
faith, but works by love.

Now let any indifferent, and judicious, and impartial man compare this with
the ancient Doctrine of the Church of England, set down in her Books of
Articles of Christian Religion and Homilies, and then judge whether it be not
more consonant thereunto (and also to Sacred Canonical Scripture) than is, 1.
Dr. H. Hammond's Practical Catechism, p. 1649. p. 31. p 41. p. 33. p. 29.
, who says, That sincere obedience, with faith, justifies men's persons before
God. Or, 2. Dr. Sim. Patricks Parab. of Pilgrim, p. 511. and (...).
, who says, That new obedience must go before we can expect to be justified by
the grace of God. And thus p. 32.
Suffer not your faith to rest, no not on Christ, till it animate you to a free
and cheerful obedience to all his commands. (Which destroys the faith of
adherence, and founds Faith upon his own works, and not solely upon Christ, if
he means (as he must do) an actual animation to such an obedience as he speaks
of.) Who says also, That good works are Friendly Debate, p. 13, 14.
necessary to justification. (He must mean a priori and antecedent to
Justification, else he speaks not ad rem, but cuffs the man of clouts of his
own making; for all men, even those he pleads against, hold, that they
necessarily follow it.) And that faith justifies, as it is effectual, by love to
our Savior; he must mean so, else he answers not his question, How can this
be, seeing we are justified by faith only? very well, (says he) for it is not
an idle ineffectual faith which justifies, but that which works by love to our
Savior, and love is the keeping of his Commandments. Which implys that Faith
justifies our persons before God, either as it is a work, or as it is working by
love; and so he makes good works Man's righteousness cannot make himself
righteous, either in part or in whole. Homily of Salvation of Mankind, p. 17.
concauses at least with Faith, of our Justification before God; or, that faith
does justify our persons before God by good works; of which Justification he
would perhaps too have love the form, as Papists would have it to be. And this
seems to be his meaning, and of his Pilgrims guide to Jerusalem, (or rather to
Rome) because he faith, It cannot be understood nor defined without works:
which implys, that good works are of the constitutive essence of Faith, Par.
Pilgrim, p. 139. and that all definitions of justifying faith that separate
obedience from faith, are but cheats and dangerous illusions. And thence he
derides the words recumbency, adhesion, rest, acquiescence, as lazy and
slovenly expressions of Faith as justifying, though our Vrsin. Catechism. p.
27^ q. 21. p. 134. Bp. Davenants Determine. 39. and of Justif. c. 32 p. 411. Bp.
Downham of Justif. l. 6. c. 4. Dr. Ames Med. Theol. l. 1. c. 3 R. 4. Pareus in
Act 15. 6.
judicious, learned and orthodox Divines have commonly used them in defining
Faith as justifying. Or, 3. Mr. Fowler's, who says, That justifying faith is
such a belief of the truth of the Gospel, as includes a sincere resolution of
obedience unto all its precepts, or true holiness in the nature of it, and that
it justifies as it does so. Who says also, Design of Christianity, c. 19. p.
221, 223.
That this principle admitted, (viz.) that faith justifies only as it
apprehends the merits and righteousness of Christ, gives advantage to
Antinomianism* Who says, That Free Discourse, part 1. p. 164. In the 160 page
of his Free Discourse, he says, that faith justifies as it works by love.
And in p. 159. he says, it justifies as it implies obedience.
Justification is mostly attributed to faith, because (...) other graces are
virtually therein contained, and that is the principle from whence they are
derived. Whereas the truth is, it is only ascribed to faith, and that because
it is the only grace th^^ does apprehend and apply the righteousness of Christ
to the sinner, as the Church of England teaches i^ her Homily of Salvation of
Mankind, the third Part, page 19. Fai^^ only is said to justify, because it
does directly send us to Christ for remission of sins; and that by faith given
us of God we embrace the promise of Go^ mercy, and of the remission of our sins
(which thing NONE OTHER (...) our virtues or works properly does); therefore
the Scripture uses to say, that faith without works does justify. Who sait^
also, That as Free Discourse, page 188.
works signify sincere obedience (...) Christ's Gospel, neither I nor those
Preacherr can account it any scandal to have it said of us, that (...) hold
JUSTIFICATION BY WORKS: he must mean it of Justification of men's persons before
God, (else he beats the air, or cunningly equivocates) And indeed so he
explains himself: Nor need we so mince it, as to say that faith justifies our
persons, and good works our faith: for understanding works, I say, for a Page
189.
working faith, our persons (if ever they be) Socinians define justifying Faith
to be obedience, fides justificans est obedientia. Catech. Racov. c. 9. The old
Photinian Heretics called it a new creature. Wendelin. Chapter Theol. l. 1. c. 25.
p. 476. compare Dr. H's, Dr. P's, and Mr. F's Doctrines of Faith and
Justification with Socinians and Photinians, etc.
must be justified by them: Which is directly and expressly contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church of England in he^ Articles and Homilies before alleged*
Sure I am, that these men's Doctrine gives great advantage to Popery, and is
directly contrary to the prime design of Christianity, which is to advance the
glory of Gods free grace in giving us his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, who
died for our sins, and rose again for our justification; and sets up
Justification by our own righteousness, which is the same false and
Antichristian Doctrine the Papists teach. How Dr. Just as the Semi-Pelagians
do, as Alvarez shows de auxil. div. great. disp. 2. page 19, 20.
Heyli^ divides Justification between faith and good works, may be seen in his
Introduction to his Cyprianus Anglicus, p. 28. Sect. 29. What false Doctrine
concerning Justification, others of A. B. Laua's party have taught in his time,
may be seen in those two Books collected to your hands, (viz.) Laudensium
Autocatacrisis, and Laudensium Apostasia. One word to these men. What Divine,
that understood himself, and did not intend to cheat men into a Popish,
Photinian, Socinian or Arminian belief of Justification by a man's own inherent
righteousness, and consequently denying of Christ's (by which alone our persons
are justified before God) ever went about to put good works or new obedience
into the definition of Faith, as it justifies our persons before God? What, is
it a cheat in Bishop Sanderson and all sound Logicians and Philosophers, to
define a man to be animal rationale, because they make no mention of risibility,
which necessarily flows from his principles, and is really inseparable from
him? Did you never read nor hear of a praecis^^e separation of a property from
its proper subject, that is a consideration of the subject without considering
the property? (if not, I shall not doubt but that you have studied Rhetoric
more than Logic and Natural Philosophy, though you brag much of your rational
Discourses and Religion too.) Now* if the subject may be defined without its
proper passion, pray, may not the cause be considered and defined too, without
its effects? Bishop Sanderson Log. l. 3. c. 17. par. 5. p. 64.
teaches us to define habits* by their end and object. And Philosophers tell
us, that Habitus distinguuntur per actus and actus. per objecta; Habits must be
distinguished by their acts, and acts by their objects. Now the proper act of
faith as it justifies men's persons before God, is not to work by love, and
resolve upon new obedience, as you insinuate; but to receive the proper object
of Justification; which is not Gods commands formally considered, as you
insinuate, but the righteousness of Jesus* Christ, called the Lord our
righteousness* and do not Philosophers give us two definitions of the soul, the
one as it is a form of the body thus: Anima est (...), corporis physici and
organici vitam habentis in potentia, and the other as it is the efficient cause
of its operations, thus, Anima est principium quo vivimus sentimus, movemur and
intelligimus primo? what do they put a cheat upon the world* and illusions,
because in the first they mention not its effects? so here, faith is in the
Doctrine of Justification, considered by our and your orthodox Divines, as the
form of Justification taken passively, whereby believers lay hold on Christ
with all his merits, by the hand of faith, and apply them to themselves. Here*
I say, they do not consider faith* as an efficient principle or cause of either
Bishop Davenant, de justitia habituali, c. 22. p 312.
inward graces, or outward good works; for all these are excluded, or (to use
our Homily of Salvation of Mankind, p. 16, 17. Faith shuts not out
repentance, hope, love, fear of God, to be joined with faith in every man that
is justified; but it shuts them out from the office of justifying, etc.
Homilies word) shut out from the business of Justification of sinners persons
before God, as I showed before out of St. Paul's and the Church of England's
Doctrine. And they may reason thus: that which Faith excludes from
justification of sinners persons before God, cannot be put into the definition
of Faith, formally considered as so justifying; but Faith formally considered
as justifying sinners persons before God, excludes works from Justification of
sinners persons before God. (For Faith and works are in this point opposed
every where by S. Paul, as was manifested before out of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, as well as St. Paul's) Therefore good works cannot be put
into the definition of faith, as it is justifying of sinners persons before God.
And it is observable by the way too, that Faith shuts out repentance and fear
of God, as well as love, from the office of justifying of sinners persons
before God, as our Homily quoted in the Margent plainly declares. And
therefore it excludes Mr. Fowler's sincere resolution of obedience to all the
precepts of the Gospel, not only from the definition of Faith as justifying,
but also from the office of justifying men's persons before God. In the point of
justifying of men's persons before God, these Mr. Fowler's Free Discourse, p.
127.
quarrelsome sottish men (as you are pleased out of your abundant modesty to
call A. B. Usher, Bishop Downham, Bishop Davenant, Mr. Perkins, Pemble, Dr.
Ames, and many others of our own learned orthodox Divines, besides many more of
foreign Countries) consider not Faith as it is the principle of good works, but
according to its proper office as justifying, which is to rest, trust upon, to
receive and apply; and so in that office it actually needs no good works or
virtues to be coupled with it, because it is but the souls instrument to
apprehend and apply the righteousness of Christ, that is freely offered in the
Gospel to it self* and which no other grace or work of man does or can do, as
was showed before. Dr. Patrick calls this, I am naught, I have naught, his
Pilgrims charm. Par. Pilgr. p. 283. Which sure is not so good a comparison as
Mr. T. W. his painted post is of an hypocrite, condemned by him in his Debate.
He that will be Christ's disciple, must deny himself and his own righteousness,
as Paul did, Phil. 3. 7. 8 9. Christ will be a whole Savior, or none at all.
He that comes to Christ for justification with his own good works in his hand,
does in effect say, that he has in truth some, but not much need of him and
his righteousness; and thereby he incapacitates himself to lay hold upon and
receive Christ and his merits: for in^us existens prohibet extraneum, he must
let go his own works, before he can apprehend and rely only upon Christ's
merits, as he must do, as was evidenced before out of the Doctrine of our
Church of England, which says, Hom of Salv. of Mank p. 17.
We must trust only in Gods mercy, and that sacrifice which our high Priest and
Savior Jesus Christ, the Son of God, once offered for us upon the Cross, to
obtain thereby Gods grace. For further and fuller confutation of this gross and
most Antichristian error (not to say heresy, as Dr. Slater calls it) I refer
you back to what I have alleged out of the Church of Englands Books of
Homilies and Articles of Religion: upon the serious reading of which, and their
Books, and comparing them together, all judicious and sound Christians will
find, that there is great cause for all men to take heed of their Books, as of
cheats and dangerous illusions (to use Dr. Patrick's words) by which they have
defamed the sincere and sound professors and assertors of the true and pure
Protestant Religion, (which to do, their learned Dr. H. More in his Mystery
Lib. 2. c. 13. p. (...) This (says he) must needs be very antichristian and
uncharitable to misrepresent men's actions and opinions in public speeches or
writings, or invent notorious lies or fictions in the disparagement of men's
persons and Doctrines, and suborn men to write them, and divulge them to the
world for truths; which is to do as was the custom of those who were under the
Dragon, that old Serpent, and false accuser of the ancient Primitive
Christians, etc.
of Iniquity, says, is one part of Antichristianism) and cunningly under the
pretense of confuting the errors, and reproving the follies and infirmities of
Nonconforming Protestants to those errors and impositions, and modes of worship
and government which they profess they like very well, have printed (what they
have preached I cannot tell) not to say Arminian, Socinian, but Popish Errors,
contrary to the express word of God, and the sound and clear Doctrine of the
Church of England; (to which ('it is believed) they have subscribed, if not
declared their assent and consent); yea, even that antifundamental error (or
rather heresy) of Justification of sinners persons before God by their own
inherent righteousness, or good works; and thereby slighted our free
Justification by the imputed righteousness of Jesus Christ apprehended and
applied alone by true Faith in Jesus Christ; which is in effect denying the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, as their Dr. More shows in his Mystery of Iniquity, and
is obvious to every man that fully understands what the Gospel of Jesus Christ
is, and that is not resolved virtually to deny Christ to be come in the flesh,
and to profess himself to be fallen from grace, as the Apostle speaks, 1 John
4. 1, 2, 3. Gal. 5. 4. From all which I shall not peremptorily conclude any
thing, but only ask this question, as Dr. Patrick Friendly Debate, page 2, 3.
does, Can he be a good subject, a good Hom. of Salvat of Mankind, p. 16, 17.
before quoted and alleged.
Christian, and a Minister of Christ, that does so?

To conclude, it is true, that good works do either actually or habitually
accompany a true justifying Faith, or do follow a justified person; but they
have no hand or efficiency at all in the justification of a sinners person
before God, as the Doctrine of the Church of England plainly shows. We are
justified by Faith with works associative, but not by Faith and works
copulative: that is, we are justified by that F^^^h that is accompanied with
works, but not by the works that do accompany it, as concauses with it thereof;
but by faith alone; because that only (and no other virtue, grace or work, does
or can do it) apprehends and applies that which does justify our persons
before God, viz. Christ's righteousness.

ART. IV.
That Faith that does justify sinners persons before God, is a bare and naked
assent to the truth of Gods word; and that so, and as an act, habit or work in
us, it justifies. THIS I renounce, 1. Because it is contrary to the Doctrine of
the Church of England in her Homily of the Salvation of Mankind, p. 17. which
says thus, The true meaning of this Doctrine, We be freely justified by faith
without works; is not, that this our own act to believe in Christ, or that this
faith in Christ which is within us, does justify us. For that were to count
our selves to be justified by some act or virtue that is within our selves; but
the true meaning thereof is, that although we hear Gods word, and believe it;
although we have faith, we must renounce the merit of our said virtues, etc.
And in the Homily of Christ's Death and Passion, T. 2. part 2. p. 1^7. thus: The
only mean or instrument of Salvation required of our part, is faith; that is, a
sure trust and confidence in the mercies of God, etc. ut supra: where it is
clear, that the faith that does justify us, is not a bare notitia or knowledge
of, and assensus, assent unto the truth of Gods word, but also (as our sound
Divines do hold and maintain) Bishop Davenant, Determ. 37.
fiducia, a sure trust and confidence in Gods mercy, etc. So also in Homily of
Salvation of Mankind, p. 20. A true and right Christian is not only to believe
the holy Scriptures and all the Articles of our Christian Faith, (that is, to
assent to them) but also to have a sure trust and confidence in Gods merciful
promises, to be saved from everlasting damnation by Christ, whereof does follow
a loving heart to obey his Commandments. And this true Christian faith, neither
Devil has, nor yet any man, which in the outward profession of his mouth, and
in his outward receiving of the Sacraments, in coming to the Church, and in all
other outward appearances, seems to be a Christian man, and yet in his living
and deeds shows the contrary.

And also p. 22. There is a twofold faith: 1. Dead, which brings forth no
good fruits, but is idle and unfruitful, and is the faith of Devils, and of
wicked men, who confess God with their mouths, but deny him in their deeds. He
believes the Scriptures to be true, but trusts not in God for the
performance of the Promises therein. He believes not in God, and trusts not
in his mercy and grace.

2. A lively Faith is not idle or unfruitful, but works by charity. And this
is not the common belief of the Articles of our Faith, but it is also a true
trust and confidence of the mercy of God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Nothing
so much commends men to God, as this assured Faith and trust in him.

By which we may see, 1. That Faith justifies not, as it barely assents to the
word of God; which may be proved thus: That is no act of Faith as it is
justifying which Devils and wicked men may have; but assent to the word of God,
Devils and wicked men may have; therefore a bare assent to the word, is no act
of Faith as justifying. The Major is undeniable; the Minor is not only affirmed
by our Church in the said Homily, but may be proved by Jam. 2. 19. Thou
believe that there is one God, thou do well; the Devils also believe and
tremble. And that wicked men may have such faith, may be seen in Jam. 2. 14.
Wicked men may assent to the History of the Scriptures, yea to this, That Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, and Savior of the World, as those did we read of in
Joh. 2. 23, 24, Many believed in his name, when they saw the Miracles which he
did: But yet these did not put their trust and confidence in Jesus for
Salvation; they believed that he was the Christ that was promised, but they
received him not to be their Savior; For Jesus did not commit himself unto
them, because he knew all men. He knew they did not believe in him with their
hearts. And Jo^. 12 42. Among the chief rulers, many believed in him* (but they
were hypocrites), for because of the I harisees they did not confess him, lest
they should be put out of the Synagogue, for they loved the praise of men more
than the praise of God. And such a believer was Simon Magus, Act. 8. 13. He
believed and was baptized, and continued with Philip, (...) wondered, beholding
the Miracles and signs which were done, and yet his heart was not right in the
sight of God, he was in the gall of bit^^rness, and bond of iniquity; which he
discovered when he would have bought the power of giving* the Holy Ghost with
money, as may be seen in Act. 8. 19, 20. 21, 22, 23. If this assent would
justify, it would ju^^^fi^ them,

2. Faith justifies not as it is an act, habit or work; for faith puts us
from it self, and remitteth us to Christ for justification, and says it is not
I that justify you, but Christ only; it is not I that take away your sins, it
is Christ only, and to him only I send you for that purpose, forsaking therein
all your good virtues, thoughts, and works, and only putting your trust in
Christ, Hom. of Salvation of Mankind, p. 18. and before that, it says, No man
by his own acts, works and deeds, seem they never so good, can be justified and
made righteous before God. ibi. p. 13. Now the act of a man's own Faith, is a
man's own act, and therefore it cannot justify him before God.

2. Because it is contrary to the Doctrine of our learned and orthodox Divines.
1. Read what Bishop ^ascic. Controv. c. 5. q. 5. p. 266, 267.
Prideaux says, Neque tamen merito fidei justificamur, sed medio, non (...),
sed (...), non propter fidem sed per fidem, non justi facti sumus, sed
declaramur, apprehendente scilicet fide, non m^da tantum cognitione, and
assensu* sed fiducia, i^^ente salvatoris merito, quod divinae justitiae
satisfaciat. We are not justified by the merit or worthiness of Faith, but by
means of Faith; not for Faith, but by Faith; we are not made, but declared
just, by Faith apprehending, not by a naked knowledge and assent only, but by a
trust resting upon the merits of our Savior, which satisfies Gods justice.

2. Archbishop Usher to this question, How is this great benefit of
Justification applied to us, and apprehended by us? excellently and truly
answers thus: This is done on our part by faith alone, and that not
considered as a virtue inherent in us Mark, this is directly, and distinctly,
and expressly against Dr. Patrick's and Mr. Fowler's false Doctrine mentioned
before. John Bradford, that pious and learned Martyr, says, That Faith as it
justifies, is to be understood thus; not that the action it self of believing,
as it is a quality in man, does deserve it, but because it takes that dignity
of the object. For in the act of justifying faith as it is an action in man, is
not to be considered alone, but must go ever with the object, and takes its
virtue thereof. Fox his Acts and Monuments in one Volume, p. 1577.
working by love, but only as an instrument or hand of the soul stretched forth
to lay hold on the Lord our righteousness, Romans 5. 1. Romans 10. 10. Jer. 22. 6.
So that faith justifies only relatively in respect of the object, which it
fastneth on, to wit, the righteousness of Christ, by which we are justified;
faith being only the instrument to convey so grrat a benefit unto the soul,
(...) the hand of the beggar receives the alms. Sum of Christian Religion page
196.

3. Bishop Downham in his learned Treatise of Justification, (where may be seen
Mr. Fowler's Arguments and Doctrine taken out of Bellarmine, fully and
punctually answered, too long to be herein inserted) Lib. 6. c. 7. Sec. 3. in
answer to this question, Whether Faith does justify formally, as being a part
of inherent righteousness; or instrumentally only as the hand to receive
Christ, who is our righteousness? He says thus: The Roman Catholics hold the
former, the true Catholics the latter. But the former I have sufficiently
disproved before, and proved the latter^ for if we be not justified by any
grace or righteousness inherent i^ our selves, or performed by our selves,
which I have before (Li^^ 4.) by undeniable arguments demonstrated: then it
follows necessarily, that we are not justified by Faith, as it is a gift or
grace, a^^ act, or habit, or quality inherent in us. And if we be justified by
the righteousness of Christ only, which being out of us in him, imputed to
those who receive it by Faith, which also Lib. 4, and 5.
before I invincibly proved: then also it follows by necessary consequence,
that we are justified by Faith only, as it is the instrument or hand of the
soul (...) apprehend or receive Christ, who is our righteousness; wherefore,
where Faith is said to justify, it must of necessity be understood relatively,
and in respect of the object: to which purpose, both Justification and all
other benefits which we receive by Christ, are attributed to Faith, as I have
showed L. 6. c. 4. Sec. 6.
before. Not that Faith works these things but because by it we receive
Christ, and with him a^^ his merits and benefits.

And for the same cause the Faith of all the faithful, though unequal in
degrees, in some greater, in some less, is (...), alike precious in the
righteousness of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 1. which is an
evidence, That faith does not justify in respe^^ of its dignity or worthiness,
but in respect of the object which it does receive: which being the most
perfect righteousness of Christ, unt^ which nothing can be added, is one and
the same to all that receiv^^ it. Of t^is see more Lib. 1. c. 2. Sec 10.

4. Bishop Reynolds upon Psalm. 110. 4. p. 443. says thus: So the^^ between
Christ and us there must be an unity, or else there can be no imputation; and
therefore it is that we are said to be justified by faith, and that faith is
imputed for righteousness, Romans 4. 5. not the (...) credere, the act of
believing, as if that were in se accounted righteousness, as it is a work
proceeding from us by grace; but because it is vinculum and instrumentum
unionis, the bond of union between us and Christ, and by that means makes way
to the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us. And the same reverend,
learned, and orthodox Bishop in his most excellent Treatise of the Life of
Christ, p. 476. says, That preciousness of faith is seen chiefly in two
respects: 1. In regard of the Objects: and 2. In regard of the Offices of it.
And p. 478. he says, That the Offices which are peculiar to faith, are
principally these three: 1. To unite to Christ, and give possession of him. 2.
The second office wherein consists * P. 480.
the excellency of faith, is the consequent of the former, namely to justify a
man; for there is no man righteous in the sight of God any further than he is
taken into the I have inserted this, not only because it makes way for what I
have chiefly to alledg, but also that those Antichristian, Popish, Arminian,
Socinian men, who call themselves Protestants, and the dutiful Sons of the
Church of England, that do not only deny, but deride and scoff at union and
communion with Christ, which is indeed the ground of all our happiness here and
hereafter, may take notice of what a learned Bishop of their party in two
several Treatises says and proves.
unity of Christ, and into the fellowship of his merits. God is alone well
pleased in Christ; and ^^ll a man be a member of his body, a part of his
fullness, he cannot a pear in Gods presence. This was the reason why Christ
would bave none of his bones broken, or taken off from the Communion of his
natural body, Joh. 19 36. to note the indissoluble union which was to he
between him and his mystical members. So that now as in a natural body the
member is certainly fast to the whole so long as the bones are firm and sound;
so in the mystical, where the body is, there must every member be too, because
the bones must not be broken asunder. If then Christ go to heaven, if he stand
unblameable before Gods justice, we all shall in him appear so too; because his
bones cannot be broken. That which thus puts us into the unity of Christ, must
needs justify our persons, and set us right in the presence of God; and this
is our faith. The Apostle gives two excellent reasons why our Justification
should be of faith rather than of any other grace; the first o^ Gods part, that
it might be of grace. The second on the part of the promise, that the promise
might be sure to all the seed, Romans 4. 16. First, Justification that is by
faith, is of mere grace and favor, no way of work or merit; sor the act
whereby faith justifies, is an act of humility, and self-dereliction, a holy
despair of any thing in our selves, and a going to Christ, a receiving, a
looking toward him and his all sufficiency; so that as Mary said of her self,
so we may say of faith, the Lord has respect unto the lowliness of his grace,
which is so far from looking inward for matter of Justification, that it self,
as it is a work of the heart, T^ credere, does not justify, but only as it is
an apprehension or This Mr. Fowler says is false, in his Free Discourse, p.
129.
taking hold of Christ. For as the hand in the very receiving of a thing must
needs first make it self empty (if it be full before, it must let all go er^ it
take hold of any other thing); so faith being a receiving of Christ, Joh. 1.
12. must needs suppose an emptiness i^ the soul before.

Faith has two properties (as a hand) to work and to receive; when faith
purifies the heart, supports the drooping spirits, works by love, carries a
man through afflictions, and the like, these are the works of faith; when faith
accepts of righteousness in Christ, and receives him as the gift of his Fathers
love, when it embraces the promises afar off, Heb. 11. 13. and lays hold on
eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 12. this is the receiving act of faith. Now faith
justifies not by working This is directly against Mr. Fowler's Doctrine before
mentioned, and against Dr. Heylin's too.
(lest the effect should not be wholly of grace, but partly of grace, and
partly of works, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.) but by bare receiving and accepting, or
yielding consent to that righteousness, which in regard of working was the
righteousness of Christ, Romans 5. 18. and in regard of disposing, imputing,
appropriating unto us, was the righteousness of God, Romans 3. 21. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Phil. 3. 9. Page 480, 481, 482. 3. The third Office of faith, is to give us,
with Christ, all things.

5. I might alledg the Testimony of Luther, Calvin, Beza, Peter Martyr, Zanchy,
Musculus, Pareus, Polanus, Tilenus, Vrsinus, Wendelinus, Wollebius, Festus
Hominius, Amesius, Junius, Macrobius, Sharpius, Piscator, Thre^^ and many more
of our own Writers; but those you usually answer by slighting, saying, they
were particular men, and Presbyterians, or Nonconformists; therefore I forbear:
but I have quoted your own approved Authors. Take therefore the Confession of
Protestant Churches in this matter.

1. The Confession of Belgia, who, Article 22 say thus: Yet to speak properly,
we do not mean that faith by it self, or of it self, does justify us, which is
but only an instrument whereby we apprehend Christ, which is our justice.
Christ therefore himself is our righteousness, which imputes all his merits
unto us; faith is but the instrument whereby we are coupled unto him by a
participation and communion of all his benefits.

2. See also the Confession of Ausburg, who say thus: When therefore we do say
that we are justified by faith, we do not mean that we are just for the
worthiness of that virtue; but this is our meaning, that we do obtain remission
of sins, and imputation of righteousness by mercy showed us for Christ's sake.
But now this mercy cannot be received but by faith, and faith does not signify
here only a knowledge of the History, but it signifies a belief of the promise
of mercy which is granted us through our Mediator Jesus Christ. And seeing that
faith is in this sort understood of a Not of a strong fancying, as Mr. Fowler
says they do. Free Discourse, p. 127, p. 130*
confidence and trust of mercy, St. Paul and St. James do not disagree; for
whereas James says, the Devils believe and tremble, he speaks of an
Historical faith; now this faith does not justify, for the wicked and the
Devils are cunning in the History. But Paul when he says, faith is reckoned
for righteousness, he^ speaks of a trust and confidence of mercy promised for
Christ's sake, whom we must receive by faith. And so it goes on, Harmony of
Confessions, Sect. the ninth.

3. And the Synod of Dort in the second Chapter, and fourth Error rejected; the
Synod having delivered the Orthodox Doctrine, rejects the Errors of them, Who
teach that the New Covenant of Grace which God the Father by the Mediation of
Christ's death made with men, does not consist herein, viz. That we are
justified before God, and saved by faith, in so much as it apprehends the
merits of Christ; but herein, viz. That God, the exaction of perfect legal
obedience being abrogated, reputes faith it self, and the imperfect obedience
of faith, for perfect obedience of the Law, and graciously thinks it worthy of
the reward of eternal life. For these contradict the Scripture, Romans 3. 24, 25.
All are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his
blood. And with wicked Socinus, they bring in an uncouth and strange
justification of man before God, Arminians, Socinians and Papists, agree in
this Antichristian Doctrine.
contrary to the consent of the whole Church.

4. The Confession of Faith of the Church of Ireland, made, as Dr. Heylin
says, by A B. Usher, and assented and consented to by the whole Clergy there,
and allowed and confirmed by the Parliament there, and by King James here, Anno
1615: When we say that we are justified by faith only, we do not mean that the
said justifying faith is alone in man without true repentance, hope, charity,
and the fear of God, (for such a faith is dead and cannot justify.) Neither do
we mean, that this our act to believe in Christ, or this our faith in Christ,
which is within us, does of it self justify us, or deserve our Justification
unto us, for that were to account our selves to be justified by the virtue or
dignity of something that is within our selves): but the true understanding and
meaning thereof is, that although we hear Gods word, and believe it; although
we have Faith, Hope, Charity, Repentance, and the fear of God within us, and
add never so many good works thereunto; yet we must renounce the merit of all
our said virtues of Faith, Hope, Charity, and all other virtues and good deeds,
which we either have done, shall do, or can do, as things that be far too weak
and unperfect and unsufficient to deserve remission of our sins, and our
justification; and therefore we must trust only in Gods mercy, and the merits
of his most dearly beloved Son, our only Redeemer, Savior, and Justifier,
Jesus Christ. Nevertheless, because Faith directly sends us to Christ for our
Justification; and that by faith given us of God, we embrace the promise of
Gods mercy, and the remission of our sins, (which thing none other of our
virtues or works properly does) therefore the Scripture uses to say, that
faith without works, (and the ancient Fathers of the Church to the same
purpose) that only faith does justify us, By justifying faith we understand
not only the common belief of the Articles of Christian Religion, and a
persuasion of the truth of Gods word in general; but also a particular
application of the gracious promises of the Gospel, to the comfort of our own
souls; whereby we lay hold on Christ with all his benefits, having an earnest
trust and confidence in God, that he will be merciful to us for his only Sons
sake. Articles 36. 37.

This is almost the same that I have before alleged out of our Books of
Homilies.

6. I showed before the Confession of Faith of the Church of Scotland, to be
seen in the Confession of Faith made by the late learned and Orthodox Assembly
of Divines, That God does freely justify those whom he has effectually
called, not by infusing righteousness into them, but by pardoning their sins,
and by accounting and accepting their persons as righteous; not for any thing
wrought in them, or done by them, but for Christ's sake alone; not by imputing
faith it self, the act of believing, or any ^ther Evangelical obedience to
them, as their righteousness, C. 11.

And in their larger Catechism, p. 95. (which would be very use^ul and
profitable, not only for all young Students, but also for our ^roud conceited
Photinian Divines to study) they show how Faith does ^ustifie: Faith justifies
a sinner in the sight of God, not because of those other graces which do always
accompany it, or of good works that are the fruits of it, nor as if the grace
of faith or any act thereof were imputed to him for his Justification; but only
as it is an instrument, by which he receives and applies Christ and his
righteousness. Gal. 3. 11. Romans 3. 28. Romans 4. 5. with Romans 10. 10. Joh. 1. 12.
Phil. 3. 9.

Gal. 2. 16.

I conclude this particular with what Cicero said Oration. 19.
to Cataline:

Nihil horum ora vultusque movere?
ART. V.
That the persons of true Believers in Christ are not justified before God by
the righteousness of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ imputed to them on Gods
part, and apprehended and applied by faith alone on their part. THIS I
renounce, 1. Because it is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England.

1. In her 11th. Article of Religion, We are accounted righteous before God
only for the merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ That is applied by
faith, as the Thirtyfourth Article of the Church of Ireland explains it.
by faith, and not for our own good works: That we are justified by faith only,
is a most wholesome Doctrine. As more largely is expressed in the Homily of
Justification. 2. In her Homilies, as Homily for Salvation of Mankind, p. 13,
14, 15, 16. No man by his own acts, works or deeds (seem they never so good)
can be justified and made righteous before God, but every man is of necessity
constrained to seek for another righteousness or justification to be ^^ceived
at Gods own hands, that is to say forgiveness of his (...) And this
justification or righteousness, whi^^ we so receive of Gods mercy Vide 34.
Article of the Church of Ireland.
and Christ's ^^rits embraced by Faith, is taken, accepted (...) allowed by God
for our perfect and full justi^^cation. On our part we are justified by Faith
(...) the merits of Christ, which is not ours, (...) by Gods working in us. We
are justified freely by Faith, without the works of the Law. Ambrose says,
That is the Ordinance of Go^^ that they which believe in Christ should be saved
without wor^^ by faith only, freely receiving remission of their sins. And p.
18, (...) Faith puts us from it self, and remitteth or appoints us (...)
Christ for to have only by him remission of our sins, or justificatio^^ So that
our Faith does as it were say to us, It is not I that take ^^way your sins, but
it is Christ only, and to him only I send you (...) that purpose, forsaking
therein all your good virtues, word^^ thoughts, and works, and only putting
your trust in Christ: because Faith does directly send us to Christ for
remission of our si^^ and that by Faith given us of God we embrace the promise
of Go^ mercy. and of the remission of our sins, (which thing none other of our
virtues or works properly does) therefore the Scriptu^^ uses to say, That
Faith without works does justify; Faith onl^ justifies us, is all one with
St. Paul, Faith without works justifiet^ us.

And in her Homily of Christ's Death and Passion, T. 2. p. 186, 187* The only
mean or instrument of Salvation required of our part, i^ Faith, that is, a sure
trust and confidence in the mercies of God, whereby we persuade This Mr. Fowler
calls a strong fancying, and thereby labors to scoff us out of our Religion
and Faith, p. 127* 130. of his Free Discourse.
our selves that Go^ both has and will forgive our sins* that he has accepted
us again into his favor, and that he has released us from the bonds of
damnation, and received us into the number of his Elect-people, not for our
deserts, but only and solely for the merits of Christ's Death and Passion, who
became man for our sakes* and humbled himself to sustain the reproach of the
Cross, that we thereby might be saved, and made inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven; and Faith shall be imputed to us for righteousness, as well as it was
to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. And Ibid. p. 188. it is said thus: Faith is the
only instrument of Salvation now left unto us.

By which it is clear, that it justifies, not as an act, habit or work, ^ut
only as an instrument apprehending and applying the righteousness of Christ.
Observe, that the word Faith in this Proposition [We are ^ustified by faith] is
to be understood relatively with relation to, or co^otation of its object, and
is sense equivalent to this, We are justified by Christ's merits or
righteousness apprehended and applied by faith. Here is a Metonimie, where the
effect of the principal cause, Christ, is attri^uted to the instrumental cause,
Faith; as the Plow is said to enrich the husbandman, and eating is said to
nourish, that is instrumentally; it is the corn that enricheth, and the meat
that is eaten, nourishes; the Plow and eating are but the instruments. So it is
said, We are saved by hope, that is by Christ, in whom we do hope; so here it is
said, that faith justifies, that is Christ's righteousness received and applied
by Faith to the Believer, justifies him in Gods sight.

2. Because it is contrary to the judgment and declared Doctrine of all those
learned and Orthodox Divines, and Vide, Latter Confession of Helvetia, p.
(...). King James in his pious Meditations upon certain Verses of Revel. 20.
says, the Pope is Antichrist, and Popery the loosing of Satan, which he proves
by several marks, among the rest this is one, Blasphemeth he not, in denying us
to be saved by the imputation of Christ his righteousness? p. 78. And K. James
also says, That Christ's sealed ones have washed their garments, and made
themselves white in the blood of the Lamb, for they by virtue of his death are
made righteous by imputation, whose blood is the only full purgation of us from
our sins. In his Par. on Rev. c. 7. p. 22.
Confessions I named before, as may be seen before. Yea, and it is contrary to
the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, as Mr. Pemble very fully and learnedly
manifests against Papists, and Arminians, and Socinians, in his Treatise of
Justification, Sec. 2. c. 1. p. 159. where he shows, that the sentence of the
Reformed Churches concerning the manner how Faith justifies, consists in two
Branches.

1. That a sinner is justified by faith, not properly as it is a quality or
action, which by its own dignity and merit deserves at Gods hands remission of
sins, or is by Gods favorable acceptance taken for the whole and perfect
righteousness of the law, which is otherwise required of a sinner; but only in
relation unto the object of it, the righteousness of Christ, which it
embraces, and rests upon.

2. That a sinner is justified by faith in opposition unto the righteousness
works in the fulfilling of the Law, whereby no man now can be justified.

Where interpreting this Proposition, [a man is justified by faith] faith, We
must understand all things relatively thus: a sinner is justified the sight of
God from all sin and punishment by faith, that is, by the obe^^ence of Jesus
Christ believed on, and embraced by a true faith. And this ^^terpretation of
that Proposition the Reformed Churches do admit, and (...) other, rejecting as
erroneous and contrary to the Scriptures such glo^^ as ascribe any thing to the
As Dr. Heylin, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Patrick, and Mr. Fowler do, as I have declared
before.
dignity faith, or make any combination betw^^^ faith and works in the point of
our Jus^^fication. Amongst which there are th^^^ erroneous assertions touching
man's Ju^^^fication by faith, which they reject.

1. That faith justifies us [per modum causae efficientis, and merito^^ as a
proper efficient and meritorious cause, which by its own worth and ^^nity
deserves to obtain Justification, remission of sins, and the grace well doing;
this is properly Popish, which he refutes. Ibi. p. 160, 161, (...) 163. Cap. 1.
(...)

2. That we are justified by faith, sensu proprio, that is, the act of
^^lieving, in that To credere is imputed for righteousness, being accepte^ God,
and accounted unto us for that whole righteousness of the Law, wh^^^ we were
bound to perform; so that our very faith is that righteousness (...) which we
are justified in the sight of God: Non quidem merito suo, (...) propter
gratuitam acceptilationem Dei. This is the error of the Ar^^nians (with whom
the Papists agree) which they received from Faust^^ Socinus, that unhappy
Heretic, in his blasphemous Book de Christo S^^vatore; and Michael Servetus in
his second Book de Lege and Evangeli^^ Which Errors are confuted by Calvin in
his Opuscula, and ibid. by (...) Pemble, Sec. 2. c. 2. p. 164, etc.

3. A sinner is not justified by faith alone, but also by other virtues (...)
graces, as Hope, love, repentance, fear of God, etc. and this is the op^nion of
the Papists, (which whether it be not the Doctrine, the scop^^ and main drift
of our Latitudinarian Divines in their Books, let t^^ impartial and judicious
Reader truly judge) which he confutes, (...) Sec. 2. c. 3. p. 167, etc. and
which is most opposed and confuted by (...) sound Doctrine of the Church of
England, as may be easily seen (...) what I have before alleged out of it.

Now that true Believers in Christ are justified, that is, declared (...)
accounted righteous before God, acquitted from their debt, the Cu^^ of the Law,
which by their sins they have deserved at Gods hands, by and for the merits of
Christ's Christ's righteousness is not only his inherent holiness, as Mr. Fowler
falsely suggests in his Free Discourse, page 128.
passive and active obedience to the will of God his Father, which is called
Christ's righteousness imputed to them; I prove thus, by arguments taken clearly
from the Doctrine of the Church of England, and Gods word.

1. They that believe in Christ, that is, that their persons are justified
before God, are justified either by their own habitual or actual inherent
righteousness, or by the righteousness of Christ imputed to them; but they are
not justified before God by their own habitual or actual inherent
righteousness; therefore they are justified by the righteousness of Christ
imputed to them. The sequel of the Major is undeniable, because there is no
other thing by or for which they are justified; that is, absolved from the
curse of the Law, and declared not guilty, but accounted innocent and
righteous. The Minor I have proved already by the Doctrine of the Church of
England, the sentence and confession of the Reformed Churches abroad, and our
own learned Divines at home, and by the authority of Canonical Scripture. The
sum of which is this:

1. Because we are freely justified by Faith, (not as an act, habit or work,
but) as an instrument apprehending and applying the righteousness of Christ,
and not by the deeds of the Law, Romans 3. 20, 24, 28. Gal. 2. 16.

2. Because all our inherent righteousness is imperfect, and accompanied with
many sins, and therefore cannot stand before the judgment seat of God, much
less merit or procure our Justification at Gods hands. To which I add this
further, Though God has ordained us to walk in good works, yet the meaning is
not by these words to induce us to have any affiance, or to put any confidence
in our works, as by the merit and deserving of them to purchase to our selves
or others remission of sins, and so consequently everlasting life, for that
were blasphemy against Gods mercy, and great derogation to the blood-she^ding
of our Savior Jesus Christ. For it is the free grace and mercy of God by the
mediation of the blood of his Son Jesus Christ, without merit or descriving on
our part, that our sins are fo^given us, that we are reconciled and brought
again into his favor, and are made heirs of his heavenly kingdom. T. 2. Hom.
of good works, part 1. page 81.

And it is observable, that the Church of England makes Justification to be
forgiveness of sins. Homily for Salvation, p. 13. And Bellarmine himself, Lib.
1. de Paenit. says, Remissio peccatorum quid est nisi justificatio?

2. True Believers in Christ are justified the same way, and by the same means
that Abraham was; but Abraham's person was justified before God, not by his own
good works, but by the righteousness of Christ imputed to him. Ergo, true
Believers in Christ are justified by the righteousness of Christ imputed to
them. The Major is the Doctrine of the Church of England, as I showed before,
and is clear by St. Paul's Doctrine. Romans 4 11, 12. As Abraham the Father of
the Faithful was justified* so shall his faithful sons, believers in Christ, be
justified too, that* righteousness might be imputed to them also. And Romans 4.
22, 23, 24. And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness. Now it was
not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed (...) him, that is Abraham;
but for us also to whom it shall be imputed, if (...) believe on him that
raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our offenses, and
raised again for our justification.

The Minor also is clear, because he was justified by his Faith, whereby he
believed God in the promised seed that is in Christ, Ro^. 4. 3. Abraham
believed God (that God that spoke to him) and it (...) counted to him for
righteousness. And I showed before, that his Faith was taken not absolutely,
but relatively, with connotation of the object Christ promised, that was
counted to him for righteousness. So Romans 4 9. Faith was reckoned to Abraham
for righteousness. And ver. 21. and therefore it (that is his Faith in Christ
the promised seed) was imputed to him for righteousness. And our Homily says,
Ibi. supra, O^^ faith shall be imputed to us as well as it was to Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob: And it necessarily must be so, for he was not justified by
Faith as (...) act or habit, or work, as I proved before by the Doctrine of the
Church of England.

3. If God does accept and allow of Christ's active and passive obedience, and
the merits thereof as full and perfect satisfaction to his Justice for true
Believers in Christ, then they are just^fied before God by the righteousness of
Christ imputed to them; but God does accept and allow of the active and passive
obedience of Christ, and the merits thereof, as full and perfect satisfaction
to his Justice for true believers in Christ; therefore true believers in Christ
are justified before God by the righteousness of Christ imputed to them. The
sequel of the Major is evident, because Christ's obedience and merits is his
righteousness. For we say not that Christ's essential righteousness, which is in
him as God, the second Person in the Sacred Trinity, or that righteousness
which he by his Spirit and Word works in believers, is imputed to believers for
Justification; but that Mediatory righteousness of Christ, whereby he suffered
for our breach of Gods most righteous Law, (which deserves Gods curse, Gal. 3.
13.) and actively fulfilled the whole Moral Law of God for us, which we were
bound to do, Levit. 18. 5. Gal. 3. 13. Gal. 4. 4, 5. Mat. 3. 15. If a Creditor
cast his debtor into prison for non-payment of such a sum of money as he owed
him till he be paid the money, or otherwise satisfied for his debt, upon his
sureties or friends coming to him and paying him all the money, and he taking,
accepting, and allowing of it, as full and perfect satisfaction to him for the
debt, does impute it, or reckon it, or put it upon his account; and
consequently to him, as though it were paid and made by his debtor in person
himself, and does therefore in manifestation thereof deliver up his bond, or
cross his Book, and release him out of prison: So it is here, Gods accepting,
taking, and allowing of our Savior Jesus Christ's, our sureties, active and
passive obedience for us, as though actually and personally performed by us, as
full and perfect satisfaction to his Justice, and thereupon (we applying it by
Faith) pardoning our sins, delivering of us from the curse of the Law,
formally, punishments and eternal death, does thereby impute his obedience or
righteousness to us, that by Faith in Christ do make application of it to our
selves.

Now the Minor is the express Doctrine of the Church of England and Ireland,
Homily for Salvation, p. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And this Justification or
righteousness which we so receive of Gods mercy, and Christ's merits embraced by
faith, is taken, Mr. Fowler himself makes Justification and acceptance with God
all one. Free Disc. p. 134.
accepted and allowed by God for our full and perfect justification. And again
Homily for Good Friday, T. 2. p. 175. Neither was it possible for us to be
loosed of this debt of our own ability; it pleased him (that is Christ) our
Surety, to be the payer thereof, and to discharge us quit; his paying our debt,
meritoriously discharging us quit, necessarily implys, that God did accept of
the merits of his death and doings for us. And Ibi. p. 177. Christ was obedient
to his Father even to the death; and this he did for us, all that believe in
him. And such favor did he purchase for us of his heavenly Father by his
death, that for the merit thereof (if we be true Christians indeed, and not in
word only) we be now fully in Gods grace again, and clearly discharged from our
sins; those expressions that Christ did purchase for us Gods favor, and
clearly discharged us from our sins, manifest it to all the world, that God did
accept and take, and allow as full satisfaction of what Christ did for us.
Again, Ibi. p. 187, 188. Christ by his own oblation, and once offering himself
upon the Cross, has taken away our sins, and restored us again into Gods
favor, so fully and perfectly, that no other sacrifice for sin shall hereafter
be requisite or needful in all the world.

And in the 34th. Article of Religion of the Church of Ireland, they say thus:
We are accounted righteous before God only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, applied by Faith; and not for our own works or merits.
And this righteousness which we so receive of Gods mercy, and Christ's merits,
embraced by Faith* is taken, accepted, and allowed of God for our perfect and
full Justification. And in 35th Article they say thus: And whereas all the
world was not able of themselves to pay any part toward their ransom, it
pleased our heavenly Father of his infinite mercy, without any desert of ours,
to provide for us the most precious merits of his own Son, whereby our ransom
might be fully paid, the Law fulfilled, and his Justice fully satisfied. So
that Christ is now the righteousness of all them that truly believe in him. He
for them paid their ransom by his death; he for them fulfilled the Law in his
life; that now in him and by him, every true Christian may be called a
fulfiller of the Law; for as much as that which our infirmity was not able to
effect, Christ's justice has performed. And this Doctrine, (viz.) that Christ
has for us made a full and perfect satisfaction to Gods Justice, is the
express Doctrine of the Church of England in her Order of the Communion, which
says there: That Jesus Christ did suffer death upon the Cross for our
Redemption, and that he made there (by his own oblation of himself once
offered) (...) full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation and
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world. And Hom^ly of Christ's Nativity,
T. 2. p. 169. Christ made perfect satisfaction by his death for the sins of all
people. And that God does take, accept and allow it as full and perfect
satisfaction for the sins of all his elect people, is most evident by the holy
Apostles Creed (which the Church of England also believes, (as well as by the
holy Doctrine of the Canonical Scriptures) which hold that Jesus Christ did not
only die and was buried, and was for a time held under the power of death and
the grave, which was as his imprisonment; but that he was raised again for our
Justification; which declared, that God was fully satisfied with what he had
done and suffered, else he would not have let him out of Prison, Romans 4. 25.
And that he ascended up into heaven, and there sits at the right hand of
God, and that from thence he shall come to judge both quick and dead, Romans 8.
34. Heb. 1. 3. And God has declared that in him he is well pleased, Mat. 3.
17. Mat. 17. 5. And that we are complete in him, Col. 2. 18. And that we are
justified in and by him, Romans 3. 24. And that we have peace with God through
him, Romans 5. 1, 2. And that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, Romans 8. 1. And that he saves his people from their sins to the
uttermost, Mat. 1. 21. Heb. 5. 25. Of which you may see much more hereafter in
the 13th particular concerning Purgatory. To pass by many more arguments,

4 Sacred Scripture does evidently hold it forth unto all that will not
wilfully shut their eyes, or that are not judicially blinded.

1. Jer. 23. 6. This is the name whereby Christ shall be called; that is, by
all Gods people, the Lord our righteousness. See Bishop Andrews his Sermon in
locum.
All Gods people shall profess that they have their righteousness from Christ,
which is in effect the same with Isa. 45. 25. In the Lord shall all the seed of
Israel be justified, and shall glory. All the spiritual seed of Israel, that
is, all Gods Elect shall be justified, that is, shall obtain remission of their
sins, and right to everlasting life by virtue of the Son of Gods righteousness,
which shall be applied to them by Faith. So Diodate in Isa. 45. 25.

2. Rom 4 6. Blessed is the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without
works. Now that righteousness is not, cannot be inherent properly in our
persons; for that is not without works; it must necessarily therefore be
Christ's righteousness, which is imputed to him that is blessed.

3. Romans 5. 17, 18, 19, For if by one man's offense (i. e. Adams) death reigned
by one (i e. by Adam) much more they which receive abundance of grace, and of
the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ; therefore
as by the offense of one, (that is Adam) judgment came upon all men unto
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one (that is Christ the second
Adam) the free gift camt upon all men (that is, that are elected in Christ)
unto justification of life. This next verse makes it most clear: For as by one
man's disobedience (that is Adams) many (that is, all that were naturally in
Adam by ordinary generation) were made sinners; so by the obedience of one
(that is of Christ) many (that is all Gods Elect) shall be made righteous. Not
efficiently and meritoriously only, but formally; as by Adams disobedience we
we^^ made sinners, not efficiently and meritoriously only, but formally for his
first sin was imputed to us and made our sin: so are believers Christ formally
made righteous by the Imputation of Christ's righteousness them.

4. 1 Cor 1. 30. Christ is made to us of God, wisdom, and righteousne^^ and
sanctification, and redemption. Where the blessed Apostle does ^^presly
distinguish righteousness from sanctification; the righteousness (...) Christ
imputed to us, from inherent righteousness wrought in us.

5. To this might be added this, That no righteousness but the rig^teousness of
Christ, who is God and man in one Person, is now (...) to satisfy the justice
of God, and purchase for us remission of our (...) and perfectly fulfill the
Law of God for us; and therefore St. (...) who understood himself very well,
Phil. 3. 8, 9, Counted all thing but dung that he might win Christ, and be
found in him, not having his o^^ righteousness, which is of the Law; but that
which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith. That is, clothed wit^ the righteousness of Christ imputed to him, as not
only Dr. Featly, b^^ all our sound Divines that have written upon the place,
expou^^ it.

6. Before I leave this point, I p^^ observe Tilen. Syntag. de Justif. p. 724.
Wend^lin. Theol. lib. 1. c. 25. These. 8. p 491.
with Divines, That remiss^^ of sins or absolution from the curse of t^^ Law,
and the imputation of the righteousness of Christ, are not two diverse or
disti^^ integranting parts of Justification, or two acts in number and really
distinct, but one and the same act respecting two terms, a quo and ad que^ from
which and to which. As darkness is by one and the same act expelled the air,
and light introduced into the air; so by one and t^^ same act of Justification
is the sinner absolved from guilt, and pronounced just; by one and the same act
is the sinners sin pardoned, and the righteousness of Christ imputed to him.
Remission of sins, and imputation of righteousness, are not two diverse or
distinct parts, secu^dum ess^, but only secundum dici; in nature, but name and
sound; for either of them taken asunder does express the whole nature of
Justification, as appears Romans 4. 6, 7. where the Apostle purposely handling
this argument, does use to remit sins, and to impute righteousnes^ as things or
phrases of equal force or signification. David describe^^ the blessedness of
man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works, saying, blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, Psalm. 32. 1, (...).

To these arguments I might add what Cardinal Contarenus in tracta^^u de
Justificatione does teach, to be seen in Dr. Ames his Bellarminus Enervatus T.
4. l 6. c. 1. p. 128. and what Cardinal Cajetan also says to the same purpose,
there to be seen; but I forbear, because I am now to deal with Protestants in
profession, though Papists indeed in those points about Justification. And that
you may see I do not wrong them, I shall here insert what Mr. Fowler And I hope
I may without offense call them so, seeing they hold the very same that Papists
do in their tract of Justification, seeing he calls us Antinomians, for holding
the Doctrine of St. Paul.
says, that he and his party do hold, Free Discourse, p. 1. p. 125. he says,
That those men are angry with those Preachers, (that is, his Latitudinarian
party) that preach a truly As if those he writes against, did not preach such a
moral and real righteousness as well as they: and as though Christ's
righteousness which is imputed to believers, were not such.
moral, and real righteousness, because they hear no talks from their Pulpits
of an imputative righteousness. And p. 126* he says, They do not use the
phrase so often, but they believe the thing in their sense, that is, so to
handle the doctrine of imputed, as to show the necessity of inherent
righteousness, (that is, as he explains himself elsewhere, to the justification
of a sinners person before God; which whether it be not downright Jesuitical,
or if you rather will, Socinian-Popery, let the judicious and indifferent
Reader judge.) This then is their notion of Christ's imputed righteousness, that
those which are sincerely righteous, and from an inward living principle allow
themselves in no known sin, nor in the neglect of any known duty, which is to
be Evangelically righteous, shall be dealt with and rewarded in and through
Christ, as if they were perfectly and in a strict legal sense so. It Is certain,
(I acknowledge) that those that are justified are sincere, but that their
sincerity does antecede, or copulatively or concausally concur to the
Justification of their persons before God, with the righteousness of Christ
imputed to them, is a grossly false notion of Christ's imputed righteousness, and
amounts to no more than what the Papists teach, That Christ has merited that
our works might merit; and is directly contrary to the Doctrine of the Church
of England, as I have showed before. And besides, he speaks not out plainly,
but says, they shall be dealt with and rewarded in and through Christ; but
how, whether as the efficient, or meritorious or formal cause, he does not
show. The latter he cannot mean, because he denies the Justification of a
sinners person before God upon the account of the imputed righteousness (...)
Christ. And p. 127. he says thus, I am confident that this (which (...)
immediately before gave) is the only true notion of the imputed righteousness
of Christ. And p. 128. The true notion (he says of those m^^ he writes
against) of the imputed righteousness of Christ is this, that Christ's
righteousness Christ's righteousness is more than his inherent righteousness, as
I showed before.
or inherent holiness, is as co^pleatly made It Is so by Gods imputation.
theirs, as if they themselves were completely and perfectly righteous; and
that upon no other They call not Faith a condition, but the only instrument of
the soul.
condition or qualification wrought in them, but (...) believing, whereby too
many of them me^^ strongly fancying this rightcousness to (...) theirs. This he
says in the Margent, i^ a false notion of it, and is grossly false doctrine.
For he says, there are two pal^ble mistakes in it: 1. That Christ's
righteousness is properly It Is as properly made ours by imputation, as Adam's
first sin is made ours.
made ours. I am confident, there is no Scripture that tells us (...) All that
we find asserted in the Gospel (...) to this matter is this, that real benefits
(...) advantages which are likewise exceeding^^ great But what are they? is
justification one of them or not, in the sense I have treated of it?
and excellent, do by the righteousness of Christ accrue to us: and those
^^less great and excellent, than if that righteousness were in the most proper
se^^ ours. 2. The other mistake is, that this righteousness is made ours, upon
no other terms than that of believing Who says so? what other terms are
required on our part besides faith in Christ (believe and thou shall be saved)
antecedent to Justification?
it is so. This is not only a And yet this man says, Conformists must not
write against the Doctrine of the Church of England.
false, but also a most dangerous opinion. And then he says, That be and his
moral Preachers are careful to show the falsity and defectiveness of some
definitions of faith, of dangerous consequence; and that this is one of the
false ones, namely, that is is a taking hold of Who are the men that so define
it? and where? Assembl. Definition of Justifying Faith.
Christ's righteousness; or a believing th^^ it is made over to us, p. 129, 130
this he calls a mysterious faith, and non-s^nse, p. 130. The Learned and
Or^hodo^ Assembly of Divines in their larger Catechism did give us this
Definition of justifying Faith: Justifying faith is a saving grace wrought in
the heart of a sinner by the Spirit and Word of God, whereby he being convinced
of his sin and misery, and of the disability of himself and all other creatures
to recover him out of his lost condition, not only assenteth to the truth of
the promise of the Gospel, but receives and rests upon Christ and his
righteousness therein held forth for pardon of sin, and for the accepting and
accounting of his person righteous in the sight of ^o^ for salvation. Joh. 1.
12. Act. 16. 32. Phil. 3. 9. Is this a false or defective definition of Faith,
or nonsense? if it be, speak out and prove it. And p. 130, 131. he says, The
reason why those moral Preachers use not at all* or but seldom the phrase
imputed righteousness, is because those men's very untoward notion has so
leavened And yet you will use the word Altar, and the phrase holy Altar, though
the Papists have level^^ it with their false notion of oftering the sacrifice
of Christ's body and blood upon it.
the heads of the vulgar, that they can scarcely hear of Christ's imputed
righteousness, but they are ready to make an ill use of it, by taking from
thence occasion to entertain low and disparaging thoughts of an inward real
righteousness. I think (says he) it would be well if it were never used.

I pray mark: 1. He calls our Orthodox Divines notion of Christ's imputed
righteousness, an ^ntoward notion. 2. He gives a Popish reason, and very
untoward false and dangerous one, why his Divines use not the phrase imputed
righteousness, because, forsooth, 't^s in danger to be abused; the same that
Papists give for their prohibiting vulgar people to read the holy Scriptures in
a known tongue, left they should abuse it. 3. Christ's righteousness and the
imputation thereof must not by these men's reason be mentioned, Lest people
should take occasion to disparage man's own real moral righteousness. Does not
this show that you prefer your own righteousness above Christ's? And page 132.
he says, But take notice that this expression, [Christs So says Bellarmine,
as T^lenus in his Syntag. de Justi^. p 726. tells us where he says frontem
persricat Bellarmi^^ It Is plainly in Romans 4. 6. ^hil. 3. 8. 9. and by necessary
consequence in Romans 5. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 1. 30. and many other pl^ces of Script. 2
Cor. 5. (...)
imputed righteousness] is not to be found in all the Bible, Nor in any of the
places where we find the word imputed relating to the righteousness of Christ,
at all to be understood; but only an effectual faith, which is the very same
with inherent righteousness, which as I said, is that moral righteousness only
that those Preachers may be justly charged with altogether insisting upon, p.
133. Here the man speaks out plainly, that our persons are justified before God
by our own inherent righteousness, as it is taken in opposition (...) the
righteousness of Christ imputed to us, which latter he utterly denies. And in
his other Book entitled, The design of Christianity* c. 19. p. 221. he says,
That faith justifies as it includes a sincere resolution of obedience -- or
true holiness* in the nature of it. Which is as directly contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church of England, as any that his Father Bellarmine has
written concerning Justification, whose arguments he urges and improves, as
will be evident to any man that reads Bishop Downham of Justification, and Dr.
Ames his Bellarminus Enervatus. And in p. 133. of his Free Discourse, he says,
There are but two Chapters in all the New Testament, where we find the word
imputed mentioned, as relating to righteousness; one is in the fou^^ to the
Romans, and the other the second of St. James. In the fourth to the Romans we
have it four or five times; and it is most evident, that there still it is to
be interpreted, as I said, (that is above, p. 132.) Which is most false; it is
evident, that it is taken, as all our sound Protestant Divines understand it, of
Faith, not as it is effectual by works, but as it is relatively considered,
apprehending the righteousness of Christ, and applying it to our selves, as I
have showed before. Bishop Sanderson was no Antinomian, consider what he says,
That Justification of sinners by the imputed righteousness of Christ
apprehended and applied unto them by a lively Faith, without the works of the
Law, is a sound, true, comfortable, profitable and necessary Doctrine. Sermon.
upon Rom* 3. 8. p. 49. in 410.
of an effectual faith, which is the very same with inherent righteousness. And
what he says for confirmation of his opinion, That Abraham was justified by
his faith as it was operati^^ by good moral works, (that is, in St. Paul'^
sense, that his person was justifie^ before God by it as so operative: else he
speaks not to the purpose, as Bellarmine commonly does; for it is yielded* That
Abraham's faith was justified by works, and declared before men, yea and his
person too before men, that 'twas a true and living faith, and not a dead
faith, or a mere profession of faith, and that he was a justified person) is
very false, and his endeavor to prove it, is like it. He says, The Apostles
design in the fourth Chapter, is to prove that the observance of Mosaical
rites, whereof Circumcision was the chief, is not necessary to men's
Justification or acceptance with God; and this he would prove by the instance
of Abraham, who was accepted, and also very high in Gods favor, even while he
was in uncircumcision, p. 134.

But to this I say, that it is clear the Apostles design in that Chapter is to
prove that no men's persons are justified by works, but that all that are
justified are justified only by Faith in Jesus Christ; and lest any should
think that only the Jews were thus justified by Faith in Christ without the
works of the Law, he proves that even the Gentiles and the Jews are justified
the same way, even by faith in Christ, because Abraham was so justified before
he was circumcised, v. 9. Comes the blessedness upon the circumcision only, or
upon the uncircumcision also? No, but it comes upon both Jews and Gentiles
alike; for Abraham was justified by faith in Christ before he was circumcised
-- that he might be the father of all them that believe, though they be not
circumcised; that righteousness, that is, that Christ's righteousness, might be
imputed to them also. And p. 136. he says, That St. James his design was to
prove against Gnostics, who were ranting Sir, we are no more Antinomians than
St. Paul was, nor Gnostics.
Antinomians, the absolute necessity of new obedience, in order to men's being
received This is most false.
into Gods favor; that is, justified or accepted as righteous. By which it is
clear, that he makes, as Dr. Patrick does, new obedience to go before
Justification. In p. 137. he expounds Phil. 3. 9. of inherent righteousness,
and to that end says, that Paul chiefly desired to be found in Christ. Whereas
it is clear, that there is no such expression nor meaning, but that he desires
only to be found in Christ. not having mine own righteousness, which is of the
Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is
of God by faith; that is, clothed with the righteousness of Christ imputed to
him, as all our Orthodox Divines expound the place, as Calvin, Piscator, Dr.
Featly, Diodate, Beza in Locum. And Dr. Willet in his Synopsis Willet Synopsis
Papismi. page 580, 986, 1000. Bp. Prideaux Fascic. Controversiarum, c. 5. q. 5.
p. ^66. Bp. Downham of Justifica^. l 7. c. 3. (...). 15. p. 460. Assembly of
Divines in their larger Catechism of justifying Faith.
Papismi 12th. Genesis Controversy of the Sacrament of Baptism, (in answer to
Bellarmine, who denies that we are justified formally by the righteousness of
Christ, but that we are justified by our own righteousness inherent in us)
answers thus: This is a great Vid. King James his saying to this purpose
before, p (...). in the Margent.
blasphemy, and contrary to the Apostle, who says, That I might be found not
having mine own righteousness which is by the Law, but the righteousness of God
through faith, Phil. 3. 9. The righteousness (...) God by faith is not our own
righteousness, but we are justified by the righteousness of God, that is, by
the righteousness of Christ, by God imputed to (...) And so Bishop Downham
expounds the place, and answers Bellarmine's shifts, and Mr. Fowler's
improvement of them; which learned answer of his is too large here to be
inserted; where he proves ou^ of Chrysostom and Ch^mnitius, that the Apostle
did in the point of Justification of his person before God, account all his
works, not only those before his conversion, but even those since, yea his
works both past and present, as loss and dung. Though these men declare
themselves by their works to be Factors for Rome, preach and print most
Antichristian Popish Doctrine, and such as some of the honester and sounder
sort of Papists have disclaimed and written against, with approbation of the
learned and Regent Papists themselves, as Dr. Ame's shows out of Contarenus,
whose works were approved by the Regent Doctors of Divinity at Paris, An. 1572.
Contarenus words are these Dr. Ames Bellar. Enervat. T. 4. lib. 6. de Justif.
c. 1. These. 1. compared with his 13th Protestants argument, page 151.
Quoniam (inquit) ad duplicem justiti^^ pervenim^^^ per sidem, justitiam
inhaere^tem nobis and charitatem, ac gratiam, qua efficimur consortes divinae
naturae and justitiam Christi, nobis donatam and imputatam. quoniam ins^^rti
sumus, and induimus Christum, restat inquirere, utranam debeamus niti, and
existimari nos justificari coram Deo, idest, sanctos and justos haberi? ego
prorsus existimo, pie and Christian dici, quod debeamus niti, niti inquam,
tanquam restabili, quae certo nos sustent^t, justitia Christi nobis donata, non
aute^^ sanctitate and gratia nobis inherente, haec etenim nostra justitia est
inchoata and imperfecta, qu^ tueri nos non potest, quin in multis offendamus,
quin assidue peccemus Id circo in conspeclu Dei non possumus ob hanc justitiam
nostram haberi justi and boni, quemadmodum deceret filios Dei esse bonos and
sanctos, Sed justitia Christi nobis donata est vera and perfecta justitia, quae
omnino placet oculis Dei, in qua nihil est quod Deum offendat, quod De^^ no^
summope^^ placcat ^ac ergo sola re certa, and stabili nobis ^^tendum est, and
ob eam solam credere nos justificari coram Deo, id est, justos ^aberi and dici
justos.

Now I suppose Mr. Fowler will have no just cause to blame me for discovering
so plainly his erroneous opinions, seeing I have dealt can^id^y with him in
repeating his own words; and he will thereby in re^se that preferment which he
has gotten already by his printing these his erroneous Doctrines I have
confuted. Though I confess I have taken this pains to convince and convert him,
and prevent others To preach against Calvin's Doctrine was the way to
Preferment, as Heylin shows in Cyp. Angl. p. 68.
embracing of his Errors. To all which I shall add Bishop Sanderson's judgment,
Justification of sinners by the imputed righteousness of Christ, apprehended
and applied unto them by a lively Faith, without the works of the Law, is a
sound, true, comfortable, profitable and necessary Doctrine. Sermon. upon Romans 3.
8. p. 49. in 4 to.

ART. VI.
That men's foreseen This is an old Pelagian Error, as St. Aug. showed, l. 2. de
Predest. Sanct. c. 18. Alvarez. de Auxil. Div. Grac^^ Disp. 1. p. 12. n. 16.
Faith, repentance, good works and perseverance, were the true causes moving
God to elect them to eternal Salvation. THis I renounce: Because 1. it is
contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, Homily of Christ's Death and
Passion, T. 2. p. 2. p. 186. Christ's death was caused by man's sin; and Gods
mercy proccedeed from Gods free love to mankind, without any merit or desert on
our part. And a little before in the same Homily, p. 1^^. Our acts and deeds
are full of imperfectness and infirmities; and therefore nothing worthy of
themselves to stir God to any favor.

And therefore I conclude, that it proceeded not from man's foreseen good will,
or Gods foresight, that he would use his will well, as believe in Christ, and
persevere in well-doing, etc. but from Gods own good will to him.

2. It Is contrary to Sacred Scripture, for the holy Scriptures do every where
(where they treat of this Election) ascribe it to Gods (...), Purpose,
good will or free grace, as Ephesians. 1. 4. 5. According as he has chosen us in
him before the foundations of the world, That we should be holy and without
blame before him in love; having predestined us unto the adoption of children
by Jesus Christ to himself, according to (...) good pleasure of his will, to
the praise of the glory of his grace, where he has made us accepted in the
beloved. Where it is clear, that we are ^^cted to holiness, and not for our
holiness, of which Faith is a chief pa^^ So verse the ninth of the same
Chapter, Having made known unto the mystery of his will, according to his good
pleasure, which he has p^^posed in himself. So v. 11. Being predestined
according to the purpose him, who works all things after the counsel of his
own will. So 2 Timothy 1^^ Not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began.
So Romans 9. 1^^ 16. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have
comp^^ on on whom I will have compassion. So then it is not of him that
wills, (...) of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. So Romans 9.
11, 12, 1^ For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or
(...) that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works,
(...) of him that calls; It was said to her, The elder shall serve the
young^^ as it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. So Rom 8
(...) 30. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conforme^
(...) the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many breth^^
(mark it, they were predestined, that they might be conformed to the image of
Christ, not because he foresaw they would be so themselves Moreover whom he did
predestinate, them he also called; and whom called, them he also justified; and
whom he justified, them he also glorifi^^ From whence I reason thus:

1. If men's foreseen Faith, good works, and perseverance therei^ did move God
to elect them to Salvation, then their Election was n^^ of mercy and free
grace, but of justice; seeing he did but choose th^^ to glory, because he saw
they were worthy, and so their Electi^^ was not of Gods free grace, but of man's
desert.

2. If God elected men to eternal life because he did foresee th^^ would
believe and do good works, etc. then Election was of him th^^ wills, and of
him that runs, and not of him that shows mercy which is directly contrary
to the express word of God.

3. If Elect on was for foreseen Faith and good works, then it follows, that
the object of Election was not fallen man, and so miserable, and an object of
mercy (as all our most sound Divines do commonly hold, and which opinion the
Popish Arminian party appro^^ of, more than they do of the Superalapsarian way)
but man restored (...) grace and justified, which all sound Divines deny.

4. The effect of Election was not, cannot be the moving cause of Election: But
Faith and good works are the effects of Election, and therefore they were not,
they cannot be the moving cause of Gods electing men to Salvation. The Major is
undensable, because the cause is before the effect, and the effect is after the
cause. The Minor is clear by express Scripture, Act. 13. 48. And as many as
were ordained to eternal life, believed. Where it is evident, that their
believing is an effect or fruit of Gods ordaining them to eternal life. So
Ephesians. 1. 4. According as he has chosen us in him before the foundations of
the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him. And Romans 8. 29,
30. Whom he did foreknow, (that is eternally elect) he also did predestinate to
be conformed to the image of his Son. Where conformity to the image of Christ
is an effect of Predestination, not a cause moving God to elect us; and by
conformity, cannot be meant only of conformity to Christ in suffering
afflictions, or bearing the Cross, as Arminians would falsely expound the
place; for so many of Gods elect Infants and others would be excluded out of
the number of Gods Elect. For many of them pass out of this world without
suffering of the Cross, as Christ did, and live here in this world in wealth,
and peace, and honor. And the next following words gainsay that gloss, That he
might be the firstborn among many brethren. Now Christ was not only the
firstborn among many brethren in regard of suffering affliction, but also and
chiefly in respect of holiness and happiness; We his Elect-brethren are
predestihated to be conformed to him in righteousness and holiness here, and
glory and happiness hereafter and consequently that we might believe and do
good works and persevere therein. For these are part of our inherent
righteousness or conformity to Christ our elder Brother He was called properly
the firstborn for his superexcellent grace, and in that our conformity to him
here was predestined from all eternity, and also our Glorification with him
in Heaven hereafter, as the next words explain the former: Whom he did
predestinate, them he also called, justified, and glorified. Vocation,
Justification, and Glorification, are the things we are to be conformed to, the
Image of Christ. And here may be observed, that Vocation, and Justification,
and Glorification, (which include or presuppose Faith in Christ, and good
works, and perseverance) are fruits of Election, and not causes.

5. If our Election was of foreseen Faith and good works, th^^ Gods electing of
us, was in order of nature after, and the fruit (...) our electing of God, and
so we should be said to choose him, (...) love him first; which is directly
contrary to Canonical Scripture Joh. 15. 16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you, and (...) dained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and
that your fr^^ should remain. Where it is clear, that the Apostles (who
reprsented not only Ministers of the Gospel, but also all Gods Church which
consists only of his Elect) did not choose God first, but (...) chose them
first. And that he did not ordain them to eter^^^ life, because he did foresee
that they would go and bring fort fruit, and persevere in well-doing; but that
they, and by con^^quence we might do so. So 1 John 4. 10. Herein is love, not
that (...) loved God, but that he loved us. That is first, as the 19 verse
(...) pounds this tenth, We love him because he loved us first.

6. Gods Election of man to Salvation cannot be from his for seeing that man
would believe, and do good works; for (...) has not since his Fall sufficient
power of himself to will to b^lieve or do good works; for it is God that
works in us both (...) will and to do, Ephesians. 2. 13. Yea, the Apostle speaks
plainly, Ep^^ 2. 8. That we are saved by grace through faith, and that that
faith is not (...) our selves, but that it is the gift of God. And so holds the
Chur^^ of England frequently in her Book (...) Homilies, For it is the Holy
Ghost, (...) Homil. of the Nativity of Christ, T. 2. p. ^67.
no other thing that does quicken (...) minds of men, stirring up good and g^^
motions in their hearts, which are agreeable to the will and comman^ment of
God, such as otherwise of their own crooked and perverse ^^ture they should
never have. That which is born of the flesh is fle^^ly, as who should say, man
of his own nature is fleshly, and c^^nal, and corrupt, and naught, sinful and
disobedient to G^^ without any spark of goodness in him, without any virtuous
or go^^ motions, only given to evil thoughts and wicked deeds: as for the fruit
of the Spirit, the fruit of faith, charitable and godly motions, if he ha^^ any
at all in him, they proceed only of the Holy Ghost, who is the (...) worker of
our Sanctification, and makes us new men in Christ Jes^^ (...) Homily
concerning the coming down of the Holy Ghos^ p. 209. We must needs agree that
whatsoever good thing is in us, either of grace or nature, or fortune, is of
God only, as the only auth^^ and worker. Verily, that holy Prophet Isaiah
bears record, and sait^ O Lord, it is thou of thy goodness that bast wrought
all our works in us, not we our selves. And to uphold the truth in this matter
against all justitiaries and hypocrites, which rob Almighty God of his honor,
and ascribe it to themselves, St. Paul brings in his belief; We be not (says
he) sufficient of our selves, as of our selves, once to think any goodthing,
but all our ableness is of Gods goodness; for he it is in whom we have all our
being, our living and moving: It is meet to think that all spiritual goodness
comes from God above only. Homily for Rogation-Week, p. 217.

3. It Is contrary to the Doctrine of the reformed Churches. The French Church
says thus, We believe that out of this universal corruption and damnation,
wherein by nature all men are drowned, God did deliver and preserve some, whom
by his eternal and immutable counsel of his own goodness and MERCY, WITHOUT ANY
RESPECT OF THEIR WORKS, he did choose in Christ Jesus; and others he left in
that corruption and damnation, in whom he might as well make manifest his
justice by condemning them justly in their time, as also declare the riches of
his mercy in the others. The Confession of the Church of Belgia, is this; We
believe that God (after the whole offspring of Adam was cast headlong into
perdition and destruction (through the fault of the first man) has declared
and showed himself to be such a one as he is indeed, namely, both merciful and
just; merciful in delivering and saving those from condemnation, and from
death, whom in his eternal counsel of HIS OWN FREE GOODNESS, he has Aliud est
in Christo legi, aliud in Christo esse; in Christo elegi est ex mundo and
numero periuntium (...) Christo, ut redemptus ab ipso, and fide donatus in
ipso, Mac. red. Th. Pol. (...). 7. q. 4. p. 67.
chosen in Jesus Christ, WITHOUT ANY REGARD AT ALL OF THEIR WORKS, Harmony of
Confessions, Sect. 5. p. 86, 87. The Church of Ireland in the 14th. Article of
her Confession of Faith, says thus; The cause moving God to predestina te unto
life, is not the foreseeing of faith, or perseverance, or good works, or of any
thing which is in the person predestined, but only the good pleasure of God
himself; for all things being ordained for the manifestation of his glory, and
his glory being to appear, both in the works of his mercy, and of his justice;
it seemed good to his heavenly Wisdom, ^o choose out a certain number, toward
whom he would extend his undeserved mercy, leaving the rest to be spectacles of
his justice. And (...) former part of this Article is the Doctrine of the
Church of E^^land also, in express terms, set down in the second Article of
^^beth, to be seen in the end of this book; how, and by whom (Ar^^ bishop
Whitgift, and several Bishops, Fletcher Elect of London, V^^han Elect of
Bangor, Tindale Dean of Eli, Dr. Whitaker, Mr. Perki^^ Mr. Chaderton, etc.) and
upon what account, Dr. Heylin in part sh^^ in his Cyprianus Anglicus, lib. 3.
p. 2^ 204. viz. Peter Baroes venting Ar^^nian, It cannot be denied but that the
same Doctrine is maintained by Arminius, and that it is the very same with that
of the Church of Rome, as appears by the Council of Trent. Co^^. 3, 4. Heylins
Introduction to his Cyp. Anglicus, p. 36.
which, as Dr. Heylin himself c^^^fesseth, is agreeable to Franciscan ^^pish
Doctrine; and which the Parliment of 1628. remonstrated to the (...) and
Kingdom to be a cunning (...) bring in Popery; the professors of (...)
opinions, being common disturbers of (...) Protestant Churches, and
incendiarie^ (...) those States, wherein they have gotte^^ head; being
Protestanis in show, but Jesuits in opinion and practice, (...) Angl. l. 3. p.
181. Now that the Articles of Lambeth are the se^^ of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, may be gathered not ^^ly from A. B. Vshers taking these
Articles into the Articles of Relig^^ of Ireland, and King James his approving
of them; but also by (...) declarations of the Commons Assembled in Parliament
in or ab^^ the year 1628, June 14. We (...) Commons of England now Assemb^^
Declaration of the Commons.
in Parliament, do claim, profess, (...) aver for truth the sense of the
A^^cles of Religion which were established in Parliament the (...) year of
Queen Elizabeth, which by the public Acts of the Churc^^ of England, and the
general and current exposition of the Writer of our Church, have been delivered
to us; and we reject the s^^ of the Jesuits, Arminians, and all others, wherein
they differ fr^^ us: To be seen in Dr. Heylins Cyprianus Anglicus, l. 3. p.
190. A^ the Parliament afterward declared (...) presly the Articles of Lambeth
to be (...) Articles of Lambeth declared to be the Doctrine of the Church of
England.
Doctrine of this Church of England, (...) that all that did oppose them were
to (...) called in question; which declaration Heylin informs us of in his Cyp.
Angli^^ l. 3. p. 197. The Synod of Dort (in which were several of our Learn^^
and Orthodox Divines (as Bishop Carleton, Davenant, Hall, Dr. Ward, Dr.
Belcanquall) in their 1st Chapter and 9th Article, say thus: This said Election
was made, not upon foresight of faith, and the obedience of faith, holiness, or
of any other good quality or disposition (as a cause or condition before
required in men to be chosen) but unto faith, and the obedience of faith,
holiness, etc. and therefore Election is the fountain of all saving-good, from
whence faith, holiness, and the residue of saving-gifts, lastly everlasting
life it self, do flow, as the fruits and effects thereof; according to that of
the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 4. He has chosen us (not because we were, but) that we
should be holy, and without blame before him in love: And therefore Error the
5th, they reject as erroneous the Doctrine of them, who teach, That the
incomplete, and not peremptory Election We deny any such incomplete Election.
of singular persons, is made by reason of foreseen Faith, Repentance, Sanctity
and Godliness begun, or continued for some time: but the complete and
peremptory Election, by reason of the final perseverance of foreseen Faith,
Repentance, Sanctity and Godliness; and this is the gracious and evangelical
worthiness, by which he that is chosen, becomes worthier than he that is not
chosen: and therefore that faith, the obedience of faith, sanctity, godliness,
and perseverance are not the fruits and effects of unchangeable Election unto
glory, but conditions and causes, sine quibus non (that is to say, without
which a thing is not brought to pass) before required and foreseen, as already
performed by those who are completely to be chosen: A thing repugnant to the
whole Scripture, which everywhere beats into our ears and hearts these and
suchlike sayings, Romans 9. 11. Election is not of works, but of him that
calls. Act. 13. 48, As many as were ordained unto life-eternal, believed.
Ephesians. 1. 4, He has chosen us that we should be holy. John 15. 16, Ye have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you. Romans 11. 6, If of grace, not of works. 1 John
4. 10, Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he first loved us, and
sent his Son, etc. The Church of Scotland says, That those of manking that are
predestined unto life, God before the foundations of the world were laid,
according to his eternal and immutable purpose, and the secret counsel and good
pleasure of his will, has chosen in Christ unto everlasting glory, out of his
mere free grace and love, without any foresight of faith or good works, or
perseverance in either of them, or any other thing in the creature, as
conditions or causes moving hi^ thereunto, and all to the praise of his
glorious grace Whi^^ Confession may be seen in the Confession of Faith, made by
the (...) learned Assembly of Divines, c. 3. Art. 5.

4. It Is contrary to the Doctrine and Confession of our godly Ma^tyrs. Robert
Clover, Master of Arts, and Martyr, in answer to (...) Devil objecting against
him his own unworthiness, says, That (...) Fathers before him were no bringers
of any goodness to Go^ but altogether receivers; they cho^^ not God first, but
God chose th^^ Fox his Acts and Monuments in one Folio, p. 1618. 2 Col.
first; they loved not God first, (...) he loved them first; yea, he bo^^ loved
and chose them when th^^ were his enemies, full of sin and corruption, and void
of (...) goodness. And that stout, and learned, and orthodox Martyr, Mr. John
Philpot, in answer to Dr. Saverson, and saying th^^ Where is there one of your
Synagogues of Rome that ever h^^ been able to answer any of the godly learned
Ministers of (...) many, who have disclosed your counterfeit Religion? Which
(...) you all (at this day) is able to answer Calvin's Institutions, wh^^^ is
Minister of Geneva? To whom Dr. Saverson said, A go^^ Minister indeed of
Cut-purses and Runnagate Traitors; and of (...) I can tell you, there is such
contention fallen between him and (...) own Sects, that he was fain to fly
(...) Town A gross lie or mistake, which Hooker in his Preface to his Eccles.
Pol. confutes.
about Predestination. (...) whom, and which, John Philpot (...) swereth thus:
I am sure you blasphe^^ that godly man, and that godly C^^ where he is
Minister, as it is your Churches condition, when you (...) not answer men by
learning, to oppress them with blasphemies and (...) reports; for in the matter
of Predesti^^tion Fox Acts and Monuments in one Volume, p. 1697. 2 Col.
HE IS IN NO OTHER OPINION THAN ALL THE DOCTOR^ OF THE CHURCH BE, AGREEING TO
THE SCRIPTURES. Mark (...) words, for the matter of Predestination; he, that is
Calvin, is of (...) other opinion than all the Doctors of the Church be, and
agreei^^ to the Scriptures. And in answer to the Bishop of Coventrey, (...)
said plainly thus: Fox Acts and Monuments in one Volume, p. 1721. 1 Col.
I allow the Church of Geneva, and the Doctrine of the same; for it is una
Catholica and Apostolica, and does follow the Doctrine the Apostles did teach.
And when his Keeper at Newgate, his old acquaintance, promised him all kindness
and favor, if he would recant his Heresy; he answered resolutely and plainly,
thus: I will never recant whilst I have my life, that which I have spoken, for
Fox Acts and Monuments in one Volume, p. 1722. 2 Col.
it is a most certain truth; and in witness whereof I will seal it with my
blood, which he did few days after. Now what Calvin held concerning
Predestination in general, may be seen at large in his Institutions; and what
of this one particular may be found there lib. 3. c. 22. Sect. 1, 2, 3. clear
against the Doctrine of Papists concerning Gods electing man to salvation for
his foreseen faith, etc. and Sect. 6. may be seen his Doctrine clearly against
Popish and Arminian Writers exposition of the 9th Chapter to the Romans, where
Mr. Fowlers shifts and glosses are answered too, which he has cunningly and
perniciously inserted in page 263, etc. of his free Discourse, too large now
here to be inserted. I have been the larger* in setting down these Confessions,
because Archbishop Laud, in his too much applauded Relation of his Conference
with Fisher, p. 36. says thus: The Church of Rome and Protestants set not up a
different Religion. So Dr. Potter in his Charity mistaken, p 62. and Dr.
Mountague. Antig. p. 14. Gag. p. 50. To whom I answer, 1. That the contrary is
hereby evident, and well known. 2. That though Papists profess the Apostles or
Nicene Creeds, yet by their erroneous Doctrines they overthrow them, as Mr.
Thompson in his Arraignment of Antichrist, plainly shows the Papists do.

ART. VII.
That men unregenerate, or in t^^ state of nature, have, by the^^ Deum offerre
gratiam omnibus and singulis and istam sufficientem reddi efficacem vel
inefficacem per voluntatem and noluntatem hominis, in cujus potestate est illam
vel acceptare vel respuere, is the false Doctrine of Papists. N. B. Totus
Pelagianismus huic sententiae includitur, says Maccovius, (...). Pontif. c.
18. p. 39. Bell. de lib. art. c. 3.
own free will, power sufficient (...) themselves, to turn themselves (...)
God, to believe, repent, and (...) good works acceptable to God wh^^ they will;
and also finally (...) resist the efficacious grace of God in converting an
elected sinner to himself. THis Position I renounce, 1. Because it is contrary
to the Doctr^^ of the Church of England, Article the 10th. The condition (...)
man after the fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and prepare h^^self by
his own natural strength, and good works, to faith, and calling upon God:
Wherefore we have no power to do good works, pleasant and acceptable to God,
without the grace of God by Christ preventing us, that (...) may have a good
will, and working with us when we have that good (...) And Homily of the misery
of man, part. 2. p. 11, 12. We have (...) goodness, help or salvation of our
selves, but contrariwise, sin, damnation and de^^ Yet Dr. Patrick says thus:
All the actions of nature you will grant to be easy, for they flow from us
with ease and facility. Now there is nothing plainer* than that the ways of
temperance, charity and trust in God, and such like, wherein we are to walk,
are most conformable to the right frame and constitution of your soul. You will
move consonantly to your own principles which God has naturally endued you
withal; you will but follow the inclination of rational nature, and that in
its highest improvement. Par* Pilg. p. 252. What Bishop Jer. Tailor held in
favor of that Popish Doctrine, see his explanation of Original sin, p. 467.
What Dr. Heyli^^ held, see his Introd. to his Cyp. Angl p. 36. Sec. 37. and p.
33. Sec. 35.
everlasting. We have in our selves (as of our selves) nothing whereby we may
be delivered from this miserable captivity (...) which we have cast our selves.
We are not of our selves able to think a good thought, or work a good deed; so
that in our selves we can find no hope of Salvation, but rather what makes
unto destruction. And Homily for Rogation-week, T. 2. p. 217. Whatsoever is
good proceeds from God as from the principal fountain and only author. And p.
220. it says what I alleged in the former Article renounced. And Part third
of the same Homily, p. 228. Faith is the first entry of a Christian life,
without which no man can please God. Faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8.
Charity wherewith we love our brethren is the work of God. If after our own
fall we repent, it is by him that we repent, who reaches forth his merciful
hand to raise us up; it is he that preventeth our will and disposes ^s
thereunto. If after contrition we feel our consciences at peace with God,
through remission of our sins, and so be reconciled to his favor, and hope to
be his children, and inheritors of everlasting life, who works these great
miracles in us? our worthiness, our deservings and endeavors, our wits and
virtue? nay verily St. Paul will not suffer flesh and clay in such arrogance,
and therefore says, all is of God, which has reconciled us to himself by
Jesus Christ. And there, p. 229. it is said, That without the secret inspiration
of the Spirit, we cannot once so much as speak the name of our Mediator, as St.
Paul plainly testifies. No man can once name our Lord Jesus Christ, but in the
Holy Ghost, much less should we be able to believe and know these great
mysteries that be opened to us by Christ. St. Paul says, that no man can know
what is of God but by the Spirit of God. As for us, says he, we have not
received the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God for this
purpose, that in his holy Spirit we might know things that be given us by
Christ. And Homily of Repentance, T. 2. p. 263. This must be verified of all
men, Without me ye can do nothing, Joh 15. And again, Yet Dr. Patrick says
thus, I am forced to love God by such a strong inclination* as has no cause
but nature. Par* Pilgrim, p. 468.
of our selves we are not able so much as to think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3.
And again in another place, God works in us both the will and the deed. And
for this cause, although Jeremy had said before, If thou return O Israel,
return unto me, says the Lord; yet afterward be says, Turn thou me, O Lord,
and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God, Jer. 4. 1. Jer. 31. 18.
And a little before in the same Homily, it is said, That we must beware that we
do in no wise think in our hearts, imagine or believe, that we are able to
repent aright or turn effectually unto the Lord by our own might and strength.
And the second Collect for Evening-prayer, O God from whom all holy desires,
all (...) counsels, an^ all ^ust works do proceed. And Collect for second
S^^day in Lent. Almighty God which do see that we have no power (...) our
selves to help our selves. Collect for 19th Sunday after Trini^^ and Collect
for Easter Day, and Exhortation before Baptism, (...) he will grant to these
children that thing which by nature they ca^^ have. And question after the
Commandments in the Church-(...) techism, That thou art not able to do these
things of thy self. And Ve^^cles said after the Lords Prayer, O Lord open thou
our lips, and (...) mouth shall show forth thy praise. Which implies, that
unless God do op^^ our mouths, we cannot show forth his praise.

2. Because it is contrary to Sacred Canonical Scripture, Romans 8. 7, (...) The
carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the Law (...) God,
neither indeed can be; so then they that are in the flesh cannot ple^^ God. 1
Cor. 2. 14. But the natural man receives not the things of (...) Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he (...) them, because they
are spiritually discerned. He wants the Spirit of G^^ to discern them savingly.
Mat. 16. 16, 17. Simon Peter answered (...) said, Thou art Christ the Son of
the living God. And Jesus answered (...) said unto him, blessed art thou Simon
Barjona, for flesh and blood has (...) revealed it unto thee, but my Father
which is in heaven. 2 Cor. 3. 5, (...) that we are sufficient of our selves to
think any thing as of our selves, (...) our sufficiency is of God. Joh. 15. 5.
Without me ye can do nothing, (...) Christ. Phil. 2. 13. It is God that works
in you both to will and to (...) his good pleasure. Ephesians. 2. 8. For by grace
ye are saved, through fa^^^ and that (grace or that faith) is not of your
selves, It is the gift of (...) And so is repentance the gift of God, Act. 5.
31. Act. 11. 18. 2 (...) 2. 25. If God will give them repentance^ to the
acknowledgement of (...) truth.

3. Because it is contrary to the Doctrine of the Reformed Protestant Churches.

As, 1. To the eighth Article of Lambeth, which (as you hear^ before) was
declared to be the Doctrine of the Church of England The eighth Article of
Lambeth is this: No man can come to Christ unles^^ it be given to him, and
unless the Father shall draw him; nor are all men (...) drawn by the Father,
that they come to the Son.

2. To the 32 Article of Religion of Ireland, None can come (...) Christ unless
it be given unto him, and unless the Father draw him. (...) all men are not so
drawn by the Father, that they may come unto the So^^ neither is there such a
sufficient measure of grace vouchsafed unto eve^ man, whereby he is enabled to
come unto The nature of man, through the transgression of our first parents,
has lost free will, and retains not now any shadow thereof, saving an
inclination to ^ill; those only excepted, whom of his grace he has sanctified
and purged from their Original leprosy. King James his Declaration against
Vorstius, p. 368. of his Works.
everlasting life. This Confession includes the 8th and 7th Articles of
Lambeth. 3. To the latter Confession of Helvetia, which says thus. --
Therefore man, not as yet regenerate, has no free will to good, no strength to
perform that which is good. In regeneration the understanding is illuminated by
the Holy Ghost, that it may understand both mysteries and will of God; and the
will it self is not only changed by the Spirit, but is also endued with
faculties, that of its own accord it may both will and do good. Harmony of
Confessions, Sec. 4. c. 9. p. 62, 63. and the like may be there seen in the
former Confession of Helvetia, p. 65. art. 9. See the Confession of Bohemia, --
For that will of man, which before was free, is now so corrupted, troubled and
weakened, that now from henceforth of it self, and without the grace of God, it
cannot choose, judge, or wish, nay it has no desire, nor inclination, much less
any ability, to choose that good wherewith God is pleased. Harmony of
Confessions, Sect. 4. p. 68. The Confession of the French Church is much to the
same effect, there to be seen, p. 70. and there in the same Section is the
Confession of Belgia, full and clear to the same purpose, with notable proofs
out of Scripture against man's natural power to convert himself to God; as John
3. 27. John 6. 44. Romans 8. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Phil. 2. 13. John 15. 5. And p. 74. of
the same Section is the Confession of Auspurg, to the same purpose. And p. 75.
they say thus: We condemn the Pelagians, and all such as they are, who teach,
that by the only powers of This is directly contrary to Dr. Patricks Doctrine
before recited in the Margent,
nature without the holy Spirit, we may love God above all, and fulfill the Law
of God, as touching the substance of our actions. The Confession of the Church
of Saxony is to the same effect, there to be seen p. 77. That man by his
natural strength is not able to free himself from sin and eternal death; but
this freedom and conversion of man to God, and this spiritual newness is
wrought by the Son of God, quickening us by his Holy Spirit. In the same
Section, p. 82, 83. the Church of Wirtemberg says thus: And whereas some
affirm, that so much integrity of mind was left to man after his fall, that by
his natural strength and good works, he is able to convert and prepare himself
to faith, and the invocating of God, it is flatly contrary to the Apostolic^
Doctrine, and the true consent of the Catholic Church. Romans 5, By one man's
trespass evil was derived unto all men unto condemnation. Ephesians. 2. When ye
were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in times pa^^ ye walked according to
the course of this world, and after the Prince, etc and we were by nature the
children of wrath, as well as others: he says, Dead in sins, and the children
of wrath, that is, strangers from the grace of God. But as a man being
corporally dead, is not able by his o^^ strength to trepare or convert himself
to receive corporal life; so be which is so spiritually dead, is not able by
his own power to c^^vert himself, to receive spiritual life. The Synod of Dort,
c. (...) Article 3. say thus: All men are conceived in sin, and born (...)
children of wrath, untoward to all good tending to salvation, forward to evil,
dead in sins, slaves of sin, and neither will nor (...) (without the grace of
the Holy Ghost regenerating them) (...) straight their own crooked nature, no,
not so much as dispose the^ selves to the amending of it. And Article 4. they
say thus. -- B^^ so far short is he from being enabled by this imbred light to
co^ to the saving knowledge of God* and to convert himself unto hi^ that he does
not make right use thereof in natural things, and ^vil affairs; nay, that which
it is, he many ways defiles it all, (...) withholdeth it in unrighteousness;
and by so doing, becom^^ inexcusable before God. Who in the 4th error rejected,
reject the error of those that teach, That an unregenerated man is not
properly, nor totally dead in sins, nor destitute of all strength tend^^ to all
spiritual good, but that he is able to hunger and thirst aft^^ righteousness,
or everlasting life, and to offer the sacrifice of (...) humble and contrite
heart, even such as is acceptable unto God For these assertions march against
the direct testimonies of Scripture, Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. Ye were dead in trespasses
and sins. Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 11. Every imagination of the thought of man's heart
is only evil continally. Moreover the hungring and thirsting for deliverance
out of misery, (...) for life-eternal; as also the offering to God the
sacrifice of a broken ^^e^^ is proper to the regenerate, and such as are called
blessed, Psalm. 51. 1^ Matthew. 5. 6. That the efficacious grace of God in man's
effectual calling, or conversion, does not depend upon the aptitude or
co-oper^tion of the will of man, but is from the supernatural work of Go^^
which the holy Scripture calls the drawing of the Father to the (...) may be
sufficiently, yea abundantly proved by that which has been said Cur gratia Dei
sit efficax in quibusdam id dependit a voluntate hominum, Bell. lib. 1. de graet
lib. arbitr. c. 12, 13.
before; but that this efficacious grace of God in converting an elected
sinner, is not finally resistible by the will of man, (as Papists and See the
3d and 4th Chapters of the Synod of Dort, and therein the Remonstrants 8th
error rejected about Conversion.
Arminians would make the world believe) may further be proved by the Homily
for Rogationweek, T. 2. part. 1. p. 21^. God does what likes him, none can
resist him; for he works all things in his secret judgment, yea even the
wicked to damnation, as Solomon says; and the Scripture says, Who has
resisted his will? Romans 9. 19. that is his effectual will in regenerating an
elected sinner; and God in his effectual calling, or converting a sinner,
takes away the resistibility against it, out of his heart, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. A
new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will
take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of
flesh; and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. Isa. 43. 13. I will work
(says God) and who shall let it? Job 9. 12. Behold he takes away, who can
hinder him? Isa. 14. 24. The Lord of Host has sworn, Surely as I have thought,
so shall it come to pass; as I have purposed, so shall it stand. V. 27. The
lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disannull it? Now Gods election of
man, is frequently called his purpose, as Romans 8. 28. Romans 9. 11. Ephesians. 1. 11.
To Papists I might urge ^s^her 13. 8, 9. Lord Almighty King, for the whole
World is in thy power; and if thou have appointed to save Israel, there is none
that can gainsay it, v. 11. no man can resist thee.
Ephesians. 3. 11. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Moreover, if man can always resist the efficacious
grace of God in converting an elected sinner, then it might come to pass, nay
it would come to pass most certainly, that Jesus Christ should have no peculiar
people; for the corrupt will of man cannot incline to embrace the grace of God,
that is offered in the Word and Ordinances of God, till the Spirit of Christ by
saving Deus qui voluntatem praeparat, ipse eam donat* quam si per suam gratiam
homini non dederit, nunquam potest homo in Deum velle credere, Fulgentius de
veritate praedestinat. l. 1.
grace do overcome and change the perverseness of it, and make it willing; for
though to will is of nature, yet to will well, is of grace; It is God that
works in (...) both to will and to do of his good pleasure, that is, to will,
and to do well, Phit. 2. 13. as the Articles, and Homilies, and Liturgy of the
Church of England, ubi supra, do abundantly declare: Or, (...) Jesus Christ
should have a peculiar people, then he must, by these me^^ Doctrine, viz. [That
man's will can ponere obicem, and always resi^^ Gods will, and determine to
refuse Gods grace offered, yea reject it, bei^^ wrought in him, which indeed
implies a contradiction] be beholding to man for it, who determined himself to
accept of his gracious offers: all which would otherwise have bee^ in vain and
ineffectual. Lastly, Bellarmine Bellar. l. 3. de gratia, c. 3. Ames. Bellar.
Enervat. T. 4. l. 3. c. 3. de efficaci gracia, p. 56.
himself setting down the vanous opinions of men about effectual grace, says
this is the first; The first opinion is of them that do pla^^ efficacious grace
in man's assent and cooperation, so that it (...) called efficacious grace from
the event, because it does disp^^^ the effect: and therefore it does dispose
the effect, because ma^^ will does cooperate, or help with it. This opinion
(says h^^ is altogether alien from the judgment of St. Augustine, and a^^ of
the Sacred Scriptures; it overthrows the foundation of Go^^ Predestination, and
abuses the wo^^ effectual grace. Wendelin Christ. Theol. l. 1. c. 3. p. 132.
Wendelin says which is the mere and special fr^^ gift of God, to the free
will of man, corrupt and dead in sins, as that it is in man's power to believe,
or not believe, do plain^^ broach a P^lag^an-heresie contrary to the whole
Scripture. Effectual grace is not a physical action whereby God does compel the
will of Vid. August, l. de correct. and gratia, c. ^4 Cui volenti sa^vum
facere, nul^um bomi^um resistit arbitrium. etc. Hier. in Ephesians. c. 1. Illt
^^nullus resistere potest, quia omnia, quae voluerit, faciat. Aquin. (...). q.
103. a. 8. and 9. 19. 2. 6, c. and ad 3.
m^n, or physically determine it without its own proper deliberation (for a
supernatural effect cannot be produced by a natural operation); and so man
nilling should be converted and believe, which implies a contradiction; neither
is this effectual grace only a moral persuasion, in it self in. different, to
which it is in man's power to yield or oppose; for so God should not work more
effectually in converting man, than the Devil and seducers do in keeping him
from conversion; and the efficacy of grace should not consist in the motion of
God, but in the strength of arguments; and so there should be placed in the
will of man unconverted, an aptitude of obeying that moral persuasion, and
converting himself: but effectual grace is a supernatural action, or work of
God, whereby he does outwardly by his word, and other appointed means, and
inwardly by the efficacy of his Spirit, not physical action, but divine,
secret, and ineffable motion, illuminate the blind mind of man, change, make
new, and convert the perverse will of man, that the will being renewed, does
begin by its own free election to will and choose the good that is showed it
from the enlightened understanding. And by this effectual grace God does so work
upon the will of man, that his will does no longer resist the grace of God, but
comply with Gods Will, and wills what he wills. Of this see further, Nihil in
libero arbitrio constitutum, superat voluntatem Dei. Aug. Enchir. c. 100.
Nothing is in man's will can overpower Gods will.
the Synod of Dort, Chapter 3, and 4. of Conversion, Articles 10, 11, 12, 13,
14. and Errors 6, 7, 8. rejected by them. See also the Confession of Faith made
by the Assembly of Divines, c. 10. of effectual calling. Article 1, 2. and the
33d Article of Religion of the Church of Ireland, and the 9th Article of
Lambeth, It is not in the free choice and power of every man to be saved.

ART. VIII.
That truly regenerated persons cannot Bellar. l. 2. de justificatione, c. 14.
Synod of Dort 3d Error rejected by them. Dr. Heylins Introduction to his Cyp.
Angl. p. 36. S. 37. and p. 31. Montagues Gag. p. 163, 164, 186. Appeal, p. 213,
214.
be certain of their etern^^ salvation, but may totally an^ finally fall away
from the act^ and habits of saving-grace before they dye, and be eternally
damned. THis I renounce. In which there are two notable points (...) Popery.

1. That truly regenerated persons cannot be certain of their eter^^ salvation;
which Bellarmine for Papists affirms, Dr. Ames for Protestants denies. Vid. Dr.
Ames his Bellarmin. Enervat. T. 4. l. 6. de justificatione, c. 2, 3, 4. p. 152,
153, 154.

1. The Church of England says thus, That the faith that do^^ justify us, is
a sure trust and confidence in the mercies of God, (...) be saved from
everlasting damnation by Christ, and an a^^ure^^ faith and trust in Christ, ubi
supra, p. (...), (...). which necessari^^ implies, that truly regenerated
persons, who have this sure trust, a^^ Homil. of Salvation of mankind, p. 20.
Homil of Christ's Death, p. 187.
assured faith and confidence of their justification, may be certain of their
everlasting salvation.

2. It Is contrary also to the 6th Article of the Articles of L^^beth; which is
this, A man truly believing, or endued with justifying faith, is certain by, or
with f^ll assurance of faith, of the remiss^^ of his sins, and of everlasting
salvation by Christ.

3. It Is contrary to the 37th Article of Religion of Irelan^ A true believer
may be certain by the assurance of faith, of the forgiveness of his sins, and
of his everlasting salvation.

4. It Is contrary to the Doctrine of the Synod of Dort, c. 5. of perseverance,
Articles 9, and 10. Of this perseverance of the elect unto salvation, and the
perseverance of true believers in the faith, the faithful themselves may be,
and are ascertained, according to the measure of their faith, by which they
assuredly believe that they are, and shall for ever continue true and lively
members of the Church, and that they have remission of their sins, and
everlasting life; and therefore this certainty is not from any special
Revelation made beside, or without the word, but from faith in Gods promises,
which he has most plentifully revealed in his word for our comfort, from the
testimony of the holy Spirit, bearing witness with our Spirit, that we are the
Sons of God, and heirs, Romans 8. 16.

Lastly, From a serious and holy care of keeping a good conscience and
endeavor of good works And if Gods chosen in this world should want this solid
comfo^^u of obtaining the victory, and this infallible pledge and earnest of
eternal glory, they were surely of all men most miserable. See also Article the
11th.

5. It Is contrary to the experience of many of Gods dear Children, of Robert
Glover, who had assurance of Gods love in Christ, in the pardon of his sins,
and of eternal life, when he came in the sight of the place where he was to be
burned, for Christ's sake; He is come, he is come, said he to his friend, that
comforted him. John Carles, another holy Martyr, answered Dr. Martin plainly
thus: That God has predestined me to eternal life in Jesus Christ, I am most
certain; and even so am I sure, that his holy Spirit (wherewith I am sealed)
will so preserve me from all heresies and evil opinions, that I shall dye in
none at all. Fox Acts and Monuments in one Volume, p* 1813. 1st and 2d* Col.

6. It Is contrary to canonical Scriptures, as Job. 14. 17. But ye know him
(that is, the Spirit), for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. And v.
20. At that day ye shall know, that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in
you. Romans 8. 15, 16. But ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we
cry, Abba Father: The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we
are the children of God; and if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and
joint-heirs with Christ. And v. 35, 38, 39. of the same Chapter, Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? -- For I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor hight, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, 1 Cor. 2.
12. Now we have received not (...) spirit of the world, but the spirit which is
of God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God, 2
Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selv^ whether ye be in the faith: prove your own
selves: know ye not that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?
Ephesians. 3. 12. In whom (...) have boldness and access with confidence by the
faith of him. 2 Timothy 4 7, (...) I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness. 1 John 3. 2^^ But we know, that when we shall appear, we shall he
like him; and we (...) that he was manifested to take away our sins: and v. 14.
of the sa^^ Chapter, We know that we have passed from death to life, because
(...) love the brethren: and v. 16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, be^^ he
laid down his life for us: which he explicates in 1 John 4. 16. (...) we have
known and believed the love (...) God has t^ us, 1 John 5. (...) He that
believes in the Son of God, (...) the witness in himself: and (...) v. 13. of
that Chapter* These things have I written unto you that beli^^ on the Name of
the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal (...) and that ye may
believe on the Name of the Son of God. 2 Pet. 1. 10. (...) thren, give
diligence to make your calling and election sure; for if (...) these things, ye
shall never fall. To pass by many other places of S^^cred Scripture, which
might be produced to prove this comfort^^ truth: That truly regenerated persons
may in this life be certain of (...) eternal salvation.



These I have produced, may, if well observed and applied, be s^^ ficient to
make it good and evident. A certainty of hope Papists gr^^ but they deny a
certainty of faith. To which I answer,

1. That if they understand by hope that which does arise from (...) ceit^ul
conjectures and discourses of human reason, they grant no m^^ to true believers
in Christ, than they grant to hypocrites; for s^^ a hope may be in them.

2. But, if by hope they mean a true Theological infused grace, whi^^ is the
daughter of faith, then they grant that which they seem to d^^ for the Apostle
does teach, That t^^ that have this hope, have the s^^ certainty with faith, as
Bishop Deter. 3. p. 18. Nos hac sp^ jam servatos esse.
D^^ ^ant argues from Romans 8. 24. ^or we are saved by hope: and this the same
Apostle calls the Anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast, Heb. 6. 19. and
Romans 15. 13. He judges that the measure of unmoved and unshaken hope is in
every true believer, according to the measure of faith that is in him. Now the
God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in
hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost. And St Hilary in his Comment upon
Matthew, p. 261. (quoted by Bishop Davenant, ubi supra) does so join this hope
with faith, that he does ascribe to both of them the same firmness an^
certainty, fluctuation and uncertainty. Dominus vult regnum caelorum sine
aliqua incertae voluntatis ambiguitate sperari, alioqui, justificatio ex fide
nulla est, si fides ipsa fiat Spes est certa expectatio futurae beatitudinis.
Pet. Lomb. 3. 26. Tho. Aquin. 22 ae. q. 18. a. 4.
ambigu^. And the Papists do in vain distinguish between a certainty of hope,
and a certainty of faith; seeing hope in the same regenerated and justified
man, cannot waver, or be unstable, unless also his faith in Christ do waver,
and be unstable; neither does a certain faith remain, unless by hope it obtain
the same certainty.

3. I say, that true believers may have a certainty of faith of their present
state of grace, and future state of glory: for their belief is or may be
grounded upon the sure and certain word, or promises of God, as John 3. 16. God
so loved the world, that he give his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life: and Act. 16.
30, 31. the Jailer said to the Apostles, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? and
they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ: they may assume, but we believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ, therefore we shall be saved* and we know that we do
believe in Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have received the Spirit of God, that
we might know the things that are freely given to us of God: and Rom 8. 16. the
Spirit bears witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God: and
Gal. 4. 6. because ye are Sons, God has ^ent forth the Spirit of his Son into
your hearts, crying Abba Father; and many other true believers, besides those
two godly Martyrs, Mr. Robert Glover and John Carles, (of whom before) have had
fidem evidentiae, the faith of evidence; they have known that they did believe.
Lord (said he in the Gospel) I believe, help thou mine unbelief, Mark 9. 24.
and the Romans, being ^ustified by faith, we have peace with God, Romans 5. 1.
How could they by faith obtain peace with God, if they were uncertain whether
they had faith or not? St. Paul, Gal. 2. 20. says thus, The life that I (...)
in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God: so Peter says, (...) 21.
15, 16. Lord, thou know that I love thee. St. John, and those t^^ believers
he wrote to, 1 John 3. 14. says, We know that we are pass^^ from death to
life, because we love the brethren; and besides, faith (...) be known by its
fruits, of which our learned and orthodox Divi^^ have written much: The Church
of England says Article 12. Th^^ good works a lively faith may be known as
evidently as a tree discerned the fruit; and I have proved it before, that we
are justified by f^^ and that we may know that we have faith, and consequently,
that are justified, and consequently we may know that we shall be etern^^
saved; for Romans 8. 30. those that be justified, shall be glorified.

2. The second point of Popery, to confirm the former, in the f^^mer Popish
conclusion renounced, is this:

That truly regenerated and justified persons may totally and finally (...)
away from the acts and habits of saving-grace before they dye, and be ^^nally
damned. To which I say, 1. It Is not denied that an unbeli^^ or wicked man may
fall away from the common grace which he (...) 2. That a truly regenerated man
may for a time lose the sense of (...) love to him in Christ, is not denied
neither. 3. That a truly reg^^rated man may fall into sin (though not that
against the Holy G^^ as the Arminians hold) is yielded also. 4. That a truly
regener^^ person or believer in Christ may fall for a time, from some act or
(...) saving-grace, is granted also, as may be seen in David and Peter, (...)
is the sense of the 16th Article of Religion of the Church of Engla^^ But 5.
that a truly regenerated p^^son or believer in Christ, can (...) and Thomas
Whittell in his Letter to John Carles, says, That God suffers his to fall,
but not finally to perish. Fox his book of Martyrs, p. 1742.
finally fall away from all the acts (...) habits of saving-grace before he
dye, (...) become a damned reprobate, is utterly ^^nied and renounced; and that
(...) cause,

1. It Is contrary to the Doctri^^ the Church of England, Article (...) Bertius
a Scholar of the late Arminius (who was the first that infected Leyden with
Heresy) was so impudent as to send a Letter unto the Archbishop of Canterbury,
with a book entitled, De Apostasia Sanctorum; the title whereof were worthy
enough to make it worthy of the fire, says King James in his Declaration
against Vorstius, p. 554. of his Works. Mark it, he calls Arminius and Bertius
his Doctrine of the falling away of the Saints, heresy: and ibid, p. 355. he
calls Arminius that enemy of God, and his Doctrine corrupt seed: and ibid, p.
350. he calls Arminius and Arminians, seditious and heretical Preachers, of
which he warned the States General not to suffer to creep in among them: and p
355. he calls them infected persons, yea Heretics, and Atheistical Sectaries,
and their Doctrine, Heresy and Schisms; yea he calls Bertius his Book of the
Apostasy of the Saints, a blasphemous Book, ibid. p. 355. And Sir Ralph
Wynwood, K. James his Ambassador, calls Arminian Doctrine of the Apostasy of
the Saints, that wicked Doctrine, ibid. p. 361.
After we have received the (...) Ghost, we may depart from g^^ given, and fall
into sin, and by (...) grace of God, we may arise ag^^ and amend our lives. Lo
here the Church holds only a partial, not a total; a temporary, not a final
falling away from saving-grace given, into sin; for it maintains that we may
rise again by the grace of God, and amend our lives. And the 17th Article is
more full. Predestination to life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby
(before the foundations of the world were laid) he constantly decreed by his
council, secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he has
chosen in Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting
salvation, as vessels made to honor. Wherefore they which be endued with so
excellent a benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose by his Spirit,
working in due season: they through grace obey the calling: they be justified
freely: they be made Sons of God by adoption: they be made like the Image of
his only begotten Son Jesus Christ: they walk religiously in good works, and at
length by Gods mercy they attain to everlasting felicity: As the godly
consideration of Predestination, and our election in Christ, is full of sweet,
pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as feel in
themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the works of the
flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up their minds to high and
heavenly things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
faith of eternal salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
fervently kindle their love toward God.

Now this is very true, and excellently good and comfortable Doctrine, in which
are many truths against the Church of Rome and he^ followers, very remarkable.
As,

1. That Gods decree of Election or Predestination unto eternal life, is
immutable (and not changeable, as Papists and Arminians hold very erroneously),
for it is called Gods everlasting purpose, whereby (...) has constantly decreed
by his counsel. -- The decrees of God are in God^ and whatsoever is in God, is
God; and God is immutable, Mal. 3. 6. I am t^^ Decretum Dei est ipsissima Dei
voluntas, Wol. Chr. Theol. l. 1. c. 3. p. 20. Et quicquid est in Deo est ipse
Deus. Decreta Dei secundum esse absolutum sunt ipse Deus Maccovius Redivivus,
Theol. Polem. c.6. p. 6. etc.7. p. 63.
Lord, I change not. Jam. 1. 17, With G^^ there is no variableness, nor shadow
of turning, Romans 11. 29. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance.
Gods lo^^ to his elect in Christ, is unchangeable, Isa. 54. 8. With everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer, Jer. 31. 3.
The Lord has appeare^ of old unto me, saying, Yea I have loved thee with an
everlasting love, Jer. 32. 40. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with
them, that I will (...) turn away from them to do them good; but I will put my
fear in their hear^^ that they shall not depart from me, John 13. 1. Jesus
loved his own, which were in the world, to the end, John 10 28 29. Christ s^ith
of his sheep thus: I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither s^^ any man pluck them out of my hands. My Father which gave them me
(...) greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers
hand: I and my Father are one, John 17. 9, 20. Christ has prayed for them, not
only that their faith fail not (as he prayed for Peter, Luke 22. 32) but that
they may be delivered from the evil of the world, v. 15. and that they may be
one, and that they may be with him, v. 21, 24. Romans 8. 35, 36, 38, 39. Nothing
shall be able to separate us from the love of Christ. See for this also the 3d
Article of Lambeth (declared as I showed before to be the Doctrine of the
Church of England) which is this: There (...) predestined a certain number of
the predestinate, which can neither b^ augmented nor diminished. See also the
13th Article of the Religion of the Church of Ireland, which is this: By the
same eternal counsel God has predestined some unto life, and reprobated some
unto Which is the first Article of Lambeth.
death; of both which there is a certain number, known only to God, which can
neither be increased, no^ diminished. See also the Synod of Dort, c. 1. of
Predestination, Can. 7. Election is the UNCHANGEABLE What Election is.
purpose of God, by which, before the foundations of the world, according to
the most free pleasure of his will, and of his mere grace, out of all mankind,
fallen, through their own default, from their first integrity into sin and
destruction, he has chosen in Christ unto salvation, a set-number of certain
men, neither better, nor more worthy than others, but lying in the common
misery with others; which Christ also from all eternity, he appointed the
Mediator and head of all the elect, and foundation of salvation; and so he
decreed to give them to him to be saved, and by his Word and Spirit effectually
to call, and draw them to a communion with him; that is, to give them a true
faith in him, to justify, sanctify, and finally glorify them, being mightily
kept in the communion of his Son, to the demonstration of his mercy, and praise
of the riches of his glorious grace, as it is written Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6. Romans
8. 30. Canon 11, 12. of the same Chapter. As God himself is most wise,
unchangeable, omniscient, and omnipotent; so the Election made by him can
neither be interrupted, nor changed, revoked or disannulled, the elect cast
away, nor their number diminished. Of this their eternal and immutable election
unto salvation, the elect in their time, (although by several degrees, and in a
different measure) are assured, and that not by searching curiously into the
depths and secrets of God, but by observing in themselves* with spiritual joy
and holy pleasure, the infallible fruits of Election, signed out unto us in
Gods word, such as are a true faith in Christ, a filial fear of God, grief for
our sins, hungring and thirsting after righteousness. And the Synod rejects the
error of those who teach, That not all election unto salvation is unchangeable,
but that some which are elected, notwithstanding Gods decree, may perish, and
for ever do perish: by which gross error they both make God mutable, and
overthrow the comfort of the godly, concerning the certainty of their
salvation, and contradict the holy Scriptures, teaching Matthew. 24. 24. That the
^lect cannot be seduced. John 6. 39, That Christ does not lose those which ^^e
given to him of his Father. Romans 8* 30, That God, whom he has pre^estinated,
called, justified, them he does also glorify.

2. That Gods decree of predestination to eternal life was made by ^^m before
the foundations of the world were laid, as may be seen also in the first
Article of Lambeth-Articles, which is this: God from eternity has
predestined certain men unto life; and certain men h^^ he reprobated. And
also in the 13th Article of Ireland, which co^tains the same Doctrine in the
same words that our 17th Arti^^ does: and also in the Synod of Dort, c. 1.
Canon 7. before f^^ recited: and Canon 8. they say, That this Election is not
mani^o^^ but one and the same of all which are to be saved, both under ^^ Old
and New Testament, because the Scripture speaks but of (...) only good
pleasure, purpose and counsel of the Will of God, (...) which he has chosen us
from eternity, both unto grace and glo^^ both unto salvation, and the way of
salvation, which he has pr^^ pared, that we should walk therein; and according
to this Doctrine is that which was set down by the Reverend Assembly of Divines
the Confession of Faith, c. 3. a. 1. God from all eternity did the most wise
and holy counsel of his own will, freely and unch^^geably ordain whatsoever
comes to pass; yet so, as thereby, nei^^ is God the Author of sin, nor of
violence offered to the will of (...) creatures, nor is the liberty or
contingen^y of second causes ta^^ away, but rather established. And this
Doctrine is clear in (...) 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the
kingdom prepared you from the foundations of the world. Ephesians. 1. 4. God has
chosen (...) him (that is in Jesus Christ) before the foundations of the world.
2 T^^ 1. 9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling; not acco^^
to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was g^^ us in
Christ Jesus before the world began. Which is directly contrary the erroneous
Doctrine of those who teach, That God chooses (...) this or that particular
person before others, till he see whether he (...) believe or not, and
persevere in the faith; who make a persevering liever in the point of death to
be the object of Gods peremptory, compl^^ full and irrevocable election unto
life; condemned the Synod of Dort in the Remonstrants, who tea^^ Acta Remonst.
a. 1. p. 7.
That Gods Election unto salvation is manifo^^ one general and indefinite,
another singular an^^ definite: and this again either incomplete, revocable,
not peremptory, or conditional; or else complete, irrevocable, peremptory o^^
absolute; likewise, that there is one election unto faith, anoth^^ unto
salvation; so that election unto justifying faith may be wit^^ out a peremptory
election unto salvation; for this (says the Syno^^ is of man's brain devised
without any ground in the Scriptures, co^rupting the Doctrine of Election, and
breaking that golden chain of salvation, Romans 8. 30. Whom he has
predestined, them also he has called; and whom he has called, them also he
has justified; and whom he has justified, them also he has glorified.

3. That they that are predestined to everlasting salvation, cannot perish
eternally, or be damned: for the Article says plainly, That God has
constantly decreed by his counsel to deliver from curse and damnation, those
whom he has chosen in Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to
everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor. Now this is also consonant to
holy canonical Scripture, in those places before alleged, and also many
others, as Mat. 16. 18. The gates of Hell (all the power and policy of the
Devil and his instruments) shall not prevail against it, that is, against the
Church of Jesus Christ: and Mat. 24* If it were possible, they shall deceive
the very elect; where note, that it is impossible totally and finally to
deceive the elect of God unto eternal life, John 10. 28, 29. And I give unto my
sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them
out of my hand: My Father which gave them me, is greater than all, and none is
able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand. 1 Pet. 1. 5, Who are kept by the
power of God through faith unto salvation. 1 John 2. 27, But the anointing
which ye have received, abides in you: the grace of God abides in him that is
truly sanctified by Gods Spirit, 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God, does
not commit sin, for his seed remains in him; that is, the seed of Gods Spirit
and Word; saving grace so remains in him, that he does not commit sin, as the
Devil does, studiously, purposely, affectionately, impenitently and
maliciously; he commits not the sin unto death, the sin against the Holy
Ghost, 1 John 5. 18. He that is born of God, cannot commit, and live, and lie
down in sin, as the Devil and the wicked do; but though he fall into sin, yet
he rises again, Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear in their heart, that they
shall not depart from me. Romans 5. 8, While we were yet sinners, Christ died for
us, much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from
wrath through him; and according to this, is the 5th Ar^icle of Lambeth, and
the 38th Article of Religion of the Church of Ireland. A true lively justifying
faith, and the sanctifying Spirit of God is not extinguished, nor vanishes
away in the elect or regenerate either totally or finally* and, because Dr.
Heylin most falsely says, That this Doctrine of the Papists and Arminians was
the Doctrine which our godly Reformers and Martyrs taught and sealed with their
blood, I shall give you a little of what they (...) lieved, said and sealed
with their blood. Thomas Whittell, Priest (...) Martyr, in his Letter to John
Carles, says thus: That God suffer^^ his to fall, but not finally to perish.
Fox Book of Martyrs in one W^^ lume, p. 1742. and John Carles a^^ swered Dr.
Martin, who exami^^ King James in his Paraphrase upon Revel. c. 9. p. 27.
says, That these spiritual grasshoppers shall be so bridled, that they shall
not have power to pervert the elect, of whatsoever degree or sort, but their
power shall extend only upon them that bear not the mark or seal of God upon
their foreheads; so on, c. 13. p. 41.
him about Predestination, thus: believe that Almighty God, our (...) dear
loving Father, of his gr^^ mercy and infinite goodness did e^^ in Christ,
before the foundation the earth was laid, a Church (...) Congregation, which he
does c^^tinually guide and govern by (...) grace and holy Spirit, so that (...)
one of them shall ever finally pe^^ and otherwise he holds not. A^^ John
Philpot, that learned Martyr, maintained the Doctrine of Pr^^ stination, which
Calvin taught in his Institutions, to be agreeing with t^^ which the Doctors of
the Church did teach, and the holy Scriptures, and w^^ he sealed with his
blood, as I showed you before out of Mr. Fox his Bo^^ of Martyrs, p. 1697. 2
Col. and p. 17^. 1722. John ^^ ^greeable to John Bradford, Martyr, in his
Letter to N. and his Wife, says thus: This is the difference betwixt Gods
children, which are regenerate and elect before all times in Christ, and the
wicked castaways, that the elect lie not still in their sin continually, as do
the wicked, but at length do return again by reason of Gods seed which is in
them, hid, as a sparkle of fire in the ashes, as we may* see in David, Peter,
Paul, Mary Magdalen, and others. Fox his Book of Martyrs, p. 1573. one Volume.
th^^ also is the Doctrine of the Synod o^^ Dort, c. 5. of the perseverance of
the Saints, Canons 6, 7, 8. For G^^ who is rich in mercy, according (...) the
unchangeable purpose of Electio^^ does not wholly take away his ho^^ Spirit
from his, no not in their gr^^ vous slips, nor suffers them to wa^^ der so far,
as to fall away from th^^ grace of adoption, and state of jus^^ fication, or to
commit the sin un^^ death, or against the Holy Ghost, o^^ to be altogether
forsaken of him, and throw themselves headlong into everlasting destruction, c.
7. For first (...) all, in these slips he preserves (...) them, that his
immortal seed (b^ which they were once born again) that it die not, nor be lost
by them; afterward by his Word and Spirit he effectually and certainly renews
them again unto repentance, so that they do heartily, and according unto God,
grieve for their sins committed, and with a contrite heart by faith in the
blood of the Mediator, craving forgiveness of them, obtain it, recover the
apprehension of the favor of God reconciled unto them, adore his mercies and
faithfulness, and from thenceforward more carefully work out their salvation
with fear and trembling, Canon 8. So, not by their own merits or strength, but
by Gods free mercy, they obtain thus much, That they neither totally fall from
faith and grace, nor continue to the end in their falls, and perish; which, in
regard of themselves, not only full easily might, but doubtless would come to
pass: yet in respect of God, it cannot so fall out; since neither his counsel
can be changed, nor his promise fail, nor the calling according to his purpose
be revoked, nor Christ's merit, intercession, and custody, be made of none
effect, nor the sealing of the holy Spirit be frustrated or defaced.

4. That they that are predestined unto everlasting life, be or shall be
effectually called, according to Gods purpose by his Spirit working in due
season; they through grace obey the calling, they be justified freely, they be
made Sons of God by adoption, and they be made like the Image of his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ: they walk religiously in good works, and at length
by Gods mercy, they attain to everlasting felicity. Which Doctrine is not only
contrary to that false Doctrine of the Papists and Arminians before renounced.
but it is also agreeable to the Doctrine taught by St. Paul, Romans 8. 30. Whom he
did predestinate, them he also called; Romans 8. 15, 16, 17. Gal. 4. 6, 7.
and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he
also glorified; and therefore they cannot fall away from saving grace totally
and finally, and be damned.

5. That it is of the mere will, or purpose, or good pleasure of God, that some
men are in Christ Jesus elected, and not others, unto salvation: for here you
see this Election is called Gods purpose, and his counsel, to deliver from
damnation those whom he has chosen in Christ out of mankind, and to bring them
by Christ to everlasting salvation. Which is not only contrary to that
erroneous Doctrine of the Papists before confuted and renounced, viz. That God
did elect men unto salvation for their foreseen faith, good works and
perseverance that would be in them: but (...) also consonant to canonical
Scripture, Romans 9. 11, 15. Luke 12. (...) Ephesians. 1. 5. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Agreeable
to this is the second Articl^^ Lambeth: The moving or efficient cause of
Predestination unto life, (...) the foresight of faith, or of perseverance, or
of good works, or of (...) thing that is in the person predestined, but only
the good will and (...) sure of God. Agreeable to which is also the 14 Article
of Relig^^ of the Church of Ireland drawn up by A. B. Usher, as Dr. H^^ tells
us, to which King James gave his consent and approbatio^ Heylins Cypr.
Anglicus, l. 4. p. 271.

6. That the godly consideration of Predestination, and our electio^^ Christ,
is full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly per^^ confirms our
faith, and fervently kindles our love to God. But the Doctrine of the Papists,
who hold that true believers in Christ may totally and finally fall away from
all the acts and habits of sav^^ grace, and become damned reprobates, is full
of bitter, unpl^^ and unspeakahle sorrow, and vexation, even to godly persons;
(...) does not confirm and establish their faith of eternal salvation (...) be
enjoyed through Christ, but rather fill their souls with do^^ of their
salvation, and fears of their damnation; and does (...) fervently kindle, but
rather quench the fire of their love to God, (...) they shall be taught, that
Gods love to them depends not upon (...) self, but upon their uncertain love
to him, from which (they say) (...) may totally and finally fall away, and be
therefore eternally damned: (...) any Doctrine, that ever was preached or
printed, did binder Piety (...) true Christianity, and comfortable walking with
God, this of the Pa^^ falling away totally and finally from saving-grace, is
one, and (...) well be put among the chief causes of the decay of Piety amongst
(...) and put into that golden book so entitled, and its contrary put (...) of
it.

Further, I might draw an argument or two more from what (...) Church of
England says in her old book of Common Prayers, whi^^ she offers to Almighty
God, as in the Collect for St. Simon and J^^ Apostles, she says this: Almighty
God, which have builded thy (...) gregation upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jes^s C^^ himself being the head cornerstone. And the next
Collect for All-S^^ day, where she says this: Almighty God, which have knit
togeth^^ thy elect in one communion and fellowship in the mystical body of thy
(...) Jesus Christ our Lord: from which this argument might be frame They that
are built upon the sure foundation or rock Jesus Christ, and are inseparably
knit together in one communion and fellowship in the mystical body of Jesus
Christ, cannot totally and finally fall away from Christ and his Church, and be
damned: but according to the Church of England, Gods elect, truly regenerated
persons, are so built, and so united; Ergo, they cannot totally and finally
fall away from Christ and his Church, and consequently not from savinggrace, by
which they are so built and knit together: the major is undeniable, and clear
by Matthew. 7. 24, 25. Therefoye (says Christ) whosoever hears these sayings
of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house
upon a rock; and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew,
and beat upon the house, and it fell not; for it was founded upon a rock. Upon
which place Pareus in locum. Veram fidem super petra aedificatam, nunquam
deficere, sed semper conjunctam esse cum perseverentia.
Pareus has this note, That a true faith built upon the rock, does never fail,
but is always joined with perseverance: and Mat. 16. 18. I say unto thee, Thou
art Peter, and upon this rock (that is, which thou have confessed) will I build
my Church, and the gates of Hell (that is, all the power and policy of the
Devil and his instruments) shall not prevail against it: the Minor is the
Doctrine of our Church in the two Collects before alleged; and Gods elect,
regenerate, true members of Christ's Church (which is his mystical body) are
inseparably knit together to Christ, and to one another: Hypocrites may be
externally by outward profession, and separably united to the Church and
Christ; but true believers in Christ, abide in Christ, Joh. 15. 2. they are
inseparably united to Christ, else, as was said before, Christ may lose his
peculiar people, yea be a head without a body; for if one of his members may be
eternally separated from See Dr. Field of the Church, his Appendix, part. 1. p.
833. That the elect called according to Gods purpose, have that grace that
excludes sin from reigning; and that this grace once had by them, is never
totally nor finally lost.
him, then others may also; and if others, then all of them may be so separated
from him; for there is the same reason of one, that there is of another, yea of
all. Our Savior says, Not one of them his Father gave him, is lost, John 17.
12. yea the Apostle speaks fully, that nothing shall be able to separate us
that are in Christ Jesus, from the love of G^^ which is in Christ Jesus, Romans
8. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Those whom Christ loved, he loved to the end, John 13.
1. Isa 54. 8. But with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says
the Lord thy Redee^^ Jerem. 31. 3. I have loved thee with an everlasting love;
theref^^ with loving kindness have I drawn thee, Jerem. 32. 40. And I (...)
make an everlasting covenant with th^^ that I will not turn away from them
(...) do them good, but I will put my fe^^ Vide King James his Declaration
against Vorstius, wherein he called the Doctrine of the Apostasy of the Saints
taught by Bertius (a Scholar of Arminius, that enemy to God) an heretical,
blasphemous and wicked Doctrine.
in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me: and Romans 11. 29. (...)
gifts and calling of God are wit^^ repentance. Gods decree of Ele^^ is
unchangeable, and therefore th^^^ gifts that flow from it, are im^^ table too.
God takes not th^^^ away from them, neither can th^^ that have them, lose
them; Chr^^^ prayed for them, John 17. 9, 15, 19, 20, 24. and Bishop Mountag^^
himself confesses that Christ was ever heard in what he pray^^ for.

ART. IX.
That the corruption of our nature, commonly called Original sin, which
remains in truly regenerated persons after Baptism, is not properly a sin.
THis I renounce, 1. because it is contrary to the sound Doctrine of the Church
of England in Homily of Christ's Nativity, T. 2. p. 167. where we may read how
excellently man was made after Gods own Image; and that Adam, falling into sin,
had in himself no one part of his former purity and cleanness, but being
altogether spo^ted, insomuch, that he seemed to be altogether a lump of sin,
and therefore by the just judgment of God, was justly condemned to everlasting
death: and this plague fell not only upon himself, but also upon all his
posterity and children for ever -- as St. Paul, Romans 5. By one man's offense,
sin entered upon all -- many were made sinners: by which words we are taught,
that as in Adam all men universally sinned, so in Adam all men universally
received the reward of sin, that is, became mortal and subject unto death,
having nothing in themselves, but everlasting damnation, both of body and soul;
they became, as David says, corrupt and abominable, they went all out of the
way, there was none that did good, no not one. And in the Homily of the Death
of Christ, T. 2. p. 184. Is not sin, think you, a grievous thing in Gods sight,
seeing for the transgression of Gods Precept in eating of one apple, he
condemned all the world to perpetual death, and would not be pacified* but only
with the blood of his own Son. And in Homily of Christ's Resurrection. T. 2. p.
195. Hard it is to subdue and resist our nature, so corrupt and leavened with
the sour bitterness of the poison, which we received by the inheritance of our
old Father Adam. But more fully the Church of England in her 9th Article of
Religion, of Original sin thus:

Original sin stands not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do vainly
talk) but it is the fault and corruption of the
nature of every man that naturally is ingendered of the off-spri^^ of Adam,
whereby man is very far gone from Original Righteous^^ and is of his own nature
inclined to evil, so that the flesh lusts (...) ways contrary to the spirit;
and therefore in every person (...) into this world, it deserves Gods wrath
and damnation; and (...) infection of nature does remain, yea in them that are
regenerat^^ whereby the lust of the flesh (called in Greek (...), whi^^ some do
expound the wisdom, some sensuality, some the affectio^^ some the desire of the
flesh) is not subject to the law of God; (...) although there is no
condemnation for them that believe, and (...) baptized; yet the Apostle does
confess that concupiscence and (...) has in it self the nature of sin. In
which Article is declared,

1. That Original sin does not consist in following or imitating of (...) in
sinning against God, as Pelagians vainly teach. 2. That Original sin is the
FAULT AND CORRUPTION of (...) nature of every man, that by ordinary generation
descends from (...) Psalm. 51. 5. Romans 7. 15. Gal. 4. 17. Jam. 1. 17. 1* Pet. 2.
11. 3. That Original sin deserves Gods wrath and damnation in every ^^^son so
born into this world, Romans 7. 23, 24. Gal. 5. 17. Ephesians. 2. 3. 4. That Original
sin is, and remains in every person so born, eve^^ them that are regenerated,
Romans 7. from verse. 7. to verse. 25. 5. That concupiscence o^ lust has in it the
nature of sin, Romans (...) 11, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24. Gal. 5. 17.
Now sum up what the Church of England says of Original sin, (...) then judge
whether she does not affirm, that Original sin is prop^^ a sin.

2. Because it is contrary to the sound Doctrine of other reform^^ Churches, to
be seen in the Harmony of Confessions, Sec. 4. p. (...) 1. It Is contrary to the
latter Confession of Helvetia. Man was fr^^ the beginning created of God after
the Image of God in righte^^ ness and true holiness, good and upright, but by
the instinct of (...) ^^rpent, and his own fault, falling from goodness and
upright^^^ became subject to sin, death, and sundry calamities; and such (...)
one as he became by his fall, such are all his offspring, even (...) ject to
sin, death, and sundry calamities; and we take sin to be (...) natural
corruption of man derived or spread from those our (...) parents unto us all,
through which we being drowned in evil (...) ^upiscences, and clean turned away
from God, but prone to (...) evil, full of all wickedness, distrust, contempt
and hatred of Go^^ can do no good of our selves, no not so much as think of
any. 2. The Confession of Bohemia or Waldenses. A second kind of sin, is
Original sin naturally engendered in us, and hereditary, wherein we are all
conceived, and born into this world. Behold (says David) I was born in
iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me; and Paul, We are by nature the
children of wrath. Let the force of this hereditary destruction be
acknowledged, and judged of by the guilt and fault, by our proneness and
declination, by our evil nature, and by the punishment which is laid upon it.
3. The French Church says thus: We believe that all the offspring of Adam is
infected with this contagion, which we call Original sin, that is, a stain
spreading it self by propagation, and not by imitation only, as the Pelagians
thought, all whose Errors One of his Errors was, that Original sin is not truly
and properly a sin, but a punishment.
we detest; and we believe that this stain is indeed sin, because it makes all
and every man (not so much those little ones excepted, which as yet lie hid in
their Mothers wombs) guilty of eternal death before God; we affirm also that
this stain, even after baptism, is in nature sin. 4. The Confession of Belgia,
which is this: We believe that through the disobedience of Adam, the sin which
is called Original, has been spread and poured into all mankind. Now Original
sin is a corruption of the whole nature, and an hereditary evil, wherewith even
the very infants in their Mothers wombs are polluted; the which also, as a most
noisome root, does branch out most abundantly all kind of sin in man; and is so
filthy and abominable in the sight of God, that it alone is sufficient to the
condemnation of all mankind; neither are we to believe that this sin is by
baptism utterly extinguished, or plucked up by the roots, seeing that out of
it, as out of a corrupt fountain, continual floods and rivers of iniquity do
daily spring and flow. 5. The Confession of Auspurg says thus: And this
Original blot is sin indeed, condemning and bringing eternal death, even now
upon all that are not born by baptism and the Holy Ghost. 6. The Confession of
Saxony, Art. 2. treats largely of Original sin: Where she approves the Doctrine
delivered to us by the first Fathers, Prophets and Apostles, and the Apostles
Scholars, even unto Augustine, and after his time, and condemns the Doctrine of
Pelagius, and all those who have scattered in the Church like doting follies to
those of the Pelagians, and they (...) like not the usual definition given of
original sin, viz. Original^^ is a want of Original justice, which ought to be
in us; and af^^^ward they say, That these wants, and this whole corruptio^^
sin, and not only a punishment of sin. Harmony of Confessions, (...) 4. p. 76,
77. 7. To this may be added the Confession of the Ch^^ of Ireland, which,
Article 24th, is the same with the Church^^ Englands. 8. The Confession of the
Church of Scotland may (...) seen in the Confession of Faith made by the late
learned and (...) thodox Assembly of Divines, c. 6. Articles 5, 6. This
corrup^^ of nature, during this life, does remain in those that are reg^^
rated; and although it be through Christ pardoned and mo^^ yet both it self,
and all the motions thereof are truly and pr^^ sin: every sin, both original
and actual, being a transgression o^^ righteous Law of God, and contrary
thereunto, does in its (...) nature bring guilt upon the sinner, whereby he is
bound ove^^ the wrath of God, and curse of the Law, and so made subjec^^ death,
with all miseries spiritual, temporal and eternal.

Now if these Churches Confessions suffice not to prove or^^ sin to be properly
a sin, give me leave, I pray, humbly to offer (...) further Confirmation and
Explication, these things that follow^^

1. That Original sin is either Imputed, or Inherent.

1. Original sin imputed, is the inobedience of Adam, in whose (...) all mere
men were, and sinned, is imputed to all his posterity, (...) they in their own
persons had acttually violated the Law of Go^^ eating the forbidden fruit, Romans
5. 12. Wherefore as by one (...) entered into the world, and death by sin, so
death passed upon all men, (...) that all have sinned; that is, in that one
man, in Adam legally^ (...) they stood under his Covenant; naturally, as they
bear his Ima^^ as they were in his loins, as two Nations are said to be in the
(...) of Rebeccah, Genesis 25. 23. and Levi to have paid tithes in the (...) of
Abraham to Melchisedeck, Heb. 7. 9, 10. the slavish estate of th^^ parents, is
imputed to their children. The natural man, though^^ may think himself fr^e yet
is sold under sin, Romans 7. 14. as re^^ lion of great persons against their
King* not only hurts their own persons, but stains their blood, and is imputed
to their posterity: so is Adams first sin imputed to us, who were in his loins,
and are natural ordinary partakers of his nature: and Romans 5. 13. it is said,
that sin was imputed; for until the law (that is of Moses) sin was in the
world; but sin is not imputed where there is no law, that is, where there is no
law broken.

2. Original sin inherent is hereditary corruption naturally propagated Vide
Homily of the Nativity of Christ, T. 2. p 167^ supra.
unto us from the fall of our first parents, making us guilty of temporal and
eternal punishments; whereby we are utterly indisposed, disabled, and made
opposite to every thing that is good, and wholly inclined to all that which is
evil, from which do proceed all our actual sins; whereby every mere man is so
corrupted in his understanding, that he does not, cannot know any thing
sufficiently concerning merely divine things belonging to his eternal
salvation, without the special grace of God, Matthew. 16. 17, 18. Flesh and blood
has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven, 1 Cor. 2.
14. For the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him; neither can be know them, because they are
spiritually discerned: and this is called sometimes blindnes^, Ephesians. 4. 18.
Vanity and carnal-mindedness in the mind and understanding. Ephesians. 4. 17. Romans
8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law
of God, neither indeed can be; hardness in the conscience, who being past
feeling, Ephesians. In Adamo nos omnes rei facti fuimus; quia nos omnes fuimus,
quod ille imus er^t, unde naturae corruptae ad nos qu^^nor emanarunt vulnera^
ignorantia in intellectu, malicia in voluntate, infirmatas in ira^^ibill, and
rebellio in concutiscih^^ appetitu. Aquin 12 ae q. 84. Ex Beda, says learned
Bishop Pridiaux. fascic. controversia^^, c 3 de peccato, q. 5. p. ^2^.
4. 19. Pravity or perversaess in the will, which is commonly called
concupiscence in the appetite; and this is formally a turning or aversion from
that which is good; materially it is an inclination to that which is morally
evil. There is in the will of man. 1. an impotency to that which is spiritually
good, as the understanding of a mere natural man cannot rightly think of any
thing that is spiritually good; so the will of a mere natural man cannot
rightly of it self, will any thing that is spiritually good, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not
that we ^^ sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but
our ^^ciency is of God. Phil. 2. 13. It is God that works in us both to (...)
and to do of his own good pleasure. 2. A proneness only to that which is evil,
Genesis 6. 5. God saw that the wickedness of man was great in (...) e^rth, and
that every imagination of the thoughts or purposes, or desire^^ his heart, was
only evil continually. 3. Aversness from that whi^^ is good, Romans 8. 7. The
carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is (...) subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be. Read Romans 3. 10, 11, 12. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5. We are
all dead in trespasses and sins, and (...) by nature the children of wrath: by
nature, not pure, but corrupt, a^^ that corrupted by Original sin: That which
is born of the flesh, (...) flesh, John 3. 6. and who can bring a clean thing
out of an unc^^ Job. 14. 4. Now Papists grant that original sin imputed, is
p^^perly a sin; but inherent, they say, is not properly a sin. Pelag^^ that old
Heretic, was the Father, and the Popish, Arminian a^^ Semi-pelagian Divines
are the (...) and followers of it. Be^^mine, T. 4. l. 2. de peccato, c. 3. sa^^
from Jam. 1. Quod (...) Jacobo in illo (...) Bellar. l. 5. de amissione
gratiae, c. 3. 9. etc. 10. Peccatum inhabitans, Romans 7. non nisi improprie
dicitur, peccatum.
non vocatur peccatum, illud non est peccatum; quod parit peccatum non est
peccatum. And Dr. Jeremy Tailor, one (...) Archbishop Lauds Chaplains, late
^^shop in Ireland, in his further Ex^^nation of original sin, says expressly
thus: That original sin is not our sin properly, not inherent in us, but is
only imputed, so as to bring evil effects upon us; for that which is inherent
in (...), is a consequent only of Adams sin, but of it self no sin; for the^^
being but two things, the constituent parts of original sin, the want of
original righteousness and concupiscence; neither of these ca^ So Pelagius and
Arminius picad.
be a sin in us, but a punishment (...) Adams sin they may be. P. 459. And p.
475. of the same book, he says, That original sin is (...) an inherent evil,
not a sin properly, but met^nimically, that is, it is the effect of one sin,
and the cause of many; a stain, not a sin; it does not damn any infant to
eternal pains of hell. And p. 474. he says thus: And since no Church did ever
in join t^ any Catechumen, any penance, or repentance for original sin, i^
s^^ms horrible and unreasonable, that any man can be damne^ for that, for which
no man is bound to repent. But, Sir, is that only properly sin, for which the
Church injoins penance? Did the Jews injoin any penance for Poligamy? and does
the Christian Church injoin penance for inward sins? is not the 19th
Commandment made void by this Doctrine? did not King David, (...). 51. 5. and
St. Paul, Romans 7. confess their original sin? or was King David's and St. Paul's
Confession, one of your Brother -- Dr. Ha^^onds free will offerings, commended
even to meriting? And I pray read there his Explanation of the 9th Article of
the Church of England, and then judge whether that of Knot the Jesuit be not
true, Preface to Charity maintained, Sec. 2. Heylins Cypr. Anglicus, l. 4. p.
252, 253.
viz. That the Doctrine of the Church of England began to be altered in many
things, for which our Progenitors forsook the Roman Church; for example, it is
said, that the Pope is not Antichrist, prayer for the dead is allowed, Limbus
patrum; it is maintained that the Church has authority in determining
controversies of faith, and to interpret Scriptures about free will,
predestination, universal grace; that all our works before effectual vocation
are not sins, merit of good works, inherent righteousness, faith alone does not
justify, Traditions, Commandments possible to be kept: your Thirty*nine
Articles are patient, nay ambitious of some sense, in which they may seem
Catholic: for Dr. Heylin in his Cyprianus Anglicus, lib. 4. p. 252. alleges
much of this charge of Knot as a commendation of our Church: and upon the 20th
and 34th Articles, he says, That more power than this, the Church of Rome did
never challenge* and less than this was not reserved unto it self by the Church
of England, in his Introduction to his Cyprianus Anglicus, p. 20, 21. where he
says, That in the year 1571. the Articles agreed upon in the year 1562. were
reprinted, and this clause [the Church has power to decree Rites and
Ceremonies, and also in controversies of Faith] (as he says) was left out by
the power of the Genevian That was the Parliament that that year confirmed the
Articl^s, to which alone subscription was injoined; yet, Heylin says, it left
out the Prayer against the Pope out of the Letany.
faction (if it were not for the Genevian-faction, your faction would soon
bring us all to Rome) but the times bettering, and the Governors of the Church
taking notice thereof, there was care taken ('it is believed (...) A. B. Land, as
Mr. Prin and Burton discovered) that the said ^^ should be restored unto its
place in all following impressions* of that ^^ but if it may be said to be
restored to its place, it is wondered (...) Dr. ^^ocket* (Warden of All-S^^
College, and Chaplain to A. B. ^^bot) Heylins Cyp. Angl. l 1. p. 76. And it is
left out of the Articles of Ireland, 1615, which were allowed by King James.
should forget to put it into th^^ 20th Article, when he made his book in
Latin, entitled, De politia Ecole^^ Anglicanae, in which, he set down all our
Liturgy, the 39 Articles of Religion, the book of Ordination of Priests and
Deacons, and Consecra^ion of Bishops, etc. I say, if it had been in the
Article, (...) very strange, that a man of his learning and integrity, and p^^
and expectation too, should leave it out; but you see it is put in, (...) you
may well guess by whom, and to what purpose, by what (...) Heylin says of it,
it reserved (or rather restored) to it self as much power as the Church of Rome
ever challenged, which Knot the Jesuit observed, That their Churches (as the
Jesuit goes on) ^^ginning to look with a new face, their walls to speak a new
language, that men in talk and wri^ing use willingly the once*fearful names of
Priests and Altar, and are now put in mind, that for exposition of Scripture,
they are by Canon bound to follow the Fathers; that Protestantism waxes weary
of it self, that Calvinism is accounted For proof, read Dr. Heylins Cypr.
Anglicus, and its Introduction, Cypr. Angl. l. 4. p. 414, 415, 416. there you will
see the agreement made betwixt the Pope or his agents, and some of our Clergy
men; and that which ^^ey call the ancient Catholic Religion, is nothing but
Popery, only abatement in some things* at least for a time, (...) Cyprianus
Anglicus was settled in his pontificalibus.
heresy at the least, and little less than treason. I say much of this, Heylin
says, was truth, and he himself in his Introduction to that History, and other
books, makes very manifest. What Chillingworth answers to this bold charge of
the Jesuit, you may see in Dr. Cheynells rise and growth of Socinianis^, c. 6.
The ^anterburian Religion, not the true Protestant Religion, p. 70* But to
return to my business, Bellarmine is answered by learned Dr. Ames, a
Nonconformist, in his Bellarminus Enarvatus, T. 4. l. 2. de peccato originali,
c. 3. p. 34. ad p. 46. which I have read; and Bishop Jeremy ^^ I hear) is
answered very learnedly and fully by Mr. Henry Jeanes* ^^other Nonconformist,
which I have not read: how conformable ^^e Bishops Doctrine is to the false
Pelagian condemned Doctrine of ^^e Church of Rome, and Nonconformable to the
true and approved ^^octrine of the Church of England, let the indifferent and
judici^^s Reader judge, Vide Maccovium Rediv. (...) Arminia^^ru^, c. 9. p. 118.

That Original sin inherent in us, is properly sin. I prove thus:

1. That which has the name and nature of sin properly so called, ^^s sin
properly so called; but original sin inherent in us has the ^^e and nature of
sin properly so called; ergo, it is sin properly so ^^lled.

1. It has the name of sin properly so called, given unto it in sa^^red
Scripture. The Reverend Sum of Christian Religion* p. 144.
A. B. ^^s^er tells us, That all other sins have ^^eir special names, but
original sin is ^^operly called sin: and Amand. Polan. Syntag. l. 6. c. 3. p.
336.
Polanus be^^re him says, that it is called abso^^tely sin, Romans 7. 8. because
it is the ^^ring and fountain of other sins, pec^atum peccans, sinning sin,
Romans 7. 13. ^^eccatum inhabitans, indwelling sin, Romans 7. 17, 20. and Mr.
Hilder^^am upon Psalm. 51. p. 283. tells us, that the Spirit of God expressly
^^lls it sin, Psalm 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, ^^d in sin did my
Mother conceive me: (and so Dr. Mer. ^asaubon, In locum*
Musculus, and Dr. Ames expound the place, which place Bishop Prideaux
Fasciculus controversiarum, c. 3. q. 5. p. 112.
says, ^^nnot be understood, but of original sin, ^^d its propagation, as both
ancient and ^^ter Divines expound the place) and in ^^ree Chapters of the
Epistle to the Romans, viz. 6. 7, 8. 14 times at ^^ast; and Heb. 12. 1. Romans 6.
6, 12, 13, 14. Romans 7. 7. I had not known sin* ^^t by the law; for I had not
known lust. (that is to be sin) except the ^^w had said, Thou shall not cove^.
Where it is clear, that lust. by which (...) meant the first unlawful desires or
motions, which have not the ^^nsent of the will, lust in the habit or
disposition, inclination, imagi^^tion, as well as lust in the act, is forbidden
in the Tenth command^^nt, as not only Beza, Par^us, Calvin and Peter Martyr,
but also Dr. Willet and Wilson, and Dr. (...) and Diodate upon the place, (...)
B. Prideaux Fasc. controvers. c. 3. q 5. p. 112. Sharpius Symphon. ^a. Novis
Epoc. p. 397.
Andrews and Dr. Mayor upon the (...) Commandment, and Bishop (...) and
Sharpius elsewhere assure (...) verse the 8. For sin taking occ^^ the
Commandment (the more (...) ^^ the more it bursteth forth, A. B. Usher Sum of
Christian Religion, p. 144.
(...) streams do, that cannot be stopped, till God by his holy Spirit (...)
it) wrought in me all manner of concupiscence; for without the (...) was dead;
that is, it seemed so to him, because he knew it (...) felt it not; but when he
knew the law, he knew sin, and (...) activity, and found 'twas alive: so verse
the 14. But I (...) sold under sin. Man is said to be carnal two ways: 1. Qu^^
carni, because he serves the flesh; so unregenerated men (...) nal. 2. Quia
proclivis est carni, because he is inclined to (...) the flesh, that is,
original corruption, which is called flesh, (...) 1. Gal. 5. ^7. so Paul was
carnal; though he had mortified (...) he had some relicts or remainders of it,
an inclination to th^^ of the flesh; he was carnal in opposition to the law
that (...) ritual, that is, he was not so spiritual as the law required; (...)
der sin: slaves to ^in are of two sorts: 1. Some sell thems^^ sin, original sin
and its lusts: they willingly obey the lusts (...) flesh, so did Ahab, and such
are wicked men. 2. Some ar^^ another, and such a slave was Paul, even after his
actual con^^ for he was a slave against his will, he desired to escape from
(...)ster, he served him unwillingly, as may be seen verses the (...). It is no
more I that do it, but sin (that is original (...)tion) that dwells in me. So
verses 23, 24. so Romans 8. 2. he (...) have added Romans 5. 12. As by one man sin
entered into the (...) death by sin: so verse the 13th. For until the law, sin;
that is (...)ginal sin, was in the world, which the Apostle proves, (...) death
was in the world till Moses, v. 14.

2. Original sin has the nature of sin, properly so called (...) I prove thus:
1. Because it is (...), a transgression of (...) which is the definition that
the Spirit of God gives of (...)perly so called, 1 John 3. 4 (...), sin is the
(...)gression of the law, as we translate the words; but (...) is d^^ from
Alpha, a Privitive Particle, and (...) lex the law, and (...) (...) a want of
conformity to the Law of God. Now that Original (...) is (...), I prove thus:

1. Because it is a want of that righ^ousness, which all men ought to ^^ave:
Vide Dr. Barlow Exercitat. 2.
Scholastical Divines define ^^ to be oarentia rectitudinis debitae, a ^^ of
rectitude, which ought to be in ^^ reasonable creature. And this I Homily of
the coming down of the Holy Ghost* p. 209. M^n of his own nature is fleshly and
carnal, corrupt and naught, sinful and disobedient to God, without any spark of
goodness in him, without any virtuous or godly motion, only given to evil
thoughts and wicked deeds.
^^ight prove out of Aquinas, (...) 82. a. 3. con. Cum originale pecca^^um
justitiae originali opponatur, nih^^ ^^iud formaliter est, quam justitiae
ori^^nalis per quam Deo voluntas subdeba^^, privatio: materialiter vero,
aliaru^^ ^^im^ virium ad bonum communicabile ^^ordinata conversio, quae communi
no^^ine concupiscentia dici potest; by which it is clear, that original sin is
nothing else formally, but a priva^^on of original righteousness, by which the
will of man was subject to God; and I find Anselm so ^^efining it. Peccatum
originale est privatio justitiae origina^is debitae ^^esse; that is, Original
sin is a privation of original righteousness, which ought to be in us. Thus far
the reformed Churches abroad (...), yea the Bishop himself does go. (...) that
this Original sin is a want Bishop Tailor himself confesses that Scotus is
pleased to affirm, That there is an obligation upon humane nature to preserve
original righteousness. Explanat. of Original sin, p. 460.
(...) that righteousness which is due, and which all men ought to have, I
prove, (...) Because it is a want of that righte^^sness which our Father Adam
^ad, viz. (...) the pure Image of God, and perfect ^^nformity to the will of
God; for that Adam (being a public person, ^^epresenting all men naturally to
de^end from him, as the fountain, or representative of all such men) ^ad, when
he was first created in the state of Innocence, he had, ^ot only for himself,
but for all his posterity that were naturally to ^^scend from him; he had it as
well ^or us, as for himself, and ^^erefore we had in him that original
righteousnes^, and we are ^ound to keep Gods ^aw [Do this] as well as he was,
and shall dye for ever for want of it, if God take us not into his Covenant
(...) Grace, and accept not of Christ's active and passive obedience (...) us,
and impute it not unto us; what Adam had, he had for us; (...) what he lost, he
lost not only for himself, but for us also; and this is the sound Doctrine of
all our Orthodox Protestant Divines; and therefore I conclude, that original
sin is a want of that origi^^^ righteousness, which all men ought to have; and
our 9th Article says, That man is very far gone from original righteousness,
which impli^^ that he ought to have it.

2. Original sin is (...), because it is a want of due confor^^ to the Law of
God, which ought to be in us; for that requires perfect love to God, and
perfect love to our neighbors: thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy might;
that is, all God, and with all thy whole man, Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
Matthew. 22. 37. Mark 12. 30. And th^^ shall love thy neighbor as thy self,
Matthew. 22. 39, 40. On these two Commandments hang all the law and the prophets;
and the law of God is perfect, Psalm. 19. 7. and Homily of Christ's Death, p.
182. and so much Bishop Tailor himself acknowledges the Harmony of Confessions
allows, as our Doctrine, Explanat. p. 492.
requires perfect obedience of every man: for Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things that are written in the book of the law to do
them; and this perfect obedience to the whole moral law, all men that will be
saved by their own good works, must perform, else they will not be eternally
saved, but damned; yea this perfect love is required in the affirmative part of
the Tenth Commandment, Thou shall not covet; thou shall love thy neighbor* not
only in word, but in deed, and in truth, perfectly and constantly. Now this
perfect love to God and man, no mere man in this world, since Adams fall from
his original righteousness, has performed; and this impotency is an effect of
Adams first sin, and is a part of original sin inherent in us, Romans 7. 18. I
know that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing: for to will is
present with me; but how to perform that which is good, I find not; that is, in
my unregenerate pa^^ dwells no serious and settled study, desire and love of
that which is spiri^ually good; and though he found in his regenerate pa^^,
through Gods special renewing grace, a will ready to do that which was
spiritually good, yet in his flesh, that is, in his unregenerate part* he found
no will, no power* no ability to perform it, as he ought; and the cause or
reason of this impotency or inability was sin that (...) in him, v. 17. To this
purpose is 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural (...) (that is, the man in the state of
corruption, in whom original (...) does reign) receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they (...) foolishness (he looks upon them not only as
foolish things, but as foolishness) unto him; neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned. Now perfect love presupposes knowledge, for
(...) non nisi nota possunt, only things known are loved.

So much to prove, that the first constituent part of original ^in, is properly
sin. Now that the second constituent part of original sin, viz. Concupiscence
is properly sin, I prove thus:

1. Because it is formally of it self contrary to the Law of God: the major
implied is undeniable, because only sin is formally, and of it self contrary to
the Law of God; for though, as Bellarmine ^^bjecteth, the Devil and unjust Laws
be subjective, contrary to the law of God, yet they are not so formaliter and
per se, formally, and of themselves, but only because they are the subjects of
evil qualities or defects, which are formally, and of themselves contrary to
the Law of God: the minor expressed, viz. that concupiscence is formally, and
of it self contrary to the Law of God, appears by Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is
enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can
be. The words in the original, which our 9th Article has, (...), the wisdom,
sensuality, affection, or desire of the flesh, is not only an enemy, but is
enmity against God; for the word in the original is (...), with the accent in
the first syllable, which signifies enmity, not (...), accented in the last
syllable, which is the adjective in the feminine gender, and cannot agree with
(...), the substantive of the neuter gender, for then it should be (...), and
it notes the irreconcilableness of the flesh to the spirit; an enemy may be
reconciled, but enmity cannot; and the reason given to prove (...), to be
enmity against God, is, because it is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be: the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, in the abstract;
Corruption in the nature is not only averse from the law of God, but it is also
against it; it is not subject to the law of God by reason of its pride and
contumacy, neither can it be, by reason of its pravity and perverseness. The
flesh (says Diodate) is not only incapable to submit to Gods will, through
weakness, but also through ^^tural repugnancy. To which may be added Romans 7.
14. For (...) know that the law is spiritual (and the law is spiritual, because
it binds not only all the humane creatures intents and purposes, but his whole
force and power, and all the thoughts and (...) o^ his heart to an holy inward
obedience, as well as to an outward complete conformity to the will of God;
which if he did as he ought to perform, he should be spiritual too, a^^ free
from death), but I am sold under sin, contrary to, and aver^^ from the law. St.
Paul after he was regenerated, was like other men, in part carnal, through the
proclivity of his nature to commit those sins, which, according to his
regenerate part, he hated, and would not; so our sound and learned Divines
expound the place, and urge the following verses to prove, that concupiscence
is properly a si^, and in the regenerate after baptism.

2. Concupiscence is properly sin, because it is forbidden in the law of God,
Romans 7. 7. I had not known sin, but by the law: for I had not known lust (the
sudden motions of mind, unlawful desires and affections which arise in the
soul, and have not the consent of the will, as our Orthodox Divines expound the
word), that is, to be sin, except the law had said thou shall not covet. Where
it is clear, that concupiscence is called sin, and that it is forbidden in the
law, of which before. To which may be added the 9th Article of our Church of
England, which says thus: Yet the Apostle does confess that concupiscence and
lust has of it self the nature of sin; and the Article says, that it is a
FAULT and corruption of the nature of every man. Bishop Jeremy Tailor himself
confesses, that it is in the Latin Copies called vitium naturae, which I think
in Morals, is Englished, vice, in Theologicals, sin; and if virtutes Ethicorum
sint splendida peccata, sure their vices are proprie-dicta peccata; which yet
the Bishop, with the Jesi^^^ denies.

3. Concupiscence is contrary to the Law of God, because we are commanded to
put it off, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. That ye put of concerning the former
conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts,
and be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and that ye put on the new man,
which after God is created in rig^teousness and true holiness. Where original
sin is called the old man, as it is in Calvin, Pareus, Peter Martyr, Diodate,
Willet, Dr. Featley, Wilson in locum, and Bishop Reynolds of the sinfulness of
sin, p. 139.
Romans 6. 6. that is, the body of sin, not nature, but our corrupt nature, which
we have contracted from our old Father Adam, as all our learned and sound
Divines expound the places, and the phrase.

4. That it is properly sin, I reason thus; that which renders persons
obnoxious to the wrath of God, is sin properly; but original sin renders
persons obnoxious to the wrath of God, ergo, original sin is properly sin: the
major is undeniable, because nothing that is not properly sin does render us
obnoxious to Gods wrath. God is angry with nothing but sin, or for sin; the
proper object of a Christians hatred, should be sin, and it is of God's as being
only contrary to his nature and law, Gal. 3. 10 the minor may abundantly be
proved by plain Scripture, Romans 5. 12. As by one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned:
and Romans 6. 23. For the wages of sin is death, (by which in regard the Apostle
speaks absolutely, without any limitation, he means death in general, of what
kind soever, temporal and eternal, Gal. 3. 10. 1 These. 1. 10. Romans 5. 18. And
because Bishop Tailor Explanat* of original sin, p. 469, 470.
denies it of death eternal* I pray read what the Church of England says of it
in her Homilies of Christ's Nativity, T. 2. p. 167. and Homily of Christ's
Death, T. 2. part. 2. p. 181. and 184. set down before in the beginning of this
Article, Man was justly condemned, therefore condemned to everlasting death.
p. 103.) and Ephesians. 2. 3. We are by nature the children of wrath. We are not
so by pure nature, then we must needs be so by corrupt nature, and that is
original sin inherent in us: Children of wrath are subjects of sin, and through
desert of sin subject to wrath, that is, the wrath of God, which he has
threatened against sinners for sin* death and damnation, and temporal judgments,
Ephesians. 5. 6. Because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children
of disobedience; only children of disobedience are children of wrath; where
there is no sin or disobedience, there God has no wrath: and our 9th Article
of Religion says plainly, that this original sin in every person born in this
world* deserves Gods wrath and damnation: and so our Church Questions of
Baptism.
Catechism says, For being by nature born in sin, and the children of wrath:
and it cannot be understood of lust with consent of will: for that, Paul
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, without doubt, knew to be sin, and that
also is actual sin, and not original, of which the Article treats. 2. Because
infants conceived and brought forth in sin, who never committed any actual sin
in their own persons, have died, as you may see in David's child, 2 Samuel 12. 18.
and experience daily shows it, and Romans 5. 14. proves it. Nevertheless death
reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgression, (that is, actually committed any sin in
their own persons; over them, that is, over infants, who sinned not actually,
or by imitation, but only by an inherent corruption of nature in them: so our
Reverend Divines, A. B. Usher and Bishop Prideaux, Archbishop Ushers Sum of
Christian Religion, p. 143. Bishop Prideaux bis Fascic. controver. c. 3. q. 3.
p. 113. Pareus in locum.
and many more of our sound Divines, as well as the ancient Fathers expound the
place: and in the order of our burial, it is said, that by Ad^^ all die, 1 Cor.
15. 21, 22.

Obj. But it will or may be objected, that infants sinned in Adam* in whose
loins they were, and that they are punished with death, (...) for their own
inherent corruption of nature that is in them, but for the sin of Adam, in
whose loins they were, imputed to them.

Answ. To this I answer, 1. That neither Bellarmine nor Papists, nor Bishop
Tailor, nor any complete Conformist in the Church of Englan^ can well object
this; for they hold Council. Trid. 5. Sec. 5. Can. Bell. de Sacrament. baptismi,
c. 11. says, Effectus baptismi primarius est ita peccatum omne abolere, idque
vi operis operati, ut quae reliqua manet prava fidelibus concupiscentia
peccatum ver^^ censeri non debet: and Bishop Tailor says, That this
concupiscence or inclination to forbidden instances is not imputed to the
baptized, (...) to the regenerated. Further Explanat. of original sin, p. 500.
And in the next Page he says, It is a contradiction to say, that the sin
remains, and the guilt is taken away -- if he pardons, he takes away the sin;
for in the justified, no sin can be inherent, or habitual. Now is not this most
notorious false Doctrine, condemned in the Palestine Synod, Article 9th,
objected against Pelagius, and contrary to Article the 9th of the Church of
England, which says, That this infection of nature does remain, yea in them
that are regenerated* And the 15th Article, which says thus: But all we the
rest (although baptized and born again in Christ) yet offend in many things;
and if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us; and contrary to 1 John 1. 8. yea, is not this truly Antinomian, yea
Antichristian? What, have justified persons no sin inherent in them? Is
justification an abolishing of the being of sin in the justified? And p. 461.
he says that in infants the very actions and desire of concupiscence are no
sins, and therefore much less is the principle: but more to my purpose he
says, ibid. p. 481. That after baptism the guilt of the first sin does not
remain: which if it be true, then according to him, they die not for that sin,
and that all persons baptized (be they non-elect) are freed by it from the
guilt of that sin; and that if they die before they commit actual sin, they are
undoubtedly saved, which many learned Divines doubt of, and many more plainly
deny it: the Scriptures alleged by Papists, as Ephesians. 5. 26. Tit 3. 5. either
are not understood of external baptism, but of internal sanctification, or
regeneration; or if of baptism, then they are to be understood obsignificative,
not physice, significative, not realiter; else it would follow, that every
person that is baptized, is really and internally regenerated, which is most
apparently false. For, 1. many that are baptized, live most wicked lives, and
die most wicked deaths, if the tree may be judged by the fruits: or else he
must hold with Jesuitical Papists, that truly regenerated persons may totally
and finally fall away from saving-grace (against which Popish Error, read what
is said before) and become castaways and damned. And because baptism came in
the place of circumcision, it would follow, that all that were externally
circumcised in their foreskins, were also internally circumcised in their
hearts; which is clearly contrary to Romans 2. 28, 29. For he is not a Jew,
which is one outwardly -- but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly, and
circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose
praise is not of men, but of God: Where it is obvious, that some were outwardly,
but were not inwardly circumcised, and in their hearts, and so it may beh ere.
Besides, our most learned and sound Divines, as Bishop Prideaux, Maccovius, and
many others out of St. Angustin hold, that sin is taken away by baptism, (yea
by justification) non ut non sit, but only non ut imputetur: the blood of
Christ washes away sin meritoriously, the Spirit of God efficiently, the word
instrumentally, the Sacraments symbolically, significatively, and
obsignificatively.
that original sin is washed away by baptism: Our Conformists consent and
assent, and subscribe to this Position, (which whether true, and so certain as
it is said, I determine not, because I know not how to prove it by Gods word).
It is certain by the w^^^ of God, that children, which are baptized, dying
before they commit actual sin, are undoubtedly saved, Rubr. after Baptism; by
which they do, yea must hold, that original fin imputed is washed away from
them by baptism, and therefore original sin imputed, is not, cannot be,
according to them, the meritorious cause of infants death, dying before they
commit actual sin in their own persons.

2. I answer, that many infants have died soon after they were baptized: (I saw
one die within a quarter of an hour after 'twas baptized) before they could be
conceived to have committed any actual sin in their own persons; therefore
original sin inherent, was the procuring, or meritorious cause of their death,
and consequently it is properly sin: their cryings cannot in reason be thought
to be sinful frowardness, or actual sin, but are but the fruits of pains or
wants, which are punishments of original sin yet remaining and inherent in
them, which do undeniably prove it to be sin properly so called; for God never
punishes, but for fin, as the Bishop himself says, ibid. p. 463.

5. There is one testimony more, which is good against the Bishop, and all
Conformists, and it is a true one; it is the beginning of the order of Baptism
set down in our Liturgy, thus: Dearly beloved, for-as-much as all men be
conceived and born in fin; and our Savior Christ says, None can enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven except he be regenerate, and born a new of Water, and of
the Holy Ghost: by which it is clear, that it is the Doctrine of the Church of
England, that infants are conceived and born in sin, but not in actual sin;
Ergo, in original sin. Now, I pray, read all these things once again seriously,
and consider how strangely the sound Doctrine of the Chur^^ of England is
undermined, perverted, if not wholly sub^erted by ^er pretended dutifu^^ sons*
and the false Doctrine of the Church of Rome* is contended for by them, ^o
bring in f^ee-will and natural power to convert a man's self, etc.

But before I leave this, a few words to the main argument for this Popish old
Pelagian Error; and that is this: That which is not Bishop Tailors further
Explanation of original sin frequently, and so, Papists and Pelagians.
voluntary, is not sin; but original sin inherent in us, is not voluntary;
Ergo, it is not sin properly. To which I answer, by denying the major; all sin
is not voluntary in their sense.

1. Because the error of the mind, which the will does follow, is fin, and yet
its involuntary, because it goes before every act of the will.

2. Sins committed through ignorance, are not voluntary, and yet are sins
properly, Levit, 5* 15.

2. I deny the minor,

1. Because original sin was voluntary in Adam, in whose loins we were, who
voluntarily committed the first sin for himself and us too. And,

2. Also it may be said to be voluntary in us, because we in our wills are
prone to sin.

3. The main of the Adversaries arguments, that Original sin is involuntary,
will reach only the propagation of it. To which I answer, that man is corrupted
even from the womb, is evident by sacred Scripture; how this came unto us, we
should not be curious to inquire, but rather industrious in Gods way to amend
it; yet the learned do say, that God, not as a Creator, but as a Judge, made the
Souls of men in the seed, without that Original righteousness which Adam had,
as a punishment of the first sin of ours in Adam, in whom we were, who by his
fin rendered us his posterity (who sinned in him) worthy to be deprived of
Original righteousness, and then from this privation follows corruption, or an
inclination to actual unrighteousness; and this is voluntary by man's own
private will.

ART. X.
That mere men in this life since Rhem. Test. an. 2 Cor. 8. 14. Pet. a Soto
assert. Cathol. de lege. Doctor Hammond's Tract of Will Worship, Sec. 16. 19.
says, That when a man shall out of a pious affection do any thing else, beside
what God has commanded by any particular precept, this action of his is to be
accounted so much the more commendable, and acceptable to God: which Mr. D.
Cawdry has answered, p. 71, 72. of Will Worship.
Adam' s fall, can perfectly fulfill Gods whole Moral Law, and also voluntarily
do works besides and above Gods Commandments, which they call works of
Supererogation, which are greater and holier than the works of the Moral Law,
and do merit remission of sins and eternal life, not only for themselves, but
also for others. THis I renounce: 1. Because it is contrary to the Doctrine of
the Church of England in all its parts. As Article 14th, which says thus:
Voluntary works besides, over and above Gods Commandments, which they call
works of Supererogation, cannot be taught without arrogance and impiety. For by
them men do declare, that they do not only render unto God as much as they are
bound to do, but that they do more for his sake than of bounden duty is
required; where^^ Christ says plainly, When ye have done all those things
which are commanded you, say ye are unprofitable servants. In which Article we
have these four things held forth unto us.

1. That works of Supererogation are voluntary works, besides, over and above
Gods Commandments, and so vice versa, voluntary works, besides, over and above
Gods Commandments, are works of Supererogation. Of which kind are Popish vows
of voluntary poverty, regular obedience, perpetual continency, Feasts, Fasts,
Ceremonies, Pilgrimages, and such like Will-worships made by them, but not
commanded by God in his Word.

2. That works of Supererogation, or voluntary works, besides, over and above
Gods commands, cannot be taught without arrogance. Which works, besides, and
above that which God has commanded and imposed, are called sometimes
Ordinances of the world, Col. 2. 20. Voluntary Religion, Col. 2. 23. Doctrines
of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1. forbidden in the Word of God, where we are commanded:

1. To walk not after the laws of men, but according to the statutes of God,
Josh. 1. 7, 8. Be strong and very courageous, that thou may observe to do
according to all the Law which Moses my servant commande^ thee; turn not from
it to the right hand, or to the left, that thou may prosper whither soever
thou go. This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou
shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according
to all that is written therein. For then thou shall make thy way prosperous,
and then thou shall have good success. Till this be done, Rulers must not look
to prosper in their Government at home, and undertakings against their enemies
abroad.

2. To hear Christ, Mark 8. 7. who teaches Christians their duty, setting
before them as their rule and direction, the law and word of God, Mat. 5. 17,
18. 19, 20. and more than that, he does not urge; and against man's needless
injunctions, Mark 7. 7. They worship (...) in vain, says Christ, teaching for
Doctrines the commandments of me^. And teaching them to observe all things
which I have commanded you, Mat. 28. 20. And Christ's sheep hear his voice, but
not the voice of strangers, Joh. 10. 3, 5. The works of Supererogation are more
rightly called the Festus Hommi^^, Disp. 19. c. 6. Opera supererogationis
rectius opera superarrogantiae appellantur.
works of superarrogance, says a learned man.

3. That Voluntary works, or works of Supererogation, besides* or above the
Commandments of God, are the subversion of godliness and true religion, and
cannot be taught without impiety. The reason is rendered in the body of the
Articles. And it is so, says Mr. Thomas Rogers in his Explications and
Confirmations of the 39 Articles, upon the 14th Article.

1. Because Gods Law is thereby broken, that men's may be kept, Mark 7. 7, 8.

2. The holy Scriptures must be contemned as not sufficient enough to bring men
to the knowledge of Salvation, which St. Paul says, (...) able to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
every good work, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.

3. God, who is only wise, 1 Timothy 1. 17. is made unwise, in not prescribing so
necessary works. To which I add:

4. That true Godliness is the right worshipping of God, as he has ap^^^ted in
the Canonical Scriptures, as all know, that know the meaning of the Greek word
(...), which signifies piety or godliness. (...) Voluntary works, or works of
Supererogation advance a worship (...) men's devising, directly against the
scope and end of the second Commandment, wherein God has commanded men to
worship him, (...) ^e has prescribed; and forbidden Will Worship, as all our
Learned and ^^thodox Divines expound that Commandment.

5. They that do worship God by such ways and means as he has ^^t prescribed
in his Word, do not love, but hate God, as both A. B. ^^her, and bishop
Babington declare in their Expositions upon that Commandment; and they worship
a God of their own devising, as not only Mr. Perkins, but also Peter Mar^r Loc.
com. clas. 2 ae. c. 4. p. 196. Nullus verus Deus est qui rebus iis coli vellit;
unde super est, dum impii tales ritus suis sacris adhibent, ut non verum Deum
adorent, sed illum, quem iis rebus delectari finxerunt. Et cum is in rerum
natura nullus ^extet, animorum suorum idolum colunt, and id^ c^rco jure possint
dici idololatrae. Perkins Cases of Conscienc. l. 2. c. 11. Sec. 2. q. 1. p. 206.
, do plainly demonstrate, Nullus ^erus Deus, etc. That is not a true God that
would be worshipped by these things, (that is such things as the true God had
not commanded or warranted in his Word, of which he spoke before) ^^ence it
remains, that wicked men while they add such rites (as he was speaking of
before) to Gods sacred things (...) ordinances, that they do not adore the true
God, but him whom they seign to be ^elighted with such things; and seeing there
is no such one in the world, they worship the idol of their own brains, and
therefore may lawfully be called Idolaters. Will Worship is the worship of any
besides God, or of God himself otherwise than he has commanded, as A. B. Usher
shows in his Sum of Christian Religion, p. 222. and in p. 223. he says
expressly, That we are to worship God by those means only, which he approves in
his Word, according to his saying to Moses, Do that which I command thee, and
do no more, Deuteronomy. (...). 12.

6. That if any thing in Gods Worship be done contrary to, or besides his
command, Non est honor sed dedicus, it is not an honor to him, but a disgrace
to him, as both St. Hom. 51. in Matthew.
Chrysostom, and Jerome Honor praeter mandatum est dedicus.
affirm, as Bishop Andrews quotes them, in his Exposition of the second
Commandment. Where p. 274. he divides the external worship of God into two
parts, Substance and Ceremony. By which it is clear, that Ceremonies are parts
of Worship; then if they be not specially commanded by God, they are forbidden
under the notion of Will Worship. And Mr. Henry Jeanes in his first and second
part of his Scholastical and Practical Divinity, shows Mr. H. Jeanes his
mixture of Scholastical and Practical Divinity, page 1. of Christ's All-fulness,
page 64, 68.
that the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome are forbidden in 1 Cor. 14. ult. out
of Dr. Ames, in answer to Dr. Hammond, especially in his second Part. But in
his first Part, after a most learned Discourse of the All fullness of Christ, he
infers reprehension to Papists and Prelatists: 1. To Papists, who prejudice him
in all his Offices. 2. To Prelatists, who have prejudiced him in his Kingly
Office, as he is the chief, so the only Lawgiver in his Church, by institution
of diverse Church Officers, which he has not appointed, nor given them
authority to appoint; as also of diverse Ceremonies of ordained and mystical
signification, appropriated unto the worship and service of God. And in his
Prophetical Office, by their institution of Doctrinal Ceremonies, which teach
spiritual duties by their mystical signification; which he says is made good
by the abridgment of that Book, which the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese
delivered to King James, December 1. 1605, page 41. Christ (say they) is the
only teacher of his Church, and appointer of all means, whereby we should be
taught and admonished of any holy duty; and whatsoever he has thought good to
teach his Church, and the means whereby, he has perfectly set down in the
Scriptures; so that to acknowledge any other means of teaching and admonishing
us of our duty, than such as he has appointed, is to receive another teacher
into the Church besides him, and to confess some imperfection in those means he
has ordained to teach us by. To which he takes leave to add the words of Dr.
Ames in his fresh suit of Ceremonies, page 210, 211. Only this by the way, I
would learn how we ca^ acknowledge and receive any means of Religious teaching
with faith, except it appear to be Appointed by an authentic teacher and
lawgiver? And how our Prelates in appointing means of spiritual teaching,
which Christ appointed not, can be accounted (therein) Ministerial teachers
under him is their and our only authentic teacher? as also, if Christ be our
authentic teacher in all good that we learn about Religion, who taught our
Prelates such good manners, as to put Pescues of their own making, into his
hand, and so appoint him after what manner, and by what means he should teach
us? Though this that Mr. Jeanes has alleged and said be very pat to his
purpose, and hard to be answered, or fairly wiped off, yet I conceive that
which he says in his Bellarmines Enervatus in answer to Bellarmines Bellar.
Enervat. T. 3. c. 8. p. 57, 58, 59, 61.
arguments for Ceremonies, more full and pertinent to my purpose, to prove them
unlawful, because they are Will Worship or works of Supererogation, besides the
words of God; to which for brevities sake I must refer the learned Reader,
where his arguments against them may be seen. Where p. 61. he answers to
Bellarmine urging for humane Ceremonies, 1 Cor. 14. ult. thus: 1. Honesty and
order did best consist in the Primitive Yet Dr. Heylin calls the pure Worship
of God performed by the French and Dutch Churches here in Archbishop Lauds
time, indecencies, and thereby condemus our Savior Christ and his holy
Apostles of indecencies in their worship of God, because without the Ceremonies
of the Church of Rome, Cyprian. Angl. l. 4. p. 281.
Church without humane Ceremonies. 2. In that very place they are tacitly
prohibited, because there is nothing left to the Church, besides the honest
ordering of things instituted by Christ; for the things instituted, and the
ordering of them do differ as the subject and its external adjunct. 3. We must
obey rulers that are set over us by God, while they do the Commendments of him
that set them over us. 4. True Religion does bring honor to God according to
his will, by those means that are appointed by him; therefore it admits not
humane Ceremonies. Bellarmine argues for Ceremonies, that some Ceremonies have
a spiritual virtue in them. Protestants answer, 1. Why some and not all, if
they all proceed from the same spirit? 2. Seeing the Scripture is a rule
perfectly directing us in spiritual life, from it alone we must be showed what
those means are which have a spiritual virtue. 3. If those [some Ceremonies]
have a spiritual virtue in them, or assisting them, then they are of more
efficacy and dignity than the Sacraments of the Old Testament, or the Baptism
of John. They are parts of the New Testament, which alone is the ministry of
the Spirit; and then the whole New Testament (by Bellarmines judgment) is not
contained in the Scriptures; which is too absurd. Bellarmine says, the Church
may institute new Ceremonies to spiritual effects, as to adorn and represent
some mystery of Religion, and by that means help rude and ignorant people.

Protestants answer: 1. That the Church is not called to make (...) Institutes,
but to observe those that have been already instituted by Christ, Mat. 28. 20.
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.

2. Every one may institute a Ceremony (says Bellarmine) to adorn and
represent, as well as the Church Bellar. l. 2. c. 8.
or God himself. But indeed no man can institute (...) ceremony to represent a
mystery of Religion, but he that has authority over Religion, over the minds
of men, to enlighten them when and how he pleases, and over the consciences of
men, to subject them to himself and his ordinances; for all these things are
required rightly to institute such a ceremony.

Bellarmine says, It Is lawful for the Church to institute new Ceremonies for
some ends, because private men inspired by God have invented new Ceremonies.
Protestants answer, As if the inspiration of God did not make God the author of
the fact, as well as the command expressed in his word. Otherwise it were
lawful for the Papists to conclude, by the same reason, that they have
authority to institute new Sacrifices and Sacraments. Bellarmine replies and
says, That the Congregation made a new Feast, Esth. 9. 1. Mac. 4. Protestants
answer, That the first was political, the second was to be disallowed.
Bellarmine says the Apostles instituted a new Ceremony, Act. 15. Protestants
answer, That there was no new ceremony instituted, but a respect to scandal, in
tollerating an old ceremony. Bellarmine says, the Church may institute some
things, and ceremonies are not repugnant to the Gospel, neither has the Lord
forbidden that we should add no ceremonies for the more commodious and
profitable administration of the Sacraments.

Protestants answer, 1. The Church cannot appoint any new thing by her own
authority.

2 Carnal ceremonies void of the Spirit, as all humane ceremonies are, are
repugnant Hildersham proves from Job. 4. 23. that humane Ceremonies are
forbidden in the Gospel, in loc. Bishop Andrews in Command. 2. p. 263, or 255.
Dr. Reynolds Conference with Heart, c. 8. d. 4. p. 565. John Launder, Thomas
Iveson, John Denly, Martyrs, professed that they believed that the Ceremonies
used here in Q. Mary's days were naught, vain, superfluous, superstitious,
which they sealed with their blood. Fox his Book of Martyrs, p. 1593, 1594,
1595, 1598.
to the perfection of the New Testament.

3. Humane ceremonies can make ^o more to the commodious and profitable
administration of Christ's Sacraments, as they were administered by Christ and
his Apostles, than the decrees of faith made by men, do make more commodiously
to illustrate the faith revealed by Christ. What shall we think, that certain
new men have a better insight, and know better what ceremonies are to be used
in Baptism, than the holy Apostles and Christ himself? So of the Supper too.

Bellarmine says, That ceremonies iustituted by the Church, cannot be omitted
without sin, yea not without scandal. Protestants answer, There cannot be
instituted Religious ceremonies by the Church without sin, and therefore they
may be omitted without sin, and ought to be omitted.

4. That we cannot fully and perfectly perform all that the Law of God
requires; for Christ says plainly, That when we have done all we can do, we
are unprofitable servants. Which shows that we cannot perfectly keep the Law;
for if we could, we should be profitable servants, getting thereby much glory
to God, and everlasting life to our selves. Do this and thou shall live. And
the Homily of the Death of Christ, T. 2. part 2. p ^82. says, Our acts and
deeds be full of imperfectness and infirmity, and therefore nothing worthy of
themselves to stir God to any favor, much less to challenge that glory that is
due to Christ's acts and merits. And again in the same Page it says thus of
Adam after his fall: He could not keep the Law neither; if Adam and his
posterity had been able to satisfy and fulfill the Law perfectly, in loving
God above all things, and their neighbors as themselves, then should they have
easily quenched the Lords wrath, and escaped the horrible sentence of eternal
death. For it is written, Do this and thou shall live; that is, fulfill my
Commandments, keep thy self upright, and perfect in them, according to my will,
then thou shall live and not die: But such was the frailty of mankind after his
fall, such was his weakness, that he could not walk uprightly in Gods
Commandments, though he would never so fain, but daily and hourly fell from his
bounden duty, offending the Lord his God diverse ways, to the great increase of
his condemnation: all are gone astray. Our frailty is such, that we can never
of our selves fulfill the Law, according to that the Law requires.

And our 15th Article of Doctrine says thus: That all we, the rest, (that is
besides Christ) although baptized and born again in Christ, yet offend in many
things; and if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves. and the truth is
not in us. Yea, the Popes Doctrine, viz. That mere men since Adams fall, can in
this life perfectly fulfill Gods whole Moral Law, is not only contrary to Sacred
Scripture, the Doctrine of the Church of England, in her Homilie^ and Articles,
but also her Book of Common Prayers. As to the Lords-Prayer wherein Christ
taught his holy Apostles, and all Gods children to say every day, Forgive us
our trespasses. To our common general Confession, We have erred and strayed
from thy ways like lost sheep. We have followed too much the devices and
desires of our own hearts. We have offended against thy holy Laws. We have left
undone those things we ought to have done, and we have done those things we
ought not to have done. And it is contrary to the prayer after every Commandment
for pardon of sin committed against it, Lord have mercy upon us. Yea, the
Litany might be brought against Papists in this point. And Prove. 7. 20. Romans 7.
15. 17, 18, 20, 23, 24: 1 John 1. 8, 9, 10. and contrary also to the Doctrine
of the Reformed Churches, to be seen in the Harmony of Confession, Sect. 4. and
the 43 Article of Religion of the Church of Ireland; and the fourth Article of
the 16th Chapter of the Confession of Faith of Scotland. Yea, the gates of Hell
(I believe) will never be able to overthrow that Faith in that Confession, made
by that Assembly. He^^ what Shelford, Sermon. p. 121, 127, 136, 139, 147. and
White Bishop of Eli on the Sabbath, p. 157. say for man's ability to fulfill the
Law, against the Doctrine of the Church of England, and what Shelford says for
works of Supererogation, Sermon. p. 184. may be seen in Laudensium
Autocatacrisis, p 70, 71. And what Bishop Forbes says in his Book de
Justificatione, may be seen in the Supplement thereunto, p. 300. And what Dr.
Patrick says may be seen in his Parable of the Pilgrim, p. 324. who there
says thus: It Is true we are not tied to that which we cannot do; but yet the
flesh will sometimes juggle and complain of impotence, when there is nothing
hinders it but sloth. This is Bellarmines argument, de observatione Legis, c.
7. si praecepta, etc. if the precepts are impossible, then they oblige none. To
this argument Dr. Ames gives this answer: Dr. Ames his Bellar. Enervatus, T. 3.
c. 7. p. 191.
1. That this argument does not prove that the Law is more possible to be kep^
by believers than by unbelievers; by the just, than by the unjust. 2. That the
obligation to keep the Law is not taken away by the impossibility that flows
from our fault. To which I shall say but thus: that the words imply, as they
may well be taken, one or both of these errors.

1. That men now are not bound to keep the Moral Law of God: Or,

2. That it is This is Pelagius his Doctrine, as may be seen in Alvarez de
Auxil. gratiae, l. 1. disp. 1. p. 4. n. 2.
possible for men in the state of corruption to keep the whole Moral Law of God.

Both which are very gross Errors, but the former of these I should suppose he
does not hold: Because,

1. He complains against Nonconformists, (though causelessly and very falsely)
for Antinomianism.

2. He presses obedience to the Law, and good works so much, as that he says,
that those that have confidence in Gods mercy through Christ, must come down
again from the top of the tree, and begin at the bottom, in obedience to all
Gods Commandments. And this must go before we can actually receive his pardon
and absolution, according to that of the Apostle, Tit. 3. 5, 6, 7. where it is
visible (says he) that his mercy cannot save us, unless we become new
creatures, and that this must go before the justification we expect by the
grace of God. In his licensed Parable of the Pilgrim, (...). 502, 511, (...).
But yet if he hold it, I shall say no more than what Gods Word expressly, and in
terminis says, Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every (...) that continues not in all
things that are written in the book of the Law to do them. Either Gods word is
false, or his Doctrine. But the second, which is this, 'That it is possible for
men in the state of corruption exactly and perfectly to fulfill the whole Moral
Law of God. Papists, that they may establish their Justification of men's
persons before God by their own inherent righteousness, or good works, do
affirm, that believers Bellar. de observatione Legis, T. 4. l. 6. c. 7.
can by the help of Gods grace, and the spirit of love infused into them at
their Justification, perfectly fulfill the whole Moral Law of God. And this
seems to be the Doctors insinuation. To which our Divines do answer, that it is
true, the Law of God is Evangelically kept or fulfilled by true believers in
Christ Jesus, whose perfect righteousness and obedience is imputed to them, and
thereby their sincere obedience, though very imperfect, as referred to the Law,
is accepted of God as perfect. But the Law is not legally kept by exact and
perfect doing for matter and manner all the works thereof, by any justified or
regenerated person in this life, since Christ ascended up into Heaven. And this
I have proved by the Doctrine of the Church of England, and may be further
proved, even by those portions of Sacred Writings which she appoints to be said
before the Common Prayers begin, or the Exhortation thereto, Enter not into
judgment with thy servants, O Lord, for no flesh is righteous in thy sight,
Psalm. 143. 2. And if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us, Joh. 1. ^8.

The Church of England (as I have showed) teaches that the works of
unjustified men are sins, Art. 13. And that the most holy and righteous
Davenant Deter. 10. page 50.
works of regenerate persons have some sin in them, Art. 15. and their graces
are but imperfect. They know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9. and they believe but in
part, Mark 9. 24. Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief. And our frailty is
such; that we can never fulfill the Law according to the perfection that the Law
requires. Plenissima charitas est in nemine. August. Epist. 29.
Homily for Good Friday, T. 2. p. 182. and p. 177. and there is original sin in
the regenerate, Article the ninth. And that concupiscence Bishop Prideaux
Fascic. Controvers. l. 3. de peccato, q. 5. p. 123.
in the regenerate is properly sin, Article the ninth. That God made man in the
state of innocence upright and able to fulfill the whole Law of God. That it is
now since his fall, in his corrupt estate, though in part renewed, impossible
ordinarily for him to fulfill the Law, is not the fault of the Law (which is
holy, and just, and good) but of man, who has by his own default disabled
himself; that it much magnifies and commends the free grace of God, in that he
does for Christ's sake accept of true believers imperfect performances, as if
they were exactly conformed to the perfect Law of God, which yet they are not.
Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Josiah, Jonah,
Job, Peter and Paul sinned. David sinned after his person was justified, Psalm.
51. and so did Peter by denying of Christ, Luke 22. 57, 58, 60. and by his
unseasonable and scandalous using the Ceremonies of the Law, or Judaizing, Gal.
2. 11, 12, 13, 14. And St. Paul himself feels and complains (Romans 7. 20, 21,
24.) of si^ that did dwell in him, of a law in his members that did draw him to
do that which he would not, and hinder him from doing that which he would do;
and of a body of death. And Gal. 3. 17. That the flesh lusts against the
Spirit.

These few failings of Dr. Patrick and Mr. Fowler, and Doctor Jeremy Tailor,
etc. may not only serve to put in the other scale against the many little
pretended ones, the Debater objects against Mr. W. B. and Mr. T. W. and others,
but also prove, That some great Conformists to the Discipline of the Church of
England, are the greatest Nonconformists to the Doctrine thereof, and those
tolerated, if not protected and promoted, while Nonformists to the Discipline,
but stout defenders of the Doctrine of Faith, and Sacraments thereof, are
rejected and silenced.

ART. XI.
That unregenerated persons own good works do make th^^ meet to receive grace
from God, or (as the School-Author say) deserve grace of congruity. THis I
renounce, because it is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England; but
before I prove it, for the better understanding of this error and the truth,
know, 1. That grace in Sacred Scripture signifies two things:

1. The favor of God, or of man in himself; and so it is taken and used in the
Old and New Testament. As Genesis 6. 8. And Noah fo^^^ grace in the eyes of God.
Genesis 18. 3. Genesis 39. 21. Ezra 9. 8. Esth. 2. 1^. So the Virgin Mary found
(...), grace with God, Romans 3. 24. Beng justified freely by his grace; that is,
by the free favor or love* mercy or goodness that is in God, manifested to us
in Christ, Romans 11 5, Election of Grace, Ephesians. 2* 8. By grace ye are saved.
Sometimes it signifies

2. The gift of grace, that is, that gracious habit of grace that is in^erent
in us, as Romans 11. 29. 2 Cor. 8. 7. See that ye abound in th^^ grace also.
Ephesians. 3. 7. The gift of grace. Ephesians. 4. 7. Unto every o^^ of us is given
grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Col. 3 16. Singing with
grace in your hearts. Heb. 12. 28, Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God
acceptably with reverence and godly fe^ 2 Pet. 3. 18, But grow in grace.

2. That the Aquinas 12ae q. 114. a. 6. (...), (...). Medina in 12ae. q. 114.
a. 3.
Schoolmen speak of (...) twofold merit, whereof the

1: Is Meritum de congruo, merit o^ congruity, which is not truly and properly
merit; but such as it is, it is defined to be this, That it is congruous,
convenient, Dr. Davenant, de justitia. c 6. p 603. ^emble of Justification, c.
1. S. 2. p. 163.
or agreeable to goodness, that G^l do reward a man working according to his
virtue or power ^^at he has. Which many learned men do deny to be truly and
properly merit. For that is truly and properly meritorious, that does properly
and absolutely for it self deserve a reward, or which does in its formal reason
include equality or condignity to that reward of which it is said to be
meritorious. But merits of congruity do not truly and properly deserve a
reward, or carry an equality or proportion with the thing said to be merited,
the grace of God; and therefore are not truly and properly merits; their merit
of congruity is nothing else but fitness, for which they have no ground in
Scripture, or right reason; yet Bellarmine, the Council of Trent, and other
Papists, retain the name, and give it chiefly to those dispositions and
preparations which they say go before Justification, according to which they
say grace is ex congruo due, and so comply with Pelagius his false Doctrine
long since condemned, Gratiam secundum merita dari, (i. e.) Grace is Aug.
Epist. 106, 107. contra duas Epistolas Pelagianorum, lib. 2. c. 8.
to be given according to merits. That is, it is congruous or fit that grace or
favor be bestowed upon men by God, according to their deservings. For if those
dispositions be merits, and if according to them, grace be given, as the
Council of Trent Secundum propriam cujusque dispositionem. Sess. 6. cap. 7.
defines, do they not plainly hold, that grace is given to men of God
according to their merits.

2. Meritum de condigno, Merit of condignity is that which includes in its
formal reason, equality, condignity, or worthiness, proportionable to the thing
of which it is said to be meritorious. And thus they say, the good works of
regenerate men do merit heaven, of which hereafter. Not to trouble you with a
full confutation of this Scriptureless and reasonless distinction of merits*
but to apply it to our present purpose in hand; I say,

1. That good I call them good works, (so quoad substantiam, but formally are
evil) because they call them so.
works done by an unregenerate man before the grace of Christ be received, or
the inspiration of his Spirit, do not ex congruo merit the favor of God. For,
1. there is no proportion between them. 2. Then our Election should not be of
Grace, as it is said to be by the unerring Spirit of God, Romans 11. 5. but of
sinful man's sinful works, which they call deserts, confuted before in Article
the sixth.

2. That good works of unregenerate men before the saving grace of Jesus Christ
be infused into them, (...) Quia ego volo, Deus me adjuvat, est Pelagianorum.
Alvarez de auxiliis Divinae gratiae, l. 1. disp. 1. p. 11.
wrought in them by his holy Spirit, (...) received by them, do not merit ex
c^^gruo, or deserve grace (that is saving grace) of congruity. Papists indeed
(...) hold, that good works done by man before he receive the sp^^ grace of
Christ, do provoke God to bestow his saving grace (...) him; and that the man
himself, a (...) tle The Synod of Dort reject as an error, the Doctrine of them
that teach, that in spiritual death no spiritual gifts were separated from the
will of man, for that the will of it self was never corrupted, but only
ENCUMBERED by the darkness of the understanding, and unruliness of the
affections, which IMPEDIMENTS BEING REMOVED, the will may put in ure her own
inbred faculty of freedom, that is, of her self, will, or nill, choose or refuse
any kind of good set before her. Which they say is contrary to Jer. 17. 9.
Ephesians 2. 3. Chap. 3, 4. Error 3d.
hindrance being taken away (...) rendered disposed to receive the gra^^ of God.
Hence is that of some Scho^^ men (of some I say, for they do not agree, but
some are sounder than Jesuits and Arminians) that God does not deny grace to
him that does endeavor to do what is in him to obtain it. And he does what is
in him, that does forsake the act of sin, the will of (...)ning, and does
endeavor to do good, and to convert himself to God. He that does this,
deserves grace (say they) by this merit of congruity, because it is congruous
(say they) that to a man acting according to his virtue, God should give a
reward according to the excellency of his virtue. And also because it were
incongruous or unfit (...) give grace to them that neglect to (...) these
things, and voluntarily oppo^^ grace offered. And this merit of congruity was
brought into the Church by some erroneous Schoolmen, and (...) others made use
of, that some reason might be given or showed of man's part, why to s^^ grace is
given, and to others not given; and so they make the first (...) ving cause of
grace taken either for the favor of God, or gifts of grace of God Spirit, to
be in man, and in man's own natural power, or free will. Which I suppose is
sufficiently confuted before, Articles the sixth and seventh.

3. That good works done before the saving grace of Christ received and wrought
in a man, ^o make him meet to receive the saving grace of God. These works I
call good according to them, which may be good quo^^ substantiam and
materialiter, but are evil quoad modum and formaliter, because not done to Gods
glory in faith, and in love, and obedience to God and his will.

Now these Errors I renounce, because they are contrary to the Doctrine of the
Church of England: 1. In her 13th Article, which is this: Works done before the
grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his (...), are not pleasant to God,
forasmuch as they spring not of faith in Jes^^ Crist; neither do they make men
meet to receive grace, (or as the School-A^rthor say) deserve grace of
congruity; yea rather for that they are not (...) ^s God has willed and
commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of sin. In
which Article are these three Conclusions.

1. That works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his
Spirit, are not pleasant unto God.

2. That works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of (...)
Spirit, do not make men meet to receive grace, or do not deserve grace of
congruity.

3. That works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of (...)
Spirit, have the nature of sin.

The first and third of these three Conclusions show the reasons of the second,
and hold forth this truth: That the works of unregenerated men, done before
they receive the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are not
good works, and so pleasing unto God; and that because they spring not from a
lively faith in Christ, but are evil, because they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done. And therefore they make not men meet to
receive grace, or deserve not grace of congruity at Gods hands, 2. And this
erroneous Doctrine of merit of congruity, and preparing and disposing, and
making men meet and worthy to receive grace, is also contrary to the Doctrine
of the Church of Eng^^ in her Homily for Rogation-week, T. 2. p. 3. p. 223.
which says thus: Faith is the first entry into a Christian life, without which
no man can please God. Faith is the gi^t of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. Charity wherewith
we love our brethren, is the work of God. If after our fall we repent, it is by
him that we repent, who reaches forth his merciful hand to raise us up; if we
have any WILL TO RISE, it is HE that PREVENTETH OUR WILL, AND DISPOSES us
thereunto. If after contrition we feel our consciences at peace with God
through remission of sins, and so be reconciled to his favor, and hope to be
his children, and inheritors of everlasting life, who works these great
miracles in us? our worthiness, our deservings and endeavors, our wits and
virtue? Nay verily, St. Paul will not suffer flesh and clay in such arrogance,
and therefore says, all is o^ God, which has reconciled us to himself by
Jesus Christ. Lo here you see that your virtue, wits, endeavors, deservings,
worthiness, are excluded from being the efficient, disposing, much more from
being the meritorious cause of the favor of God, or grace of faith, or love or
repentance, etc. in us, and that these are the gifts of God, which he by his
Spirit works in us. And 3 it is contrary to the Church of England's Liturgy,
as Collect for the 17th Sunday after Trinity: Lord we pray thee that thy grace
may always prevent and follow us, and make us continually to be given to good
works. And in one of the Collects after the Communion: Prevent us, O Lord, in
all our doings with thy most gracious favor, and further us with thy continual
help, that in all our works begun, continued, and ended in thee, etc. Wherein
we acknowledge that Gods grace and favor must prevent us, and go before our
doing or beginning to do any good works, and that his grace must follow and
further us with its continual help; else we shall not be able to begin nor
continue to do good works acceptable to him. And 4. it is contrary to the tenth
Article of the Church of England of Free Will: The condition of man after the
fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turn and prepare himself by his own
natural strength and good works to faith and calling upon God. Wherefore we
have no power to do good works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the
grace of God by Christ PREVENTING us, that we may have a good will; and WORKING
with us, when we have that good will.

2. Because it is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of Ireland, Articles
25, and 26. which accords with the Doctrine of the Church of England verbatim,
in her tenth and thirteenth Articles.

3. Because it is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of Scotland, which also
agrees with the Doctrine of the Church of England, to be seen in the
Confession of Faith made by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, Edinburgh,
August 27, 1647. Sess. 23. c. 9. Art. 3, 4. c. 10. Art. 1, 2. c. 16. Art. 2, 3.
7.

Now these Errors of the Papists are grounded upon two Errors more, which they
have received from the Pelagians.

1. The first Error which is the ground of these, is this: That men in the
state of corruption, before they are endued with a lively faith in Jesus
Christ, can by the power of their own free will do good works: which Papists
call dispositions, or preparations of grace, which they say do out of congru^^y
move God to bestow his grace upon them, and prepare or make them meet and
worthy to receive Gods grace. Now though this error be sufficiently, yea
abundantly confuted before, especially in the seventh Article of this
Renunciation, yet because it is the ground of many others, and it is so much
stood upon, and it is so pleasing to corrupt reason: Give me leave to say
something more against it here also. And,

1. I say, that this Doctrine is condemned by the Synod of Dort, Chap. 3, 4.
Error 3. before recited. And also Error 5, We reject the Doctrine of them that
teach that corrupt and natural man can so rightly use common grace (by which
they mean the light of nature) or those gifts which are left in him after the
fall, that by the good use thereof, he may attain to a greater, namely
Evangelical or saving grace, and by degrees at length Salvation it self. And
God for his part shows himself ready in this man^er to reveal Christ to all
men; seeing he does sufficiently and efficaciously afford to every man
necessary means for the making Christ known, and for faith and repentance. They
give not their reason there for their rejecting of the former part of this
Error, because that they had it done before in the third and fourth Error
rejected. But against the latter they say thus: For this is convinced to be
false, as by the experience of all ages in the world, so also by the
Scriptures, Psalm. 147. 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel; he has not ^ealt so with any Nation, and as for his
judgments they have not known them. Act. 14. 16, God in times past suffered all
Nations to walk in their own ways. Act. 16. 7, 8. Paul and his company were
forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the Word in Asia; and after they were
come to Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit suffered them
not. And Error the ninth, they reject the Doctrine of them that teach, That
grace and free will are co-partening causes, jointly concurring to the
beginning of conversion, and that grace does not in order of causality go
before the action of the will; that is, that God does not effectually help man's
will unto conversion, before the will of man moves, and determines or setleth
it self thereunto. For this Doctrine was long since condemned by the ancient
Church among the Pelagian Errors out of the Apostles authority, Romans 9. 16. It
is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy. And 1 Cor. 4. 7, Who makes thee to differ from another, and what have
thou that thou did not receive? Item Phil. 2. 13, It is God which works in
you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. In that Synod were Divines at
the Synod of Dort.
five of our learned Divines sent by K. James, Viz. George Carlton Bishop of
Landaff, John Davenant Priest, Doctor and public Professor of Divinity in the
University of Cambridg, and Master of Queens College there. Samuel Ward Priest,
Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of Taunton, and Master of Sidney-Colledg in the
University of Cambridg. Tho^^ Goad Who I suppose was sent instead of Dr. Joseph
Hall, who fell sick after he came to the Synod.
Priest, Doctor of Divinity, chief Chaunter of the Cathedral Church of St. Paul
in London. And ^^ B^^^^^quall a Scotchman, Priest, ^^chelor of Divinity, who
said of this an^ (...), this is our opinion and judgment, in witness whereof we
have (...) subscribed. And it is, as I showed before, directly contrary to the
express words of the Doctrine of the Church of England in her tenth Article:
The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works to faith and calling
upon God; wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant Good works are
brought forth by Grace. Homily of Good works, T. 2. p. 81.
and acceptable to God, without the special grace of Christ preventing us, that
we may have a good will, and working with us, when we have that good will. Lo
here you see it clearly and plainly affirmed, that man in the state of
corruption before he receive the special grace of God in Christ, cannot turn
and prepare himself by his own natural strength to faith, or do good works
acceptable to God. And these reasons may be given for it:

1. Because we are spiritually dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1, Col.
3. 13. Now as a man that is corporally dead cannot of himself move, dispose or
prepare himself to his Resurrection or enlivening; so a man that is spiritually
dead in sin, cannot raise or dispose and prepare himself, or actively concur
toward his raising up again, or to his spiritual life.

Obj. But against this they object: 1. That in a dead carcass there are no
relics of life; but in unregenerated men they say, there are some relics of
spiritual life.

Answ. To which I answer and say, 1. That there are no relics of spiritual
life in a man that is spiritually dead in trespasses and sins; for death in
Spirituals does fully exclude spiritual life. A man is not, cannot be said to
be truly and properly dead, while there is a^^ life in him. 2. With this
accords the Doctrine of the learned A. (...) Vshar, in his Sum of Christian
Religion, p. 143. who there says th^^ Every man is by nature dead in sin, as a
loathsome carrion, or as a dead corpse, and lies rotting and stinking in the
grave, having in him the seed of all sins. Ephesians. 2. 1. 1 Timothy 5. 6. 3. The
Synod of Dort condemn as an error this Doctrine: That an u^regenerated man is
not properly no^ totally dead in sins, nor destitute of all strength to
spiritual good, but that he is able to hunger and thirst after righteousness,
or everlasting life, and to offer the sacrifice of an humble and contrite
heart, even such as is acceptable to God. For these assertions march against
the direct testimonies of Scripture, Ephesians. 2. 1, 5, Ye were dead in trespasses
and sins. And Gen, 6. 5. and 8. 21. Every imagination of the thoughts of man's
heart is only evil conti^ally. Moreover the hungring and thirsting for
deliverance out of misery, and for life eternal, as also the offering to God
the sacrifice of a broken heart, is proper to the regenerate, and such as are
called blessed, Psalm. 51. 19. Mat. 5. 6. 4. The Church of England maintains
this Doctrine also, in her Homily of the Nativity of Christ, T 2. p. 167. where
we may read thus: That Adam falling into sin, had in himself no one part of his
former purity and cleanness -- And a little after, His posterity had nothing in
themselves but everlasting damnation both of body and soul. Which fully proves
that there was and is in every man since the fall before the special grace of
Gods Spirit be wrought in him, a total privation of spiritual life. And in
Homily for Christ's Death, T. 2. p. 182. it is said, That man could do nothing
that might pacify Gods wrath. So Ibid. 183. and in Homily for Whitsunday, T.
2. p. 209. Man by nature is f^esbly and carnal, without any spark of godliness.
Does not all this prove a total privation of all spiritual life?

Obj. But they say, That God does not bespeak dead carcasses to arise: but he
speaks to men dead in sins, and then does set before them their disease, which
implies some life, and a power of rising in them.

Answ. To this I answer thus: 1. That Christ spoke to Lazarus that had been
four days dead, and in the grave, these words, Lazarus come forth, Joh. 11. 43.
2. That Gods raising of men dead in sins unto spiritual life, is a great
miralce, as it is called in the Homily for Rogation-week, T. 2. p. 228. Who
works these great miracles in us? yea greater than Christ's raising of dead
Lazarus; for to his Vivification and Resurrection there was no opposition in
him; but to the spiritual Vi^ification and Resurrection of men in the state of
corruption, there is opposition, not only from without by the Devil and the
world, but also within by their inbred corruption, which makes them averse from
that which is good, yea which is enmity against God, Romans 8. 7.

That Gods speaking to unregenerate men dead in their sins, implies not that
they have a power in themselves of raising themselves to spiritual life, no
more than Lazarus; but it shows what they are, (...) what they should do, not
what they can do. He gave them a power at first in Adam, to do whatsoever he
commanded them to do, but they through their own default have disabled
themselves, he therefore m^^ justly require it of them, and punish them for
their loss of it, and neglect of their duty.

Obj. But they say, That the dead carcass cannot resist Gods raising of him,
but the unregenerate man can. Ergo, they have a power of rising.

Answ. To this I answer, 1. That the unregenerate Elect cannot finally resist
their regeneration; for the power of God in regenerating his Elect in Christ is
irresistible, as has been proved before Art. 7th. 2. That it follows not, that
because unregenerated men have a power to resist their spiritual resurrection,
they therefore have a power to raise themselves, but rather proves they have
none, their corruption is so great.

Obj. But they object, That in the dead carcass there is no power to rise, but
in the unregenerate there is a power to regeneration.

Answ. There is a passive power in unregenerated persons to regeneration, that
is to be regenerated by the Spirit of God. But there is not in them an active
power or ability to regenerate themselves.

Ob. But God calls upon unregenerated men to cast away their sins, and to make
them a new heart, and a new spirit, and turn your selves, Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32.
Now, say they, if they cannot do these things, and if he alone can do them, how
can he in reason call upon them to do them.

Ans. To this I answer thus: 1. That praecepta ostendunt, non qu^^ possumus,
sed quid debemus. Precepts do show not what we can do, but what we ought to do.
Or they show what by grace we can do, but not by our selves, says the learned
Fasciculus controversiarum, c. 3. q. 4. p. 122.
Bishop Prideaux. 2. That God does do some things, and yet exhort and command
men to do them. God works in men to will and to do, and yet he exhorts them
to will and to do, to love him and to keep his Commandments. Our Savior
commands us to believe in him, Joh. 14. (...). And yet he says, That no man
can come to him except the Father, which sent him, do draw him, Joh. 6. 44. And
you know that Faith is the gi^^ of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. So here, turn ye, shows
what we ought to do, (...) what we can do. We had once in Adam a power to do
what he commands. he does call upon us for doing of it, though now we cannot do
it without his special help and grace. 3. Consider what th^^ Church of England
says in her Homily of Repentance, T. 2. p. 263. (...) must be verified of all
men, Without me ye can do nothing. And again, of our selves we are unable so
much as to think a good thought: and again, it is God that works in us both
to will and to do. And for this cause (pray mark this) although Jeremy had
before said, Jer. 4. 1. If thou return, O Israel, return unto me, says the
Lord; yet afterward he says, Jer. 31. 18. Turn thou me, O Lord, and I shall be
turned. Which plainly shows, that they could not turn themselves to the Lord,
but the Lord himself must turn them, or else they would never return, or be
turned. And the next words of the Homily are, St. Ambrose does plainly affirm,
that the turning of the heart unto God, is of God. But to return to my proof of
the point, That a man in the state of corruption cannot without the special
grace of God turn and prepare himself to grace.

2. Because a man by nature is not capable of those things which are spiritual,
but they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

3. Because the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, for it is not
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8. 7.

4. Because an unconverted man is unfit to think any thing that is spiritually
good, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing
as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. (...), our idoniety or fitness
is of God. The very thoughts, the imaginations of unconverted men are only
evil, and that continually, Genesis 6. 5. (...), the wisdom of the flesh is enmity
against God, and therefore not fit to prepare and dispose men to grace.

5. Because before his conversion he is an evil tree; now au evil tree cannot
bring forth good fruit, Mat. 7. 18. He is an Ethiopian accustomed to do evil,
Jer. 13. 23. which cannot change his skin.

2. They ground this their false Doctrine of merit of congruity upon auother
error, which they suppose and teach. viz. That God ^oth dispense his grace
according to the preparations and dispositions of men that are to receive it,
as was showed before. But God says otherwise, Romans 11. 15. I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion. Mark it, he does not say, I will have mercy on them, who by doing
first that which is in them, are by themselves disposed to the receiving of
saving grace, by the merit of congruity; but he says on the contrary in the
next words: It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God
that shows mercy. That is, on whom he pleases, Which place Peter Martyr
understands thus: That neither Election is in respect of any thing in man, and
that ^e has no power to will of himself, but that it is of God himself, who
shows mercy on whom he will, and (...) he will he hardneth. St. De
Predestinatione, c. 14. Defendimus contra novum Pelagianorum errorem gratiam
Dei non secundum merita nostra dari, sed gratis dari, cui datur, quia neque
volentis, neque currentis, sed miserentis est Dei: justo autem judicio, non
dari, cui non datur; quia non est iniquitas apud Deum.
Augustine s^^, We defend against the new error of (...) Pelagians, that the
grace of God i^ gi^^ not according to our merits, but that (...) given freely
to whom it is given. Be^^ it is not of him that wills, nor of (...) that
runs, (that is, as I humbly co^ceive, of him that inwardly wills, (...)
outwardly endeavors, that it is n^^ for any thing in man that he has done)
but of God that shows mercy. A^^ that by a just judgment it is not give^ to
him to whom it is not given: For there is none iniquity with God. And that of
the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 11. God works all things according to the counsel of
his own will, is very considerable and to our purpose* And besides all these
things it will follow from this erroneous Pelagi^^ Doctrine, that some men
before saving-grace received from Gods Spirit, may by their own endeavors
difference themselves from others which have not performed such endeavors as
they have; which is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine in 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who
makes thee (...) differ? and what have thou that thou did not receive? (the
sense of which is, as our Church declares in the Contents of that Chapter,
That we have nothing but what we have r^ceived.) For every one of these men may
answer and say, that the preparations and disposition gotten by (...) own
endeavors have differenced me; for I have had an endeavor ^o good, which I
have not received from the fullness of Christ the Mediator, but from the
fountain of nature, or from my own free will, yet remaining in me: but this is
abominably false, and contra^y to the Doctrine taught by St. Paul, and St.
Ambrose, St. Augustine; a^^ all the Reformed Churches I named before. Lastly, I
deny this error* That a man unregenerated can dispose ^^elf to true real
regeneration, or that (...) A. B. Usher in his Sum of Christ. Religion, page
338. says, That unregenerate men do no good works, which he there proves.
man unregenerate can do such works (...) so please God, as to move him to
co^fe^^^ on ^h^m some saving grace. Which (...) prove to be false, not only by
the D^^ctrine of the Church of England; an^ the reformed Churches before
alleged, and the reasons before give^ but also briefly thus: 1. Because it is
impossible for any man to please G^^ with^^t faith, Heb. 11. 6. and Romans 8. 8.
They that are in the flesh (as all ^^regenerated men are) cannot please God. 2.
God cannot be said to be moved by the works of unbelievers, to bestow
supernatural grace upon them; for if God be not moved by the works of true
believers to bestow this or that good thing, which he does bestow upon them
then, much less can he be said truly to be moved with the works of ^^believers
to confer his supernatural grace upon them. But now that God is not provoked by
the works of true believers, as a cause or reason, why he does bestow that
which he does bestow upon them* These things do manifest, 1. Because all the
works of true believers are due debts to God. Luke 17. 10. When ye have done
all those things that ^re commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants, we
have done that ^^ich was our duty to do. And therefore as they cannot come into
muster of merit, so they cannot move God to do good to them, Ex de^ito. (...)*
All the gifts of God which he bestows upon true believers are free gifts, and
proceed from his free grace and mercy. They are said to be justified freely by
his grace, Romans 3. 24. Romans 5. 18. To be regenera^ed of grace, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5.
To be saved of grace, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Tit. 3. 5. ^^ I offer this: The young man
in the Gospel, Mat. 19. 16. who came to Christ and asked him, What good he must
do to have eternal life? our Savior said, He must keep the Commandments. But
which, said the young man? Jesus said, Thou shall do no murder, thou shall not
commit adul^^ry, thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear false witness,
honor thy father and thy mother, and thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. The young man s^it^, all these have I kept from my youth up. What lack I
yet? And in Mark 10. 17. he is said to come running, and that he kneeled down
to Christ and asked the question. And in verse. 21. it is said, That Jesus
^e^olding him, loved him. Lo here a man that had outwardly in appearance kept
the second Table, came earnestly and humbly to Christ for his gracious
direction to Heaven, was not this man as much prepared as the Papists well
disposed unregenerated man? and yet Christ let him go, and did not bestow his
saving grace upon him. Nay more, (...) sought the blessing with tears, and yet
went without it, Genesis 27. 34. And yet on the other hand behold another, Saul a
zealous man against Christ, and persecuting the Disciples of Jesus Christ, who
breathed out threatenings against believers in Christ, and made havoc of the
members of Christ, entering into every house to find and apprehend believers in
Christ, haling men and women, committed them to prison, Act. 8. 3. an informer
against them that called upon the name of Jesus, and a cruel active persecutor
of them, and yet notwithstanding all this, though he had done Christ and his
Church much evil at Jerusalem, and was going to Damascus to apprehend (...)
that he found of that way, and bring them bound to Jerusalem, Christ met him by
the way, spoke to him, and asked him, Why he persecuted him? and even then
bestowed his special grace upon him, he converted him, Act. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
11. For behold he prays. This I take to be (...) clear demonstration of the
Apostles truth, That it is not of him that ^^eth, or of him that runs, but of
God that showed mercy; and a confutation of the Papists Error, That God is not
causally or meritoriously ^^ved to bestow his grace upon men, for or according
to their own preparation or dispositions; but he does all according to the
counsel of his own will, (...) that he has mercy on whom he will have mercy,
and whom he will be ^a^^neth; and shows that saving grace is not deserved of
God by carnal man's works, but freely given us of God, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. The wheel
turns round, not to the end that it may be made round, but because it is ^^de
round, therefore it turns round: So no man does good works to receive grace
by his good works, but because he has first received grace, therefore
consequently he does good works: as it is in our Homily of Go^^ works, T. 2.
part 1. page 81. 4. To this might be added, That the works Virtutes Ethnicorum
sunt splendida peccata. Aug.
and virtues of unregenerated me^ (...) sin. Prove. 21, 4. The plowing of the
wicked is sin. Prove. 15. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abominatio^ to
the Lord. Prove. 28. 9. Their prayers are an abomination. And Ro^^. ult.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, And our 13th Article of Religion. And that
therefore they do not please God, (for he hates sin above all things, as being
most contrary to his nature and will) and consequently do not move God to
bestow his Grace upon unregenerated men.

ART. XII.
That the good works of regenerated men do ex condigno at Gods hands, merit
eternal life for them. THis false Doctrine I renounce, because it is contrary to
the Doctrine of the Church of England in her book of Homilies, Homily of good
works, T. 2. part. 1. p. 81. Though God has ordained us to walk in good works,
yet the meaning is not by these words to induce us to have any affiance, or to
put any confidence in our works, as by the merit and deserving of them, to
purchase to our selves or others, remission of sins, and so consequently
everlasting life; for that were ^lasphemy against Gods ^^rcy, and great
derogation to the bloodshedding of our Savior Jesus Christ; for it is the
free grace and mercy of God, by the mediation of the blood of ^is Son Jesus
Christ, without merit or deserving on our part, that our sins are forgive^ Yet
Bishop Montague in his Appeal, p. 233, says, The wicked go to enduring of
torments everlasting; the good to enjoying of happiness without end; thus is
their state diversified to their deserving. See him also Antig. (...). 153.
Shelfor^ Ser. p. 153. Shelford Ser. p. 198. Laudensium Autocatacrisis, p. 70,
71, 72.
us, that we are reconciled, and brought again into his favor, and are ^ade
heirs of his heavenly kingdom: And in her 11th Article of Religion, We are
accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ by faith, and NOT FOR OUR OWN WORKS OR DESERVINGS. Now if we are
not justified by our own merits, then certainly we are not saved by our own
merits; if our good works do not merit our justification, then they do not
merit our eternal salvation. 2. It Is contrary to the 35th Article of Religion
of Ireland. Although this justification be free unto us, yet it comes not so
freely unto us, that there is no ransom paid therefore at all: God showed his
great mercy in delivering us from our former captivity, without requiring of
any ransom to be paid, or amends to be made on our parts, which thing by us had
been unpossible to be done* And whereas all the world was not able of
themselves to pay any part toward their ransom, it pleased our heavenly
Father, of his infinite mercy, without any desert of ours, to provide for us
the most precious merits of his own Son, whereby our ransom might be fully
paid, the law fulfilled, and his justice fully satisfied: so that now Christ is
the righteousness of all the^ that believe in him. He for them paid their
ransom by his death. He for them fulfilled the law in his life: That now in
him, and by him, every true Christian man may be called a fulfiller of the law;
for as much as that which our infirmity was not able to effect, Christ's
justice has performed: and thus the justice and mercy of God do embrace each
other; the grace of God not shutting out the justice of God in the matter of
our justification, but on^y shutting the justice of man (that is to say, the
justice of our o^^ works) from being any cause of deserving our justification.
3. It Is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of Scotland to be seen in the
Confession of faith made by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, c. 16.
Article 5. We cannot, by our best works, merit pa^don of sin, or eternal life,
at the hand of God, by reason of the great disproportion that is between them
and the glory to come; and the infinite distance that is between us and God,
whom, by them, we can neither profit nor satisfy for the debt of our former
sins; but when we have done all we can, we have done but o^^ duty, and are
unprofitable servants; and because as they are good, they proceed from his
Spirit; and as they are wrought by us, they are defiled (...) mixed with so
much weakness and imperfection, that they cannot endure the severity of Gods
judgment: Behold here is the Doctrine of the three Churches in his Majesty's
three Kingdoms, against this Popish Autichristian Doctrine of Merits.

But 4. It Is contrary to sacred Scripture. That the good works of regenerated
men do not merit eternal salvation at Gods hands, ^prove*

1. Because eternal life is the gift of God, Romans 6. 23. That which is given to
us, is not merited by us; but eternal life is given to us; therefore eternal
life is not merited by us.

2. Because we are not saved by our own good works, but by the mercy of God,
Tit 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness, which we have done, (...) according to
his mercy he saved us: therefore our good works do not merit eternal salvation.

3. Because the Apostle says, that we are saved by grace, Ephesians 2. 8, 9. where
by grace is meant the favor or mercy of God in him, a^^ (...) by works, which
we have done or do; and the reason is given, lest (...) man should boast; which
we might do, as that we have saved our selv^^ and God has not saved us, if our
own good works within us, or do^^ by us (as our Homily speaks) did merit
eternal salvation.

5. The good works of regenerated men do not ex condigno, men eternal life at
Gods hands, because they want the proper conditions of proper merit; for that
which is properly merit ex condigno, or is properly meritorious, has, or ought
to have these Conditions.

Cond. 1. That it be perfectly good: but the good works of regenerated men are
imperfect. This I have proved before out of our book of Homilies, Articles of
Ireland, and Confession of Scotland, and sacred Scripture, Homil. of Christ's
death, t. 2. part. 2. p. 182. alleged Article 6th.
Article the 10, and this 12th of this, See also Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, O Lord, ^^r in thy sight shall no flesh be
justified, Romans 3. 20. Gal. 2. 16. Psalm. 130. 3. If thou, Lord, should mark
iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? Gal. 5. 17. Isa. 64. 6. The stains of our
righteousness are no less than menstruous. Dr. Slater in 2 These. 2. 11. p. 167.
And upon this account our good works are not meritorious, ratione pacti, or
ratione operis: for the Covenant of works, Do this, and thou shall live,
requires perfect obedience, without any imperfection; which, if we perform not,
eternal life is not due unto us ratione pacti, by virtue of the Covenant of
Works; and if you come in, and plead the Covenant of Grace (Believe, and thou
shall be saved) you deny the condignity of your works, and come over to us, for
Gods free grace given unto us, for we are not justified and saved for our good
works worthiness, but for Christ's sake, in whom he has elected us unto eternal
life.

2. Cond. That it be not due, or debt: but our good works are due debts, which
we owe to God, Luke 17. 10. When ye shall have done all these things which are
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was
our duty to do. We may merit of men, when we do them some notable piece of
work, which we were not bound to do; but we can do no good work, to or for God,
but that which we are bound to do; therefore we cannot merit by doing good
works, which are but our duty. Adam while he was in the f^ate of innocence,
could not by his perfectly good works have merited ex condigno, eternal life at
Gods hands, by reason of the dignity of his works, because his works were due
from him to God, as I showed before in the Article of Original sin.

Cond. 3. That they be only ours: but our good works, as they are good, are not
properly Homily for Rogation-Week, t. 2. p. 297, 220. alleged before Article
7. p. ^1.
ours, but are the free gifts of God, and works of God in us, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not
that we are sufficient of our selves to think ^^t thing as of our selves, but
our su^ficiency is of God, Joh. 15. 5. Without me (says Christ) ye can do
nothing; that is, nothing that is spiritually and truly good, and acceptable to
God: and Phil. 2. 13. it is God that works in you to will and to do (that
which is good) of his good pleasure. See more in Homily of Repentance, t. 2. p.
263. alleged before Article 7th.

Cond. 4. That it profit him of whom we merit: but our good works do not profit
God, Job 22. 2. Can a man be profitable unto God? Psalm. 16. 2. Our goodness
extends not to thee. Romans 11. 35. Who has first given unto him, and it shall
be recompensed to him again, Luke 17. 10. When you have done all you are
commanded to do, say, We are unprofit^ble servants; and therefore our good
works cannot merit any thing of God, by their own worth, and oblige him to give
us a reward for their profit done him.

Cond. 5. That there be a proportion between the thing meriting, and the thing
merited; but between our imperfect good works and eternal life, there is no
proportion; merit of condignity must be equal to the reward, or thing merited;
that is truly and properly meritorious that does properly and absolutely for it
self deserve a reward, or which does in its formal reason include equality or
condignity t^ that reward, of which it is said to be meritorious; but now that
there is no proportion between our works and eternal life, is proved Romans 8.
18. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. Where it is clear, tha^
the Apostle, who was a regenerated man, and had done as many good works as any
regenerated man after his conversion, as appears by his works; yet those he
slig^ts in comparison of the knowledge of Christ by faith; and who suffered
many great and cruel afflictions (and (...) last Martyrdom, for Christ's sake)
yet he reckoned them all not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed in us in heaven: they hold no true proportion or equality with the
reward, neither in respect of dignity or worth, nor in respect of duration or
time: these aff^^ctions are not worth that glory which we shall have in heaven;
a^^ these afflictions, which are but for a moment, are not worthy to be
equalled with that eternal weight of glory, which they work for us, if righ^^
born. This place, says Pareus and our Dr. Fulk and Willet in locum tollit omne
meritum condigni, Pareus in loc.
Dr. Fulk, takes away all merit of condignity; for if the sufferings of the
Saints, neither for quality nor quantity are proportionable to the glory that
is to come, then it follows necessarily, that they are not worthy; if the
sufferings of Martyrs come short of the value and worth of the glorious
happiness of Saints triumphant in heaven, then sure much more do their best
actions come short thereof* There is a reward, ratione pacti, when a man
promises such a reward to a person, if he do such a work for him. Now this
reward is called wages, not properly merit, because it may be merely of
promise, and not of desert. (e. g.) A man may promise another man an 100 l. of
good gold to fetch him a bottle of straw; which, when he has done, he is bound
to give or pay it to him, because he promised so much; but this is not properly
merit of condignity; for the work done, was not worth the money (supposing, as
is to be supposed the straw easy to be had, and near at hand), for there was
no proportion between the fetching of the bottle of straw and the 100 l. Now
where there is merit of condignity, there must be proportion between the merit
and the reward, because the reward of the merit is an act of justice, as
Aquinas shows, and justice is a certain equality, as he there proves out of the
Philosopher. 12. (...) q. 114. a. 1. c.


2. There is a reward^ ratione operis, when a man does such a work, that does
of its self and its own nature, carry such a dignity and worthiness in it, as
that it deserves such a reward to be given to him in justice. Now this is that
the Papists are to prove, that our good works do; that there is such
excellency, dignity, and worthiness in them, as that they do of their own
nature deserve eternal salvation at Gods hands, and that God is bound in
justice with it to reward us for the dignity of our good works, which we
Protestants utterly deny; and we say, that if we should yield that our good
works do thus merit eternal life at Gods hands, these absurdities would easily
follow.

1. That we had something whereof to glory, or to boast of, that we had merited
our salvation, contrary to Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.

2. That eternal life were not freely given to us, but of due and just debt
paid to us, contrary to Romans 6. 21.

3. That Christ dyed in vain, contrary to Gal. 2. 21. This is one of the Church
of Romes Antichristian Doctrines, which does in effect deny Christ to be come
in the flesh. It Is but a vanity in our men, the great friends to Rome, to say,
that Papists profess with us the Apostles Creed; when as indeed and in truth,
by their doctrines and practices, they deny and overthrow what they profess;
for if men can by their own strength turn themselves to God when they will, and
fulfill the whole moral Law, do works of superogation, and by the right use of
their natural reason and will, merit ex congruo, the first grace, and then ex
condigno, merit eternal life; What need was there for Christ so have come into
the world, and taken our nature upon him, become our surety, to have fulfilled
the law, and dyed for us? And therefore our Homily before alleged, says very
well, That this Doctrine of Merits speaks blasphemy against Gods mercy, and
great derogation to Christ's bloodshedding: and another Homily before alleged,
That whosoever denies this Doctrine, that faith alone justifies, is not to be
accounted a Christian man, nor for a setter forth of Gods glory, but for a
setter forth of man's vain glory, and for an adversary to Christ and his Gospel;
and that it were the greatest arrogance and presumption of man, th^^ Antichrist
could set up against God, to affirm, that a man might by his o^^ works take
away, and purge his own sin, and justify himself. Homily of salvation of
mankind, p. 16, 17.

Obj. But they say, That Christ (...) merited that our good works, that are his
Nova haec est Theologia Prophetis and Apostolis ignota, Christus meruit ut nos
mereamur nobisipsis vitam aeternam. Dr. Ames. Bell Enerv. t. 4. c. 2. p. 214.
gifts wrought in us, and performed by us, should merit eternal life.

Ans. 1. This I have often heard said, but could never as yet see it proved;
and therefore till it be proved, I deny it because there is neither sacred
Scripture. nor good reason for it. I know that true believers in Christ are
made worthy, 2 These. 1. 5. Apoc. 3. 4. by the perfect righteousness of Christ
imputed to them, and apprehended and applied by a lively faith; but this makes
not their imperfect works, which, as good, he works in them, and which they owe
unto him, meritorious at Gods hands again. God does reward his people with
eternal life, secundum opera, Romans 2. 6.
according to their works, but not propter opera; for their works; and the
reward is of free gift, not of due debt; for it is ex p^^misso, of Gods own free
promise, but not ex dignitate operis, not for the worthiness of the works done;
it m^^ be due ratione pacti, by reason of the Covenant that God freely made to
^^lievers in Christ; but it is not due ratione sacti, that is, it is not due for
the worthiness of the works done.

Obj. But against all this Bellarmine and Debate, p. 14.
Dr. Patrick object Mat. 25. from 31. to the end; but chiefly the 34 and 35
verses, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world; for I was (...) ^^ungred, and ye gave me meat; I
was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I (...) a stranger, and ye took me in, etc.
Hence Bellarmine and Dr. Patrick would infer, that good works of regenerated
men are meritorious or efficient causes of their eternal salvation, and
consequently of their justification.

Ans. To which I answer, 1. That good works are via ad regnum (as St. Bernard
speaks) but not causa regnandi, they are the way that God has appointed us to
walk in to the kingdom of Heaven, but they are not the cause of our reigning
there; they may be conditions, sine quibus non, without which we cannot get
thither, but not efficient causes of our getting there. 2. It Is true, that God
requires good works at our hands, as fruits and evidences of justifying faith,
and as ^^edent conditions to our eternal salvation, and as manifestations of
our love and thankfulness to God for his abundant love to us, in our election,
s^stification, adoption, sanctification and preservation, etc. but not as
conditi^^s of the Covenant of Grace, or as efficient or meritorious causes of
our Justification or salvation, or foreseen moving causes of our election. 3.
That the word (for) does not always show the cause of a thing, but sometimes it
renders the reason of a thing, which reason may be drawn from the effect; as
it is in Luke 7. 47. Her sins are forgiven, for she loved much; where by (for)
is showed not the cause why, but the reason to prove, that her sins were
forgiven; For she loved much. Mary her great love was not the cause why her
sins were forgiven her, but the effect, sign, and evidence thereof; she liad
received much love from God, therefore she loved God very much: So here, God is
merciful, for he rewards the merciful to his members according to their
works: this reason from the word, for, here, is not from the cause of our
inheriting the kingdom of Heaven, but from the effect, to prove the cause: The
argument may be thus; They that are the elected, justified, and adopted
Children of God, shall inherit the kingdom of Heaven; but you at my right hand
are such, ergo, ye shall inherit the kingdom of Heaven: the Minor our Savior
prov^s by their works, thus; They that are for Christ's sake merciful to Christ's
Members and Ministers, are the elected. justified and adopted Children of God;
but you are merciful for Christ's sake, to Christ's Members and Ministers; Ergo,
you are the elected, justified and adopted Children of God: the Minor, viz.
that they were merciful for Christ's sake, to Christ's Members and Ministers,
Christ proves by their works; For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc.
So that here you may see that the Particle for is not used here causally, but
rationally; it does not declare the cause of their salvation, but it declares a
reason to prove that they were the blessed Children of God, and heirs of the
kingdom of heaven: for, he here proves their election, quoad quod sit, but not
quoad cursit, that they were elected, etc. but not why they were elected; and
therefore it makes nothing for the proof of Bellarmines, or Dr. Patricks
Doctrine.

This Doctrine, that Christ has merited, that our good works might merit, is
one of Antichrist's delusions, to be taken heed of, 2 These. 2. 11. lest we be
induced to believe a lie, that is the whole Antichristian Faith and Religion,
which is a complicated lie.

2. This Doctrine of theirs implies, either that Christ has not sufficiently
merited eternal life for us, or that our meriting is vain and needless; for
that which is sufficiently done to that end by Christ, needs not that it should
be done again by us to that end.

3. That whatsoever Papists say to the contrary, it is evident, that they do
divide the glory of meriting eternal life between Christ and Christians,
because they give it not solely to that grace that is in Christ, but also to
that grace that does inhere in us, or is done by us; to which also they ascribe
our justification. And for a further evidence, they exhort people to do good
works by this argument, It Is more honorable to merit Dr. Ames. Bell. Enervat.
t. 4. c. 72. p. 206.
by a man's self, than by another; and 't^^ more honorable to have eternal life
by merit, than by gift, as Bellarmines, Durands and Tappers following word set
down by Dr. Ames, do plainly show magis honorisicum, etc. that is, It is more
honorable to have eternal life by merit, than only of gift, says Bellarmine,
Far be it that righteous men should expect eternal life, as (...) poor man does
an alms; for it is much more glorious, that they, as conq^^rors and triumphers,
do possess it, as crown due to their labors; so says Tapper. Tapper in Art.
Lovan. t. 2. art. 9.
It is more honorable to have a thi^^ by a man's self, or of a man's self, th^^
(...) another, or by another; for be that has any thing by his own proper
merit, (...) a manner has it by himself, in as much as he has made that thing
due (...) him by his own proper action, says D^rand. Now let any unprejudiced
m^^ Durand in 3. d. 18.
that understands common reason, judge what the Papists mean, and what their
words do signify, when they say; That Christ has merited, that regenerated
persons good works might merit eternal life; and whether this be not, as I
said, one of their strong delusions, by which they are deceived themselves, and
endeavor to deceive others; and whether these Popish Grandees false, heretical
and blasphemous Doctrines above Ames. Bellar. Enervat. t. 4. l. 7. c. 2. p. 209.
recited (as Guido the Hermit confessed, in his revocation of them, that they
were) do not rob God of the honor of his free grace; and Christ, our blessed
Savior, of the honor of his inestimable merits and overthrow the Gospel, yea
blow up Christianity it self, under the pretense of advancing it, and utterly
destroy the souls and bodies of many well-meaning people, and pick the pockets
of many thousands, to fill the proud Pope of Romes Coffers, and satisfy (if it
be possible) the covetous, ambitious, and malicious lusts of that man of sin,
and his adherents, let the world judge.

ART. XIII.
That there is a place after this life called Purgatory, wherein the souls of
believers, dying since Christ's resurrection, are purged from sins, by penal
Council. Trident. Sess. 6. can. 30.
satisfaction, which were not purged in this life so fully as they ought, that
they may enter into heaven. THis I renounce, because it is contrary to the sound
Doctrine of the Church of England, Article the 22d, of Purgatory. The Romish
Doctrine concerning Purgatory, Pardons, worshipping and adoration, as well of
Images, as of Relics, and also invocation of Saints, is a fond thing, vainly
invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to
the word of God. In Homily of Prayer, T. 2. part. 3. p. 122. it is said, That
there are but two places after this life, Heaven and Hell, the one proper to
the elect, and blessed of God; the other to the reprobates, and damned souls,
as may well be gathered by the Parable of Lazarus. Against the ground, or
rather indeed pretense for Purg^tory, viz. That some sins of believers were not
fully purged away in this life, and must therefore there be purged away by
making satisfaction by suffering for them; The Church of England says (...)
her Homily for Good Friday, T. 2. p. 177. That Christ Jesus did purchase such
favor for us, by his death, of his heavenly Father, that for the merits
thereof (if we be true Christians indeed, (...) not in word only) we be now
fully in Gods grace again, and clearly discharged from our sins. And in the
Homily of the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ, T. 2. part. 1. p. 200. she says, Thou must believe that Christ has
made upon his cross a full and sufficient sacrifice for thee, a perfect
cleansing of sins, so that thou acknowledge no other Savior, Redeemer,
Mediator, Advocate, Intercessor, but Christ only. 2. It Is contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church of Ireland in the 101 and 102 Articles Homil. of the
misery of man, part. 2. p. 11 He, i. e. Christ, is the high and everlasting
Priest, which has offered himself once for all upon the Altar of the Cross,
and with that one oblation has made perfect for evermore them that are
sanctified: He is the alone Mediator between God and man, which paid our
ransom to God with his own blood, and with that has he cleansed us from all
sin; he is the Physician which heal eth us all our diseases, and of all our
venial sins too.
of their Religion: which is this; After this life is ended, the souls of Gods
Children be presently received into Heaven, there to enjoy unspeakable
comforts; the souls of the wicked are cast into Hell, there to endure endless
torments. The Doctrine of the Church of Rome concerning Limbus patrum, Limbus
puerorum, Purgatory, Prayer for the dead, Pardons, Adoration of Images and
Relics, and also invocation of Saints is vainly invented without all warrant
of holy Scripture, yea, and is contrary to the same. 3. It Is contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church of Scotland, contained in the Confession of Faith made
by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, Chap 22. Article 1. The bodies of
men after death return to dust, and see corruption; but their souls (which
neither die nor sleep) having an immortal subsistence, immediately return to
God who gave them: the souls of the righteous, being then made perfect in
holiness, are received into the highest Heavens, where they behold the face of
God in light and glory, waiting for the full redemption of their bodies; and
the souls of the wicked are cast into Hell, where they remain in torments, and
utter darkness, reserved to judgment of the great day; beside these two places
for souls separated from their bodies, the Scripture acknowledges none. It Is
contrary also to the latter Confession of Helvetia, Article 26. to be seen in
the Harmony of Confessions, Sect. 16. p. 483. and to the Confession of the
French Church, Article 24. to be seen ibi. Har. of Confessions, Sect. 16.

For the further confutation of this Popish, Poetical and Antichristian
Purgatory, I shall lay down these plain ensuing Positions:

Position 1. That the souls of true believers in Christ, do, a^ soon as they
die, go immediately into heaven, and therefore not into the Popes Purgatory.
The antecedent Proposition I prove thus.

1. From Isa. 57. 2. He shall enter into peace, that is, the righteous man that
dies before evil days come, enters, in his soul, into Heaven, and his body
rests in his grave, called his bed; and if so, then undoubtedly he goes not
into the Popes Purgatory, for there is no peace to them that are there, for
they are tormented, say Papists, with the ^^me torments that they in Hell are
tormented with.

2. From Luke 16. 22, 23. The beggar Lazarus died, and was carried into
Abraham's bosom by the Angels; and the rich man died, and was cast into hell.
Now that by Abraham's bosom, is meant Heaven, Vide also Homil. for Whitsunday,
p. 21 321 421 5216. recited Article 14. hujus.
is clear by the forecited Doctrine of the Church of England, etc. if not by
the consent of Papists too; that the Angels that carried his soul into Abraham's
bosom, were not evil, but good Angels; for that neither good Angels go into
Hell, nor evil into Heaven, must also be yielded, as the 25th verse of that
Chapter declares; then it will follow necessarily, that the soul of Lazarus was
carried by the holy and blessed Angels into Heaven, where Abraham's bosom was,
and not into any part of Hell; for Lazarus was comforted; he was not only not
tormented with poena sensus, vel damni, the punishment of sense or loss, but he
was actually comforted; which implies not only a ceasing of his former
suffering evil things, but enjoying of good things, the comforts of the other
life, the full knowledge of God, and feeling his fatherly love.

3. It Is said Luke 23. 43. by our Savior himself to the Thief upon the Cross,
immediately before his death, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise, that is
in Heaven, and therefore not in the Popes Purgatory, for that is not Paradise.
Paradise is a place of pleasure and happiness, but the Popes Purgatory is a
place of pain and misery of hellish torments, as Papists say. In 2 Cor. 12. 2,
4. Paradise and that Heaven, is coelum Emperaeum, the seat of the blessed,
where God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, the blessed Angels,
and souls of just men made perfect, are, and enjoy pleasures for evermore. So
it is taken in Revel. 2. 7. To him that overcomes will I give (says the Spirit
to the Churches) to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the
Paradise of God. Where, by the Paradise of God, not only Pareas, and others of
our learned men upon the place, but also Cornelius a Lapide himself,
understands, as the most genuine sense, the fruition of God and eternal
blessedness, of which the Paradise of Adam was a figure, sign, and type.

4. In Revel. 14. 13. we read thus, And I heard a voice from heaven, saying
unto me, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth. yea, says
the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors. The word here most
observable, is (...), which says Cornelius a Lapide (and P^reus says that all
Copies, except Montanus's) does end the full sense of the former sentence,
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, (...) ab hoc tempore, from this
very time, that is, from this instant of time, that they dye, they are blessed,
as learned Mr. Leigh in his Critics expounds the word, and assures me in his
Notes upon the place, that Dr. Reynolds and Gerard do so interpret it; and so
does Scriveli^^ too; and the Latins interpret it Amodo, id est, ex nunc and
deinceps in aternum, puta a tempore mortis illico requiefcunt and requiescent
in omne aenum. Cor. a Lapide (...)
amol^^, which we English henceforth, that is from this time forward, that is,
from the time of their death, and so forward for ever, are they blessed that
die in the Lord. Pareus upon the place says That this is a true and charitable
opinion, that those that die in the Lord, do from the point or instant of their
(...) become and continue to be blessed. And it is observable that they are said
to be blessed (...) morientes, dying, or qui moriuntur, who (...) die in the
Lord, in the present tense, not in the future, who shall di^^ hereafter (though
they shall be blessed too), which shows, that (...) soon as ever they are dead,
they begin to be blessed (...), prese^^ and perfectly (as some expound the
word) and henceforth, even for e^^ though before their death they are in some
sort, as St. Paul was partly carnal, as well as spiritual, yet their souls
depart not so, (...) are, if not immediately before, yet in the instant of
their departure from their bodies, through faith purged by the blood and spirit
of Jesus Christ, from all their sins; and so their spiritual uncleanness being
perfectly done away, they are fitted for, and received into that City, into
which nothing that defiles shall enter. And this may be proved further.

5. From Joh. 5. 24. Verily I say unto you, he that believes my word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death to life. So Joh. 3. 36. He that
believes on the son, has everlasting life: he has it not only in the price,
and promise, and expectation, but also in the * inchoation and first Vrsin.
Catechis. p. 2. q. 58. p. 414. Dr. Reynolds in 1 John 5. 12. p. 430. He that
has the Son, has life. 1. In pretio. 2. In permisso. 3. In primitiis.
fruits; he has the beginnings of it here in this life, in the kingdom of
grace, and he shall have it in more full and complete possession of it, as soon
as he departs out of this life, habenti dabitur, to him that has shall be
given; to him that has true saving grace, shall be given more grace, not only
quoad sufficientiam here, but quoad gloriam hereafter. Cornelius a Lapide, a
great Jesuit, and Father in the Church of Rome, assures me, that the Church (he
means the Church of Rome) calls the days of Saints death, dies natales, their
birth-days, and that hac de causa, for this reason, because the same days they
are newborn into a blessed and glorious life; and upon this account (says he)
does the Church solemnize their birth-days; not those in which they are born
with sin, into a temporal life, but those in which by a temporal death they
pass to an eternal life. And,

6. This may be further confirmed by that of the wise man, the Preacher, King
Solomon, Eccles. 12. 7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was; and
the Spirit to God who gave it; then, that is, when a man dies, his body, which
was made at first of the dust of the earth, returns to the earth its first
material principle; and the soul, that was immediately made by God, of a
spiritual substance, returns to God, the Father of Spirits, for judgment,
either of absolution or condemnation, which is more particularly and privately
passed upon every Heb. 9. 27.
man's soul immediately after its separation from the body; that is, says the
learned Bishop Reynolds in his Notes upon the place, (commonly called the
Assemblys-notes), Vt stet judicio ante Deum, that it may appear before his
tribunal to be judged; and certainly, as the body goes into the dust, so
certainly the soul returns unto God to be judged. Now the bodies go
immediately to the dust, to the earth, so the souls immediately to God, Hence,
says he, the godly are translated into Paradise in Abraham's bosom, into the
condition of just men made perfect, Luke 16. 22. Luke 23. 43. The wicked into
the prison of disobedient spirits, reserved there in Hell unto the judgment of
the great day, Luke 16. 23. 1 Pet. 2. 19. As the souls of wicked men, when they
die, go immediately from God into Hell, so do the souls of godly men go
immediately to God into Heaven; and consonant to this, is that of our Savior,
John 5. 24 before alleged: He that hears my word, and believes on him that
sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into judgment, that is into
the judgment of condemnation, as our translation (according to the sense) has
it: and John 3. 36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life: it
notes a present and indeseasable interest and possession in heaven.

7. Very agreeable to this, is that devout and believing confident prayer of
St. Stephen, at his death, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Upon which this is the
Assembly-note (as it is commonly called) That this is the true comfort of the
elect, that they are assured, that Christ Jesus (who died for them) in their
dissolutions, receives their souls into his safe and blessed custody, to live
with him, who is the life and God of the living. And,

8. This is confirmed also by 1 Pet. 4. 19. Wherefore let them that suffer
according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their souls to him in
well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

9. To these testimonies may be superadded, 2 Cor. 5. 4. For we know, that if
our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved (...) habemus, we have (in
the present tense) a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens; and that the souls of all believers enter into this heavenly
house, as soon as they depart out of their earthly tabernacles, may be further
proved from the 6th and 8th verses of that Chapter; where it is said thus: That
while we are a home in the body, we are absent from the Lord; and that we are
willing to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord; which
necessarily implies, that they did believe, that as soon as ever their souls
were gone out of their earthly homes, they should be present with the Lord in
heaven; for of that they say, we are confident. And.

10. Of this opinion and belief was St. Paul's as you may see in Phil. 1. 21,
23. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is Mori lucrum quaesi dicat, mors
est lucrum heatitudinis, mortem ergo non timeo, quia si occidar and moriar,
vitam aeternam lucrabor, and inevolabo, praesensque sistar ac fruar Christo. So
Chrisostom. Anselm. Theophilact. Oecumenius, Thomas Aquinas in locum.
gain. (How could his death begain to him, if he must not go immediately to
Heaven, but to Purgatory, there first to suffer hellish punishments for his
sins?) Yet if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labor; yet what I
shall choose, I wot not; for I am in a strait between two, having a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better. Here you see the Apostle
Paul desired to depart out of the Tabernacle of his body, and why, that he
might be with Christ: he believed that as soon as his soul was departed out of
his body, she would presently be and remain with Christ: but where? not in the
Popes Purgatory, for there Christ was not, but in heaven; there he believed he
was, whom the heavens must receive till the restitution of all things, Act. 3.
19. He believed that his soul would presently be with Christ in Heaven, and
therefore, he says, that death temporal would be better for him, than temporal
life. Certainly, had St. Paul believed, that, after his soul had ended her work
in his body here, she should be carried into the Popes Purgatory, and there be
punished for his sins, for a time, it may be, till the day of judgment: he
would have easily resolved himself, that it had been better for him, as well as
for the Philippians, to abide in the flesh, and not to die: I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, is as if he had said thus, I am now bound q.
d. Jam alligatus sum corpori, si hoc vinculo solvar, ero cum Christo, illique
astringar. Cor. a lapide in locum.
to my body; but if I were loosed from this bond, I should be with Christ, and
bound to him, says Cor. a lapide. Hence note, says he, that souls altogether
pure, do presently, when they leave the body, not sleep, but are with Christ in
heaven and eternal life; and therefore the Apostle desired to be dissolved, and
dye, that he might be with Christ: but if he ought to expect after death the
day of judgment, that, then at length, he might enjoy Christ, he had in vain
desired to be dissolved rather than live, because then after his dissolution
and death, he should be absent from Christ, as much as if he had remained in
this life; much more he there speaks out of Chrysostom, Theophilact,
Oecumenius and Cyprian, to the same purpose. It Is observable, that he says
that souls that are altogether pure, pass presently out of their bodies into
Heaven: and this, he says, is the opinion of Turrian, and of Suarezius, and
that St. John, Apoc. 14. 13. speaks of souls perfectly just. Now this, I say,
is their shift to put off all our Protestant Divines have alleged from sacred
Scripture against their Purgatory; for they hold that those that are cast into
Purgatory, are not perfectly purged, but must be purged perfectly by suffering
temporal punishment, and thereby making penal satisfaction to the justice of
God; of the fondness of which hereafter: but I Will close with them, and assume.

Position 2. That the souls of those persons that are justified by faith is
Christ's blood, are perfectly purged from their sins, if not immediately
before, yet at the moment of their death: and that therefore, by their own
concessions and affirmations, they go not into the Popes Purgatory, but to
Heaven, as I have proved before* and for the clearing of this, know, that not
only their Angelical Doctor (as Papists call Tho^^ Aquinas) but our own Divines
hold, that there are three effects of sin: 1. Reatus, the guilt. 2. Macula, the
spot or stain. 3. Pa^^, the punishment of it. Now,

1. The guilt, worthiness or desert of sin, which obliges the sinner to the
sustaining of just punishment for his sin, is washed away in our justification,
by the perfect satisfaction and merits of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, as the Church of England abundantly testifies in her books of
Articles, Homilies and Common Prayer, and the Canonical Scriptures plainly
declare, as in John 1. 29. Be^^ the lamb of God, that takes away the sin of
the world. 1 John 1. 7. (...) the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all
sin. 1 John 2. 12. If (...) man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous and he is the propitiation, that is, the propitiator for
our sins, who do^^ make atonement, expiate, satisfy, and purge away the guilt
of o^^ sins, and make peace, and pacify his wrath, and make him propiti^^
merciful, favorable and good unto us: and 1 Timothy 2. 6. He g^^ himself a
ransom for all: Himself, God-man, a ransom for all. H^^ 9. 14, 15. How much
more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself
without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the living
God? and lest the adversary sho^^ say, that he did not perfectly purge away all
sin, read Heb. 10. (...) and by one offering he has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified: (...) Apoc. 1. 5. it is said of Christ, that he washed us
in his own blood: (...) 1 Cor. 3. 11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and
by the Spirit of our God: And upon this account does the Apostle declare and
infer, Therefore there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. God
in our justification imputes 2 Cor. 5. 19.
not our sins unto us, and consequently not our guilt, but he imputes the
righteousness of our Savior Jesus Christ unto us, and does repute us just, as
though we had no sin, and consequently no guilt upon us; but Papists do
acknowledge by Christ Jesus a freedom from sin, according to the guilt of sin,
but they deny it according to the punishment: of which hereafter.

2. Macula, the spot, stain, or filth of sin (which deprives the soul of its
spiritual beauty, which it should have, and is made vile, Mat. 15. 11. Apoc.
21. 11.) is taken away by sanctification, 1 Cor. 3. 11. But ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified. Ephesians. 5. 26, 27, That he might sanctisie and cleanse it; i.
e. His Church, with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it
to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing,
but that it should be holy, and without blemish So Tit 3. 5, 6. Cant. 4. 7.
Christ Church is all fair, there is no spot in her; and I might say to Papists,
that they hold, that venial sins do Veniale peccatum non causat maculam in
anima. Th. Aquin. 12 ae q. 89. a. 1. B. Medin in 12 ae. q. 88. a. 1. p. 1209.
not make a spot in the soul, and therefore that there is no need of casting it
into Purgatory to purge them from them: but, I say, though this sanctification
be imperfect in this life, yet it is perfected at the hour or instant of death.
Heb. 12. 23. But ye are come to the spirits of just men made perfect; that is
ye are come to the company of just men's souls in heaven, that are made perfect
in grace. Hence we may easily and certainly conclude,

1. That the godly souls of justified men, when they depart out of their
bodies, do live with God and the blessed Saints in heaven; because otherwise
they cannot be taken into fellowship with them, and that therefore they live
not in the Popes Purgatory.

2. That the souls of justified men are perfect in heaven; all their
imperfections, infirmities and corruptions, with which they were troubled,
while they were in their bodies, are perfectly done away, and they are made
perfect in grace, 1 Cor. 13. 10. But when that which is perfect is come, then
that which is in part shall be done away. v. 11. Now we see through a glass
darkly, but then face to face; now I know in part, but then shall I know as I
am known. It Is true, we have our sins here, while we are in the body of
corruption, that lets us in doing good, and disposes Mores animae sequutur
temperamentum corporis.
us to do evil, and makes us wretched, as St. Paul complains, Romans 7. But as
soon as we put off this body of death (as some think Paul called it) the old
man and all its lusts and affections, are put off too, perfectly; and we are in
our souls made perfect; not only sincere, and as perfect is opposed to
hypocrisy, as now; but we are perfect, as perfect is opposed to that which is
imperfect; there shall remain no sinful imperfections in our souls, but we are
as the holy Angels of God, and do Gods Will as they do, perfectly, without any
the least sin whatsoever; and this Doctrine, not only sound Protestants, but
Papists themselves do hold too; for they say, That the day of the Saints death,
is their birthday; for, in that (say they) they are Cornelius a Lapide in
Apoc. 14. 13.
newborn, and enter into everlasting life; yea wise King Solomon says, That
the day of ones death, is better than the day of ones birth; that is, to true
believers in Christ, it is not to them a vindictive punishment, but a passage
from this life in sin and misery, to a life better in Heaven, sinless and
blessed; and to me, that which is said in our Liturgy, in the order of burial,
is a good confirmation, which is, you know, thus: Forasmuch as it has pleased
Almighty God of his great mercy to take to himself the soul of our dear brother
here departed; which is true, though not of all, yet of all Gods elect in
Christ; and we cannot in reason conceive, that God, their loving Father, who
has elected them in Christ his Son, who has suffered for them, and which
suffering he has accepted as full satisfaction for them, will in Christ's
presence, who is ever with his Father, and at his right hand, making
intercession for them, bid them be gone, or send them to the Popes Purgatory,
there to suffer hellish torments till the day of judgment; and we cannot
conceive that Christ himself would do it.

To all this I might urge an argument ad homines, which may convince them,
though not us, and say, that Papists must hold, if not this truth with us too,
yet more, that Saints even in this life, are perfect; else their justification
by their own habitual righteousness, and their meriting eternal life by their
own good works, and their perfectly fulfilling the law; will fall to the
ground: if there remain some sins in the souls of persons that are justified
before God, which must be purged away by suffering temporal punishments in
their Purgatory; then certainly neither was their inward habitual righteousness
perfect, and so could not justify them before God, but needed a justification
and pardon it self, and so their justification of their persons before God, is
overthrown by this their covetous Doctrine of Purgatory; nor was their outward
actual righteousness or good works meritorious of eternal life, but rather for
the sin in them, deserved eternal death. If believers in this life can both for
matter and manner in their own persons keep and fulfill the whole Moral Law (as
they plead they can) then this their casting off their souls into Purgatory to
be purged from some venial sins committed in their lifetime here in the body,
which were not sufficiently purged here (as they say) must needs fall to the
ground; and therefore they must deny their forementioned Doctrines of
Justification, Merits and fulfilling the Law, or renounce this of Purgatory,
which overthrows them; for this Dilemma will push them with one horn, or both;
if they say, that their inherent righteousness is perfect, then they destroy
their pretended foundation for their Purgatory; then there will be no sins
remaining to be purged in Purgatory; if they say, that their inherent
righteousness is imperfect, then I say, they destroy, their justification
before God by their own inherent righteousness; for imperfect righteousness
cannot justify them in the sight of God, but will stand in need of a perfect
righteousness to procure a pardon for, and cover its imperfectness; if they
affirm that imperfect righteousness will justify men's persons before God, then
they plainly deny Christ, and say in effect (whatsoever they pretend to the
contrary) that there was no need of his coming into the world, and doing and
suffering what he did; for it is yielded, that men by the light of nature, the
study of Moral Philosophy, and good education and observation, have attained to
great measures of Moral Justice, which yet neither justifies them before God
(as our 13th Article undeniably proves, of which I spoke before) nor saves
them, as our 18th Article plainly John 3. 3. Acts 15. 24, 28. Romans 3. 10, 20,
28. Gal. 3. 16. Gal. 5. 18. Col. 2. 16, 20. Ephesians 2. 8, 9. Apoc. 20. 10. Apoc.
21. 8. Acts 4. 12. John 3. 16. Mark 16. 16. John 14. 6. Hebr. 11. 6.
shows: the title of which is this; Of obtaining salvation only by the Name of
Jesus Christ. The Article it self is this: They also are to be had accursed,
that presume to say, That every man shall be saved by the law or sect which he
professes, so that he be diligent to frame his life according to that law, and
the light of nature; for holy Scripture does set out unto us only the Name of
Jesus Christ, whereby men must be saved: so I might argue from their
meritorious works; but I forbear.

To all which I shall add what I have found in Dr. Field of the Church
(Appendix, part. 1. l. 2. p. 772.) since I wrote that before, of Saints being
perfectly cleansed from all sin at the moment of their death: He says thus,
speaking of one Higgins, in the 20th Chapter of that Appendix, I produce the
judgment and resolution of Scotus, Durandus and Alexander of Ales, That all
sinfulness is utterly abolished in the very moment of dissolution, and that
there is no remission of any sin in respect of the fault and stain after death:
The words of these Authors I set down at large: the words of Alexander of Ales
(the first of the Schoolmen, called the irrefragable Doctor) are these: Final
grace takes away all sinfulness out of the soul, because when the soul parts
from the body, all proneness to ill, and all perturbations which were found in
it, by reason of the conjunction with the flesh, do cease: the powers thereof
are quieted, and perfectly subjected to grace, and by the means all venial sins
are removed: so that no venial sin is remitted after this life, but in that
instant wherein grace may be said to be final grace, it has full dominion, and
absolute command, and expels all sin. Whereupon he adds, That whereas the
Master of the Sentences, and some others do say, that some venial sins are
remitted after this life: some answer, that they speak of a full remission,
both in respect of the fault, and stain, and the punishment also; but that
others more narrowly and piercingly looking into the thing, do say, that they
are to be understood to say, Sins are remitted after this life, because (it
being the same moment or instant that does continuate the time of life, and
that after life) they are remitted in the very ^^ment of dissolution, grace
more fully infusing and pouring it self into the soul at that time, than
before, to the utter abolishing of all sin, all her impediments formerly
hindering her working, now ceasing. Death unto the godly, is the utter
abolishing of sin, and perfection of mortification, says A. B. Usher, Sum of
Christian Religion, p. 545.
Thus you see, that not only our learned Protestant Divines, but also Alexander
of Ales, the first School-man, called the irrefrag^^ Doctor, Scotus, the
subtle Doctor (...) Durand, the Master of the Ceremonies, as the Papists
themselves esteem and call them, were of this judgment, That the souls of men
dying in the state of grace, at the mome^ of death are purged and cleansed
perfectly from all the fault and stain of (...) sin; and then it will follow,
that they are freed from the third effe^^ of sin too, and that is*

3. Poena, punishment, which is an evil inflicted upon the sinner himself, or
his surety, for sin: For, 1. if the guilt of sin be perfectly taken away (as
indeed it is in our Justification, and the stain of sin be also perfectly taken
away in the moment of our death, and sin be wholly abolishhd, then the
punishment of sin must needs be taken away too. Of this judgment was St.
Bernard, When all the sin shall be wholly Bernard in Psalm. qui habitat, Ser. 10.
taken out of the way, no effect of it shall remain, that the cause being
altogether removed, the effect shall be no more; and you know, it is a rule in
reasoning, Sublata causa tollitur effectus, the cause being taken away, the
effect cease: Sin then being perfectly destroyed, when death parts the soul
from the body, all its effects, guilt, filth, and punishment, must consequently
be destroyed too; and that all sin is taken away in the moment of the
dissolution of the soul and body, I have sufficiently proved; and therefore the
punishment is taken away too. Pray hear what God himself says to this point,
in Ezekiel. 18. 22. When the wicked man shall turn from all his sins that he has
committed, all his transgressions that he has committed shall not be mentioned
unto him. Now if God has so far forgiven their sins, as that he will not
remember them, then certainly he will not punish them for them in another world
with hellish torments; if God punish truly penitent men for their sins in this
world, and that to come, too; he cannot be said, not to remember them, but to
remember them (as we say) with a witness; if he forgives and forgets all their
sins, then undoubtedly he forgives and forgets their venial sins too; if he
forgive their mortal sins, their sins of enmity against God, which make God
displeased with the sinner (as Aquinas and his followers speak) then it will
follow by an undeniable consequence, that he forgives and forgets their venial
sins, their lesser sins, which are not Peccatum veniale non est contra legem,
quia venialiter peccans non facit quod lex prohibet, nec praetermittit quod lex
per praeceptum obligit, sed facit praeter legem, quia non observat modum
rationis, quem lex intendit. Aquin. 12 ae. q. 88. a. 1. (...). Medin in 12
(...) q. 89. a. 1. p. 1209.
against the law, but only besides the law, and which, though they displease
God, yet they do not make the sinner displeasing to God; and that they do only
obnubilate, but do not obtenebrate grace, as Bell. t. 4. l. 2. De peccato
venial^ c. 1.
Medina teaches: and those sins which Mr. Chillingworth in his dangerous book,
says are so small, as that he durst not ask God pardon for them, and which B.
Medin in 12 (...). q. 88. a. 1. p. 1199.
Bellarmine says are ex natura and ratione probati, in their own nature and
kind of sin, venial, that is, not repugnant to the love of God and (...)
neighbors, that do not render as unworthy of the friendship of God, and gui^^^
of eternal death; and that are so small, as that it were unjust to punish the^
with eternal death; that they do not exclude out of heaven, but that God
himself is bound by law that he has made to give to his friends the kingdom of
(...), notwithstanding their venial sins, of which, although they d^ repent,
yet are presently remitted ex natura status quum anima emigrat e corpore, from
the nature of the state, when the soul departs out of the body, as Papists
teach; how these sins, I say, should need to be purged away from believers
souls (the friends of God, whose sins God has covenanted to pardon) by such
temporal punishments in Purgatory, as are the same for nature with those the
Devil inflicts upon the damned in hell; and yet that their mortal sins, as
David's adultery and murder, Peter's denial of his Lord and Master, Paul's
persecuting of the Saints, and, which do, as they confess, cause a spot or
s^^i^ in the soul, and are contrary to the Law of God, and do render the ^^^er
displeasing to God, and deserve eternal death, as Aquinas and Me^^, ubi supra,
do plainly teach, should escape the same penal Purgation in Purgatory, is to me
very strange, improbable, and inconsistent Doctrine, as well as contrary to
sacred Scripture; which says of God thus, Jer. 31. 34. I will remember their
sin no more, that is, punish them no more: and of them, (1) Rom 8 1. There is
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: if no condemnation, the^
surely no hellish punishments. (2) Apoc. 14. 13. That they rest fr^^ their
labors: and if from their bodily labors, as Papists yield they do, then much
more from spiritual labors, else it had been no comfort for them to die,
seeing their death would but free them from corporal pains, which could last,
at most, but for the short time of their lives here, but would transmit their
souls into spiritual helli^^ pains, which will last till the great day of
judgment, except the Pope of Romes good will can be procured to let them out
somewhat sooner, as the Popes Doctors teach. (3) That Romans 5. 1. being
justified by faith, they have peace with God: but to have peace wi^^ God, and
to suffer the torments of hell inflicted by the Devil f^^ some hundreds, it may
be thousands of years, are altogether inconsistent.

And this is an approved truth, though man's sin do deserve temporal and eternal
punishments, yet the offense being remitted, the punishment is remitted also,
which is excellently well proved by Dr. Davenant; and that their Remissa culpa
remittitur poena. Dr. Davenant, (...) ^33. p. 149.
sins are forgiven in this life absolutely, perfectly and fully, even when they
believe in Jesus Christ; and therefore the holy Scripture speaks of
justification and remission of sins in the present tens^, and time past, Romans
4. 2, 5, 7, 9, 16, 22. Romans 5. 1. Romans 8. 1. Gal. 2. 16. Here believers in
Christ are forgiven all their sins, and there are all punishments due to their
sins forgiven also.

Now that the punishment due to the offense or offender by Gods Law, is
forgiven, when the offense is forgiven; I prove thus: 1. Because punishment
properly so taken and called, is inflicted only for sin: Punishment is an evil
inflicted upon the sinner, or his surety for sin: The sin which Poena est malum
peccatori propter peccatum inflictum, Ames. Med. l. 1. a. 12. p. 55.
deserves it, being taken away, it must necessarily be taken away too. 2.
Because to remit the sin, is not to impute it any more to punishment, that is,
not to punish it. What man will or can say that a Magistrate has perfectly
pardoned a murderer, and yet hang him up for the murder? It implies a
contradiction to say, that God has forgiven true believers in Christ all their
sins, and yet to say he punishes them for them, to be satisfied for breach of
his Law. 3. To say, that God has forgiven true believers all their sins, and
yet punish them for them with temporal punishment properly so called, in
Purgatory, for the satisfying of his justice, is undeniably to ascribe
injustice to God, who is justice it self; seeing this way they teach, that God
does punish the soul that has no sin, only because it formerly had sin, which
he has for Christ's sake fully forgiven (...) and besides too, here would be
another piece of injustice, most blasphemously fixed upon God; if he should
forgive all sins to the sinner for Christ's sake, who has made full
satisfaction to him for the believing sinners sins, and yet punish the sinner;
to exact for one offense a double satisfaction; one from Christ the surety, and
another from the poor sinner. Would it not be decried as a grievous piece of
injustice for a creditor to exact of the surety that is bound for 100 l. in a
penal Bond of 200 l. the 200 l. and receive it, and release the surety, and yet
afterward sue the Bond upon the principal for non-payment of his 100 l. at the
time conditioned? Yet this piece of injustice, Papists do in effect, by their
Doctrine of the souls of believers in Christ suffering in Purgatory temporal
penal satisfactions, that is, punishments to satisfy Gods Justice for breach
of his Law, after he had taken full satisfaction from Christ his Son, and their
surety, and so exact and receive full satisfaction, the whole Bond of him, and
then afterward exact of them satisfaction in part, too* fasten upon God, who is
Justice it self; for he has punished his own Son, who voluntarily, and by his
Fathers consent, became their surety: He laid on him the iniquity of us all,
Isa. 53. 6. that is, the punishment of all our sins Read verse. 5. He was
wounde^ for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the
chastiseme^^ of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed;
though he had no sin of his own; he had done no violence, neither was deceit in
his mouth, yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, yea to put him to death, v.
9, 10. And he did bear our sins, that is, the punishment of our sins, is his
own body on the tree, that is, on the cross, Isa. 53. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 2. 24. and
this he did, not for himself, for he had no sin, 1 Pet. 2. 22. but for us, and
in our s^ead, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 24. Yet notwithstanding all this, Papists, by this
their Doctrine of Purgatory, (that believers souls for whom Christ has
suffered the punishment, paid the bond of 200 l. (...) so fully satisfied the
debt; yet that God has sued the bond again upon the (...) believers soul, and
will make that make him satisfaction too, in part at least, though, I say, he
was fully satisfied before by his Son and her surety Jesus Christ the
righteous, as appears by his letting him out of prison, when he had him fast in
the grave, at his resurrection; by which he openly declared, that he was fully
satisfied, Romans 4. ult. Who was delivere^ (that is, to death) for our offenses,
and was raised again for our jus^i^^cation; to assure us, that he has
satisfied for us, pacified his Fathe^^ wrath with us for our sins, and procured
his favor for us, and his gracious acceptance of us), charge God with this
great injustice.

And to prevent the Papists objection, that Moses, David, a^^ others, after
their sins were forgiven, were punished with temp^^ punishments; I say that
they were not punished with Gods vindi^^ justice for their sins, but that they
were chastised in love and mercy, to humble them for sin past, and prevent sin
for the future in the^^ others: afflictions, that believers suffer in this
life, are not properly ^^nishments, but castigations; and though they may be
materially t^^ same that punishments inflicted upon unbelievers are, yet they
are not formally such: for we must know that the formal reason of punishment
properly and strictly so called, is always to be fetched fr^^ the final cause;
for the pain which is inflicted of God as a revenging or punishing Judge, with
that intention, that it shall satisfy his Justice, has the true and proper,
or formal reason or nature of punishment; and this kind of pain, we deny to be
inflicted upon Moses, David, or any other true believers after remission of
their sins; but what pain is infl^cted of the same God as a provident Father,
with this intention, that he may further the salvation of his children, obtains
the nature of a Aquin. 12 ae. q. 87. a. 7.
medicine, not of punishment; and this kind of pain we grant is by our most
wise and loving Father imposed upon true penitents in this life, after their
sin is pardoned: but Papists devised punishments are for satisfaction, not for
correction: True believers in Christ, do in this life undergo poenam
correctivam, corrective pain, but not poenam satisfactoriam, satisfactory pain
here in this life, or in Purgatory, 1. Ad demonstrationem debitae miseriae. 2.
Ad emendationem labilis vitae. 3. Ad excitationem necessariae patientiae dixit
Augustinus in Joh. Tract. 124. Potest and quantum adjici, quod Christus docet,
Joh. 93. Manifestatio operum Dei, Tilen. Syntag. p 2. c. 65. de Purgatorio,
These. 15. p. 956.
or any where else: they suffer not pain to satisfy Gods justice, but for the
demonstration of deserved misery, the ^^endment of a sinful life, the exercise
^f necessary patience, and the manifestation of Gods power* as the word poena,
pain or punishment, is taken in a large sense, so paternal castigation of the
godly for their sins, such as David's was; affliction for the trial of their
faith, patience and constancy, such as Jobs was; and Martyrdom for the
testimony of saving truth, are by some of our Divines called punishments; but
not in that sense that punishment properly so called is taken, which only is
called penal satisfa^^ion* and that is punishment inflicted upon the sinner, or
his surety, for sin, to satisfy Divine Justice, which is either temporal for
duration, but everlasting and infinite for virtue and value, by reason of the
transcendent dignity of the person suffering, equivalent to the everlasting in
time; and such was the penal satisfaction which Christ suffered for the sins of
his elect; or everlasting in duration, which is begun in this life, and
continued for ever after this life in the world to come; and such is that which
impenitent reprobates suffer* Reprobates are bound by the Law of God to perform
for themselves this penal satisfaction, and therefore they do begin it in this
life, and after this life continue it in hell, to all eternity, because they
can never fully satisfy, Mat. 25. 41. But this penal satisfaction is not
required to be made in part or in whole of true believers in Christ, because
Jesus Christ their surety has satisfied for them to all eternity.

3. Because this Popish Doctrine, that the souls of believers in Purgatory
suffer punishment to satisfy for their sins, not sufficiently purged away in
this life, is a very dishonorable and destructive Doctrine to the full and
perfect satisfaction of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: therefore I lay down
this plain Position.

Position 3. That the satisfaction our Savior Jesus Christ has made for all
the sins of true believers in him, is a full, sufficient, and perfect
satisfaction: But Papists Doctrine of Purgatory-satisfactions says virtually,
interpretatively, and in effect,

1. That it was not an universal satisfaction for all the sins of all true
believers in Christ, which is contrary to express canonical Scripture, Tit. 2.
14. Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity. 1 John 1. 7. And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from
all sin. 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness s if he cleanse
us from all iniquity, from all sin, from all unrighteousness, then certainly
from venial sins.

2. Christ's active obedience and sufferings were not a sufficient satisfaction
to the Justice of God for the breach of his Law by true believers in him: which
is directly contrary, 1. to the Doctrine of the Church of England, in her order
of Communion; which says there, That Jesus Christ did suffer death upon the
cross for our redemption, and that he made there (by his own oblation Homil. of
Christ's death, T. 2. part. 2. p. 187, 188. So Homil. of the worthy receiving
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, T. 2. part. 1. p. 200.
of himself once offered) a f^^* perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, ob^^ and
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world: and Homily of Christ's Nativity T.
2. p. 169. Christ made perfect satisfaction by his death for the sins of all
people: and Homily for Good Friday, T. 2. p. 175. concerning the death of
Christ* it says, That it was impossible for us to be loosed from this debt by
our own ability; it pleased (...) therefore to be the payer thereof, and to
discharge us quit: and p. 177. of the same Homily, it says thus, Such favor
did Christ purchase (...) us by his death, of his heavenly Father, that for the
merit thereof ((...) we be true Christians in deed, and not in word only) we be
now fully in Gods grace again, and clearly discharged from our sin.

2. It Is contrary to Canonical Scripture, which says that Christ has made a
full and perfect satisfaction to God for all the sins of all believers in him:
1. Because the Scripture says, that he paid the price that was due to God from
us: For 1. he not only perfectly fulfilled the Law for them, he was made under
the Law, Gal. 4. 4. And he fulfilled all righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. And he came
not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, Mat. 5. 17. And that he did not for
himself, but for believers, is evident, Gal. 4. 3, 4, 5. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. And
the righteousness of Christ is imputed to believers for righteousness, Phil. 3.
9.

2. But he suffered for true believers in him, great sorrow in his soul, Mat.
26. 37, 38. Grievous torments in his body, Mat. 27. 46. Luke 22. 44. Joh. 20.
For he was crucified and died, Mat. 27. 35. Phil. 2. 8. Mark 15. 24, 37. He was
buried and remained under the power of death for some part of three days, but
without corruption; he suffered poenas infernales hellish torments, eternal in
essence, as Maccovius will have it, equivalent to helltorments, by reason of
the worthiness of his person, into which our humane nature that suffered was
taken, that what he suffered in his humane nature is attributed to, and taken
to be the suffering of his person, (...), God-man. And therefore is it said,
that he descended into Hell, as it is in our Creed; and that he humbled himself
and became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2. 8. And that
by himself he purged our sins. Heb. 1. 3. And that he himself suffered, Heb. 2.
18. And that he offered up himself, Heb. 7. 27. Heb. 9. 26. And that he gave
himself a ransom for all that do in believe him, 1 Timothy 2. 6.

2. Because as a demonstration, that he had fully satisfied the justice of God
by what he had done and suffered for his peculiar people,

1. God let him out of Prison at his Resurrection; He rose again the third day
with the same Numerical body that he suffered in, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. Joh. 20. 25,
26, 27. And he ascended up into heaven.

2. He advanced him to the Government of the World; Heb. 1. 3. When he had by
himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.
Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. Wherefore God also has exalted him, and given him a name
which is above every name. Where by Name, Calvin, Beza, Diodate, Dr. Featly,
and many others, understand dignity, and authority, and renown, as the word is
Jacet sine nomine truncus.
commonly taken, as Calvin says. And it signifies, that the highest authority
is given to Christ, and that he is placed in the highest degree of honor and
authority, and that there is not the like dignity to be found in heaven or in
earth. Which I take to be an Exposition of Mat. 28. 18. And Jesus came and
spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth;
(which is not to be understood of his Essential, but of his Mediatory power,
whereby he has power to gather, govern, sanctify, justify, and glorify his
Church; and in order hereunto, to subdue and rule all his and their enemies,
and make them all to be subject to him) that at the name of Jesus; that is, not
at the The Ceremony of bowing at the Name of Jesus, was revived to crush the
Puritans, as our reverend Dr. Heylin says, that the Prelates and Clergy
assembled in Convocation, Ann. 1603. Seeing the Puritan faction to get ground
among us, revived the old custom used in time of Popery, ordered the uncovering
of the head in all the acts and parts of public worship, Can. 18. When the
Name of Jesus shall be mentioned, due and lowly reverence shall be done by all
persons present, as it has been accustomed. Introduct. to his Cyp. Anglic. p.
18.
naming of the word Jesus, as the Sorbonists would have: which, says Calvin,
is ridiculous, the honor here by Paul required, being due to Christ our Lord
and Savior. All creatures in heaven and earth, in the whole world, are and
shall be subject to the power and authority of Jesus Christ Godman. And this
honor and authority, Christ acknowledges is given to him, Mat. 28. 18. and is
clear here, Phil. 2. 9. which is an undeniable evidence, That he has fully
satisfied Gods justice, and pacified his wrath, and procured his favor for
those for whom (...) died upon the Cross. And further it is said, That from
thence he shall come (...) judge both the quick and dead.

3. God has declared, That in ^i^ he is well pleased, Mat. 3. 17. Mat. 17. 5.
And that we are complete in him, Col, 2. 18. That we are justified in and by
him, Romans 3. 24. Act 13. 39. That we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, and access to this grace wherein we stand, (...) rejoice in hope of the
glory of God, Rom 5. 1, 2. That there is (...) condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. And that he saves his people from their sins to the
uttermost, Mat. 1. 21. Heb. 5. 2^. And that none of them the Father gave him,
is lost, Joh. 17. 12. Yea, what need any more proofs of this Truth? Papists
themselves hold that Christ's merits are sufficient to save the whole world, and
therefore they are sufficient to save his own peculiar people from their sins,
and consequently from these temporal punishments of their venial sins. Christus
Deus quantum Medina in 3. partem, q. 1. a. 2. p. 98.
ad sufficientiam satisfecit pro omnibus, quantum efficatiam vero pro iis qui
salvi fiunt tantum. Thomists hold, That satisfactio Medina in 3. partem, q. 1.
a. 2. p. 99.
Christi Domini fuit sufficiens perfect, immo excedens peccata multoque and
omnium debita omnium hominum, ex toto rigore justitiae: that is, That Christ's
merits are sufficient to satisfy for the sins of all men, but efficacious only
to them that are saved. And that the satisfaction of Christ the Lord, was
perfectly sufficient, yea exceeding all sins, and the debts of all men, and
that in rigor of justice; that if Christ's merits were put in one scale, and the
sins of the whole world were put in the other scale, Christ's merits would
outweigh them all.

Now all these things laid together and well considered, do make it manifest,
that Papists Purgatory (a covetous fiction of their own brains is not only
without, but also against Sacred Scripture, injurious not only to believers
souls, and blasphemous against God, making him unjust, but also abominably
sacrilegious against Christ, robbing him of the honor of his full, perfect and
sufficient satisfaction, which he has made unto God for all the sins of Gods
Elect, and contrary to their own Doctrine in other Wisdom 3. The souls of the
righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torments touch him.
points.

Lastly, many other things might be objected against their Doctrine of
Purgatory: As 1. that their Purgatory-fire, being (as they say) material,
cannot work immediately upon separated souls, which are immaterial. 2. That by
their own confession, there remains nothing to be purged away but punishment;
which is not a sin, nor does it beget a spot, and therefore needs no purging,
and cannot be purged away by inflicting it; it is impossible that Purgatory
should take away punishment, and inflict it together.

But I have been too long upon this selfish, covetous, blasphemous and
antichristian Romance, because it is so much against the glory of God, and the
honor of Jesus Christ, and is the source and spring from whence many other
Popish Errors do flow; and by overthrowing it, their Papal Indulgences, Prayers
for the Dead, their selling of Masses, their doing of many good works to merit,
to release souls out of Purgatory, will fall to the ground.

Obj. But Bellarmine answers, That there is no injury done to Christ hereby,
that is, by putting man to make satisfaction for himself; for, says he, the
whole virtue of good works and satisfaction does depend upon Christ's merits;
and that which we do, his Spirit does do.

Answ. To this it is answered, 1 That there is done great injury to Christ:
Because 1. by this mean Christ were not a perfect Redeemer. 2. He were not our
only Redeemer, which is contrary to 1 Timothy 2. 5. 3. He were not a satisfactory
Redeemer, but man himself must suffer, and thereby make satisfaction to God
himself, else he could not be saved. 4. He should not purge us by himself from
all our sins, Heb. 1. 3. but we our selves must do it in part at least, by
suffering temporal punishments in Purgatory. 5. Frustra fit per plura quod
fieri potest per pauciora, that is vainly done by many, that may be done by a
few Christ was and is able to save us alone and by himself; He is mighty to
save, ^sal. 63. 1. He needed not the help of man, and therefore he trod the
wine press alone, Isa. 63. 3. and of the people there was none with me. 6.
Bellarmine (as Dr. Ames shows) notwithstanding his fair pretense, ascribes the
satisfaction Bellarm. Enervat. T. 2. l. 5. c. 2. p. 210.
made to God, to man, Vna tantum est actualis satisfactio, and ea est nostra;
that is, there is but only one satisfaction, and that is ours. 7. Though Christ
does work in us by his Spirit, yet that does not enable us by suffering
temporal punishments to make satisfaction unto God. 8. Bellarmine's bold
assertion, That by Christ's satisfaction we have grace to satisfy Divine
justice, is like that before mentioned, that Christ merited that we might
merit; without any ground at all in Canonical Scripture, which says that
Christ by himself (not by us) purged our sins, Heb. 1. 3. and that God laid on
him (not on us) the chastisement of our peace, and that with his stripes (not
with our own) are we healed, Isa. 53. 5. What Bishop Mountague, Bishop Maxwell,
and Bishop Andrews in his Strictura is made to say after he was dead,
concerning offering and prayer for the dead, and Dow and Pocklington have
written, may be seen in Laude^. sium Autocatacrisis, c. 5. p. 81, 82. And lest
any should be deceived by them, I pray read Dr. Ames his Bellarminus Enervatus.
T. 4. l. 5. c. 1, 2. where you will find Bellarmine's and these men's arguments
for Purgatory answered.

ART. XIV.
That the Pope of Rome successively, Bellar. T. 1. l. 3. c. de Antichristo.
Bishop Mountague. Gag. c. 10. p. 74. Appeal, p. 141. A. B. Laud checked Bishop
Hall for calling the Pope of Rome Antichrist, and commanded him to expunge it
out of his Book for Episcopacy. Vide Dr. Heylin, Cyp. Angl. l. 4. p. 406. Dr
Heylin says, as the Papists do, That the Pope cannot be Antichrist, for
Antichrist must be a single person, a Jew, and must kill Enoch and Elias. Col.
of Schism, page 81.
or the Papcy, is not the Antichrist, of which the Sacred Scripture writes.
THis I renounce: 1. Because it is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of
England, Homil. of good works, T. 1. part 3. p. 38. It gives honor to God for
giving to King Henry the Eighth the knowledge of his Word, and an earnest
affection to seek his glory, and to put away all such superstitious and
Pharisaical Sects by Antichrist invented, and set up against the true Word of
God, and the glory of his name.

And Homily of Obedience, Part 3 page 76. it says thus, But concerning the
Usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, which he most wrongfully challenges as
the Successor of Christ and Peter, we may easily perceive, how false, feigned
and forged it is, not only by that it has no sufficient ground in holy
Scripture, but also by the fruits and doctrine thereof. And in the same Page it
says thus: He ought rather to be called Antichrist, and the Successor of the
Scribes and Pharisees than Christ's Vicar, and Peter's Successor. And in Homily
of Willful Rebellion, Part 6. page 316. The Pope or Bishop of Rome is called
the Babylonical Beast of Rome. And Part 5. p. 309. of the same it is said:

That Christ expressly forbids his Apostles, and by them the whole Clergy, all
Princely Dominion over people and Nations; and he and his holy Apostles
likewise, namely Peter and Paul, did forbid unto all Ecclesiastical Ministers,
dominion over the Church of Christ. And indeed while the Ecclesiastical
Ministers continued in that order that is in Christ's word prescribed unto them,
and in Christian Kingdoms kept themselves obedient to their Princes, as the
holy Scripture does teach them, both was Christ's Church clear from ambitions,
emulations and contentions, and the state of Christian Kingdoms less subject
unto tumults and rebellions. But soon after the Bishop of Rome did by his
intolerable ambition challenge to be Head of the Church, he became at once the
spoiler and destroyer of the Church, which is the Kingdom of our Savior
Christ, and of the Christian Empire, and all Christian Kingdoms, as an
Universal Tyrant over all. Wherefore let all good subjects, knowing these
special instruments and ministers of the Devil, to the stirring up of all
rebellions, avoid and flee them, the pestilent suggestions of all usurpers and
their adherents, and embrace all obedience to God, and their natural Princes,
that they may enjoy Gods blessing, and their Princes favor.

Homily against Wilful Rebellion, Page 310. And whosoever denies this
Doctrine, That Faith alone justifies, is not to be accounted a Christian man,
nor a setter forth of Gods glory, but for an adversary to Christ, (that is an
Antichrist) and his Gospel, and for a setter forth of man's vain glory.

Homily of Salvation of Mankind, Page 16, 17. and in the same Page thus: That
were the greatest arrogance and presumption of man that Antichrist could set up
against God, to affirm, That a man might by his own works take away and purge
his own sin, and justify himself.

Again, in the Prayer appointed for the Fifth of November, set forth by
Authority of Parliament, 3. Jacob. c. 1. it is prayed thus: Root out that
Antichristian and Babylonical Sect. The Church of England in her Homily against
the peril of Idolatry, Part 3. p. 70. says thus, The Prophet Daniel, c. 11
declares such sumptuous decking of Images with gold, silver, and precious
stones, to be a token of Antichrists Kingdom, who as the Prophet shows, shall
be adored as God with such things. Dr. Heylin's Introd. to his Cyp. Angl. p. 1^
which say of Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground. etc.
and to this end strengthen the hands of our gracious King, the Nobles and
Magistrates of the Land, with judgment and justice to cut off these workers of
iniquity, whose Religion is rebellion, whose Faith is faction, whose practice
is murdering of souls and bodies, and to root them out of the confines of this
Kingdom.

And Dr. Heylin himself, who was no small friend to the Pope and Popery, says
thus, That in the Book of Homilies are some hard expressions against the Pope,
but none more hard than those in the public Letany; for in King Hen. 8. and in
the second of King Edward the sixths days, the people were appointed to pray
for their deliverance from the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and his
detestable Enormities.

Now from this sound Doctrine of the Church of England, I hope I may have leave
without offense to our Heylinists, to prove the Pope of Rome successively to be
the Antichrist the holy Scripture writes of: As thus:

He that under the pretense of Religion, being the Servant, the Vicar of
Christ, and the Successor of Peter, is the Inventor and setter up of
Superstitious and Pharisaical Sects, which are against the Word of God, and the
glory of his name; that challenges and exercises Princely dominion over
Nations and people, and dominion over the Church of Christ, which is his
Kingdom, whose usurped authority has no good ground in holy Scripture; that
produces Antichristian fruits, practices and doctrines; affirming, that a man
can by his own works take away and purge his own sin, and justify himself; and
denying this Doctrine, that a man is justified alone by faith; That is the
Babylonical beast, that is the successor of the Scribes and Pharisees, the
spoiler and destroyer of Christ's Church, the instrument and minister of Satan,
the head of that Antichristian, Babylonical Sect, which say of Jerusalem (that
is the true Church of God) Down with it, even to the ground; whose Religion is
rebellion, whose Faith is faction, and whose practice is murdering of souls and
bodies; is not to be accounted a Christian man, the Vicar of Christ, the
Successor of Peter, but an adversary to Christ and his Gospel; That is
Antichrist, the Antichrist the holy Scripture writes of: But the Pope of Rome
successively is so, and (...) therefore he is the Antichrist the holy Scripture
writes of. The major is the Doctrine of the Church of England. The Minor is
also very largely proved in every particular by Dr. Henry More in his Learned,
and Elaborate, and Ingenious Book, called, The Mystery of Iniquity, which
deserves seriously to be read, and compared with the Doctrine and practices of
the Church of Rome. The full proof of the Minor would take in the whole Body of
Popery, which is learnedly confuted by Dr. Ames in his Bellarminus Enervatus,
Festus Hommius in his seven Theological Disputations against the Papists and
others. Yet I shall take the pains to set down some of the heads, and leave you
to apply them.

1. The Pope of Rome is not (as he pretends to be) Christ's Vicar General here
on earth.

1. Papists do not prove that the Pope of Rome is Christ's Vicar General, either
in Temporals or Spirituals, by Sacred Scripture.

2. Christ is such an Head of his Church, that he needs not such a Vicar on
Earth as the Pope pretends to be; for Christ is God as well as Man, and is ever
with his Church, and will be, even to the end of the world, Mat. 18. 20. Mat.
28. 20. Lo I am with you even to the end of the world.

3. To set up the Pope of Rome to be Christ's Vicar, is to deny Christ's presence
with his Church. For a Vicar is one that does supply the place of one that is
absent; and it is to deny Christ to be the Monarch of his Church, and says in
effect, that he is not (...), and makes the Church of Christ, monstrous Biceps,
having two heads.

4. The Officers that Christ has appointed in his Church, are not his Vicars,
but his Ministers, Stewards, etc. their Office is not Magisterial, but only
Ministerial.

5. When Christ ascended up into Heaven, he did not commit the Government of
his Church Universal to one man, but to the whole College or company, or
society of his Apostles, Joh. 20. 21. Christ said to all his Apostles (except
Thomas) that were alive, this, As my Father sent me, even so send I you, etc.
Here Christ performed that which he promised to Peter, Mat. 16. 19. And I will
give thee, etc. That was but a promise of this gift, here Christ performed it
to him, and to all his Disciples, to whom in Peter the promise was made. Read
also for this, Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. And when the Apostles died, they did not
institute one particular man over the whole Universal Church of Christ on
Earth, but ordained fit men in every particular Church or Congregation of
believers to rule it, and gave them authority, and a charge to govern it by
common counsel; as ye may see was the practice of two Apostles, when they
solemnly took their leave of the Churches, which they had planted, Act. 20. 28.
Take heed therefore unto your Hooker says, That the Apostles themselves
ordained only in each Christian City a College of Presbyters and Deacons to
administer holy things. Evaristus a Bishop of Rome about 112 years after the
Birth of our Savior, begun the distinction of the Church into Parishes,
Ecclesiast. Pol. l. 5. p. 433. And in the end of the same he says, That
Presbyters and Deacons having been ordained before to exercise Ecclesiastical
Functions in the Church of Rome promiscuously, he was the first that tied each
one to his own station.
selves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you
overseers, (...), Bishops, (as he there calls all the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus) to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood.
Here you may see that the Government of the Church of Ephesus was committed not
to one singular man alone over the flock, and the Pastors too, as Papists would
have, but to the whole Presbytery, or company of Presbyters, whom Paul sent for
at Miletus, Act. 20. 17. to whom he gave this authority and charge. Read also,
I pray, what St. Peter says (whose Successor the Pope pretends to be) to the
Elders, that is the Presbyters of the Churches of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bythinia, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. The Elders which are among you I
exhort, who am also an Elder, (he does not say Bishop, much less Bishop of
Bishops, but (...), fellow-Presbyter) and a witness of the sufferings of
Christ, also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed. Feed the flock of
God which is among you, (not far distant from you) taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind; neither as being Lords (mark this) over Gods heritage, but being
ensamples to the flock, of humility, holiness, meekness, righteousness,
patience, constancy, charity, mercy, etc. not of pride, profaneness, tyranny,
injustice, cruelty, beastiality, covetousness, etc. And when the chief s^epherd
(Christ) shall appear, (that is, come to Judgment) ye shall receive a crown of
glory that fades not away.

Lo here again, the Government of the Church is not committed to one man, or
Bishop, but to the Presbyters of the Churches, and they forbidden to Lord it
over the flock* much more over their fellow-Presbyters, or shepherds of the
flock, but commanded to give good example to their flock, expecting not a
triple Crown here on earth, that perishes, but a Crown of Glory that fades
not away, which Christ, (the only chief Shepherd* will give at the great day of
Judgment, to all his holy, humble, diligent, and faithful Pastors. And thus was
the Church governed in the Primitive times, communi conci^io Presbyterorum, by
the common Jerome. in Tit. (...) 1. Jerome. ad Evagrium.
council of the Presbyters, as St. Jerome told the Pope himself; and this
Council was not such a picked Council of Princely Cardinals of his own creatures
and sworn vassals, as the Popes is (which has only a show of the ancient
Government of the Church, but is indeed a wicked combination against it, a mere
device to uphold his Usurpation, tyranny, power, pride, and Lordly dominion
over the Princes of the world, and the Churches, and Church Officers of Jesus
Christ) But it was a common Council of fellow-Presbyters of the same Church,
chosen by the Church; in which Council for necessary order sake, was* by common
consent to^, chosen for that time one Presbyter, that was the most worthy,
grave, a^^ able man, to be president, or if you will, Speaker of that Council
for t^^^ time, who had only a precedence of order, but no more a superiority of
jurisdiction over the College of Presbyters, than the Speaker of the House of
Commons has over the rest of his fellow-commoners in Parliament assembled here
in England.

2. That the Pope of Rome is not St. Peter' s Successor either in his
Apostleship (for that was extraordinary and died with him) or Bishopric. For
Peter the Apostle was not properly a Bishop, neither could he be, as the word
Bishop is now commonly taken with us. For he was an Apostle of the whole
Church, and so could not be tied to the Church of Antioch or Rome, as Papists
would make the world believe he was. He that makes Peter the Apostle, a Bishop,
brings him o^^ of the Parlor into the kitchen, as Dr. Raynolds speaks of St.
James the Apostle in his Conference with Heart. He that makes the King of
England a Justice of Peace, or the Lord Chief Justice of England a Justice of
Peace but of one County, Diocese, City, or Parish or Town, unkings the King,
and Unlord-chief-justiceth the other. Peter had no superiority of authority
over the rest of his fellow-Apostles; Peter was not the Rock upon which Christ
promised to build his Church, but that Confession that Peter made in the name
of Christ's Disciples, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. And Peter had
the same Commission from Christ and no other, that the other Apostles had, and
they had the same that he had Peter was no more Bishop of Rome, than S. Paul
was. Nay it can never be proved by Sacred Scripture, that Peter the Apostle was
at Rome at any time; but that he was elsewhere above twenty years, may be
proved by Sacred Scripture; and very probably that he was not at Rome, when we
cannot certainly prove him elsewhere in this or that particular place.

Obj. Papists out of Eusebius say thus, That when Peter had laid the foundation
Heart in Conference with Dr. Raynolds, c. 6. D. 3. P. 257.
of the Church at Antioch (where be sa^e Bishop seven years) he went to Rome,
and (preaching the Gospel there twenty-five years) continued Bishop of that
City.

Ans. To this I answer thus: 1. That though Eusebius was a ^^arned man, yet he
was a mere man, and not infallibly guided in his History and works, as the
Prophets and Apostles were. 2. Eusebius is reproved by Pope Gelasius in a
Council of seventy Bishops, as false in his History; which reproof is proved to
be just by Canus, viz. For his reporting of Christ's Epistle to Agbarus, and his
avouching many things by Clemens Alexandrinus; whereas the fable of the one,
and the works of the other are reproved by the Council. And moreover he writes
in the same Chronicle, That Sennacherib, who besieged Jerusalem, and
Salmanassar, who took Samaria, were one and the same man, which Saint Com. in
Isa. 36.
Jerome has showed to be contrary to holy Scripture, as Dr. Confer. c. 6. d. 3.
p. 258.
Reynolds answers Heart. And he says further, That such another oversight is
this of Peter' s being seven years Bishop of the Church of Antioch; and 25
years after that, Bishop of the Church of Rome; and he gives those probable
reasons that others do give, to prove, That Peter was never at Rome. He proves
the first part of the story to be false, and contrary to Sacred Scripture thus:
Peter by this account should have gone to Antioch about the 4th. year after
Christ's death, and there abode seven years, even till the second So Cornel. a
Lapide, Chron. Actuum Apostolorum, page 3.
year of Claudius the Emperor, in Cornel. a Lapide says, he went to Rome the
third of Claudius in his Preface to the first Epistle of Peter.
which he went to Rome. But the holy Scripture shows, that Paul (who was not
presently converted after Christ's death) after three years found Peter at
Jerusalem, Gal. 1. 18. He went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him
fifteen days. And Peter after that abode within the coasts of Jury, first at
Lydda, Act. 9. 38. then at Joppa, where he tarried many days, Act. 9. 43. then
at Caesaria, Act. 10. 48. then at Jerusalem, Act. 11. 2, where Herod Agrippa
cast him into prison in the second or Cornelius a Lapide says, 'twas in the
third year of Claudius, Chron. Act. Apostolor. p. 3. the very time that he
removed (as he says) from his seven years sitting Bishop at Antioch to Rome,
and wrote his first Epistle. Preface to the 1. Epistle of Peter.

Vid. Lightf. Harmony, p. 92.


third year of Claudius, as it is likely, (for he died in the fourth) when the
Church of Antioch was both plainted and w^tered by others, and not by Peter,
viz. by Barnabas and Paul, and were called Christians before ever Peter c^^
there: And therefore the first branch of Eusebius his report, that Peter having
founded the Church of Antioch, and that he sat there Bishop seven years in the
second year of Claudius, is flatly contrary to Scripture. And Onuphrius in his
Annotations upon Platina in Vitam B. Petri Apostoli, says, It is most clear,
and surely known by the Acts of the Apostles, and Paul' s Epistle to the
Galatian^, that for nine years after Christ's death, Peter never went out of
Jury, till the second year of the reign of Claudius, and therefore he could not
sit seven years Bishop at Antioch before he went to Rome.

Thus the former part of Eusebius his story being proved false, why may not the
latter part, viz. [that Peter after this sat twentyfive years Bishop of Rome]
be also false? To which I add further, that it is evident by Gal. 1. 18 that
after three years after, Paul return from Arabia, he returned to Damascus,
which might be (...) or seven years after Christ's death. For Papists write that
P^^ was converted the 20th year of Tiberius the Emperor, which was the second
year after Christ's death, as they themselves recko^ And he went after he
received his sight, to Damascus, and then preached Jesus Christ, Act. 9. 19,
20, 22. and thence went into Arabia, and thence returned to Damascus again, and
there prea^^ched; and then after three years he went up to Jerusalem to s^^
Peter, and abode with him fifteen days, which could not be (...) above six
years after Christ's death. Then fourteen years after that, Paul with Barnabas
went up from Antioch to Jerusalem; th^^ is fourteen years after Paul's
Conversion, as Cornelius a Lapide wi^^ have it; but others think 'twas fourteen
yea^^ after his Dr. Lightfoot's Harmony, p. 96.
first going up to Jerusalem to s^^ Peter, which must needs be nineteen or
twen^^ years a^ least, after Christ's death Others will have it to be to the
Council of Jerusalem, which was, as Jerome says, eighteen years after Christ's
death, where Peter was the first, but not the conclusive speaker, Act. 15. and
then and there it was agreed among them, that Paul and Barnabas should be the
Apostles of the Gentiles, and Peter and James of the Jews, Gal. 2. 9. And that
after this, Peter came down to Antioch, as Onuphrius affirms, ubi supra; and
that then Paul reproved him to his face for dissembling. Which clearly confutes
Eusebius his story of St. Peter's being Bishop seven years at Antioch, before
the second or third year of Claudius. Papists say, that the Council was held
the ninth year of Claudius; and that that very year he banished the Jews out of
Rome, and that then Peter by the counsel of God came from thence If Peter had
then came from Rome, and upon such an account, it is very probable that some
mention would have been made of it in Sacred Writ, as well as of Aquilla' s and
Priscilla' s, Act. 18. 2.
to Jerusalem, but this they do not prove by good evidence. Affirmantis est
probare, they that affirm that Peter was at Rome, must prove it. I have proved
that Peter was at Jerusalem and the coasts thereabout, above 20 years after
Christ's death, then he could not be at Rome the second or third year of
Claudius, as they say, but prove not: Cornelius a Lapide says, that from
Christ's death to Peter's death, which was the last year of Nero, there Chron.
Actuum Apostolorum, p. 7.
were but 36 years; above 20 of which years I have proved Peter to be
elsewhere. Then its undeniably true, That he sat not seven years Bishop at
Antioch, and 25 years Bishop at Rome; for there remain but 16 years at the
most; in which time it will be difficult, if not impossible to prove, that
Peter was at Rome.

That Peter was not at Rome, I offer these arguments.

1. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans (written in the third of Nero's reign,
say some; others say 'twas written in the 13th of Claudius, in which Peter, say
Papists, sat Bishop Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10. p. 432
of Rome) saluteth many Saints, but makes no mention of St. Peter, whom it is
very probable he would not have neglected, if he had been there Bishop.

2. When Paul was at Rome, he wrote to those that were abroad, and makes
mention of several particular fellow laborers, and yet he makes not mention of
Peter. Yea, though he make mention of the Salutation of Aristarchus and M^rcus,
(one whom they say was at Rome with Peter) Jesus called Justus (one of the
Circumcision,) and Epaphras, and St. Luke the beloved Physician, who wrote the
Gospel, and the Acts of the Apostles, and Demas, who afterward forsook him;
though, I say; he remembers these men's Salutations to the Colossians, yet not
one word of, or from Peter, Col 4. 10, 11, 12, 14. and when he wrote to Timothy
from Rome, a little before his death, he says to him, Eubulus greeteth thee,
and Pudens and Linus, who is said to be the first Bishop of Rome, (that is
Pastor of the Church there) and Claudia, and all the brethren; yet no
remembrance from Peter to him, though he had been at Rome, and could not but be
acquainted with Peter, if he had been there, 2 Timothy 4. 21. So in his Epistle
from Rome to Philemon, verse. 23, 24. he says thus, There salute thee Epaphras
my fellow laborer in Christ Jesus, Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas and Lucas my
fellow laborers; yet not a word of Peter.

3. Paul mentioning his fellow-workers unto the Kingdom of Go^, names
Aristarchus, Marcus, and Jesus, who is called Justus, says thus, These are my
fellow-workers unto the Kingdom of God, which have been a comfort to me; but
not a word of Peter; yea, if he had been there Bishop of Rome formerly, it is
charitable to conceive that he would have written to the Church at Rome in
Paul' s behalf, but not a word of any such matter. They say that they heard not
any thing concerning him, Act. 28. 21.

4. Paul at Rome writing to Timothy, tells him thus, At my first answer, no man
stood with me, but all men forsook me, 2 Timothy 4. 16. Now if Peter had been
there, and Bishop of Rome, as they say he was, it is not probable that he would
have forsaken him, especially having had such a check for his first denying of
his Lord and Master.

5. When Paul was brought Prisoner to Rome, Luke in the Acts of the Apostles.
Act. 28. tells us, that he was received of the brethren, yet makes no mention
at all of Peter; though Cornelius a Lapide tell us, That Claudius Actuum
Apostolorum Chron. p. 5.
his Decree for banishing the Jews, was revoked the first year of Nero, this
being they say, the third; but Diodate says, 'twas the tenth or eleventh year
of Nero' s reign, i^ which time Peter might have returned to Rome, at least
once in t^^ years he might have visited his Church there, and St. Paul too, to
whom he had given the right hand of fellowship in a more emi^^^^ and more
dangerous place than Rome, even at Jerusalem.

6. After Paul had been at Rome three days, he sent for the chief of the Jews;
and when they came to his lodging, he gave them an account of his being brought
prisoner there. Which if Saint Peter had been there, it is very likely he would
have known, and told them, yea, if he had been formerly Bishop of Rome, though
he had been at Jerusalem or Antioch, or thereabout, he would have sent them
notice of it, either by letter, or by word, by some one of the Brethren, but
that they deny, Act. 28. 21.

7. They desire to hear what he thought; for as concerning this Sect, we know
that it is every where spoken against. And they appointed him a d^y to hear him
of it, to whom he expounded and testified the Kingdom of God, persuading them
concerning Jesus Christ, both out of the Law, and out of the Prophets, from
morning till night, Act. 28. 21, 22, 23. Now had Peter (who was the Apostle of
the Circumcision) been there at Rome then or before, no doubt but he would have
taught his own countrymen the Kingdom of God, and manifested out of the Law of
Moses and the prophets, that Jesus Christ was the Messiah, before Paul came
there. But they were ignorant of the very foundation of Christianity, and
talked of it, as of a strange thing, a new Sect, and much talked against; and
if he had been there then, this had been a fit time for him to have joined with
St. Paul in preaching Jesus Christ; but we read of none of all this in Sacred
Scripture.

8. There is no mention of Peter' s joining with Paul in any of his Epistles
written from Rome, though he mentions Timothy to Philemon, to the Colossians,
to the Philippians; if Peter had been then at Rome, and Bishop there, it is
probable that Paul would have gotten his hand or name, or commendations to some
one or other of these Epistles that were thence written. Now put all these
things together, and it will manifestly appear, that Peter did not sit Bishop
so long as Papists say he did; and it will most probably appear, that he was
never at Rome.

Object. But they say, That Peter came to Rome again the twelfth year of Nero,
and that then also Cornel. a Lapid. Chron. Act. Apostol. p. 7.
Paul returned thither also, and that they both restored the Church there, that
was falling away by reason of Nero' s persecution.

Answ. To this I answer thus: 1. That this is only said, but not proved. (...)
That this is a very improbable story.

For, 1. It Is improbable that* Peter, who forsook Rome as soon as ever Claudius
his Decree for Banishment of the Jews was published, for fear of losing his
life, should after Nero's bloody* Persecution was begun, adventure to return to
Rome.

2. It Is most probable that Paul this year, or rather after it, wrote his
second Epistle to Timothy, in which he tells him thus, I (...) now ready to be
offered, and the time of my departure is at hand; I have fought a good fight,
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, etc. Do thy
diligence to come shortly to me; do thy diligence to come before winter, 2 Timothy
4. 6, 7, 8, 9, 21. Yet in this Epistle is no mention of Peter, though, as was
observed before, E^bulus, Pudens, Linus, Claudia, and all the Brethren saluted
him: And he makes mention of only Luke that was with him, and how others were
disposed of, as there is to be seen; and if Peter had been there, he would not
have sent for Mark also, and given that reason he does, For he is profitable to
me for the Ministry; would not Peter have done more that way than Mark, if he
had been there?

Obj. But Peter was at Babylon, and there wrote his first Epistle to the
dispersed Jews, 1 Pet. 5. 13. The Church that is at Babylon sal^teth you. Now
by Babylon he means Rome, as Cornelius a Lapi^^, Heart, and other Papists
expound the place. And that because Rome is by the Fathers and our Protestant
writers called Babylon in the Revelations of John, Rev. 17, and 18. chap.

Answ. To this, learned Dr. Reynolds gives a full, large and learned Answer.
But I answer Conference with Heart, c. 6. d. 3. p. 262, 263, etc.
briefly thus, that in Sacred Scripure we read of Babylon, 1. Literal. 2.
Mystical. Babylon lit^ral is Babylon in Caldea, where the Israelites were in
ancient time carried captive. And this Babylon most of o^^ Learned men do here
understand by Peter's Babylon, the Church th^^ is at Babylon in Caldea. Here
Peter, they say, was, when he wro^^ his first Epistle; but others say he was in
Babylon in Egypt, which is called Cairo, and that there he wrote his first
Epistle, and th^^ thence he sent Mark to Alexandria in Egypt, and that he was
the first Bishop, that is Congregational or Parochial Pastor there, for there
were no Diocesan Bishops then. One of these two without doubt, he was at; but
that he was at Rome, Babylon Mystical, is improbable, as I have proved before,
And that Peter should call Rome Babylon, there is no reason given. And there
was no need for him to disguise the name of Rome with the Mystical nnme of
Babylon, as there was afterward for St. John. If he had been at Rome, he might
without any danger, and he would without doubt, have said plainly, if he had
been Bishop there, as they say he then was, The Church that is at Rome saluteth
you. Here by the way take notice, that Papists to prove Peter at Rome, do
confess that Rome is that wicked Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, and all
abominations, designed to destruction, which is a good argument against
themselves. But I deny this consequence, Peter was at Babylon, therefore he was
at Rome.

Obj. But by Babylon, Papias, the Apostles Scholar, does say, was meant Rome,
as Eusebius says, Hist. l. 2. c. 25. and Jerome de viris illustribus.

Answ. To which I answer: 1. That Eusebius was an Arrian, has been proved
false in this matter before, and may again. 2. That whether this Papias should
be yielded to be one of the Apostle John's own Scholars, is not certain; yet he
was a man of a very small judgment (as says judicious Dr. Reynolds) who
mistaking the meaning of the Apostles speeches in a matter of greater weight,
deceived many Fathers that followed for his antiquity, as both Eusebius. Hist. l.
3. 36.
Eusebius and Jer. de Scriptor Eccles. in verba Papias.
Jerome do report of him. The less strange, if they believed him, and others
them, in this point, of no such importance then; and that Mark was Peter' s
Scholar at Rome, came from him by one as good as himself, Clemens Alexandrinus,
as Dr. Conference with Heart, c. 6. d. 3. p 265.
Reynolds speaks. The Centurists speak of him as of a weak man for judgment,
whose obscure writings, and his writing of two (...) John's Disciples, Johannes
Discipulus, and Johannes Senior, bred great disturbance in the Church, by his
unskilful making a difference Quid Jacobus aut Johannes, sive Matthaeus, vel
alius, quisquam ex discipulis Domini, quidque Aristion, and Senior Johannes,
Discipuli dixerint, Cent. 2. l. 10. p. 133.
between John the Disciple, and John the Elder, about the authority of John' s
Epistles, and the Revelations. And they say of him, that he brought forth many
strange parables and doctrines of Christ in his Books, and that he was a man of
a mean judgment, and that he did not rightly understand the Apostles
disputations and examples. And being such an one, he might and did
misunderstand St. Peter, who spoke of the Church at Literal Babylon, which he,
knowing and hearing St. John, (whose Scholar they say he was) by Babylon in his
Revelations to mean Rome, thought Peter to mean so too, which was the ground of
his Error, that Peter was at Rome, and of those that inconsiderately followed
him. Old Writers have misreported things, and yet have said they had them from
the Elders, and they from the Apostles. Irenaeus who wrote in the next Age
after the Iren. l. 2. c. 39.
Apostles, reports, That the Lord Jesus taught forty or fifty years, and that
this he had of all the Elders of Asia, and that they had it from St. John, and
that St. John lived with them till Trajan's time; and that Mr. Calamy was
mistaken and abused by a Writer and Printer of his Casual Sermon preached at
Aldermanbury, after the Act aagainst Nonconformists Preaching, viz. That we
should be delivered, Anno 1666, but he affirmed no such words, but reproved
that vain conceit.
some of those Elders did not only see John, but other Apostles, and they heard
these things from them. And yet notwithstanding all these great Authorities or
Traditions, this was an erroneous opinion of Irenaeus; and that of Epiphanius
is held the sounder, That Christ lived but about thirty-three years, and the^
suffered death; and this is believed, because it is most agreeable to
Scripture. Therefore I say, that the testimony of Papias, yea of Jerome, is not
to be credited, where there is not good ground in Sacred Scripture for their
opinions, especially where many probable reasons are produced from Scripture
against their uncertain opinions. And so I may say of the Fathers, that said,
that Peter was at Rome and died there. Some of our Divines produce Jerome to
prove, that he was Crucified at Jerusalem. Papists say, that he was Crucified,
which was a Jewish death; and that Paul, who without doubt suffered death at
Rome, was beheaded, which was a Roman death. Dr. Confer. c. 6. d. 3. p. 265.
^yranus (a Papist) upon Mat. 23. 34. says, Some of them ye shall kill, as
James the Brother of John, etc. Some shall ye crucify, as Peter and Andrew his
Brother. Vid. also Chrysostom in Mat. 23. 34.
Reynolds tells Heart, that a learned man, viz. Velenus in opusculo inscripto
Petrum non fuisse Romam, (...) illic passum, of our side, having weighed, and
seeing the dissension of Writers touching the time that he came to Rome, and
knowing by the Scripture, that their speech of his abode in Rome is false, and
marking the shameful practice of the Romanists in forging calos for their own
advantage, as Constantines Donation; and espying some such forgery among their
Monuments of Peter, (...) Linus fable of his death; and finding his Martyrdom
mentioned by Jerome and Lyra in such sort as though he had been crucified by the
Scribes and Pharisees, he was brought by these and the like persuasions into
this opinion, that Peter never came to Rome. And of this opinion was Balae^^ in
Act. Romans Pont. l. 1. praefat. and so have been many others since. And besides,
there were Christians at Rome in the time of Tiberius and Caligula, before ever
Peter is reported to be at Rome, as Eusebius witnesses, Hist. l. 2. c. 2. and
Tertullian in his Apology, c. 5. And if we may believe Libro 1. recognitionum
Clementio. Object. Papists object, that if Peter long ago preached to the
Gentiles, Act. 15. 17. Ergo, he preached at Rome. Answ. I answer thus: 1. That
it follows not. 2. Paul preached to the Gentiles before Peter did, Act. (...).
3. Before Peter saw the Vision of the sheet, and heard the command of the Lord,
be thought it unlawful for him to go to the Gentiles, Act. 10. 28. 4. Peter
first preached Christ to Cornelius and his friends at his house in Caesaria,
Act. 10. 5. It Is most probable that Antioch received the Gospel from Barnabas
and Paul, and others, before Rome, and they were first called Christians, Act.
11. 19, 26. 6. Some of those strangers of Rome that were at Jerusalem, Act. 2.
10. might preach the Gospel at Rome.
Clement, Barnabas was there before Peter. And that which is objected out of
Act. 28. 21. that the Jews told Paul, That they had received no Letters out of
Judea concerning him, and that neither any of the brethren showed or spoke any
harm of him, is not to be conceived that they had not received or heard of his
Epistle, which he sent to the Romans some few years before; but concerning his
particular business and occasion of his being sent Prisoner then to Rome. And
it makes much (as I observed before) against St. Peter's being so long Bishop
at Rome, (as Papists would have) that these Jews should hear nothing of Paul,
and be so ignorant of the Doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, of which
Peter was by special agreement an Apostle to them Thus I suppose I have
sufficiently overthrown the main foundation of the Popes Primacy and Supremacy.
For if Peter was never at Rome, then he was not Bishop of Rome; and if he was
not Bishop of Rome, then the Pope of Rome is not his Successor in the
Episcopacy thereof, and then by Papists own consequence, he is not supreme
Bishop of all the Church.

3. The Pope of Rome successively was, and has been the inventor and setter
forth of Superstitious and Pharisaical Sects, which are against the Word of
God, and the glory of his name. To show in particular how every Pope brought
some Superstition into the Church, would be very Voluminous, for that therefore
I must refer you to the Centurists, to Dr. Reynolds Conference with Heart, to Dr
Henry More's Mystery of Iniquity, and the little Treatise of ancient
Ceremonies, called Vitis degeneris, Bishop Jewel's Works, and the Mass in
English and Latin, by James Mountain, Printed 1641. I might refer you to the
Popes Decretals, (and indeed they are a good evidence against themselves) but
they are late forgeries, devised to justify their latter Superstitions and
Usurpations, therefore I forbear, though some Romanizing Protestants have them
in too high estimation. Though ^ome real Heretics were the first Inventors of
some Superstitions, yet the Popes and their Agents were the first setters up
and imposers of the^^ in the Church; bringing of Spittle, Salt, Cream, Oil, and
the sign of the Cross into the service of God at Baptism, is well known to be
theirs. Kneeling or adoring (as Bishop Sparrow in his Rationale, p. 273.
some men call it) at the receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Using
the sign of the Cross above thirty times; praying to and for the Dead at their
Mass, worshipping of Vide ubi supra, p. (...) what the Church of England says
in her Homily against peril of Idolatry, part 3. p. 70.
Images of Saints departed this life; of Crucifixes, the Cross, Altars, bowing
to the East, their Superstitious Fasts and Feasts, putting holiness in times,
places, things, which God has not placed in them, as in Water, Garments,
Surplices, Cowles, Crosses, Bells, Books, Candles; their Sacerdotal garments,
which ought (they say) to be hallowed and consecrated by the Bishop, as the
Amice, the Albe, or Surplice, the Girdle, the Stole, the ^annell, or Maniple,
and the Chasible for ordinary Priests. And the Bishops Gloves of leather,
Sandals, or Apostolical Shoes, Breeches, the Tunick, the Dalmatick, the Miter,
they are all brought into the Church, as I said, by the Popes of Rome and their
Agents. The Amice is the first Priestly habit, in which the Priest muzles his
head in form of an Hood, of which habit their Doctors say See and wonder at
their most ridiculous application of Scripture. Durands Rationale, l. 3. c. 2.
Tollet instructio Sacerdotis, l. 2. c. 2.
the Apostle speaks, Ep^. 6. 17. Take the helmet of salvation. And it is worn
upon the Priests head, because his head signifies the Divinity, which kept it
self hidden at the Lords passion, as Gabriel Biel says in his Eleventh Lesson
upon the Canon of the Mass. And so says Pope Innocent the third, l. 1.
Mysteriorum, cap. 35. where also he says, that this Amice signifies the Angel
clothed with a cloud, Revel. 10. 1.

2. Upon this Amice the Priest puts the Albe or Surplice, which is, as Mountain
calls it, a white I have known some wear an half-shirt instead of a Surplice.
shirt, because it is written, Innocent 3. l. 1. c. 51.
Let thy garments be always white, Eccles. 9. 8. And it is of fine linen,
because it is written, That the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints,
Revel. 19. 8. This shirt has about the borders of it some light work with
green or red silk, because it is written, The Queen is at thy right hand with
embroidered garments, Psalm. 45. So Innocent 3d, B. 1. of the Mysteries of the
Mass. Gabr. Biel in his 11th Lesson upon the Canon of the Mass, says, that
this Albe, or white Surplice, signifies the fools garment wherewith Herod
clothed Christ for to mock him.

3. Upon this Albe they put the girdle, which signifies chastity, for as Pope
Innocent 3d says, Luxury is in the reins; of this girdle (say they) speaks
Isaiah the Prophet, Innoc. l. 1. c. 37, and 52.
Isa. 11. 5. Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins. It serves also to
put us in mind, that Christ has a golden girdle girt about his paps, Revel. 1.
15. and of what is said by St. Luke 12. 35. Let your loins be girded about.

4. The Stole comes next after, which signifies the yoke of the Lord, Mat. 11.
30. and hangs on the right hand, and on the left, because we must be armed with
the armor of righteousness on the right and on the left hand, 2 Cor. 6. 7.
Tollet Instruc. Sacerd. l. 2. c. 2. Innoc. l. 1. c. 9. and 54.
says, That it goes down to the ground, for to signify perseverance, which
goes unto the end.

5. Then comes the Maniple or Fannel, in fashion of a Napkin upon the left arm,
because it is written, Psalm. 126. Venientes venient cum exultatione portantes
manipulos suos, they shall come bringing their sheaves with them with
rejoicing, as Durand and Tollet say, and Pope Innocent also, B. 1. chapter 43.
where he says also, that the Maniple is put upon the left arm, because it is
written in the Song of Songs, his left arm is under my head.

6. The last piece, and which does cover all the rest, Innoc. 3d l. 1. c. 50.
is the Chasuble (from casula a little cottage, which I take to be a Cope)
which signifies charity. For as St. Peter says, Charity covers a multitude So
does a Chasuble.
of sins, 1 Pet. 4. 8. Pope Innocent says, it signifies the Universal Church.

When the Bishop sings Mass:

1. He changes or shifts his shoes and stockings, because God said to Moses,
put off thy shoes, for the place whereon thou stand, (...) holy ground,
Exodus 3. 5. Pope Innocent the third in the first Book of the Mysteries of the
Mass says, That Isaiah by the spirit of prophecy admire^ the beauty of the
Bishops stockings and sandals, when he said, How beautiful are Isa. 52. 7. But
when and where do Bishops do so? Preaching is none of their work, they say.
the feet of those that bring glad tidings, that publish peace! And in his 2d
Book, Chap. 22. he says, That the priest ought to pray toward the East,
because the dayspring fom on high has visited us, Luke 1. 78.

2. When the Bishop sings Mass, he has gloves on his hands, to the end (as
Durand the Master of the Ceremonies says) that his left hand may not know what
his right hand does, according to the Lords co^^ment, Mat. 6. 3. And these
gloves are of le^t^^^, because Jacob's hands were covered with kids-skins,
Innoc. 3. l. 1. c. 41. and 57. Innoc. 3. l. 1. c. 34.
when Isaac blessed him, as the Pontifical teaches. And Pope Innocent also
says, and he groundeth the Sandals or Episcopal shoes upon that which is
said, Psalm. 60. Over Edom will I cast out my shoo.

3. The Rings he has on his hands signify that he is the Spouse of the
Church, as it is written, For I have espoused thee to one husband, 2 Cor. 11.
2. Again, because the father of the What a prodigal Bishop? Innoc. 3. l. 1. c.
46. and 61.
prodigal son caused a ring to be put upon his finger; which finger whereon the
ring is, signifleth the Holy Ghost, as it is written, Is not that a piece of
blasphemy?
digitus Dei est, thi^ is the finger of God, Exodus 8. 19. as the same Authors
say.

4. The Cross, or Pastoral staff, signifies the correction, as it is written, 1
Cor. 4. 21. Shall I come unto you with a rod. And in Psalm. 45. 6. The Scepter
of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter; though the Cross (it may be) be a crooked
staff.

5. The Horns of the Miter signify the two Testaments, says Pope Innocent the
third, B. 1. of the Mysteries of the Mass, c. 60. these things you may read in
Peter du Moulins Book of the Mass in French and Translated into English by
James Mountain, Ann. 1641. Chapters 12, and 13 and Chap. 8. Moreover thus, at
Mass they lig^^ Wax-candles at Noonday, because Christ said, I am the light of
the world. And the Altar must be of stone, because St. Paul says, that the
rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. Of the two Horns of the Altar, the one signifies
the Jews, and the other the Gentiles. Whence also the Priest transporteth the
Mass Book from one Horn to the other, because that from the Jews the Gospel is
passed to the Gentiles. And this Mass Book is laid upon a Cushion, because it
is written, My yoke is easy and my burden light, Mat. 11. 30,

The Priest turns his back to the people, because God said to Moses, Thou shall
see my back-parts, Exodus 33. 23. Sometimes he turns again, showing his face to
the people passing by, because St. Paul says, Videmus in aenigmate, we see
through a glass darkly, 1 Cor. 13. 12. When the Priest passes from one corner
of the Altar to the other, the Clerk which serves him, removes also with him,
because the Lord said, Where I am, there shall also my servant be, Joh. 12. 26.
The Massifying Bishop stands at the right horn of the Altar, because it is
written, Deus ab austro veniet, God shall come from the South. These things are
to be seen in Bishop Durand's Rationale, in the Books of Pope Innocent the
third, of the Mysteries of the Mass; in Gabriel Biel upon the Canon of the
Mass, in Tollet of the Instruction of Priests, in Hugo de Sancto Victore in his
Mirror of the Church.

Who but the Popes instituted in the Church the making of the sign of the Cross
to fright away the Devil? who but Pope Honorius, not above 500 years since,
instituted kneeling (which some call adoring) at receiving the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper? Which, says Bishop Jewel, William Bishop Jewel Sermon. upon 1 Cor.
11. 23. p. 51, 52. Bishop Jewel's Reply to Harding, art. 8. d. 1. page 283.
where he pleads against adoration of the Sacrament, that there is neither
commandment of Christ, nor any word or example of the Apostles, or ancient
Fathers for it; but that 'twas lately devised by Pope Honorius, about Anno
1226. but after Transubstantiation as Viti^ Degene^^ says, page 109.
Durand, and John Dunce, Scotus, perceiving, could not be justified, without
great peril of Idolatry, they removed the bread and wine out of the Sacrament,
and turned them into the body and blood of Christ, and so brought in
Transubstantiation, which destroys not only the nature of the Sacrament, but
the body and blood of Christ too. All Papists that I have read, as Aquinas, 3.
q. 75. a. 2. O. Contrariatur venerationi hujus Sacramenti, si aliqua substantia
creata esset ibi, quae non possit adoratione latriae adorari.
Aquinas, Vasquez, Bellar. de Sacramento Eucharistiae, l. 2. c. 8. a. 2. and
cap. 13. a. 5. and cap. 24. a. 6. Hard^ng's answer to Jewel's Challenge, fol.
111. a.
Bellarmine, and some others say, as Durand and Scot^^ do, that to kneel at
receiving the bread and wine at the Lord's Supper, as Papists did, if Christ's
body and blood be not corporally present under them, is Idolatry. Upon this
account I find the learned Frenchman Dall. Apol. c. 20. and Dr. Heylin says
thus, The Lutherans held with the Catholics, that Christ's body was really in
the Sacrament, else they knew that there was no reverence due to the Sacrament,
History of Presbytery, p. 2. Yea, he says, This prayer [the body of the Lord
Jesus Christ preserve thy body and soul unto eternal life] was left out of King
Edward's second Liturgy, because 'twas thought to savor, of
Transubstantiation, Cypr. Angl. 25. A B. Laud in his Star. Chamber-Speech, page
55. says very well of Communion Tables standing Altarwise thus, That if it
advance or usher in Superstition and Popery, it ought to stand so in none.
Dallaus saying to this purpose, That this, viz. their kneeling at receiving
the Elements in that Sacrament; were ground enough, if there were nothing else,
to separate from the Church of Rome. All our learned and sound Divines maintain
against the Church of Rome, That it is Idolatry to kneel purposely before a
creature in a Religious state, or state of worship, put before a man; that we
may not do the needless works of Idolators; that it is scandalous to do
needlessly, as Idolators do; that a public declaration of a man's good intention
in doing a needless action that appears evil, or is otherwise scandalous, frees
not that action from being actively scandalous. That it is impossible to adore
God in or through an image, and set give no religious positive reverence, that
is, worship to the image. To give the appropriate signs significative of our
agnition of the Divine excellency to any thing that is not God, is Idolatry.
Nay, though these appropriate signs were used without devotion by the party,
toward the supposed object, and were intended only by other men to be directed
thither, or only were interpretable to be so directed, it were Idolatry
notwithstanding, says Dr. Henry More in his Mystery of Iniquity, c. 10. p. 32.
Idolatry is committed (says he) when we perform some rite or ceremony, that is
to say, some external religious action appropriated to the signifying our
acknowledgment of divine eminency before, or rather unto, that which is not
God. Where by [before or unto] I understand (says he) an intended direction
(by our selves or others, or at least by interpretation of custom) of the
religious action, as to an object we would If this and what Bishop Prideaux,
Fasc. cont. loc. 4. S. 3. q. 6. p. 241* be true, I see not how Catholics or
Lutherans, or Dr. Heylin himself can free themselves from Idolatry, ^^
injungitur ut indifferens, and recipitur a nostris ut ghost is summae
reverentiae tanto mysterio debitus. For is not kneeling received and done by
them, as to an object they would honor thereby? and is not kneeling a purposed
and an accustomed sign of our acknowledgment of Divine excellency in Gods
house, and in Gods worship there?
honor thereby, for that is the only thing whereby the action becomes
Idolatry; for there will always be a necessity of performing our religious
rites before or toward something or other, by way of circumstance of place,
which might be without the least guilt or suspicion of that crime. Wherefore it
is the intended and accustomary application of the appropriate signs of the
acknowledgment of the Divine excellency unto an object where the Divine
excellencies are not, that is to any thing that is not truly God, which is this
heinous sin of Idolatry, says Dr. Henry More in his Mystery of Iniquity, c.
10. p. 33. For (says he) as a woman that renders or gives up to one that is
not her husband, what is appropriate to her husband, to wit, the use of her
body, let her fancy what mental restrictions or directions of her intention,
she will, in the act, is questionless a downright adulteress; so whosoever
applies the appropriate acknowledgments of the Divine excellencies, which is
religious worship, to that which is not God, let him mince it as well as he
can, with mental limitations and restrictions, if he once pass this religious
worship upon this undue object, he is thereby without all controversy, a gross
Idolater. Ibid. Again he says, Whatsoever is interposed betwixt God and us by
way of object in our worshipping, is not an help, but an hinderance to the
perfection of that worship. Ibid. c. 14. p. 50. To worship before an image, and
to worship an image, are in sacred Scripture all one, Hence Amaziah, who bowed
down before the gods of the Edomites, is judged to have committed Idolatry, for
the Lord was angry with him, 2 Chronicles. 25. 14, 15. Mark it, that which is called
bowing down before the gods of the Edomites, in the 14th verse, is in the 15th
verse called seeking after, that is serving of the gods of the people. And to
put it out of doubt, learned Ainsworth upon Exodus 20. 5. says the very same,
as Mr. Pool quotes him upon the place, Idem est adorare coram Domino and
Domino, to pray before God in 1 Chronicles. 17. 16. is in 2 Samuel 7. 27. called,
praying unto God: and idem est procumbere coram Diabolo and Diabolo; for that
which is in Mat. 4. 9. called falling down before the Devil, is in Luke 4. 7.
called worshipping of him. And to bow down to images, Non animi actum sed
corporis designat, imaginibus ullum signum honoris, quocunque tandem animo id
fieret, exhibere prohibeatur, say Grotixs and Rivet, as Mr. Pool there quotes
them. To fall down before an image does note, not the act of the mind, but of
the body. It Is forbidden to give to images any sign of honor, with what mind
or intention soever it be done. In 1 King. 12. 30. the people are said to
worship before the Calf, as they in Exodus 32. did, which God (who is the best
interpreter of men's actions) expounds to be worshipping of the Calf, Exodus 32.
8. Psalm. 106. 19. for it is called a sin, v. 30. yea a great sin, 2 King. 17.
21. yea, they are for it expressly called Idolaters, 1 Cor. 10. 7. Neither be ye
Idolaters, as some of them were, as it is written, the people sat down to eat,
and rose up to play. Which place where it is so written, is Exodus 32. 6. Where
the story of their Idolatry is recorded.

Though I have but touched at these things, yet I may seem to some men to dwell
upon them; therefore to proceed. Who but Papists brought into the Church,
worshipping of Relics, as the tail of the ass on which Christ rode into
Jerusalem; the clouts in which our Savior was wrapped when he was a child, one
of which the Emperor Vide Sleiden's Commentaries.
Charles the Fifth worshipped, when he was made Emperor? The Whighs of Joseph
and our Savior, like Carpenters, used when they made yokes, kept close in a
box? if you will believe them? The coals on which St. Laurence was broiled? a
feather of the Angel Gabriels wings, alias of a Peacocks tail. Much more might
be said of the superstition and Idolatry of the Pope and Church of Rome, as his
five superadded Sacraments, Invocation of Saints, decking and worshipping of
Images, but I forbear for brevities sake.

2. That the Pope has been the setter up of Pharisaical Sects against the word
of God (for besides the word, is in Scripture sense against the word) might be
illustrated by his making more orders of Church Officers than Christ or his
Apostles appointed in his Nos maxim in eo a Pontificiis dissentimus, quod illi
inter Ecclesiae ministros numerant creaturas humanas: nos autem nullos
ministros Ecclesiasticos agnoscimus, praeter illos quos Christus instituit and
Ecclesiae in Scrip^^ris commendavit Dr. Ames Bellar. Enervat. T. 2. l. 3. c. 3.
p. 108.
Church, as Ostiarius, the Door keeper, Lector, the Reader, Exorcista, the
Exorcist or Conjurer, Acoly^kus a Clerk or Waiter upon the Bishop or Priest; or
Subdiaconus, a Subdeacon; Diaconus, a Deacon; Sacerdos a Priest: Of which
orders (as they call them) only two, the Canons (as the Master of the Sentences
says. Sent. 4. Did. 24.) think are sacred Orders, because the Primitive
Church, so far as they can read, had only these two, viz. the order of
Deaconship and Priesthood, and of these only we have the Apostles precept. And
because all the Schoolmen that write upon Peter Lombard, hold, that Bishops are
not an order Bonavent. in Sen. 4. Did. 24. q. 3. a. 2. Aureolus in Sen. 4. d.
24 q. 1. a. 2. Omnis forma ex quo est in actu, etc. Every form in as much as it
is in act, has power to communicate it self in the same kind; therefore every
Priest has power to celebrate orders, why then do they not celebrate them?
because their power is hindered by the Decree of the Church, whereupon when a
Bishop is made, there is not given unto him any new power, but the former
power, being hindered, is set at liberty; as a man when the act of reason is
hindered, and the impediment is removed, there is not given unto him a new soul.
And there he says, that Episcopatus is not a superior order is plain, because
it has no superior act, as it is distinguished against Priesthood, which is
apparent, because the act of a Bishop as it differs from Priesthood (...) to
or dain, and the act of a Priest is to consecrate the Body of Christ, i. e. to
consecrate and administer the Sacrament.
distinct from preaching Presbyters, and that the order of Priesthood is the
highest and perfectest order, and that a preaching Presbyter may by virtue of
his order do all that a Bishop can do in the Church, were he not restrained by
the Bishop or Church. And none that I find among the Papists. but Jesuits and
the Spaniards in the Council of Trent, held or hold that Bishops are by divine
right ^n order of Church Officers distinct from and superior to preaching
Presbyters, but only that they are a degree or dignity of Presbyters, and that
by humane institution, if any way; I shall not lay that to their charge, though
the Jesuitical party endeavored what they could at the Council of Trent to
carry it in those very terms, as may be seen in the History of the Council of
Trent, B. 7.

Yet Festus Hommius says, that the Apostolic and truly Primitive Church was
altogether ignorant both of the names and functions of Popes, Patriarchs,
Archbishops, Metropolitans, Arch-presbyters, Archdeacons, Suffragans, A. B.
Usher says, That new Ministeries are forbidden in the second Commandment. Sum
of Christ. Religion, p. 222. And Mr. Perkins in his order of Causes, c. 21. p.
62. says, That in the second Commandment is forbidden the Romish Hierarchy
from the Parrator to the Pope.
Abbots, Priors, Monks, Canons, Deans, Prebends, Vicars, Sacrificers, Priests,
and the like, as they are now used in the Papacy. Disp. 2^. T. 5. p. 122.

What are those Sects of Monks and Friars, of which there are many Orders, as
Carmelites, Franciscans, so called from St. Francis, Dominicans, so called from
St. Dominick, Augustines, so called from St. Augustine; and Jesuits, which
Order Ignatius Loyola the founder, got confirmed by the Popes of Rome, (whose
creatures and vassals now they are in the Church of Rome) but Pharisaical
Sects, all studious of the Popes Decrees, and observant of his commands, though
never so superstitious, idolatrous, abominable and wicked, and contrary to Gods
Law, as the old Pharisees were of the Traditions of the Elders, the latter
swearing to him blind obedience, all making a show of Religion, but under the
pretense thereof devour widows houses; they garnish and visit the Sepulchers of
the Martyrs, but shed the blood of Christ's most faithful Ministers and members;
who observe the traditions and commands of the Pope, but make void the
commandments of God, Mat. 15. Mat. 23. I know not any men under heaven more
like the old Pharisees than these creatures of Antichrist in the Church of Rome
are; their Doctrines and doings declare them his Formalists, who have it may be
a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, who make these latter times
to be very perilous, 2 Timothy 3.

3. That he challenges Princely dominion over the Church of Christ, and
people, and Nations, needs no proof. Three Popes of Rome successively forged
and pleaded a forged Decree for the Pope of Rome's Supremacy; his trampling
upon Emperors and Kings, making them to kiss his Toe, hold his Stirrup,
deposing of them, and making others; making what Laws he pleases; dispensing
with, and making void Gods Laws as he pleases, releasing subjects of their
allegiance to their lawful and godly Princes, and commanding them to rebel
against, dethrone and destroy them, and their most Christian and loyal
Subjects. In a word, he exalts himself above all that is called God, or that
is worshipped, 2 These. 2. 4. which is one great mark of Antichrist.

4. That his usurped authority has no good ground in holy Scripture, but is
expressly forbidden by our blessed Lord and Savior, Mat. 20 25, 26. But Jesus
called them, (i. e. his Disciples unto him) and said, ye know that the Princes
of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them; and they that are great, exercise
authority upon them, but it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be
chief among you, let him be your servant. Even as the son of man came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many, Luke
22. 25. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Nether as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being
ensamples to the flock. Neither in those places of Scripture where Christ's
Ecclesiastical Orders of Church Officers are set down, is there any mention of
an Universal Bishop, as 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. Peter the Apostle
disclaims this Princely Monarchy and Supremacy, when he called himself, the
Elders of the Churches Fellow Presbyter, and forbid them to Lord it over Gods
heritage, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. Cyprian in his Epistles to several Popes of Rome,
calls them brothers. Jerome also writing to the Pope of Rome, tells him, and
proves it too, that by divine right a Bishop and a Presbyter is the same, Act.
20. 17, 28. Phil. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. Ephesians. 4. 11. in his Epistle
ad Oceanum, that with the ancient Fathers, Bishops and Presbyters were all one.
And adversus Lucifera nos, he says, that a Bishops preferment was not by
necessity of Gods Law, but granted to him by the Church, to honor him withal.
In his Epistle ad Evagrium, handling this question at large, he says, Who can
endure his foolishness that preferred Deacons before Priests, that is Bishops,
seeing the Apostle plainly teaches, that a Bishop and a Presbyter are all one?
And for proof he alleges, Tit. 1. 5. Act. 20. 17. 28. Phil. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 5.
1, 2. Ephesians. 4. 11. And of this judgment also was St. Augustine, Chrysostom,
Beda, Oecumenius, Sedulius, Primasius, Theophilact, Theodoret, Anselm, Ambrose,
John Wickliff, Thom. Walden, Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Oecolampadius,
Melancthon, John Lambert Martyr, Bishop Hooper, Bishop Bale, Mr. Tindal Martyr,
Musculus. Zanchius, Bullinger, Gualter, Chemnitius, Danaeus, Chamier, Junius,
John Bradford M^rtyr, Dr. H^mphry, Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Hollard, Professors of
Divinity at Oxford, Bishop This is Bishop Jewel's argument against the Pope, in
his Def. of his Apology.
Jewel, Bishop Morton, Dr. Whitaker, Mr. Cartwright, Dr. Willet, Amandus
Polauus* Michael Medina among the Papists, and many more that write upon the
Sentences, many of which may be seen in Mr. Masons defense of Ordination by
Presbyters in the Reformed Churches where there are no Diocesan Bishops.

5. That he produces Antichristian Antichristianism was covered for a long
time under the Cloak of Orthodoxy, and Ceremonial indifferency, says Mr.
Tomson, a Bishops Chaplain, in his Antichrist arraigned, p. 85.
fruits, practices and doctrines, appears by his abominable pride,
superstition, Idolatrous worships, pretended miracles, and lying wonders, by
his Council of Trent, wherein he Decrees, That men's persons are justified
before God by their own good works, and all the errors before confuted, denying
justification of men's persons before God by faith alone; which Errors he
labors to maintain by his Creatures, as Bellarmine, Stapleton, Harding,
Cornelius a Lapide, and others, especially by the Jesuits, and also introdu^ing
his Traditions, and Apocryphal Scriptures, in which are many things directly
contrary to Gods word, and Christ's interest; and upon these and some other
accounts did our Church of England in King Edward the sixth his reign, pray in
her Litany thus, From the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and his detestable
enormities, good Lord deliver us.

6. That he is the Babylonical Beast, that has two horns like a lamb, and
speaks as a dragon: That is, he professes the innocence of Christ, the Lamb of
God, but speaks and acts like a Dragon; he utters blasphemous speeches,
thunders out cruel and unjust Excommunications against Christ's servants, and
venteth and maintains Doctrines of Devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy,
having his conscience seared with an hot iron; forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with
thanksgiving 1 Timothy 4. (...), 2, 3.
of them which believe and know the truth. The t^^ horned beast by his
Ecclesiastical and Temporal power, pretending Orthodoxy, and Ceremonial
indifferency, decency and order, and Apostolical traditions, better adorning
and promoting Christianity, restored the Image of the old Pagan Beast; that is,
under these and some other pretenses restored idolatry and tyranny again into
the Roman Empire, and persecution against the true Church of Christ.

The two Horned Beast in the 13th of the Revelations is, say some, the same
with the great Whore, arrayed in purple, and scarlet, that (...) a golden cup
in her hand, full of all abominations and filthiness of her fornication, upon
whose forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the great, the mother of
harlots, and abominations of the earth, in the 17th of the Revelations. But I
humbly conceive with submission to better judgments, that if this do not intend
some other Beast like the great Whore of Rome, as I fear it does; then the
Whore or Church of Rome, is in the 13th Chapter described by her Head, and
principal ^^mbers chiefly, because Horns signify Powers. And in the 17th
Chapter she is described as taking in not oaly the Head and Cardinals, but the
whole Hierarchy, which rides upon the Roman Empire* that is, rules it, is a man
does that rides upon an horse, and is carried, supported and maintained by it.
There is no person or persons to whom the proper ^^^ks of the Babylonical
Beast, or Antichrist, does so properly and truly agree, as to the Pope or Popes
of Rome, with the Popish Hierarchy and Clergy.

The Woman or great Whore, that is the Church of Rome with her Beast with two
Horns, Revel. 13. is in Revel. 17. described,

1. Generally: 1. That she is a great Whore, that is an abominably Idolatrous
The Church of Rome is an Idolatrous Church, an Harlot, as the Scripture calls
her; so says our Church, Homily against the peril of Idolatry, Part 3. p 69.
Church. 2. That she sits upon many waters; that is, that she rules many
people, v. 1, 15. 3. That the Kings of the earth have committed fornication
with her, and the inhabiters of the earth been made drunk with the wine of her
fornication; that is, with her Idolatries, v. 2.

2. More particularly, and thus: 1. More obscurely. 1. By her rule and
government. She sits upon a scarlet colored beast, full of the names of
blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns; that is, the whole Roman Empire as
Idolatrous, with a Pagan Antichristian Idolatry; that is, she had the The
Emperor of Germany is the Popes Advocate, sworn to defend the Pope and Church
of Rome. The Pope makes him swear to defend the Church of Rome, to banish
Heretics, and to have no company with the wicked; to maintain by all means
possible the dignity of the Bishop of Rome, and all privileges granted to the
Church of Rome, as Sleiden ^hews in his Commentaries, l. 2* (...). 2^, 25, 26.
rule and government, she turned him, she curbed him, she spurred him, she made
him do what she would for the upholding of her self, for the maintaining and
propagating of her false Doctrine and worship, and caused him to make War and
Laws against those that would not obey her Decrees, and submit to her power;
that is, she guided and exercised an Imperial powerful, bloody, and blasphemous
enemy to Christ and his Church, v. 3.

2. By her pompous and whorish apparel, and ornaments, and the wo^^ was arrayed
in purple, and scarlet color, and decked Homil. against the peril of Idolatry,
p. 69. to be seen in Article 15. p. (...) hujus.
with gold and precious stone, and pearls; that is, was a very proud and
imperious, and bloody Whore. And so is the Pope, and so are his Cardinals
arrayed.

3. By her enticing and intoxicating cup, wherewith she allures and prepares
her foolish lovers to spiritual fornication, that is, to Idolatry and falseness
to Jesus Christ, and his Interests. Having a But may it not be understood and
intended of her specious pretenses of Orthodoxy, devotion, decency, and order,
with which she induces her lovers to drink of her abominable cup, to swallow
her Heterodoxies, Superstitions, and Usurpations, and Idolatries?
golden cup in her hand, full of abominations and filthiness of her
fornication. The golden cup (says Pareus upon the place) are the Popes golden
titles wherewith he has hitherto commended to the world the (...) of his
fornication: viz. Pope, holy Father, Father of Fathers, Pastor of Pastors, his
Holiness, Christ's Vicar, S^^ Peter's Successor, etc. It refers literally to the
Popes triple Crown, and rich Cope* glittering with pearls and precious stones,
and to his Cardinals rich robes, says Dr. H. More.

4. By her Name, as Whore, v. 5. and upon her forehead was her name written,
Mystery, Babylon the Which implies, as Mr. Mede in his Comment upon Revel. 14.
that there may be, and are other little Babylons, petty Harlots, with whom the
inhabitants subject to each of them may be defiled with spiritual adultery, (i.
e.) Idolatry.
great, the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth. Which is an
allusion to impudent and notorious Whores, who had their names, not only
written upon their cells to be known at home, but also upon their foreheads to
be known abroad too, as Seneca Controvers. 2. l. 1. and Tertullian, Lib. de
pudicitia, plainly show; and such an one is the Pope and his Church of Rome,
she is not Babylon Literal, but Mystical; that is, she is a very impudent and
notorious Idolater; and the mother, that is the conceiver, the bringer forth,
and the nourisher of all Idolatries and Idols in the world; and the word
mystery shows that it cannot be understood of Rome-Pagan. as some Papists would
have it, but must be understood of Rome-Christian in profession, as
Idolatrizing with Christian objects. And one reason is, because this beast
comes after (...), the other; that is, after the Christian Emperor, and is the
last; for it goes into perdition, Revel. 17. 8, 10, 11.

5. By her extreme cruelties, barbarities, and bloody tyrannies, and
persecutions, murders, and detestable enormities. Revel. 17. 6. And I saw a
woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs
of Jesus. And this has been abundantly manifested in the Popes of Rome, and
their agents, whom they rid, ruled and spurred on to most bloody and cruel
murdering of the Saints of Jesus, under the names of Waldenses, Albigenses,
Wicklivists, Hussits, Lutherans, Calvinists, Hugonots, Puritans, and other
names, condemned and destroyed by the Pope of Rome's authority, instigation or
approbation, as Heretics or Schismatics, because they would not drink of the
Church of Rome's whoring cup. Of which you may read in Mr. Fox his Books of
Martyrs, Mr Fuller's Holy War, Sleiden's Commentaries, the Supplement to Philip
de Comines History, where is described Papists bloody and treacherous murdering
of thousands of Protestants in Paris, and the parts adjoining; and the
relations of the bloody and barbarous Massacres in Ireland, and the Valleys of
Piedmont, promoted by the Pope, and acted by Papists. Reverend Dr. Prideaux in
his Sermon entitled, Gowries Conspiracy, upon 2 Samuel 20. 1. p. 13. says thus:
Let us depend upon it, as long as there is a Pope and a Devil, Princes
professing the Gospel shall never be secured from Gowries and Garnets. And a
little after that, he says thus: I have gleaned these few scatterings by the
way out of their own Doctrines, to prove, that their Doctrine directly
warranteth Treason, let the Traitors be what they will; and that none can be an
absolute Papist, but if he thoroughly understand himself, and live under a
Christian Prince, that has renounced the Popes authority, must needs, being
put to it, be an absolute Traitor. No persons under heaven have been more
bloody and cruel to sincere Professors of pure Christianity, than the Popes of
Rome, and Papists; that they are not still the same, we have no good reason to
believe, but more cause to take heed of them.

2. She is described more plainly: 1. By the Beast that carries her, on which
she rides, that is the Roman Empire, as it is Idolatrous with a new kind of
Idolatry, that is with a Pagano-Christian, or Papal Idolatry, v. 8. The Beast
that thou saw was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit,
and go into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder (whose
names were not written in the book of life from the foundation of the world)
when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is. This may seem to
some to be a more obscure description of the Whore than the former; but you
must know, that this is a description of the Roman Empire not simply according
to its substance and polity; but formally, as respecting the quondam Church of
Christ, as Idolatrous again, but with a new form of Idolatry, worshipping the
true God not after his prescribed way, but its own; and the Saints of Jesus
with such kind of worship, as the Pagans worshipped their Ethnic Deities. It Is
a representation of the Roman Empire degenerating from pure Christianity, into
Paganizing or Idolatrizing Christianity, which though it profess Christianity
It Is said of Pope Gregory the seventh, thus, Qui titulo Christi negotiura
Antichristi agitat, That under the title of Christ he does the work of
Antichrist, as Aventin. Annal. Boior, l. 5. p. 455. speaks.
, yet bears the Image of the ancient Pagan Idolatrous Empire. The Image of the
beast that was, and is not, and yet is, exactly answer the one the other, and
differ only in Objects, but not in form of Worship. Concerning which Empire,
Saint John foretold, it might and would be said and found ^o be true, when the
Woman, that is the Pope and his Hierarchy, shall sit upon it and rule it, and
be carried and supported by it; it was, and is not, and yet is. The meaning of
which in short is this: The Roman Empire was Idolatrous and against Christ in
all her six first Heads, Kings, Consul^ Dictators, Decemviri, Tribunes, and
Pagan Caesar's, or Emperors. The Empire was then purely Paganly Idolatrous, it
Worshipped Heathen gods and goddesses, as Jupiter, Mars, Saturn, Venus, Ju^^,
Bacchus. etc. (as St. Augustine shows in his Book of the City of God) which
they looked upon as Deities, and worshipped their Images, or rather by, in, or
through their Images, they worshipped them, as Papists now worship God by
Images, Crucifixes, Crosses, Altars, etc. And is not, that is, purely Paganly
Idolatrous as 'twas before; for the object is Christian. And yet is, that is is
really Idolatrous in another form, that is, it is Papally Idolatrous, that is,
it is overrun and overruled with Pagano-Christian Idolatry, as Dr. More calls
it. Whereas the Empire in her first six Heads or forms of Governmen^^ did
Idolatrize by worshipping those Heathen men, and their Ghosts and Images, and
Altars, whom they accounted excellent, and hated those that were against their
Idolatries and Superstitions, is now in this state or condition under the
seventh and last Head overrun and overruled with Pagano-Christian Idolatry,
it worshippeth the true God in, by, and through Images, it worshippeth Saints
departed this life, and Angels, Altars, Crosses and Relics, and Ordinances of
God; and it hates and persecuteth the undefiled followers of Jesus Christ, who
will not defile themselves with women, will not drink of the Golden cup of
fornication of the great Whore of Rome, or of any of her sister Churches, but
keep themselves close to Christ's pure worship and interests, and follow the
Lamb wheresoever he goes. And this Beast (as thus Idolatrous) shall ascend out
of the bottomless pit, that is, as some will have it, out of the Sea, Revel.
13. 1. which is as a bottomless pit for multitude of people, Revel, 17. 15. or
(as most will have it) out of hell, because it is said, Revel. 13. 2. that the
Dragon, that is the Devil, the Angel of the bottomless pit, Hell, Revel. 9. 11.
Revel. 16. 13. as well as the old bloody Pagan Emperors, gave him his seat,
his power and authority, and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder after,
that is, follow this Idolatrous Beast, and submit to, and practice his
Idolatrous Worships. The generality of Inhabitants, that is, reprobates only,
whose names are not written in Gods book of life, shall admire and follow this
beast; but none of Gods Elect will totally and finally follow this filthy
Beast, that is thus ridden and spurred to Idolatry.

And he shall go into perdition: as he is guided by the son of perdition,
Antichrist, 2 These. 2. 3. and ascended from the bottomless pit of Hell, Revel.
9, 11. Revel. 13. 2. 2 These. 2 9. the place of perdition; so he shall go into
perdition; he shall be destroyed as Idolatrous, and be cast into everlasting
perdition for his Idolatries, and for his being ruled by the Woman, the Pope,
and Hierarchy, or Church of Rome, and for persecuting and destroying of the
faithful followers of Jesus Christ, Revel. 19. 20. Revel. 21. 8.

2. This Beast which the Woman rides, is described by the place where he sits,
by his seat which the Devil gave him, Revel. 13. 2. And this is said to be the
place where the Woman, that is where the Pope and his Hierarchy sit too, Revel.
17. 9. The seven heads are seven mountains on which the woman sits, that is,
Rome, for Rome was the ancient seat of the first six Heads of the Roman Empire;
and was sometimes the seat of the Roman Emperors, as thus Idolatrizing with a
new kind of Idolatry, and it is now the seat of the Pope of Rome, and of his
Hierarchy. Now Rome is known to be built upon seven hills, which are these,
viz. Palatinus, Capitolinus, Quirinalis, Caelius, Esquilinus, Viminalis,
Aventinus. Septem urbs alta jugis toti quae praeside^ orbi: The City mounting
on seven Hills, and overruling the whole Earth. There Is no City but Rome that
was built upon seven Hills, that did in St. John's time, reign over the Kings
and inhabitants of the earth. Therefore this description most properly
belongs to the City of Rome, Revel. 17. ult. And the seven heads do not only
signify bi^^s, on which the chief City or seat of the Emperor (in St. John's
tim^ and long after) of the Empire was built, and which shall at this time of
the state of the Empire be the seat of the Woman, that is of the Pope and his
Idolatrous Hierarchy; but it also signifies seve^ Kings.

3. This Beast is described by the several sorts of Government that that City
built on seve^^ Hills in St. John' time, and the Empire had been, then was, and
afterward was to be subject unto; v. 10. T^^ are seven Kings, that is, sorts of
Governments; five are fallen, viz. Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemviri,
Tribunes. And one is, viz. the Pagan Caesar's or Emperors. And the other is not
yet come, that is, the purely Christian Emperor, who shall bring the Empire
into (...) pure state of Christianity, as compared to what it was in some of
the former heads, and especially shall be in the last head, who shall worship
God not after the manner of the Heathens that went before him, nor of Papists
that follow after him; but purely without such Pagan inventions as his
Predecessors used, or such Popish inventions as his Successors used after him,
and in whose time the Church shall not be persecuted for following the Lamb
wholly, and keeping her self a pure Virgin for her beloved Husband Christ. And
this Christian Emperor, or form of Government is called another, because in
form of Ecclesiastical Government, and as referred to the Church of Christ, it
was specifically different from those that went before him, and that which
followed after him. This Christian Government was not come in St. John's time,
but it came long after, and began in our Constantine's time, and continued but
a short time. And this Christian Emperor caused Pagan Idolatry and Persecution
for Christianity to cease, and is therefore said to wound the former beast or
head to death, that is as Idolatrous and persecuting, Revel. 13. 3. And one of
his heads was as it were wounded to death; to wit, the sixth head: but this
continued but a little while; for the old Dragon seeing himself cast out into
the earth, resolved to raise up persecution again, against the Church of
Christ, by the Church, under the fair and specious pretenses of honoring God
and his servants, and under the notion of Orthodoxy, decency and order, to
bring into the Church or Emp^re, error, superstition and Idolatry, and thereby
really dishonor God, deface his worship, and raise up persecution against Gods
Church. And to this end he instigated the two-horned beast to set up a new form
of Idolatry, viz. worshipping God in, by, or through Images and devices of
their own, and worshipping Gods ordinances and servants, and all under the
notion of honoring God and Christ, and beautifying his worship, and promoting
his service; and to compass this, brought in a new persecution against the true
members of Jesus Christ, that would not make an image to the beast that had the
wound; that is, because they would not yield to their innovations, errors,
Idolatries and superstitions, and deal falsely with Christ, and dishonor his
Saints, as he and his superstitious, idolatrous, erroneous, ambitious and
covetous Clergy did and do, and will do, till they go to their place. To this
end he sets up Emperors and Kings after his own hearts desire, Idolatrous,
blasphemous and cruel, against Christ's Church in the Empire, which is here
called the beast that was, and is ^ot, even he is the eight; that is, he is the
eight King in regard of one Christian, besides the six Pagan heads; and is of
the seven Idolatrous, ^^d goes into perdition. He is called the eight a^ the
Christian Emperor is taken in, because he succeeds him too, and has something
of him, profession of the Christian Faith, of the Worship of the true God; but
under the pretense and notion of honoring God and his servants, and
maintaining his truth, and promoting his service, he brings into the Empire,
error, heresy, blasphemy, idolatry, and ^^tichristianism and persecution, and
destroys and persecutes that which he pretends to set up and uphold; and
therefore he is the seventh and* last Idolatrous head that shall be in the
Empire, that is, the last form of Government that shall be erroneous,
Idolatrous and blasphemous. For he goes into perdition, which notes his utter
ruin* and final overthrow, as Idolatrous and persecutive of true Christianity,
and the ^xtirpation of Idolatry out of it.

4. This Beast is described by its parts or powers, into which it is divided:
v. 12. The ten horns which thou saw are ten Kings, which have received no
Kingdom as yet: that is in St. John's time, nor till the Empire was divided and
broken into parts, or until it became, or was to become again a Beast,
Idolatrous and pernicious to Christ and his loyal followers; but re^eive power
as Kings one hour; that is, (...) little while; with the beast, that is, with
the beast whose name is, [was, and is not, and yet is,] that is, the beast
under the seventh and last head.

5. This ten* horned beast is described by its unity and activity: 1. By its
unity to help this Idolatrous, blasphemous and obnoxious beast on* whom the
Pope and his Hierarchy ride. v. 13. These have one mind, and shall give up
their power and strength unto the beast. These ten Kings shall be of one mind
in the main for matters of Religion; that is, shall be of the Religion of the
Empire; that is, of the Pagano-Christian; or, if you will, the mungrel
Samaritan Religion, whereby the Empire had again become a beast. And shall give
their power and strength; that is, shall be ready by their authority, and by
force of arms, and Vide King James his Paraphrase upon the place.
by what other means they can, to maintain the beast in its beastly Idolatrous
condition, blasphemies, superstitions and persecutions; or else shall give the
Idolatrizing Emperor (which is the head of this beast) the aid or assistance
of their armies or forces (if need so require) against all opposers of this
mungrel Religion. For the Emperor is looked upon as The Emperor of Germany,
who has a show of the old Emperors, is called and sworn to be the Popes
Advocate, and to defend him, as may be seen in his Oath when he is made
Emperor. Sleid. Com. l. 1. f. 25, etc.
the chief Champion or Generalissimo of all the Papal forces, and these ten
Kings may be conceived to be the ^or^^ of his head, as coming into a kind of
subordination and combination with him, in making War against the Lamb. But
that power which influenceth all, is the Whore of Rome, the Pope and his
Hierachy, that rides the beast. And truly when the head of this gr^^ Whore
(says a learned Doctor) is once found to be so big as to out-top the Secular
heads of the Empire, and both pretends to and makes use of that boasted jus
utrinsque gladii, the right of both Swords, that is, so soon as the Pope is
found to act the Caesar, as well as the Universal Patriarch, there is no
incongruity to allow him represented in two places (as many learned men do) as
well as he sustains two parts, and conceive him typified (...) well in the last
head of the beast, as in the costly adorned head of the gr^^ whore. Thus the
reverend Doctor. And indeed I see not but the whole description in the 13th
Chapter, as well as that in the 17th Chapter of the Revelations, may truly and
properly be attributed to the two-horned beast, and the Woman; for whatsoever
the ten* horned beast is said to do, he does it by the direction, instigation*
and approbation of the two-horned beast and Woman. Quod quis per alium facit,
per se ipsum facere videtur. The murder of Vriah, though it was effected by the
Ammonites, yet it is charged upon King David, who gave direction for it to his
General Joab, and he is guilty of it too, for following of David's unjust
command, 2 Samuel 12. 9. Thou have killed Vriah the Hitti^e with the sword, and
have slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon. So here, what the
tenhorned beast is said to do, may be well charged upon the Church of Rome, the
Pope and his Hierarchy, because he causes the earth, and them which dwell
therein, to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed, and he
deceives them that dwell on the earth by the means of these miracles which he
had power to do in the sight of the beast, Rev. 13. 12, 14. Rev. 19. 20. And
therefore is the blood of the Prophets, and of all the Saints, and of them that
were slain upon the earth for Religion, said to be found in her, Rome, Revel.
18. 24.

2. Their activity, v. 14. These shall make war with the Lamb. In Rev. 13. 7.
it is said, That this ten-horned beast shall make war with the Saints, and
overcome them. But here in Revel. 17. 14. he makes war with Christ, and is
overcome by him, for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are
with him, are called, and faithful, and chosen. It Is true, that they that make
war against Christ's Saints, do make war against Christ, Act 9 4 Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? Those Kings that make war against and persecute Christ's
Saints, as such, do make war against and persecute Christ himself, and so he
takes it, and will reward it. That this ten-horned beast is said to overcome
the Saints, and yet to be overcome by Christ, may be both true of the same
beast; for he did overcome the Saints at first, but he is, or shall be overcome
by Christ, and his called, chosen and faithful Soldiers at last; and therefore
it is said. That he that leade^h into captivity shall go into captivity; he that
kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword; here is the patience and
faith of the Saints, to suffer in the mean time, and to believe and wait for
the performance of this promise, Rev. 13. 10.

2. The Whore is described more plainly by her large Dominion, by the people
upon whom she sits, called in the first verse, many waters, which is
interpreted by the Angel, v. 15. And he says u^^o, the waters which thou
saw, where the whore sits, are people, and multitudes, and nations, and
tongues; which is a manifest description of the Roman Empire, which consisted
of many People, and Nations, and Tongues; and upon these as well as upon the
ten-horned beast, or chief secular rulers, did the great Whore of Rome sit,
that is, reign and rule, prick on, and stir up to Superstition, Idolatry, and
Persecution against Christ's Church. And therefore it is said, That the Kings of
the earth, that is of the Empire, or earthly Church, and the inhabitants of the
earth have committed fornication, and been made drunk with the wine of her
fornication, Revel. 17. 2. she claims universal power over all this Terrestial
world.

3. This great Whore is described by her destruction. And that 1. By the A
learned man by ten Kings understands their Kingdoms, or people, who against the
minds of their Kings will thus destroy the great whore. Antic. p. 23. Revel.
18. 9.
instruments of her ruin, and they are the ten horns, or the ten Kings unto
whom the Roman Empire was divided; v. 16. And the ten horns which thou saw
upon the beast, these shall hate the whore, etc.

2. By the degrees of her destruction, these ten Kings shall hate the whore,
and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her
with fire.

1. They shall hate the whore of Rome, the Pope, his Cardinals, Hierarchy and
Clergy, with whom they have committed spiritual fornication; whereas before
they loved her, while the virtue of her intoxicating cup lasted; but now seeing
their own folly, and her cunning craftiness, selfishness, pride, covetousness,
luxury, filthiness, hypocrisy, and cruelty, that her whole Government,
Religion, Worship, pompous Ceremonies, Purgatory, Indulgences, Excommunions,
Jubilees, Processions, Doctrines of the Popes Infallibility and Supremacy,
Justification of men's persons before God by their own good works, traditions,
merits, holiness of times, places, Churches, Altars, Vestments, Copes, Hats,
Palls, Surplices, Crosses, Spittle, Cream, Salt, Holy Water, Auricular
confession of sins, worshipping of Saints departed, Angels, Images, Relics of
Saints, kissing of the Popes Toe, of the Tail of the Ass on which Christ rode,
adoring of the pretended Cross on which Christ was Crucified, bowing to the
East, setting up of Altars and Crucifixes, and Tapers on them, and bowing to
them as they do, baptizing of Bells, forbidding to Marry, but allowing of
Stews, dispensing with Oaths, incestuous Marriages, holding of Plurality of
Dignities, Benefices, with cure of souls, and causeless Non-residency, and many
more such Doctrines and practices, politic devices to uphold, enrich and
advance themselves, their relations and servants, and suppress the pure
Doctrine and Worship of Christ, and undo and destroy his most faithful servants
and sincere Worshippers: I say these Kings seeing these things, and many more,
clearly, their inordinate love is turned into well-guided hatred of her. They
hate her, that is, they separate from her, they avoid communion with her, they
cease to commit any spiritual fornication with her.

2. They make her desolate; they do not only forsake her themselves, but also
they cause their subjects to do so too, and that they do, by setting up in
their respective Kingdoms Gods pure worship and service, without her proper
ceremonies (which she calls Bellar. de effectibus Sacrament. l. 2. c. 3. a. 20.
badges and Aquinas, 12^. q. 103. a. 4. O.
professions of her Religion) and Gods pure word without her Legends,
Apocriphals, and Traditions.

3. They make her naked, which they do both by words and deeds.

1. By words, by public Preaching, Confessions, and Writings, declaring and
demonstrating her abominable filthiness, that she may be detested by others.

2. By deeds, by withdrawing her gold, silver, precious stones, first fruits,
Peter Pence, Abbeys, Friories, Commendams, Benefices, Dignities and Revenues
from her, which were wont to be given her, which the Whore by her pious frauds,
cunning craftiness got from the Ancestors of Kings and deluded people.

4. They shall eat her flesh, which is to be understood not carnally, but
mystically, these Kings shall not prove Canibals, and corporally with their
teeth eat the flesh that is upon the bones of the great Whore of the Pope, and
his Cardinals, but they will retain either to their own proper use, or rather
for the maintenance of Gods pure Worship and Interests, those revenues which
were paid to the Whore, out of their Dominions as such, to the upholding of her
Pride and Idolatries, Superstitions, Luxuries and Bawds; and they shall
persecute her, which in Scripture Language, is eating of ones flesh, Job 19.
22. Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh? Psalm.
27. 2. When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes came upon me to eat up my
flesh, they stumbled and fell. Upon which words St. Augustine says thus,
Carnes nostras manducant, qui nos persequuntur, they that persecute us, do eat
our flesh.

5. They shall burn her with fire; that is, they shall consume and destroy her
as she is a Whore, that is, as she is an Idolatrous, false, and Antichristian
Church; but whether they shall go to Rome her seat, and burn that with material
fire in order to the destruction of this Mystical Babylon, is not certain; yet
I dare not positively determine against it, because all I have read, except
one, are for it. But this is certain, that they shall be zealous against her,
and against her false Doctrine, and false Worship, and her cunning undermining
of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the pure Worship of Christ, and the true
interests and ends of Christianity; and to that end, countenance, maintain and
protect, and promote true and pure Gospel Worship and Doctrine, and the
assertors thereof, and discountenance and suppress such persons as labor by
power or policy to advance Antichristian Doctrines, practices and interests;
for they know that they have crafty, treacherous, cruel, powerful and malicious
enemies to deal with, Rev. 16. 13, 14. And I saw three unclean spirits like
frogs; come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the Cardinals, Bishops,
Jesuits.
mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet. For they are
the spirits of Devils working miracles, which go forth unto the Kings of the
earth, and of the whole world to gather them to the battle of the great day of
God Almighty.

3. By the principal Author of her destruction, v. 17. And God shall put it
into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree and give their Kingdom unto
the beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled. Hence some learned men
have conceived, that those Kings, at least some of them that have hated the
great Whore, and made her desolate and naked, and have eaten her flesh, but
have not burnt her with fire, that is, have not utterly consumed her
Idolatries, false Doctrines, Hierarchy, Vide King James his Paraphrase upon
Revel. 17. p. 56. Revel. 18. 9.
Ceremonies, Images, Altars, Laws, etc. but have retained them upon such
grounds as may easily bring them in love again with the great Whore, shall
again give up their power and strength, and Kingdoms to the beast, the great
Whore rides, and consequently to her and her abominations, that have been
rejected; and the industrious actings of some men to reconcile the Greek and
Protestant Churches to the Church of Rome, have increased the fear of that
opinion. Now what God will do, I know not; but I know that men's not receiving
the love of the truth, and their having pleasure in unrighteousness, is a just
and provoking cause thereof, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. But I humbly conceive, that
though these words are placed immediately after the degrees of the great Whores
destruction, yet they do not necessarily imply, that they shall agree again to
give up their Kingdoms to the beast, and so to the great Whore again, but they
are an assurance that God will make the ten horns or Kings, Viis and modis,
some one and some another way instrumental to destroy the great Whore, as he
has promised. And that because, as what they did before in unanimously
agreeing to give up their power and strength to the beast, proceeded from God
in his wise and wonderful Providence, for the fulfilling of his words by his
Prophets, Dan. 7. 8, 21, 22, 25, 28. As he put it into their hearts to fulfill
his will, and to agree to give their Kingdoms to the beast to uphold Idolatry,
superstition, heresy, and the Whores tyrannies, and this in just judgment
against them; so now he who has the hearts of Kings in his hands, will
alienate their hearts from the great Whore, and incline their wills to agree to
hate her, and to make her desolate and naked, and to eat her flesh, and to burn
her with fire. God is able to do it, and he will do it in his appointed time,
Dan. 7. 25. Rev. 18. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. For strong is the Lord, who judges her.

4. Lastly, the great Whore is described most plainly by her seat, or chief
place of residence, and therein Society and Government, v. 18. and that is
Rome. And the woman which thou saw is that great city which reigns over
the Kings of the earth. The Angel saw that there might be some that would in
time suggest, that other Cities were built upon seven Hills (as Bishop
Mountague in favor (some think) of the great Whore, says Constantinople is)
therefore prevents this Evasion, and says, that the City where the great Whore
of Babylon sits, is that great City [which did in St. John' s time reign over
the Kings of the earth,] he speaks of her in the present tense, which reigns
over the Kings of the earth. Now Constantinople was not then in being, as it is
now, and has been since; Constantine of Byzantium made it the Head of the
Oriental Empire, and enlarged it, and called it Constantinople, and it did not
reign then in St. John's time over the Kings of the earth, as Rome did, and
therefore it cannot be this great City. Rome did in St. John's time, and long
after, reign over the Kings of the earth, as Poets, Fathers Ribera, Bellarmine,
Cornel. a Lapide.
, and Papists themselves acknowledge; it is a shame for Protestants to question,
much more to deny it. But this Woman succeeds in that City and Polity to govern
it, and the whole Empire, as it is a beast. This Woman is not a singular
person, but a City or Polity, and society of men, governing in that great city
Rome, which in St. John's time did reign over the Kings of the earth, the whole
Empire. So now this great Whore there sits and rides the beast, the Empire, (at
least it did so) as Idolatrous* as in St. John's time, the Woman the great city
of Rome (not the walls, houses and streets, but) the citizens; and not every
one of them, but the Rulers, the Emperors, Senators and Officers ruled that
great city, reigned over it, and over the Kings of the earth; so now the Woman,
the great Whore, the Pope, the two-horned beast, and his Cardinals, and Clergy,
and Officers, reign (or at least did so) over the Kings of the earth, which is
ascribed to the whole Ciey, because the Head and Officers, and Rulers thereof
did, and do it.

And this Seat of this Babylonical beast, or great Whore, or Antichrist, may be
found in his number 666, as Dr. More in his Synopsis Apocalyptica relates; of
which he Synops. Apocalyp. l. 1. c. 15. Sec. 10. p. 314*
says, he has treated largely in his Mystery of Godliness, Book 5. C. 16.
Sec. 8. to which Book, and to Mr. Potter of the Number of the Beast, he refers
for fuller satisfaction. His Mystery of Godliness I have not seen, but I have
read Mr. Potter's Book of the Number of the Beast, Printed at Oxford, Ann.
1642, of which Book there were either but few Printed, or they were suddenly
bought up, that it is a hard matter to get one of them; of which Book I took
some scraps; of which, because of the scarcity of the Book. I shall make bold
to communicate some which are to my business in hand, and the rather, because,
the Book is so highly commended by learned Dr. Twiss, Mr. Mede, and Dr. More,
Revel. 13. 18. Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding count the Number
of the Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is 666.

The Mystery of the number 666 is to be found out by comparing it with the
number 144, to which this number 666 is as it were the aut^^numerus, and must
therefore be interpreted after the same manner, and in the same particulars
applied to the Synagogue of Antichrist, as the number 144 ought to be applied
to the Church of Christ.

Now the mystery of the number 144 (which is the number opposed to the number
666) consists in the square-root thereof, and and therefore the mystery of the
number 666 must be in the square-root thereof also. But now to find out the
true interpretation of this number 144, it is generally granted by all ancient
and latter Interpreters, that the chief, if not the only cause why this number
was chosen rather than any other number to be the measure of the wall of the
Celestial Jerusalem, Revel. 21. 17. is, because this number is raised and
built upon the number 12, which being multiplied into it self, produces the
square-number 144. For as this number 144 is raised and built upon the number
12 only, and cannot possibly admit of any other number to be the root and basis
of it; so neither can the Church of Christ admit of any other foundation than
that which is already laid by the 12 Apostles. As therefore this number 144 is
built upon 12 Unities, so is the Church of Christ built upon the 12 Apostles.
And as the number 12 is more conspicuous and remarkable in this number 144 than
any other number, because it measures not only the bottom or root, but the
sides and ranks of it also; so it is evident, that the number of 12 is more
conspicuous and remarkable in the Church of God than any other number
whatsoever. And hence it is, that this number 12 is repeated above 144 times in
the Scriptures, and is in them so often used, and in so many and so diverse
particulars applied by the Spirit of God to things appertaining to the Church,
that we cannot but acknowledge this number to be chosen, and as it were affected
by the Holy Ghost, rather than any other. And though the number 144 may truly
be said to be Gods number rather than any other numbers, because it
represents the figure of the City, and in general the form and structure of
the Church and Hierarchy thereof; yet it cannot so properly be called Gods
number, as the number 12, which almost in all material respects, is applicable
to the Church, and is used in the Scriptures always, as numerus certus pro
certo, and not as numerus certus pro incerto, in which sense it must needs be
granted that the number 144 does sig^^ifie and represent the Church in general.
And whereas the number 144 is no where mentioned in Scripture but in Revel. 21.
it must be granted, that it is not there to be the measure of the Wall (which
does in that place signify the spiritual building of Gods Church) because
there then were or at any time should be precisely. so many and no more
faithful Christians, or living stones built upon the 12 foundations there
named, but that we might learn thence, that how great or how little soever the
number of faithful Christians should be, yet they must be all built upon the
foundation of the 12 Apostles, as the number 144 is built upon 12 Unities. And
hence it is granted by Interpreters, that this number 144 was chosen to be the
measure of the Wall of the new Jerusalem, for this reason chiefly, (if not
only) because it is the only square-number which can be raised and built upon
12 Unities, as is clear to all those that have understanding to extract the
root of numbers.

As the number 12 was the measure, number, and foundation of the city, gates
and wall of the ancient and literal Jerusalem, and was in respect of the 12
Patriarchs the root from whence the 12 Tribes had their Original according to
the flesh; so the same number 12 should be the only conspicuous number in the
foundation and structure of the spiritual and new Jerusalem, in which the 12
Apostles are 12 spiritual fathers, answerable to the 12 Patriarchs, and are 12
foundations laid by our Savior Christ, upon which, and according to which
foundation (that is by multiplying of the Doctrine of the Apostles by (...)
self only) all the spiritual builders of Gods Church in the times (...) come,
ought to erect and square their buildings. And they are also placed at the 12
Gates as 12 angels to keep out (as it were with a two-edged sword) every thing
that defiles, and to admit into this Church by the gates of Baptism, committed
first and originally unto them, and prefigured by the 12 Oxen under the brazen
Sea, 1200 of every Tribe, that is all those faithful Christians and true
Israelites which can derive their spiritual Genealogy from the faith and
doctrine of the 12 Apostles. And this is without all question the true and
natural interpretation of the numbers and measures of the new Jerusalem, spoken
of Revel. 21. 16, 17, etc. The new Jerusalem spoken of Revel. 21. is the sAme
with Jerusalem spoken of in Ezekiel. 48. the Church militant not triumphant is
meant by it, as almost every line, and every word evidenceth, as not only Mr.
Potter and Forbs, and and other Protestants, but many Papists observe.

The number 144 is a square and perfect number, built and raised upon the
number 12; so the Church of Christ is a square and perfect building, built upon
the doctrine of the 12 Apostles.

It Is also true, that as the number 666 is neither a square nor perfect number,
nor built upon the number 12; so neither is the Romish Hierarch a square and
perfect building, neither is it built upon the doctrine of the (...) Apostles.
So Forbs and Potter, p. 44.

The number 666 is to be counted by extraction of the root, because the
opposite number 144 is so to be accounted To extract the square-root of a
number given, is to The root of a Number.
find out the greatest number, which being multiplied into it self, and having
the fractions added to the product, if there be any fractions remaining, makes
the fir^^ number. Now the square-root of the Beasts number 666, is the fatal
evil number 25, and the fractions remaining are 41. Prove this by multiplying
In short, that is the square-root of a number, which being multiplied by it
self, exactly makes the number given, or comes nearest to it, but does not
exceed it.
25 by it self 25 times, which makes 625, add the remaining 41, and you have
the just number 666.

As 12 is the greatest and least square-number which is or can be contained in
the number 144; so 25 is the greatest and least number which can be contained
in the number 666. It Is frequent in many Mathematical praxi, or Arithmetical
operations, to cast away and not to regard the fractions of numbers. If a An
Example.
Captain have 666 men under his command, and would reduce them to a
square-figure, which he would find to be 2541/51, and by that he would conclude
that he must of necessity take the number 25 to be the number of his ranks, and
the number of men in every rank, and no other number would serve his turn, and
the 41 odd men he must reject as unuseful if he will have his Army exactly
square; 25 is the root of the square-number without fractions, and of other
numbers with fractions added to it. Potter, 68. 25 is remarkable in the root of
666 two ways: 1. In that it is the only Cardinal number of the prime or Cardinal
Unities. 2. In that it is the only number of ordinal unities, or fractions, by
which that root can be by fewest figures most exactly expressed; and therefore
I conclude that this fatal number 25, is the number of Antichrist, opposed to
the number 12, and that in an higher and greater degree of opposition, than 666
is opposed to the number 144, seeing that number is most remarkably applicable
to the City and Hierarchy of Antichrist, and is chiefly intended by the number
666.

12 Is a good and a perfect number always taken in a good sense in Scripture.
So 25 is an unfortunate number in it self, and has been branded for an evil
and unluckie number, both by Profane and Sacred Writers, although they knew no
relation that it had either to Antichrist, or the number 666. The number 5 is a
fatal number, and all numbers ending in 5, or made by it, are evil. Jerome upon
Ezekiel. 11. says, that the 25 is never used in a good sense. Jerome and Lyra
upon Ezekiel. 11. say, that the 25 men mentioned there, that were at their Images,
do signify Apostates from Faith and Religion. John Huss on Ezekiel. 8. interprets
the 25 men which stood before the pictures, to be understood of the mystical
Whore. So Oecolampadius upon the place, it mystically and typically shows that
quintessence of impiety and malice, and Idolatry, which these latter times have
discovered in the Church of Rome. Petrus Bougus shows, that this number 25,
which does not only end in 5, but is made by the multiplication of 5 by 5, is
mysteriously evil. And let me add, that those that were to be trained up for
the service of the Tabernacle, were to pass that number before they were to be
admitted (except extraordinarily called), Numb. 8. 24. From 25 years old and
upward, they shall go in to wait upon the service of the Tabernacle.

As Antichrist is opposed to Christ, and as 666 is opposed to 144, so is 25
opposed to 12, so must those things which are chiefly to be measured and
numbered by this number 25 be correspondent on the one side, and in some sort
opposed to, or set against those things which are measured, numbered and
described by the number 12. For this cause is the Church-militant in Revel. 21.
measured, numbered, and described by these two numbers only, 144 and 12, that
there might be an express example in sacred Scripture, not only showing in
general, how the number 666 ought to be interpreted, but also leading us as it
were by the hand, to those particulars in which the root of the number ought
principally to be applied. As that Rome is answerable to Jerusalem, and the
Pope^^ Cardinals to Christ's Apostles.

1. As Jerusalem was truly Matter gremium and ostium omnium Ecclesiarum; so does
Rome falsely pretend her self to be. And so Rome really is the mother of all
spiritual whoredom and abominations, in respect of all those Churches which
have been seduced by her.

2. That the Popes Cardinals are answerable to Christ's Apostles; they style
themselves by way of eminency the Apostles Successors* they are the soul of the
Papacy, and the Pope accounts them parts of his own body, who with him make a
complete Corporation, and Mystical body, maintaining and upholding, and
representing all Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction.

1. They were instituted at Rome in the first foundation of the Papacy, by the
Pope, about the time of Constantine the Great, in imitation of our Savior
Jesus Christ, who did in the first most remarkable foundation of his Church
erect the College of Apostles at Jerusalem, giving them a name, prefixing their
number, and giving their office, as the Pope has done at Rome.

1. The name which Christ gave to his Disciples was to be called Apostles, Luke
6. 13. and the name which the Pope gave his best beloved Disciples, is to be
called Cardinals. For as Christ in his Church gave some to be Apostles, some
Teachers, some Prophets, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. so the Pope in the Romish
Church has given some to be called Cardinals, some Abbots, some Jesuits, some
Monks, some Friars, some Exorcists, some Acolytes, and some other titles and
dignities.

2. The first limited number which Christ gave to his Apostles, was according
to the number of the Gates and Tribes of Jerusalem; so the first limited and
prescribed number of Cardinals given by the Pope was according to the number of
the common Gates of Rome, and according to those divisions of the City and
people of Rome, which the Popes have made, answerable to the Tribes of
Jerusalem.

3. The office and commission which Christ gave to his Apostles, consisted in
three things.

1. The administration of Baptism was committed chiefly and originally to them,
and they were first commanded to go and baptize all Nations, and as it were by
the 12 Gates of their Baptism to bring all true Israelites into the spiritual
Jerusalem; so at the first institution of the Popes Cardinals, their office and
commission was chiefly to baptize, and they were fixed to certain Churches in
Rome, in which only Baptism was to be celebrated.

2. The Apostles were to preach the Gospel, and to plant Christian Religion in
all the world. So the Cardinals having quickly committed the celebration of
Baptism to others, employed themselves wholly to preach the Pope, and to plant
and propagate Popery, in all Kingdoms of the world.

3. Christ gave to his Apostles chief power to forgive and retain sins; so
likewise the Pope committed the chief care and dispensation of selling Pardons
and Indulgences to his Cardinals, saying to them, as Christ said to his
Apostles, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whose sins ye retain,
they are retained.

As the Apostles truly were and are the root and foundation of the Christian
Church, and all jurisdiction; so the Cardinals falsely pretend themselves to
be, and truly they are the very basis and foundation of the Romish Religion and
Hierarchy; and therefore the root and foundation of that superstition and
impiety, which being derived originally from Rome, has diffused it self into
all the Christian world by them.

As it is the privilege of the 12 Apostles to be as it were 12 stars set in that
crown, which is mentioned Revel. 12. so it is the special privilege of the Popes
Cardinals to have their names written in the crowns of their Prince the Pope,
as witnesses Jacobatius de Consil. number. 153.

There was a twofold state and condition of the Apostles: 1. They were Apostoli
urbis, affixed (as it were) to the City Jerusalem, where they were to abide,
till Till they received the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost.
they were endued with power from above; but afterward they were Apostoli
Orbis. So likewise the Cardinals in imitation and affectation of like honor
are styled Cardinales Vrbis, and Orbis. They remain as it were affixed to the
City of Rome, until they are endued with power from above, (i. e.) till they
are sent out by the Pope, as his Nuncio's and Legates into the Kingdoms of the
World.

As the Apostles in respect of their spiritual Fatherhood, are fitly answerable
to the 12 Patriarchs, who were the Fathers of all the Israelites according to
the flesh; so the Pope's Cardinals are called Patres spirituales Ecclesiae.

As the Apostles having supreme authority in the Church may in some sense be
said to be the Judges of the world, and to sit upon twelve Thrones to judge the
twelve Tribes of Israel: So the Cardinals make their Consistory of their
Apostolical See to admit of no appeal, but to be of such a Celestial
sublimity, that it is equal to the Tribunal-seat of God, and therefore they are
styled Judices Orbis, and they do exercise all Civil and Ecclesiastical power
over the City and people of Rome, which the Patriarchs did in the Literal, or
the Apostles in the spiritual Jerusalem. There is not one of the Titles which
the Apostles had, but they are emulous of, or else to be the image of that kind
of Government which was before their lives, remarkable in the City of Rome.

Both which Considerations are incident to the right discerning of that
Antichrist, who is not only to resemble some ancient Government of Rome, but
also to be that Synagogne of Satan, mentioned Rev. 2. 2, 9. which say they are
Apostles but are not; which say they are Jews, but are the Synagogue of Satan.

The first number of Cardinals in their first institution is chiefly to be
considered, as that which does most remarkably characterize Antichrist in his
first original. Now they were instituted, as their own Authors Gondisalnus de
origin Cardinalatus. Onuphrius Panvin. de praecipuis urbis Romae Basilicis.
Pol. Virgil, l 4. de inventoribus rerum, c 9. Bibliothecarium Damasum, Platina,
^aron. An. 378.
say in the time of Pontiani Marcelli, Romans Pontif. but Isidore Muscovius says
of the Cardinals thus: But others more warily have affirmed, that they were
first created in the time of Sylvester the first, in the ^ear 314, who (as they
say) ordained a College of Cardinals according to the similitude of the
Senators, etc. About which time the Pope divided the City and people of Rome
into 25 Titles or divisions, in each of which division When these Parishes were
made Diocesses, then were these Priests made Cardinals, says Polidore Virgil,
by having a formal power and jurisdiction added to them, as is apparent by like
testimony of Volateranus.
there was a Parish Church erected for the administration of Baptism, and in
every one of these Churches a several Presbyter was assigned and appointed, who
was called afterward Cardinal. When these Parish Priests degenerated into
Cardinals, and were made a College and corporation, exercising a new kind of
super-Episcopal jurisdiction in and over these Churches, then was the birth of
Antichrist, then did Antichrist truly, really, and locally sit in these
Christian Churches at Rome, and from thence his Pseudo-Apostolical authority
has been obtruded and imposed upon other Churches. There were in Rome
according to the sense literal, 25 Gates, and according to the sense spiritual
25 Churches for Baptism, and 25 Pastors placed in those 25 Churches, and 25
Cardinals sitting and ruling in them, and 25 Titles, Tribes or Parishes
belonging to them.

Jerusalem was in compass 1200 furlongs, in which Christ did first and chiefly
erect his Church and Hierarchy For the number 12 having 1000 of furlongs added
to it, is the true solid measure of an imaginary Cube, which compass is equal
to the compass of the City Jerusalem; so the number 25 having 1000 of furlongs
added to it, is the true The number twenty-five notes the seat of Antichrist
solid measure of that imaginary Cube, whose compass is equal to the compass of
the City of Rome. 25000 Furlongs will make 14 miles and half, and almost half a
quarter, which agrees to Rome.

The Apostles creed, which is the sum of the 12 Apostles Doctrine of Faith,
which Christ's Church believes, divides it self into 12 Articles; the Papists
have added 13 more, and made the number of their articles of faith 25. For
whether we take the Doctrine of the Council of Trent it self to be the Faith
and Doctrine of the Church of Rome, or that Creed which was composed by Pope
Pius the fourth, according to the Doctrine decreed in that Council, in either
of these the number of 25 is as remarkably applicable to the Romish Faith, as
the number 12 to the Apostles Creed. And it is their whole faith, Sacrosancta
oecumenica Tridentina Synodus, ejus fidem confiteamur, ejus decreta semper
servemus.

Responsio patrum, Semper confiteamur, semper servemus.

Cardinal. a Lothoringia. Omnes ita credimus, omnes id-ipsum sentimus, om^^s
Acclamationes patrum in fine Concillii. page 396.
consentientes and amplectentes subscribimus. Haec est fides beati Petri and
Apostolorum, haec est fides Patr^^ haec est fides orthodoxa.

Responsio Patrum, Ita credimus, ita sentimus, and subscribimus.

I pray mark this all along, that the Pope of Rome divided the City of Rome
into 25 Parishes, and in th^^ placed 25 Presbyters, which were first The number
of Cardinals was 25 in St. Jerome's time, as appears by his words upon Ezekiel. 11.
25. Hodie in Ecclesia, quae est Dom. Dei.
called Parish Priests, afterward they were called Cardinal-Priests, to whom
was given a larger power, and that these are parts of his body, and his
Apostles. And I pray mark this also, for it will prevent many scruples. As the
first foundation of that Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, which Christ did build upon
the 12 Apostles, was laid by Christ before Christian Religion was remarkably
apparent in the world, and countenanced by supreme civil authority; (...) the
first foundation of the Popish Hierarchy was laid before the main er^^ of
Popery were remarkably in the world, and countenanced by supreme civil
authority. As the Doctrine of the Creed was laid before 'twas gathered into one
body, so was the Doctrine of the Papacy laid before 'twas gathe^^ into one body
in the Council of Trent, or put out by Pope Pius the fourth.

Obj. But there are Cardinal-Deacons, and Cardinal-Bishops; Erg^^ the number of
Cardinals is above 25.

Ans. It Is true there are more Cardinals now than there were (...) first
designed and instituted by Evaristus say some, others by M^^cellus, but others
by Sylvester. There were 25 in Jeroms time, as appears by his Comment upon
Ezekiel. 11. Which number he seems there (...) apply to Rome. Those 25 men in
Ezekiel. 8. 16. who worshipped toward the East, of whom the Spirit of God says,
these are the men that give evil counsel in the City, and that devise mischief;
they were types of the 25 Cardinals of the City and Church of Rome, these are
Popes Counselors, who devise mischief against the Church of Christ. And though
their number was de facto increased, yet 'twas not de jure, for in the time of
Gregory (who is said to reduce the Cardinals Titles to their ancient number)
there were 25 and no more, as they are nominated by Onuphrius in his Book de
Pontificum and Cardinalium ratione. Johannes Diaconus in vita Gregorii, l. 3.
c. 11.

That as Jerusalem material had 12 material gates, so had or has Rome Literal
25 material Gates.

The Names of the 12 material Gates of material Jerusalem according to
Villapardus, Tom. 3. p. 68, 69. were these.

1. Porta Fontis. 2. Porta Stercoris. 3. Porta Vallis. 4. Porta Anguli. 5.
Porta Vetus. 6. Porta Ephraim. 7. Porta Piscium. 8. Porta Benjamin. 9. Porta
Gregis. 10. Porta Aquarum. 11. Porta Equorum. 12. Porta Filcalis.
The Gates of the City of Rome according to Onuphrius are these.

1. Porta Flumentana. 2. Porta Collatina. 3. Porta Quirinalis. 4. Porta
Viminalis. 5. Porta Gabinia. 6. Porta Esquilina. 7. Porta Caelimontana. 8.
Porta Latina. 9. Porta Capena. 10. Porta Ostiensis. 11. Porta Portuensis. 12.
Porta Janiculensis. 13. Porta Sentiminiana. 14. Porta Aurelia. 15. Porta
Querquetularia. 16. Porta Piacularis. 17. Porta Catularia. 18. Porta Minutia.
19. Porta Magionia. 20. Porta Sangualis. 21. Porta Naevia. 22. Porta
Randuscula. 23. Porta Levercalis. 24. Porta Libitinensis. 25. Porta
Triumphalis.
These Gates were actually existing between the times of Pliny and Justinian,
which does very well agree with that time wherein Marcellus did erect 25
Cardinalships in Rome. Those seven other which Pliny mentioned, ceased to be
Gates before his time; and those two other which Onuphrius mentions, were not
common Gates of the City, but one of them was of the Palace, and the other of
the Capitol.

As the Apostles Creed consists of 12 Articles, so the Popes Creed consists
of 25 Articles, History of the Council of Trent, l. 2. p. 130. which are these
that follow.

1. Credo in unum Deum patrem omnipotentem factorem coeli and terrae visibilium
omnium and invisibilium. The Popes Creed, Council. Trident, p. 558.


2. Et in unum Dominum Jesum Christum, fili^^ Dei unigenitum, and ex patre
natu^^ ante omnia saecula, Deum de Deo, lumen de lumine, Deum verum de Deo
vero, genitum (...) factum, consubstantialem patri, per quem omnia facta sunt.

3. Qui propter nos homines and propter nostram salutem descendit de celis, and
incarnatus est ex Spiritu sancto ex Maria Virgin, and homo fact^^ est.

4. Crucifixus etiam pro nobis sub Pontio Pilato, passus and sepultus est.

5. Et resurrexit tertio die secundum scripturas.

6. Et ascendit in coelum, sedit ad detram patris.

7. Et iterum venturus est cum gloria judicare vi^os and mortuos, cuj^^ regni
non erit finis.

8. Et in Spiritum sanctum Dominum and vivificantem, qui ex patre and filio
procedit, qui cum patre and filio s^mul adoratur and conglorificatur, q^^
locutus est per prophetas.

9. Et unam sanctam Catholicam and Apostolicam ecclesiam.

10. Confiteor unum baptisma in remissionem peccatorum.

11. Et expecto resurrect^^em mortuorum.

12. Et vitam venturi saeculi. Amen. Thus far he agrees with the Nicene Creed.


13. Apostolicas and Ecclesiasticas traditiones reliquasque ejusdem ecclesiae
observationes and constitutiones firmissime admitto and amplector.

14. Item sacram scripturam juxta eum sensum quem tenuit and tenet sanct^ matter
ecclesia (cujus est judicare de vero sensu and interpretatione sacrar^^
scripturarum) admitto, nec eam unquam nisi juxta unanimem consensum p^trum
accipiam and interpretabor.

15. Profiteor quoque septem esse vere and proprie sacramenta novae legis (...)
Jesu Christo Domino nostro instituta, atque ad salutem humani generis lice^ non
omnia singulis necessaria, scilicet Baptismum, Confirmationem, Eucharistiam,
Paenitentiam, extremam Vnctionem, ordinem, and Matrimonium, illaque gratiam
confer, and ex his baptismum confirmationem and ordinem sine sacrilegio
reitterari non posse.

16. Receptos quoque and approbatos ecclesiae Catholicae ritus in supradictorum
omnium sacramentorum sol^nni administratione recipio and admitto.

17. Omnia and singula quae de peccato originali and de justificatione in Sacro
sancta Synodo Tridentina definita and declarata fuerunt, amplector and recipio.

18. Profiteor pariter in Missa offerri Deo verum proprium and propitiatorium
sacrificium pro vivis and mortuis, atque in sanctissimo Eucharistiae Sacramento
esse vere realiter and substantialiter corpus and sanguinem una cum anima and
divinitate Domini nostri Jesu Christi, fierique conversionem totius substantiae
panis in corpus ejus, quam conversionem Catholica ecclesia Transubstantiationem
appellat.

19. Fateor etiam sub altera tantum specie totum atque integrum Christum,
verumque sacramentum sumi.

20. Constanter teneo purgatorium esse, animasque ibi detentas fidelium
suffragiis juvari.

21. Similiter and sanctos una cum Christo regnantes venerandos, atque
invocandos esse, eosque orationes Deo pro nobis offerre, atque eorum reliquias
esse venerandas.

22. Firmissime assero imagines Christi ac Deiparae semper virginis, nec non
aliorum sanctorum habendas and retinendas esse, atque iis debitum honorem and
venerationem impertiendam.

23. Indulgentiarum potestatem a Christo in ecclesia relictam fuisse,
illarumque usum Christiano populo maxim salutarem esse affirmo.

24. Sanctam Catholica and Apostolicam Romanam ecclesiam omnium Ecclesiarum
matrem and magistram agnosco, Romanoque pontifici, beati Petri Apostolorum
principis successori, ac Jesu Christi vicario veram obedientiam spondeo ac juro.

25. Caetera item omnia a sacris canonibus and aecumenicis conciliis ac
praecipue a Sacro-sancta Tridentina Synodo tradita, definita and declarata,
indubitanter recipio atque profiteor simulque contraria omnia atque haereses
quascunque ab ecclesia damnatas and rejectas and anathematizatas ego parite^
damno rejicio, and anathematizo.

The words which follow in the Bull [Hanc veram Catholicam fidem] imply a
perfect form of doctrine or faith is promised or declared, and therefore so
this is to be looked upon.

Now its greater impiety and presumption to add new Articles, than to reject
the old. It more properly befits Antichrist to deny the Faith, ex consequenti
and indirecte, than to renounce the external profession of it. For the mouth of
Antichrist ought to be as a fountain sending forth sweet and bitter waters; he
is to have a form of godliness, but to deny the power of it. He is to pretend
himself to be a Christian, and to be built upon the true foundation of the
Apostles, but he is also to overthrow this foundation upon which in some sort
he is and pretends to be built, by superinducing damnable doctrines, ex
consequenti and indirecte, contradicting and denying that faith which he does
externally profess. The Devils themselves may make profession of the Christian
Faith to the same end that Antichrist does, that is, to deceive by it. And it is
probable, that the Devils do more certainly know and believe the Historical
truth of the Creed, than some Popes have done. Lastly, the Papists themselves
cannot deny, but that their imaginary Antichrist (who shall be as they pretend
of the Tribe of * Dan) must believe, or at least Dr. P. Heylin says, That the
Pope of Rome is not Antichrist, because Antichrist must be a single person, a
Jew that must kill Elias and Enoch, as I find him alleged by Dr. C. of Schism,
p. 81.
profess himself to believe so many of the Articles of the Creed as the Jews
now do, or as may evidently be proved by the old Testament. By all which it is
evident, that the external profession of faith can no way privilege the Pope
from being Antichrist, which was to come into the world, but rather it may be
truly said, that this external profession is causa sine qua non, such a thing
as could not but concur to his Constitution. For Antichristianism consists in
two parts, the one being an open, yet feigned and hypocritical profession of
Christianity; the other a secret and indirect, yet a real and effectual
eversion of it.

So this form of professing the Faith above mentioned consisting of 25
Articles, of which 12 belong to the first, part, and 13 to the second, may be
fitly esteemed a perfect sum and character of Antichristianism.

Besides Mr. Potter shows in many things that the number 25 does agree to, and
is affected by the Church of Rome. e. g.

1. There were 25 Bishops met at the first Session of the Popes Council of
Trent; They met not by accident, but as they were appointed by the Pope.
though more met afterward, and sometimes less, yet the first Session was that
which gave nomen and esse to the Council, and therefore the number in this
Session is most remarkable, and rather to be observed than any other number.

2. The whole Council is divided into 25 Sessions, as all Editions of the
History testify.

3. The number of Popish Vide acclamationes patrum in fine Concilii. p. 397.
Archbishops which subscribed to this Council, was 25, as the History
testifies. Though many others subscribed, yet Archbishops are most remarkable,
because as Bishops in General Councils represent their whole Clergy, so Bishops
themselves, especially in the Romish Hierarchy, are virtually and
representatively contained in their Archbishops.

4. The number of the Decrees was 25, I mean such as concern matters of It Is
observable that the number of the Fathers which subscribed the 25 Decrees of
the Council of Trent, ended in that unlucky number 5, for the number of all the
subscribers was 255, as is to be seen in the acclamations at the end of the
Council.
faith and reformation, which only are to be accounted for the Decrees of the
Council, as appears by the last words of the last Session.

5. Where the Pope has had rule, he has planted many of his Creatures with
that fatal number 25; as here in England there were 25 Abbots which had voices
in the Parliament House, as Cambden witnesses. In many of the Abbeys and
Priories they affected the number 25, as appears in the Book called
Bibliotheca Cluniacensis, in which he reckons up 13 Societies of that Order,
that had 25 Monks. The Pope has lately erected the Order of Knights of the
most Glorious Virgin Mary, instituted at Rome by Paul the 5th. An. 1618.
wherein it is ordered, that 25 always remain resident at Rome in the Court of
the holy Father, having 20 Ducats by the Month, and the like number at Loretto.
In the highest Court at Rome are instituted 25 Officers.

6. Upon St. Peter's Church at Rome, says Angelus Bocca in appendice
Bibliothec. Vatican. p. 419. upon the top of that Church there is placed upon a
gilded Globe of brass, a gilded Cross of 25 handsbreadth in length. In the
forepart of this Church are 5 Gates, which are commonly used, and one other
Gate, which is called Porta sancta, the holy Gate, which stands open only one
year in 25, and the 25th. year being ended, it is again shut by the Pope, as
Onuphrius de praecipuis Romae Basilic. c. 4. In this Church (as also in St.
Mary the great) have been 25 Altars, as Onuphrius particularly recites them, de
praecipuis Romae Basilicis, c. 6. p. 289.

1. Altar S. Christi; 2. altar S. Leonis; 3. altar S. Hadriani; 4. altar S.
Mariae; 5. altar S S: processi; 6. altar S. Mauritii; 7. altar Silvestri; 8.
altar Mariae; 9. altar Gibinii; 10. altar Martialis; 11. altar Bartholomei;
12. altar Pastoris; 13. altar S. Thomae. 14. altar S. Andrei and Gregorii;
15. altar beatae Virginis; 16. altar Innocentii; 17. altar Sudarii; 18.
altar S. Antonii; 19. altar S. Tridentii; 20. altar S. Philippi and Jacobi;
21. altar novum S S. Apostolorum; 22. altar Mortuorum; 23. altar vetus
Simonis and Judae translatum in mediam ecclesiam; 24. altar Habundii nunc
dict. S. Catharinae; 25. altar Petronellae. All these 25 Altars were erected
and altogether actually existing in St. Peter's Church at Rome before the year
1500, that is before there was any new addition to the building of the Church.

7. They have imprinted upon every one of these altars 25 round spots, (which
in Arms do signify numbers, as is observed by the Author of Armory, E. B. p.
179.) and they are used to make them in their sanctified Banners, to make them
fortunate. Vide Elements of Armory, p. 166.

8. In this Church of St. Peter's is besides the said 25 little Altars, one
great Altar or Sepulcher, viz. that of St. Peter, which is as it were their
Sanctum Sanctorum, upon which no man may celebrate Mass, but the Pope only.
This Altar or Sepulcher is made four square, of a perfect Cubical figure, the
length, breadth and height of it are equal, the measure of every side or area
of this Altar is precisely 25 foot of square measure, as the words of Baronius,
Ann. 324. and Onuphrius de praecip. Romans Basil. c. 4. do testify.

9. They have most remarkably imprinted the number 25 upon all their Altars,
because Christ's 5 Wounds (as they call them) are in 5 several places engraven
upon the top of every Altar. Which their multiplying of our Saviors Wounds
from 5 to 25, what it may signify either in their intention, or beyond their
intention, is not material to enquire; but certain it is that there are usually
and ordinarily 25 Prints, marks or dints engraven upon all their Altars. St.
Peter's has thus, and so have others.

10. The Pope keeps his Jubilee every 25 year.

11. As they seem to affect (says he) the 25th year, so also the 25th day of
the Month, for their chief Holy Days are upon the 25th day more than upon any
other day; as the 25th of December for the Nativity of our Savior. The 25th of
January for St. That is Paul the Hermit, not the Apostle.
Paul's Conversion. The 25th of February for the Feast of St. Mathias. The 25th
of March for the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin. The 25th of April for
Saint Marks day. The 25th of July for St. James his day, and upon the 25th day
of August is the Feast of St. Bartholomew celebrated at Rome, as their Breviary
witnesses, although in other places it be celebrated one day sooner.

12. It Is observed by a learned man, that when Gregory reformed the Calendar,
they rejected the Golden Number 19, by which means they made a twofold Epact of
25, of which one is written thus, 25 the other thus XXV, or in a different
color. Who also adds this, That until he could see some reason why the
Jesuits fastened this conceit upon 25, rather than upon any other number, he
should impute it to their affectation of this number above all other.

And it is observed that Antiochus, who in many, almost in all things was a type
of Antichrist, (insomuch that what some Authors expound of Antiochus in Daniel,
other Authors interpret of Antichrist) fails not in this, but of all the days
of the month, he and his Officers did solemnize the 25th day by offering
sacrifice upon the Idols Altars on that day, and by their Monthly persecution
of the Jews on that day, as appears Mac. 1. 59.

Obj. But it is objected concerning the number of the College of Cardinals, that
at their first institution it was not 25, but 26, because the Pope numbreth
himself among the Cardinals, as he is Peter's Successor in his Apostleship, and
because he is a Cardinal so accounted.

Answ. To this it is answered, that the Popes were not of the decreed number 25,
as Christ was not numbered among the 12 Apostles, though he was an Apostle, Heb.
3. 1. but was their Lord and Master, and head. So the Pope, as he pretends
himself to be Vicarius Christi, is not, and cannot be numbered among the
Cardinals, but is their Lord and head.

The reason why the number 666 was chosen (says Mr. Potter) was because the
only figure of this number is a perfect figure, perfectly representing the city
of Rome; as the number 144 was chosen, because the figure of this number is a
perfect figure perfectly representing the city of Jerusalem. For which he gives
many reasons, and proves what he says by Demonstrations too many and large to
be set down here, which I believe all the Papists in the world will never be
able fully to answer; to him for brevities sake I must necessarily refer you.
Thus far Mr. Potter of the Number of the Beast 666. I pray seriously read the
Book, you will find more in it than I can express here. Mr. Mede when he looked
upon it at first, he slighted it, and read it with much prejudice; but by that
time he had read all of it, and read it again, he admired it as the
excellentest piece that ever was Printed of that subject.

By counting the Number 666 thus, you may find the rise, body and seat of
Antichrist.

If the application of the Number 666, or its root 25, does discover any other
Church or City besides Rome, it is no more than Dr. H. More, and Mr. Mede
collect, that there may be little Babylons, petty Harlots elsewhere, out of
Rome in Italy; and though it may hold the faith as Rome anciently did, yet it
may degenerate and become Romish first; and so Antichristian in the end, as the
City and Church of Rome did and does. Which I humbly conceive should make all
Churches examine themselves what they hold and practice, that is held and
practiced by that apostatized Church, and come wholly off from her in what she
has not express Canonical Scripture for, or allowed example of, or precept for
it, or promise to it, therein.
And the apostasy of other Churches may be measured by their near accession to,
and agreement with this Queen of Harlots; As learned Dr. Henry More has
observed in his Synopsis Apocalyptica, l. 1. cap. 15. Sect. 10. page 314. where
he shows, that the square root of the number of the Beast is 25, and does
detect to whom the Vision of the Beast does belong. And besides the name long
since foretold and found to be (...), whose Numeral Letters make the Number
666, is considerable as appears thus:

L A T E I N O S

50 1 30 5 10 300 70 200

Put these Numbers together, and you may find that they make exactly the number
666. And it is very well known that upon the division of the Empire into Eastern
and Western, the Greeks called the Western Churches, the Latin Churches, and
the Western Bishops in General Councils were called the Latin Bishops; and the
distinction of the subscriptions were under the titles of Patrum Latinorum, and
patrum Graecorum, and the very name of the Beast does determine him to Rome and
Italy, where Dr. Prideaux in his Introduction to History, put out in his Son
Matthews name, P. 91. says, that Vitalianus, one of the Bishops of Rome, in
the year 666 sent Theodorus a Greek, and Hadrian an African into England to
bring in the Latin service, being the year 666, just the number of the Beast,
of which the word (...) and (...), give a shrewd account.
the Latin Tongue was and is used in every thing. Mass, Prayers, Hymns, Litany,
Canons, Decretals, Bulls, Councils, Bible, which agreeing with other marks of
the Beast, is very significant and convincing, that the Pope of Rome with his
apostatizing Clergy is the great Whore or Antichrist.

I have been so large in this point, that I must for brevities sake forbear to
alledg what learned King James in his Epistle to his Apology to all Christian
Princes, says; where he fully and clearly proves the Pope to be Antichrist.
And in his Paraphrase upon the Revelations, in which he every where calls the
Pope of Rome Antichrist, and the Church of Rome the false persecuting and
Antichristian Church. However Dr. Heylin in his Cyprianus Anglicus endeavors
dishonourably to pervert his words and works. Dr. Prideaux in his Sermon upon
Rev. 2. 4. p. 36. Sermonum, says thus roundly, Fathers and brethren, is this a
time to make a doubt whether the Pope be Antichrist or no, seeing his horns and
marks are so apparently discovered? Bishop Sanderson in his Sermon upon 1 Timothy
4. 4. p. 414. Sermonum, says thus: The Apostle gives instance in two of those
Antichristian Doctrines, viz. a prohibition of Marriage, and an injunction of
abstinence from Meats, which particulars being so agreeable to the present
tenets of the Romish Synagogue, do give even of themselves alone a strong
suspicion, that there is the seat of Antichrist. But joined unto the other
prophesies of St. Paul, and of St. John in other places, make it so 2 These. 2.
3. Apoc. 13. 11.
unquestionable, that they who will needs be so unreasonably charitable, as to
think the Pope is not Antichrist, may at the least wonder (as Moulins
Accomplishment, in the Preface.
one says well) by what strange chance it fell out that these Apostles should
draw the picture of Antichrist in every point and limb so just like the Pope,
and yet never think of him,

I have one thing more to remind you of, and that is this, That though the
Antichristian Church of Rome do in words profess the Doctrine of the Apostles
Creed, yet by their other super added Doctrines they do overthrow it. As is
evidently to be seen in the sum of their Doctrine before recited; their own 13
Articles superadded to the first 12 of the Nicene Creed, do overturn and
destroy, in effect, them. Mr. Thomson in his Arraignment of Antichrist, p. 96,
97, etc. will inform you how they cross every Article of the Creed, and so will
others, as Hemingius Antichristi-machia, Beza, cap. 7. conf. Dr. Abbot against
Bishop, Part 3.

To all which let me, I pray, add but a little more, which the Church of
England plainly says in her Homily for Whitsunday, p. 213, 214, 215, 216.
where having declared three marks of a true Church, whereby it may be Marks of
a true Church.
known: viz. 1. Pure and sound Doctrine preached. 2. The Sacraments ministered
according to Christ's institution. 3. The right use of Ecclesiastical
Discipline: It says thus: Now if ye will compare this with the Church of Rome,
not as it was in the beginning, but as it is at present, and has been for the
space of 900 years and odd, you shall well perceive the state thereof to be so
far wide Rome as it is now is no true Church; this A. B. Laud contradicts in his
Relation of Conf. p. (...). and Bishop Mountague in his Gag. 50. A. B. Laud
says, that Papists and Protestants hold not forth a different Religion (...).
Bishop Mountague says, That the present Church of Rome is not diverse from the
ancient Church of Rome, but remains firm in the same foundation of Doctrine and
Sacraments.
from the nature of a true Church, that nothing can be more. Neither are they
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, retaining the sound and
pure Doctrine of Jesus Christ; neither yet do they order the Sacraments, or the
Ecclesiastical keys, in such sort as he did first institute and ordain them;
but have so intermingled their own traditions and inventions by chopping and
changing, by adding and plucking away, the now they may seem to be converted
into a new guise. Christ commanded unto his Church a Sacrament of his body and
blood, they have changed it into a So did Gyles Widows in his Schismatical
kneeless Puritan, p. 34, 89. the Church is the place of Gods presence, the
Communion Table the Chair of State of the Lord Jesus, and his chiefest place of
presence in our Church, where his Priests sacrifice the Lords Supper to
reconcile us to God offended with our daily sins. Bp. Sparrow says, it is an
unbloody sacrifice, in his Ration. p 391. and p. 280. he says the Priest
offers up the sacrifice of the holy Eucharist.
Sacrifice, Christ ministered to the Apostles, and the Apostles to other men
indifferently under both kinds; they have robbed the lay people of the cup,
saying, that for them one kind is sufficient. Christ ordained no other element
to be used in Baptism, but only water, whereunto when the word is joined, it is
made (as St. Augustine says) a full and perfect Sacrament; they being wiser in
their own conceit than Christ, think it is not well nor orderly done, unless
they use conjuration, unless they hallow the water, unless there be oil, salt,
spittle, tapers, (why was the sign of the Cross left out) and such other dumb
ceremonies, serving to no use, contrary to the plain rule of St. Paul, 1 Cor.
14. who willed all things to be done in the Church unto edification. Christ
ordained the authority of the Keys to excommunicate notorious sinners, and to
absolve them which are truly penitent; they abuse this power at their own
pleasure, as well in cursing the godly with bell, book and candle, as also
absolving the reprobate, which are known to be unworthy of any Christian
society, whereof they that list may see examples, let them search their lives.
To be short, look what our Savior Christ pronounced of the Scribes and
Pharisees in the Gospel, the same may be boldly and with safe conscience
pronounced of the Bishops of Rome, namely, that they have forsaken and daily do
forsake the commandments of God to erect and set up their own constitutions.
Which thing being true, as all they that have any light in Gods word, must
needs confess, we may well conclude according to the rule of Augustine, that
the Bishops Aug. contra Petiliam Donastae Epistol. c. 4.
of Rome and their adherents are NOT THE TRUE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST, much less
then to be taken as CHIEF HEADS AND RULERS of the same. Whosoever, says he, do
dissent from the Scriptures concerning the Head, although they be found in all
places where the Church is appointed, yet are not in the Church; a plain place
concluding directly against the Church of Rome. Wheresoever ye find the spirit
of arrogance and pride, the spirit of envy, hatred, contention, cruelty,
murder, extortion, witchcraft, necromancy, etc. assure your selves that there
is the spirit of the Devil, and not of God, albeit they pretend to the world
never so much holiness; for as the Gospel teaches us, the spirit of Jesus is a
good spirit, an holy spirit, a sweet spirit, a lowly spirit, a merciful spirit,
full of charity and love, full of forgiveness and pity, not rendering evil for
evil, extremity for extremity, but over coming evil with good, and remitting
all offense, even from the heart. According to which rule if any man live
uprightly, of him it may be safely pronounced, that he has the Holy Ghost
within him; if not, then it is a plain token that he does usurp the name of the
Holy Ghost in vain. Ye shall judge them by their fruits, which if they be wicked
and naught, then it is impossible that the tree of whom they proceed should be
good. Such were all the Popes and Prelates of Rome for the most part, as does
well appear by the story of their See Dr. Prideaux his Introduction to History,
from p. 77. to p. 155. there you will read of Usurping Nimrods, Luxurious
Sodomites, Egyptian Magicians, devouring Abaddons, incurable Babylonians,
Bishops of Rome.
Lives; and therefore they are worthily accounted among the number of false
Prophets, and false Christ's, which deceived the world a long while. The Lord of
heaven and earth defend us from their tyranny and pride, that they never enter
into his Vineyard again, to the disturbance of his silly poor flock, but that
they may be utterly confounded, and put to flight in all parts of the world.
And be of his great mercy so work^ in all men's hearts by the mighty power of
the Holy Ghost, that the comfortable Gospel of his Son Christ may be truly
preached, truly received, and truly followed in all places, to the beating down
of sin, death, By K. Edward the sixth, and Q. Elizabeth's Injunctions, all
Deans, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars and Ecclesiastical persons, were to the
best of their skill to declare against the Bishop of Rome's pretended and
usurped power and jurisdiction two times at least every year openly, Art. 1.
but have not some of them really neglected it, been ready to declare four times
in the year for the Bishop of Rome's traditions, inventions and dumb
Ceremonies, and that the Pope of Rome is not Antichrist?
the Pope, the Devil, and all the Kingdom of Antichrist, that like scattered
and dispersed sheep, being at length gathered into one fold, we may in the end
rest togetogether in the bosom of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, there to be
partakers of eternal life, through the merit and death of Jesus Christ our
Savior. Amen.

Obj. But it may be objected by some, that all this that is here in this Homily
said against the Bishop of Rome and his Adherents may be said of some other
Churches, or at least against some other Bishops and their Adherents as have
rejected the Bishop of Rome's authority, as Mr. Mede observes, that the Greek
Churches have, who embrace the beasts impieties, but refuse to be subject to
him.

Ans. To this I answer thus, 1. with Mr. Mede and Dr. More, that there may be
little Babylons, but Rome is Babylon the great; they may be sister, or
daughter-harlots, but Rome is the mother of harlots. They may be little Misses,
but she is the great Whore; other Churches may be corrupt in Doctrines of Faith
and the Sacraments, and the exercise of the Keys, but none so corrupt as Rome
is. 2. If any Churches have retained too much of the Popes Doctrine,
Discipline, Ceremonies, Practices, let them come out of Babylon, that they
partake not of her sins, and receive not of her plagues, Apoc. 18. 4. have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them.

2. It Is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of Ireland, which Church in her
80th Article of Religion says thus: The Bishop of Rome is so far from being
the supreme head of the universal Church of Christ, that his works and doctrine
do plainly discover him to be that man of sin foretold in the holy Scriptures,
whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and abolish with the
brightness of his coming.

3. It Is contrary to the Confession of Faith by the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, and sworn to by King James and the Subjects of Scotland, which says
thus, But especially we detest and refuse the usurped authority of that Roman
Antichrist upon the Scriptures of God, upon the Church, the civil Magistrate,
and consciences of men. The whole Confession is very considerable and imitable,
to be seen in the latter end of the Harmony of Confessions.

4. Not to mention what other Churches hold of the Pope of Rome's being the
Antichrist, yet because Dr. Heylin finds so much fault with the 80th Article of
Cypr. Angl. lib 4. p. 269. and 273.
Ireland, and pleads so much for Romish erroneous Doctrines as taught by our
first Reformers and Martyrs, (but most falsely, as I have showed in some points
before) I shall give their sense of this point, as I find their sayings set
forth by Mr. Fox in his Book of Martyrs in one Volume.

Walter Mantell in his Apology prays thus: I beseech the living God which
has received me to his mercy, and brought to pass that I die steadfast and
undefiled in his truth, at utter defiance and detestation of all Papistical and
Antichristian Doctrine. I beseech him to keep and defend all his chosen, for
his names sake, from the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, that Antichrist, p.
1398. Q. Mary, March 2. 1554.

Bishop Hooper (of whom Dr. Heylin boasts much to little purpose) in his Letter
of Consolation sent to certain godly brethren taken in Bow-Church-yard in
Prayer, and laid in the Counter in Breadstreet, says thus: I have been sorry
to perceive the malice and wickedness of men to be so cruel, devilish and
tyrannical, to persecute the people of God for serving of God, saying and
hearing of the holy Psalms, and the word of eternal life. These cruel doings do
declare, that the Papists Church is more bloody and tyrannical than ever was
the sword of the Ethnicks and Gentiles. When I heard of your taking, and what
ye were doing, wherefore, and by whom ye were taken, I remembered how the
Christians in the Primitive Church were used by the cruelty of Be-like there
are some Christened Heathens.
unchristned heathens, in the time of Trajan the Emperor about 77 Christians
of old looked upon and accused as Traitors and movers of sedition for serving
the true God truly; so now by Papists and such like.
years after Christ's ascension into heaven; and how the Christians were
persecuted very sore, as though they had been Traitors and movers of sedition;
whereupon the gentle Emperor Trajan required to know the true cause of
Christians trouble. A great learned man called Plinius wrote unto him, and
said, it was because the Christians said certain Psalms before day unto one
called Christ, whom they worshipped for God. When Trajan the Emperor
understood it was nothing but Conscience and Religion, he caused by his
Commandments every where, that no man should be persecuted for serving of God.
He a Gentile and heathen man would not have such as were of a contrary Religion
punished for serving of God; but the Pope and his Church has cast you into
prison, being taken even doing the work of God, and one of the excellentest
works that is required of Christian men, that is, The Pope and his Church worse
than heathens against Christ's Church.
while ye were in prayer, and not in such wicked and superstitious prayers as
the Papists use, but in the same prayer that Christ taught you; and in his name
only ye give God thanks for that ye have received, and for his sake ye asked
for such things as ye w^nt. O glad may ye be that ever ye were born, to be
apprehended while ye were so virtuously occupied. Blessed be they that suffer
for righteousness sake, etc.

And a little-after he says thus: You may perceive by your imprisonment, that
your adversaries weapons against you be nothing but flesh, blood and tyranny.
For if they were able they would maintain their WICKED RELIGION by Gods word;
but for lack of that they would violently compel such as they cannot by holy
Scripture persuade, because the holy word of God, and all Christ's doings be
contrary unto them. Fox Book of Martyrs, p. 1412.

John Rogers Martyr, Divinity-Reader at Paul's, called the Church of Rome the
Antichristian Church. Fox Book of Martyrs, p. 1416. And in the same page in
answer to Bishop Gardners question, Whether he believed in the Sacrament to be
the very body and blood of our Savior Christ, that was born of the Virgin
Mary, and hanged on the Cross, really and substantially? He said thus, Even as
the most part of your Doctrine in other points is false, and the defense
thereof only by force and cruelty; so in this matter, I think it to be as false
as the rest. For I cannot understand [really Yet our men hold that Christ's body
is really and substantially in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Else they
basely equivocate. Vid. Dr. Laurence Court-Sermon, p. 18 Bishop Mountague in
his Appeal, p. 289. Heylin in his History of Presbytery, p. 2. Yea, not only
Dr. Kellet, Pocklington, but A. B. Laud himself say, that for the presence of
Christ's body in that Sacrament, the Altar it self as well as the Elements must
be adored, as I have showed before in Article the second.
and substantially] to signify otherwise than corporally; but corporally
Christ is only in heaven, and so cannot be corporally also in your Sacrament.
And in the next Colume of the same Page he positively affirms, Bishop
Gardners Catholic Church (as he called the Church of Rome) is the
Antichristian false Church. And in page 1417, he says, That the Church of Rome
is the Church of Antichrist. And in page 1419 of the same Book he says thus:
If God look not mercifully upon England, the seeds of utter destruction are
sown in it already by these hypocritical Tyrants and Antichristian Prelates,
Popish Papists, and double Traitors to their natural Country.

Mr. Laurence Sanders in his Answer to Dr. Weston's Question, viz. Who was of
your Church thirty years past? said thus, Such, quoth I. as that Romish
Antichrist and his rabble have reputed and condemned as Heretics. Fox Book of
Martyrs, p. 1422. And after his Examination, standing among the Officers, and
seeing a great multitude. He warned them of that which by their falling from
Christ to Antichrist, they did deserve; and therefore exhorted them by
repentance to rise again, and to embrace Christ with strong faith, to confess
him to the end in the defyance of Antichrist, sin, death, and the Devil, so
should they retain the Lords favor and blessing, p. 1424. And in his Letter to
his Wife and others of the Faithful, he says thus: And although I am not May
not many Nonconformists say almost the same now. God now preaches to their
people, and to the whole Kingdom by their silence and suffering.
so among you as I have been to preach to you out of the Pulpit, yet does God
now preach unto you by me, by this my imprisonment and captivity which now I
suffer among them for Christ's Gospel sake, bidding them to beware of the Romish
Antichristian Religion and Kingdom, requiring and charging them to abide in the
truth of Christ, which is shortly to be sealed with the blood of their Pastors,
etc. p. 1427.

Bishop Hooper told Bishop Gardner, That forasmuch as the Pope taught Doctrine
altogether contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, he was not worthy to be
accounted as a member of Christ's Church, much less to be Head thereof Ibi. p.
1433. And in his Speech to the Sheriff of Gloucester, he said thus: I come not
hither as one enforced to die (for it is well known I might have had my life
with worldly gain) but as one willing to offer and give my life for the truth,
rather than to consent to the wicked and Papistical Religion of the Bishop of
Rome received and set forth by the Magistrates of England, to Gods high
dishonor and displeasure. Ibid. p. 1436. And in his Letter to Mrs. Anne
Wartop, he calls the Church of Rome the Synagogue of Antichrist, that bears
the name of Jerusalem. Ibid. p. 144^

Dr. Rowland Tailor Martyr, in his Answer to his Friends that exhorted him to
fly to save his life, said thus: What Christian man would not gladly die
against the Pope and his Adherents? I know that the Papacy is the Kingdom of
Antichrist, altogether full of lies and falsehood. Fox Book of Martyrs, p. 1446.
And in his Answer to Bishop Gardner, who exhorted him now to rise with them,
and receive mercy offered, etc. he said thus: That so to rise should be the
greatest fall that ever I could receive; for I should so fall from my dear
Savior to Antichrist. Ibid. p. 1447. And in a Letter to a Friend touching the
causes of his death, he says thus: That he did affirm the Pope to be
Antichrist, and Popery to be Antichristianity. Ibid. p. 1449. Col. 2. And in
his Answer to Bishop Bonner, when he came to the Prison to degrade him, wishing
him and his fellows to turn to his Mother, he said to him: I would you and your
fellows would turn to Christ, as for me I will not turn to Antichrist. Ibid. p.
1451. 1 Col. And in his Letter to his Wife, he says, The Popish Mass as it is
now, is but one of Antichrists youngest Daughters, in the which the Thomas Wats
said to the 11th Article, that he believed that the Bishop of Rome is a mortal
enemy to Christ and his Church. Fox his Book of Martyrs, p. 1512.
Devil is rather present, and received than our Savior, the second Person in
Trinity, God and man. Ibid. p. 1455. Col. 1.

Mr. Hawks in Answer to this Question of Bishop Bonner, Did you ever drink any
deadly poison? says thus: The Popes Traditions and Ceremonies pestilent deadly
poison.
Yea, forsooth, I have, for I have drunken of the pestilent Traditions and
ceremonies of the Bishop of Rome. Fox his Book of Martyrs, p. 1504. Col. 1.

Mr. John Bradford Martyr, proves the Church of Rome not to be a true Church,
but a false Church, and the Pope the Head thereof to be the wicked one, that is
Antichrist. And he tells the Bishop of York, and the Bishop of Chichester, That
they did wickedly in coupling themselves to the Church of Rome again. Fox his
Book of Martyrs, p. 1533. col. 2. And in page 1543, he tells the Londoners
thus: That in testimony of this my Faith I render and give my life, being
condemned as well for not acknowledging the Antichrist of Rome to be Christ's
Vicar General, and supreme Head of his Catholic or Universal Church here, or
elsewhere upon Earth, as for denying the horrible and Idolatrous Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and Christ's real corporal and carnal presence in his
Supper, under the forms and accidents of Bread and Wine. And he says the same
in his Letier to the University and Town of Cambridg, page 1544. And a little
after in the same Letter he says to Cambridg, Do thou not know Rome to be
Babylon? And in his Letter to Lancashire, he says, That Transubstantiation is
the dearly beloved of the Devil, and the daughter and heir of Antichrists
Religion, etc. Ibid. p. 1546. And in his Letter to a Woman that desired to
know, Whether she might be present at the Popish Mattins or no, refraining from
the Mass? he says thus: This Latin Service is a plain mark of Antichrists
Catholic Synagogue, so that the Communicants and approvers of it, thereby
declare themselves to be members of the same Synagogue, and so cut off from
Christ and his Church; whose exterior mark is the true administration of his
Word and Sacraments. Furthermore, the example of your going thither to allow
the Religion of Antichrist (as doubtless you do indeed howsoever in heart you
think) occasioneth the obstinate to be utterly intractable, the weak Papists to
be more obstinate, the strong Gospellers to be sore weakened, and the weak
Gospellers to be overthrown; which things how great offenses they be, no pen
Yet do not many men make nothing of scandalizing their brethren now, by
injoining and practicing the needless ceremonies of the church of Rome.
is able to utter by Letters. Ibid. p. 1565. And in a Letter to the Lady Vane,
he says, That the Bishop of Rome is undoubtedly that great Antichrist of whom
the Apostles do so much admonish us. Ibid. p. 1565. col. 1. And a little after
he says, That the Bishop of Rome is a Butcher, or a Bite-sheep rather than a
Bishop. How can we call him Christ's Vicar, that resists Christ, oppugneth his
verity, and persecuteth his people, and like a Prelate prefers himself above
God and man? Ibid. p. 1566. col. 1. And in his Letter to certain godly men, he
says thus: Therefore take heed, for the Lords sake take heed, and defile not
your bodies or souls with this Romish and Antichristian Religion set up amongst
us again, but come away from, as the Angel cries, from amongst them, in their
Idolatrous service, lest ye be partakers of their iniquity. Ibid. p. 1568. col.
2. And in his Letter to a godly Gentlewoman that was cast off by her Friends,
because she would not go to the Popish Mass, he says thus: You cannot be
partaker of Gods Religion, and Antichrists service, whereof the Mass is most
principal; you cannot be a member of Christ's Church, and of the Popes Church.
Ibid. p. 1570. And in his Letter to N. and his Wife, he says, Now has
Antichrist all (...) power again. Ibid. p. 1571. And in his Letter with a
Supplication to Queen Mary and her Council, he says thus: That the Lords eyes
were set to destroy England and your Highness, and all your Honors, if in time
ye look not better to your office and duties herein, and not suffer your selves
to be slaves and hangmen to Antichrist and his Prelates, which have brought
your Highness and your Honors already to let Barnabas loose, and to hang up
Christ, Ibid. p. 1574.

John Launder Martyr, in his Confession before Bishop Bonner, says, That
whosoever does teach or use any more Sacraments than Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper, or get any Ceremonies, he does not believe that they be of the
Catholic Church, but does abhor them from the bottom of his heart. And does
further say and believe, That all the service, sacrifices and ceremonies now
used in this Realm of England (yea in all other parts of the world, which have
been used after this manner) be erroneous and naught, and contrary to Christ's
institution, and the determination of Christ's Catholic Church, whereof he
believes that he himself is a member, and in this Faith he died. Fox his Book
of Martyrs, p. 1593.

M. Luther History of the Counc. of Trent, lib. 1. p. 76.
said to the Popes Nuncio, that nothing can be received from Rome compatible
with the Ministry of the Gospel.

Derrick Carver Martyr, in his answer to Bishop Bonner, says, That your
Ceremonies used in the Church are beggarly and poison. Ibid. p. 1594.

Thomas Iveson Martyr, confessed, and to his death stood to this Article
objected against him by Bonner, That he believes that all the ceremonies now
used in this Church of England are vain, superfluous, superstitious, and
naught. Ibid. p. 1595. col. 1.

Of the same Faith was John Denley Gentleman, as may be seen in his Answer to
the seventh Article. Ibid. p. 1598 And the said John Denley in Answer to the
third Article objected against him by Bishop Bonner, said thus, That I believe
that this Church of England using the faith and Religion which is now used, is
no part or member of the aforesaid holy Catholic Church, but is the Church of
Antichrist, the Bishop of Rome being the head thereof. Ibid. p. 1597.

Patrick Packingham Martyr, told Bishop Bonner plainly to his face, That the
Church which Bonner believed, was no Catholic Church, but was the Church of
Satan, and that therefore he would never turn to it. Ibid. p. 1598. col. 2.

Henry Laurence Martyr, being required to put his hand to his Answers, writ
thus: Ye are all of Antichrist, and him ye follow. Ibid. p. 1599. col. 1.

George Tankerfield Martyr, plainly told Bishop Bonner, That the Church whereof
the Pope is the supreme head, is no part of Christ's Catholic Church. Ibid. p.
1602. col. 1.

Mr. Robert Glover, Master of Arts, and Martyr, plainly told the Bishop of
Leichfield, That the Church of God knows and acknowledges no other head but
Jesus Christ the Son of God, whom ye have refused, and chosen the man of sin,
the son of terdition, enemy to Christ, the Devils deputy and lieutenant, the
Pope. Ibid. p. 1616. col. 1. In which place he gives six notes of Christ's true
Church, which the Church of Rome wants, yea acts against and contrary to
them: By which, says he, they do declare themselves to be none of the Church
of Christ, but rather of the Synagogue of Satan. Yea, he there tells his Wife,
That he called them with good conscience, as Christ called their forefathers,
the children of the Devil; and that as their father the Devil is a liar and
murderer, so their Kingdom and Church (as they call it) stands by lying and
murdering, therefore my dear Wife have no fellowship with them. Ibid.

Bishop Ridley in his Letter in Captivity, calls the Church of Rome the
Strumpet of Babylon, and the Pope of Rome Antichrist. Fox his Book of Martyrs,
p. 1626. col. 1. And in his Answer at his Examination to Bishop White, he
says, He cannot but confess with St. Gregory, a Bishop of Rome also, that the
Bishop of that place is the very true Antichrist, whereof St. John speaks, by
the name of the Whore of Babylon. And I say (says he) with the said St.
Gregory, that he that makes himself a Bishop of all the world, is worse than
Antichrist. Ibid. p. 1650. col. 2. And in his Communication with Dr. Brooks
Bishop of Gloucester, when he degraded him, exhorting him to recant and submit
to the Church of Rome, he says thus: You know my mind concerning the usurped
authority of the Romish Antichrist. Ibid. p. 1659. col. 2. And a little after
when he would Bishop Ridley, though when he was in his Pontificalibus, he
contended too much for the Surplice, etc. yet when he came to die, he refused
it, and abominated it.
put on him the Surplice, etc. he inveighed against the Romish Bishop, and all
that foolish apparel, calling him Antichrist, and the apparel foolish and
abominable, Ibid. In his Farewell Letter to all his Friends, he calls the
Bishop of Rome the Babylonical Beast; and the then Bishops of England thieves
of Samaria, Sabei, Caldei. These robbers have rushed out of their dens, and
have robbed the Church of England of all the aforesaid holy treasure of God,
they have carried it away, they have overthrown it, and instead of Gods holy
word, the true and right administration of Christ's holy Sacraments, as of
Baptism and the other, they mix their Ministry with men's fantasies, and many
wicked and ^^godly traditions. Ibid. p. 1674. And these Bishops he calls the
Soldiers of Antichrist. Ibid. p. 1675. col. 1. And in his Letter to the Lords
Temporal, he says thus: I wonder, my Lords, what has bewitched you that ye
are so suddenly fallen from Christ unto Antichrist, from Christ's Gospel unto
men's traditions, from the Lord that bought you, to the Bishop now of Rome. I
warn you of your peril, be not deceived, except ye will be found willingly
consenters unto your own death: For if ye think thus, we are Laymen, this is a
matter of Religion, we follow as we are taught and led; if our teachers and
governors teach us and lead us amiss, the fault is in them, they shall bear
the blame. My Lords it is true, I grant you, that both the false teacher and the
corrupt governor shall be punished for the death of their subjects, whom they
have falsely taught, and corruptly lead, yea and their blood shall be required
at their hands: But yet neverthelss shall that subject die the death himself
also, that is, he shall also be damned for his own sin. For if the blind lead
the blind, Christ says, not the leader only, but both shall fall into the
ditch. Shall the Synagogue and the Senate of the Jews (trow ye) which forsook
Christ, and consented to his death, therefore be excused, because Annas and
Caiphas, with the Scribes and Pharisees, and their Clergy, did teach them
amiss? yea, and also Pilate their Consenters and doers are both guilty, says
Bishop Ridley, Ibid. p. 1675.
governor, and the Emperors Lieutenant, by his tyranny did without cause put
to death? Forsooth no, my Lords, no. For notwithstanding that corrupt Doctrine,
or Pilates washing of his hands, neither of both shall excuse either that
Synagogue and Seigniory, or Pilate, but at the Lords hand for the effusion of
that innocent blood, on the latter day shall drink of the deadly whip. Bishop
Gardners six Articles called the Whip with six strings, I ^elieve he alluded to.
Ye are witty and understand what I mean. Therefore I will pass from this to
tell you that ye are fallen from Christ to his adversary the Bishop of Rome,
page 1667. And immediately after he tells them, That he does not (in calling
the Bishop of Rome Christ's adversary or Antichrist) rage or rail, but speak
the words of truth and sobriety. And shows, That that Church while it continued
in the Apostles Doctrine, was Apostolic; and those that sat in that See might
be called Apostolici: but since that See has degenerated from the trace of
Truth and true Religion which it received of the Apostles at the beginning, and
has preached another Gospel, has set up another Religion, has exercised
another power, and has taken upon it to order and rule the Church of Christ by
other strange Laws and Canons, and rulers, than ever it received of the
Apostles, the Apostles of Christ; which thing it does at this day, and has
continued so doing (alas, alas, of too, too long a time); since the time (I
say) that the state and condition of that See has thus been changed, in truth
it ought of duty and of right to have the names changed both of the Sea and of
the Sitter therein. As that See then for that true trade of Religion, and
Doctrine of Christ's Apostles, justly and truly was called Apostolic; so as
truly and justly for the contrariety of Religion and Is this not directly
contrary to A B. Laud's Doctrine, in his Relation, wherein page ^^6. he says,
That the Church of Rome and Protestants set not up a different Religion?
diversity of Doctrine from Christ's and his Apostles, that See and the Bishop
thereof, at this day both ought to be called, and are indeed Antichristian. The Sea is the seat of Satan, and the Bishop of the same that maintains the
abominations thereof, is Antichrist himself indeed. And for this cause this See
at this day is the same which St. John calls in his Revelation, Babylon, or
the Whore of Babylon, and spiritual Sodoma and Egyptus, the mother of
fornications, and of the abomination upon the earth; and with this Whore do
spiritually meddle, and lie, with her, and commit most stinking and abominable
adultery before God, all those Kings and Princes, yea all Nations of the earth
which do CONSENT TO HER ABOMINATIONS, and use or practice the same. Ibid. p.
1668.

And in his Lamentation for the change of Religion in England, he says thus:
The head under Satan, of all mischief is Antichrist and his brood, and the same
is he which is the Babylonical Beast. Ibid. p. 1671. col. 2. And in p. 1673, he
calls King Edward the sixth, that innocent, that godly hearted, and peerless
young Christian Prince. Whom Dr. Heylin says, He was a man of ill principles,
and that 'twas no infelicity to the Church (he means Rome sure) that he died so
soon. And in p. 1673, col. 2. he says thus: Now then seeing the Doctrine of
Antichrist is returned again into this Realm, and the old Laws of Antichrist
are allowed to return with the power of their father again, etc.

Mr. John Philpot Martyr in his seventh Examination and Answer, says. That the
Church of Rome is a false Church, and the Synagogue of Satan. Ibid. p. 1704.
col. 2. And in his ninth Examination, he tells Harpsfield, That the Religion of
Rome is a false Religion. Ib. p. 1709. col. 1. So he told Chadsey, Ibid. p.
1715. col. 1. And at his last Examination he told the Lord Mayor of London,
That he was sorry to see that that authority which represents the Kings and
Queens persons should now be changed, and be at the commandment of Antichrist.
And ye (speaking to the Bishops) pretend to be the follows of the Apostles of
Christ, and yet ye be very Antichrists and deceivers of the people; and that
Church (which ye pretend to be the Catholic Church) is the Church of Rome, the
Babylonical, and not the Catholic Church; of that Church I am not. Ibid. p.
1721. col. 1.

Thomas Whittel Priest and Martyr, says, That he was well content to give over
his body for the testimony of Gods truth and pure Religion against Antichrist
and all his false Religion and Doctrine. Ibid. p. 1738.

Barthlet Green a Scholar and Martyr, affirms, That the Church of Rome is the
Church of Antichrist. Ibid. p. 1744.

A. B. Cranmer, M. calls and proves the Pope of Rome to be Antichrist. Fox
his Book of Martyrs, p. 1768. col. 2. That the Traditions and Religion of that
usurping Prelate of Rome are most erroneous, false, and against the Doctrine of
the whole Scripture; and the author of the same to be very Antichrist, so often
preached by the Apostles and Prophets, in whom do most evidently concur all
signs and tokens. whereby he is painted to the world to be known. Ibid. p.
1774. col. 2. Many of which marks he sets down there. And at St. Mary's in
Oxford when he recanted his Recantation, he said thus: And for the Pope I
refuse him, as Christ's enemy, and Antichrist, with all his false Doctrine; and
this he declared he spoke without dissimulation. Ibid. p. 1781. col. 1. And in
his Letter to Queen Mary, he says thus of the Pope, If this be not to play
Antichrists part, I cannot tell what is Antichrist, which is no more to say,
but Christ's enemy and adversary, who shall sit in the Temple of God, advancing
himself above all others, yet by hypocrisy and fained religion shall subvert
the true Religion of Christ, and under pretense and color of Christian
Religion shall work against Christ, and therefore has the name of Antichrist,
whom he there proves to be Antichrist. Ibid. p. 1784. col. 2.

John Mandrell, Robert Spicer, and William Coverley denying the Pope to be head
of the Church, or Christ's Vicar, affirmed him to be Antichrist and Gods enemy,
Ibid. p. 1788.

William Times, Curate and Martyr, answered Bonner, That the Sea of Rome is the Sea of Antichrist; and therefore to that Church I will not conform my self, nor
once consent to it. Ibid. p. 1791. And p. 1793. he says, The Church of Rome is
the Antichristian Church.

Sixteen Martyrs at once make this Confession: The Sea of Rome is the Sea of
Antichrist, the congregation of the wicked, whereof the Pope is head under the
Devil. Article the third, for proof of which they offer to be burnt. Ibid. p.
1810. col. 1.

ART. XV.
That it is lawful to set up and suffer Bishop Mountague in his Gag. page 300.
says, That Images and Pictures of Christ may stand in Churches pro
institutione rudiorum, and commone factione Historiae and excitatione
devotionis. And page 318. that the Images and Pictures of Christ, the blessed
Virgin, and Saints, may not only for Civil uses, but also for Religious
employment and helps of piety, be set up in Churches; and that the Church of
Rome and we differ not therein, so practice exceed not Doctrine. And p. 317.
that Dulia may be given to them.
Images of the Sacred Trinity, of God the Father, of God the Son, Crucifixes,
of God the Holy Ghost, or of Saints departed this life, in Temples, or
Churches, where Gods people do usually meet to worship God. THis I renounce: 1.
Because it is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England in her excellent
Homily against the peril of Idolatry, wherein she says as follows, p. 12.
These costly decki^^ of Churches and Images, have nothing profited those that
are wise and of understanding. but have thereby greatly hurt the simple and
unwise, occasi^^ing them thereby to commit most horrible Idolatry. p. 13. Our
Images (...) been, be, and if they be publicly suffered in Churches and
Temples, (...) will be worshipped, and so Idolatry committed to them. Wherefore
our I^^ges in Temples and Churches be indeed none other but Idols, as unto
(...) which Idolatry has been, is, and ever will be committed p. 15. That
(...) honoring of abominable Images is the cause, the beginning and end of
(...) evil; and that the worshippers of them be either madmen, or most wicked
men. p. 17. Although it be said now commonly, that Images be Lay-(...) Books,
yet we see they teach no good lesson, neither of God, nor of go^^ness, but all
error and wickedness; and therefore God, as he forbids (...) Idols or Images
to be made or set up, so does command such as we find (...) and set up, to be
pulled down, broken and destroyed, Deuteronomy. 7th and (...) Chapters, where it is
observable, that all the occasions of Idolatry (...) to be avoided. and
therefore did God forbid marriages with the children of Idolaters, for they
will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods; so
will the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and destroy thee suddenly.
p. 18. To set up Images or Altars is a wickedness and great offense, and
abomination in the sight of the Lord. p. 19. It is impossible that we should be
worshippers of Images, and the true servants of God also, as Paul teaches, 2
Cor. 6. p. 21.

Upon 1 John 5. ult. Tertullian says, Keep your selves from Images and Idols;
he says not now, keep your selves from Idolatry, as it were from the service
of them, but from the Images or Idols themselves, that is from the very shape
or likeness of them; do ye think those persons which place Images and Idols in
Churches and Temples, yea shrine them even over the Lords-Table, as 'twere of
purpose to the worshipping and honoring of them, take good heed either to St.
John' s counsel, or Tertullian' s; for so to place Images and Idols, is it to
keep themselves from them, or else to receive or embrace them?

P. 22. Origin says, That in the Commonwealth of the Jews, the Carver of Idols
and Image-maker was cast far off, and forbidden, lest they should have an
Occasions of Idolatry forbidden.
occasion to make Images, which might pluck certain foolish persons from God,
and turn the eyes of their souls to the contemplation of earthly things. And
again in another part of his Book against Celsus he says thus: It is not only
a mad and frantic part to worship Images, but also once to dissemble or wink
at it. Athanasius says, that the invention of Images came of no good, but of
evil; and whatsoever has an evil beginning can never in any thing be judged
good, seeing it is altogether naught. Lactantius says, That no Religion is in
that place wheresoever any Image is. For if Religion stand in godly things,
(and there is no godliness but in heavenly things) then be Images without
Religion.

P. 23. Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus, who lived 390 years after
Christ's ascension, writes to John Patriarch of Jerusalem thus: As I entered
into a certain Church to pray, I found there a linen cloth hanging in the
Church-door painted, and having in it the Image of Christ, as it were, or of
some other Saint; (for I remember not well what Image it was) therefore when I
did see the image of man hanging in the Church of Christ, contrary to the
authority of the Scriptures, I did tear it, and gave counsel to the Keepers of
the Church, that they should wind a poor man in the said cloth, and so bury
him. And afterward the same Epiphanius sending another unpainted cloth for
that painted one which he had torn, to the said Patriarch, writes thus: I will
you, will the Elders of that place to receive this cloth which I have sent by
this bearer, and command them, that from henceforth no such painted cloths,
contrary to our Religion, be hanged in the Church of Christ. For it becomes
your goodness rather to have this care that you take away such scrupulosity,
which is unfitting for the Church of Christ, and offensive to the people
committed to your charge. Upon which the Homily notes as follows.

1. That Epiphanius judged it contrary to Christian Religion and the authority
of the Scriptures to have any Images in Christ's Church.

2. That he rejected not only carved, and molten Images of Christ, or of any
other Saint, but also Such as are in many Church-windows and walls.
painted Images out of Christ's Church.

3. That he regarded not whether it were the Image of Christ, or any other
Saint, but being an Image would not suffer it in the Church.

4. That he did not only remove it out of the Church, but with a vehement zeal
tare it in sunder, and exhorted that a Coarse should be wrapped and buried in
it, judging it meet for nothing but to rot in the earth; following therein the
example of good King Hezekiah, who brake the brazen Serpent to pieces, and
burned it to ashes, for that Idolatry was committed to it.

5. That Epiphanius thinks it the duty of vigilant Bishops to be careful that
no Images be permitted in the Church; for that they be Occasions of scruple or
offense are not to be permitted in the Church.
occasions of scruple and offense to the people committed to their charge.

To these some other good Notes might be super-added, as 1. that Epiphanius Had
A. B. Laud been Patriarch there -- he might possibly have been fined 1000 l.
and deprived of his Bishopric, and been bound to his good behavior for time
to come for so doing, as Mr. Sherfield the Recorder of Salisbury was, for
taking down the pictures of the Trinity in painted glass, and setting up white
glass in the place of it in St. Edmonds- Church there, as Dr. Heylin relates*
l. 3. page 228, 229, 230.
was out of his own Diocese, and yet he brake down the Image, and tare it to
pieces. 2. That he gave notice of it after he had done it, to the Patriarch of
Jerusalem, whom it chiefly concerned to look to it. 3. That he willed him to
will the Elders of that Church, upon the door of which the painted cloth was
hung, to take that unpainted cloth he had sent, for that for that painted one
he had torn, and command them that from henceforth no such painted cloths be
hanged in the Church of Jesus Christ.

But the Homily goes on, p. 24. and says, That whereas Images began at that
time secretly and by stealth to creep out of private houses into the Churches,
and that first in painted cloths and walls, such Bishops as were GODLY AND
VIGILANT, when they espied them, removed them away as unlawful and contrary to
Christian Religion, as did here Epiphanius; to whose judgment you have not only
St. Jerome the Translator of his Epistle, and the writer of the History
Tripartite, but also all the LEARNED AND GODLY Then will it not follow, that
they that set them up and plead for them, are not learned and godly Clarks, and
not godly and vigilant Bishops that do not what they can to remove them?
CLARKS, yea the whole Church of that age, and so upward to our Savior Christ's
time by the space of above 400 years, consenting and agreeing.

And P. 25. St. Augustine says, Such as worship the dead are not CATHOLIC
CHRISTIANS. He esteems worshipping of Saints Tombs and Pictures as good
Religion as gluttony and drunkenness. He allows greatly Marcus Varro,
affirming, that Religion is most pure without Images; and says himself, that
Images be of more force to crooken an unhappy soul, than to teach and instruct
it; and that Images in Churches do by and by breed error and Idolatry. P. 26.
and p. 27. Jerome upon Jer. 10. says, That the errors of Images have come in
and passed to the Christians from the Gentiles, by an heathenish use and custom.

Where note, says the Homily, That St. Jerome and Eusebius agree, that these
Images came in among Christian men by such as were Gentiles and accustomed to
Idols, and being converted to the faith, retained This well considered, why may
we not wonder that some of our first Reformers, wholly bred up in Popery,
reformed so much, and did not retain all the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome,
seeing as much may be said for them as for those they retained; and the grounds
and reasons upon which they rejected some, would, if men would be ruled by
right reason and religion, reject those they retained?
yet some remnants of Gentility, not thoroughly purged. We see (says the
Homily) Act. 15. That the Jews being newly converted to Christianity, would
have brought in their Circumcision (whereunto they were so long accustomed)
with them into Christ's Religion; with whom the Apostle St. Paul had much ado,
for the staying of that matter, for which there was more to be said than for
Images (yea or humane Ceremonies) But a man may most justly wonder of Images so
directly against Gods holy word and strait commandment, how they should enter
in.

And P. 28. Serenus Bishop of Masile, a godly and learned man, who lived about
600 years after Christ, seeing the people by occasion of Images fall to most
abominable Idolatry, brake to pieces all the Images of Christ and Saints that
were in that City; and was therefore complained of to Gregory the first of that
name Bishop of Rome, who was the first learned Bishop that did allow the having
of Images in Churches, that can be known by any writing or history of
antiquity. But though he permitted that Images should be in Churches, yet he
forbad worshipping of them, as appears by his Epistle to Serenus; yet blames
him for breaking of them, upon whose authority they were set up in Churches;
but they fell presently all in heaps to manifest Idolatry by worshipping of
them, which Bishop Serenus (not without just cause) feared would come to pass.
Now if Serenus his judgment, thinking it meet that Images, whereunto Idolatry
was committed, should be destroyed, had taken place, Idolatry had been
overthrown; for to that which is not, no man commits Idolatry. But of
Gregory's judgment, thinking that Images might be suffered in Churches, so i^
were taught that they should not be worshipped, what ruin of Religion, and what
mischief ensued afterward to all Christendoth, experience has to our hurt and
sorrow proved, by the schism arising between the East and West Church about the
said Images; next by the division of the Empire into two parts by the same
occasion of Images, to the great weakening of all Christendom. Whereupon, last
of all, has followed the utter overthrow of the Christian Religion and noble
Empire of Greece, and all the East-parts of the world And by this means
Antichrist got into the Saddle and his Throne.
, and the increase of Mahomet's false Religion, and the cruel dominion and
tyranny of the Saracens and Turks in worshipping of them.

P. 30. and 31. Constantine the fifth, after the example of Leo his Father,
kept Images out of the Church, called a Council of all the learned men and
Bishops of Asia and Greece, who decreed, that it is not lawful for them that
believe in God through Jesus Christ, to have any Images, neither of the
Creator, nor of any creature, set up in Temples to be worshipped, but rather
that all such things be by the Law of Cum quid prohibetur, prohibentur illa
omnia, per quae p^^^enitur (...) illud.
God forbidden, and for the avoiding of offense, ought to be taken out of
Churches. But Paul Bishop of Rome, and Stephen the third, refused to obey the
Emperors Decree, and assembled another Council, and therein condemned the
Emperor and his Council of Heresy, and made a Decree that the holy Images of
Christ, and the blessed Virgin, and other Saints were indeed worthy of honor
and worshipping.

And P. 33, Not only the simple and unwise were ensnared with Images, but now
the learned and Bishops fell to worshipping of Images. For 'twas decreed in the
East also, in Irene's and Theodora's time, that Images should be set up in all
Churches of Greece, and that honor and worship should be given to them; and
now ye may see that come to pass, which Serenus feared, and Gregory the first
forbad in vain, viz. that Images should in no wise be worshipped. Again, it is
hard, yea impossible any long time to have Images publicly in Churches without
Idolatry.

And P. 34. At Eliberi, a notable City in Spain, the Spanish Bishops called and
held a Council, and there decreed in Article 36. thus: We think that Pictures
ought not to be in Churches, lest that be honored or worshipped which is
painted on walls.

And Canon 44, they say thus: We thought good to admonish the faithful, that as
much as in them lies, they suffer no Images to be in their houses; but if they
fear any violence of their servants, at the least let them keep themselves
clean and pure from Images; if they do not so, let them be accounted none of
the Church. There was another Council in Spain called Concilium Tolletanum 12,
which decreed against Images and Image-worshippers.

And P. 36. The Bishop of Rome Excommunicated the Emperor, because he opposed
his Images; and chose Charles King of France to be Emperor, because he
succored his Images. Then the Nobles of Greece chose Nicephorus to be
Emperor; he and Scaurus, the two Michael's, Leo and Theophilus, and other
Emperor* opposed Images. And when Theodorus, Emperor, would have agreed with
the Bishop of Rome at the Council at Lions, and have set up Images, He was by
the Nobles of the Empire of Greece deprived, and another chosen in his place.

And P. 40. All Images as well ours, as the Idols of the Gentiles are
forbidden, and unlawful in Churches: 1 Of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Deuteronomy. 4. As in the first part of this Homily, Isa. 40. 3. Part. To paint Christ
for remembrance of his death, is forbidden in the second Commandment: For, 1.
because his body is a creature in heaven, therefore not to be represented by an
Image in the service of God. 2. An Image can only represent the manhood of
Christ, and not his Godhead, which is the chiefest part of him, both which
natures being in him unseparable, it were dangerous by painting the one part
from the other, to give occasion of Arianism. Apollinarism, or other Heresies.
3. Since that in all the Scriptures which speak so much of him, there is no show
of any portraiture or lineament of his body, it is plain that the wisdom of God
would not have him painted. A. B. Ushers Sum of Chapter Relig. p. 231.
Act. 17. Hab. 2. 2. Of Christ, for he is God and man, and you cannot paint the
Godhead.

P. 41. and p. 42. Images are lies, therefore they are not Laymens Books. And
again, If true Images of Christ, and Saints, could be made, yet they are
unlawful to be made and see up in Churches to the great and unavoidable danger
of Idolalry. Primitive Christians were complained of, that they had no Images
in their Churches. Hence it is inferred there, that they took all Images to be
unlawful in the Church or Temple o^ God, and therefore had non^ Which is a good
negative argument for matter of fact.

And P. 44. The Primitive Church which is especially to be followed, (...) most
incorrupt and pure, had publicly in Churches neither Idols (...) the Gentiles,
nor any other Images as things Observe, that the Homily says before, That they
are not simply unlawful, but for their offense as being occasions of Idolatry;
then it will follow, that occasions of Idolatry (and so of other sins) are
directly forbidden in Gods Word.
directly forbidden (...) Gods Word. But it is objected, Th^^ Images are not
absolutely forbidden to be made, but only that they should be made to be
worshipped; and th^^ therefore we may have Images, so (...) worship them not,
for that they (...) things indifferent, which may be ab^sed, or well used.
Answ. This (...) yielded in part. Flowers are wroug^^ in Carpets. Arras, and
Pictures (...) Princes printed or stamped in the^^ Coyns, which when Christ did
see in the Roman Coin, we read (...) that he reprehended it, neither do we
condemn the art of Painting and Image-making as wicked of themselves; but we
would grant them, that Images used for no Religion, or Superstition rather, we
mean Images of none worshipped, nor in danger to be worshipped of any, may be
suffered. But Images placed publicly in Temples, cannot possibly be without
danger of worshipping and Idolatry; wherefore they are not publicly to be had
or suffered in Temples. The Jews, to whom the Law was first given, and should
best know the meaning of it, would not suffer Images publicly to be in the
Temple at Jerusalem, though no worshipping was required at their hands, but
rather offered themselves to death, than to assent that Images should be once
placed in the Temple; neither would they suffer any Image-maker among them. And
Origin added this clause, lest their minds should be plucked from God to the
contemplation of earthly things. And they are much commended for this earnest
zeal in maintaining Gods honor, and true Religion.

P. 45. And truth it is, that Jews and Turks, who abhor Images and Idols, as
directly forbidden in Gods Word, will never come to the truth of our Religion
while the stumbling blocks of Images remain among us, and lie in their way.

And P. 49. What means it, that Christians after the use of the Gentiles,
Idolaters, cap and knee before Images? is not this stooping and kneeling before
them, adoration of them, which is forbidden so directly by Gods Word?

P. 50. Satan desiring to rob God of his honor, desires exceedingly that such
honor might be given to him; wherefore those which give the honor due to the
Creator, to any creature, do service acceptable to no Saints, who be the
friends of God, but unto Satan, Gods and man's mortal and sworn enemy.

Obj. But they say, that they do not worship the Image as the Gentiles did
their Idols, but God and the Saints, whom the Images do represent; and
therefore that their doings before Images are not like the Idolatry of the
Gentiles before their Idols.

Answ. It Is answered thus: St. Augustine, Lactantius, and Clemens, do prove
evidently, that by this their answer, they be all one with the
Gentiles-Idolaters. The Gentiles (says St. Augustine) which seem to be of the
purer Religion, say, We worship not the Images, but by the corporal Images, we
do behold the signs of the things which we ought to worship. And Lactantius
says, the Gentiles say, we fear not the Images, but them after whose
likenesses the Images be made, and to whose names they be consecrated. And
Clemens says, that Serpent the Devil utters these words by the mouth of
certain men, We to the honor of the invisible God, worship visible Images,
which surely is not false. See how in using the same excuses which the
Gentile-Idolaters pretended, they show themselves to join with them in
Idolatry. For notwithstanding this excuse, Augustine, Lactantius, and Clemens,
prove them Idolaters. And the Scriptures say, they worship stocks and stones
(notwithstanding this excuse) even as our Image-mongers do. And Ezekiel
therefore calls the gods of the Assyrians stocks and stones, although they
were but Images of their gods. So are our Images of God and the Saints named by
the names of God and his Saints, after the use of the Gentiles. What should it
mean that they according as did the Gentile-Idolaters, light Candles at
noontime, or at midnight before them, but therewith to honor them? for other
use is none of so doing; for in the day it needs not, but was ever a Proverb
of foolishness, to light a candle at noonday. And in the night it avails not
to light a candle before the blind, and God has neither use nor honor
thereof. By which it appears, that Are not Tapers appearances of the same
Religion to be abstained from, as well as candles?
we do agree with the Gentile-Idolaters in our Candle-Religion.

And P. 52. As the Gentiles, so our Image-maintainers have invented and spread
many lying-tales, and written many Fables and Miracles of Images.

And P. 53. Among the holy Relics they have (they say) the tail of the Ass on
which our Savior rode, which they offer to be kissed, and to be offered unto.

And P. 55. The having of Images in Churches publicly, has not only brought
us to worshipping of them, but to worshipping of them with the same kind of
worship wherewith they worship the Copy, as the Homily shows out of Nacla^tus
Bishop of Clugium.

And P. 56. the Homily says thus, (Having showed and proved that our Images
have been, be, and will be worshipped, and by their own confession, that they
ought to be worshipped) I will out of Gods Word make this general argument
against all such makers, setters up, and maintainers of Images in public
places, thus: And first I will begin with the words of our Savior Christ: Woe
be to that man by whom an offense is given. Woe be to him that Is there not the
same reason against Popish Ceremonies, and other unnecessary things?
offends one of these little ones, or weak ones, Mat. 18. Better were it for
him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the midst of
the sea and drowned, than that he should offend one of these little ones, or
weak ones. And in Deuteronomy. 27. God himself denounces him accursed that makes the
blind to wander out of the way. And in Levit. 19. Thou shall not lay a
stumbling block or stone before the blind. But Images have been, be, and as
afterward shall be proved, ever May not the same be said of Popish Ceremonies?
Con the Popes Nuncio brought with him into England in A. B. Laud' s reign, many
Relics of Saints, Medals, and pieces of gold, with the Popes picture on them,
to seduce the Ladies of the Court and Country. Heylin' s Cyp. Angl. l. 4. p.
358.
will be offenses and stumbling blocks, especially to the weak, simple, and
blind common people, deceiving their hearts by the cunning of the Artificer, as
the Scripture expressly in sundry places does testify, and so brings them to
Idolatry, and therefore woe be to the erector, setters up, and maintainers of
Images in Churches, for a greater penalty remains for them than the death of
the body.

Obj. If it be replied, that this offense may be taken away by diligent and
sincere doctrine and preaching of Gods Word, as by other means; and that Images
in Churches therefore be not things absolutely evil to all men, although
dangerous to some; and therefore that it were to be holden, that the public
having of them in Churches is not expedient, as a thing perilous, rather than
unlawful, and utterly wicked.

Ans. This will be answered by proving the third Article, which follows, That
it is not possible, if Images be suffered in Churches, either by preaching of
Gods Word, or by any other means, to keep the people from worshipping of them,
and so to avoid Idolatry. And 1. concerning preaching, if it should be
admitted, that although Images were suffered in Churches, yet might Idolatry by
diligent and sincere preaching of Gods Word be avoided; it should follow of
necessity, that sincere Doctrine might always be had, and continue as well as
Images, and so that wheresoever; to offense, were erected an Image, there also
of reason a godly and sincere Preacher should and might be continually
maintained; for it is reason that the warning be as common as the
stumbling block, the remedy as large as the offense, the medicine as general as
the poison; but that is not At least not probable, for those rulers that are so
foolish as to set up or suffer needless Images, will be so wicked as to set up
idle or Idolatrous Preachers also.
possible, as both reason and experience teaches. Wherefore preaching cannot
stay Idolatry, Images being publicly suffered. For an Image, which will last
for many hundred years, may for a little be bought; but a good Preacher cannot
with much be continually maintained. Item, if the Prince will Those Preachers
that are offended at their pulling down, and see no hurt in them, but conceive
much good in and by them, will never be good Preachers against them, and such
was Bishop Sanderson, as appears by his Sermon upon Romans 3. 8. p. 70. in 4to.
fuffer it, there will be by and by many, yea infinite Images, but sincere
Preachers were and ever shall be but a few in respect of the multitude to be
taught. For our Savior Christ says, the Harvest is plentiful, but the workmen
are but few, which has been hitherto true, and will be to the worlds end. And
in our time, and in our Country so true, that every Shire should scarcely have
one good Preacher, if they were divided. Now Images will continue to the
beholders, preach their Doctrine, that is worshipping of Images, and Idolatry,
to which preaching mankind is exceeding prone, and inclined to give ear and
credit, as experience of all ages and Nations does too much prove. But a true
Preacher to stay this mischief, is in very many places scarcely heard in one
whole year, and some where not once in seven years, as is evident to be proved.
And that evil opinion which has been long rooted in men's hearts, cannot
suddenly by one Sermon be rooted out clean. And as few ^^inclined to credit
sound Doctrine, as many and almost all be prone to Superstition and Idolatry;
so that herein appears not only a difficulty, but also an impossibility of
the remedy. It appears not, that sound and sincere Preaching has continued in
one place above a hundred years; but it is evident, that Images, superstition,
and worshipping of Images, and Idolatry, have continued many hundred years. For
all writing and experience do testify that good things do by little and little
ever decay, until they be clean banished; and contrariwise evil things do more
and more increase, till they come to a full perfection and wickedness. For
example, for preaching of Gods Word, most sincere in the beginning, by process
of time waxed less and less pure, and after corrupt, and at last altogether
laid down, and left off, and other inventions of men crept in place of it. And
on the other part, Images among Christian men were first painted, and that in
whole stories together, which had some signification in them, afterward they
were embossed, and made of timber, stone, plaster and metal. And first they
were only kept privately in private men's houses, and then afterward they crept
into Churches, but first by painting, but afterward by embossing, and yet were
they at first no where worshipped; but shortly after they began to be
worshipped of the ignorant sort of men, as appears by Gregory the first
Bishop of Rome, in his Epistle to Serenus Bishop of Marcelles. Of which two
Bishops, Serenus for Idolatry committed to the Images, brake and burnt them;
Gregory, although he thought it tolerable to let them stand, yet he judged it
abominable that they should be worshipped, and thought (as is now alleged)
that the worshipping of them might be stayed by teaching of Gods Word,
according as he exhorts Serenus, to teach the people, as in that Epistle
appears. But whether Gregory's opinion, or Serenus his judgment were better
herein, consider ye. For experience by and by confuteth Gregory's opinion. For
notwithstanding Gregory's writing, and others preaching, Images being once set
up in Temples, simple men and women shortly after fell on heaps I humbly pray,
may not the same be said of kneeling at receiving the Sacrament? was it not at
first injoined as a thing indifferent; but was it not received of ours as a
gesture of the highest reverence due to so great a mystery, as Bishop Prideaux
speaks? And does not Bishop Sparrow call it adoring, in his Rationale, p. 273.
Vide Art. 1. p. 5. hujus.
to worshipping of them, and at last the learned also were carried away with
the public error, as with a violent stream or flood. And at the second Council
at Nice the Bishops and Clergy decreed, That Images should be worshipped; and
so by occasion of these stumbling blocks, not only the unlearned and simple,
but the learned and wise, not the people only, but the Bishops, not the sheep
only, but the shepherds themselves, who should have been guides in the right
way, fell to Idolatry, in worshipping of Images

And P. 69. the Homily says thus: The Romish Church is not only an Idolatrous
Church, an Harlot, as the Scripture calls her, but also a foul, filthy, old
withered Harlot, (for she is of ancient years) understanding her lack of nature
and Yet Hooker in his Ecclesiast. Policy, l. 4. Sec. 9. p. 145. in answer to
Mr. Cartwright' s, and Bucer' s Objection against Popish Ceremonies: viz. That
Popery for want of utter extirpation of her Ceremonies has taken root and
flourished again, but has not been able to re-establish it self in any place,
after provision made against it, by utter evacuation of all Romish Ceremonies,
says thus, As we deny not, but that this may be true; so being of two evils to
choose the less, we hold it better, that the friends and favorers of the Church
of Rome should be in some kind of hope to have a corrupt Religion restored,
than both we and they conceive just fear, lest under the color of rooting out
Popery, the most effectual means to bear up the state of Religion be removed,
and so a ^^y made for Paganism, or for extreme barbarity to re-enter. To which
by the way I give this short answer: 1. That he acts directly against the
Doctrine of the Church of England, and therefore it is no wonder that his Book
was commended to the Pope of Rome as the best written in English, and that he
alone deserved the name of an Author. 2. He makes the Whores attire and
Ceremonies to be the most effectual means to bear up the state of Religion,
which is most abominably false and scandalous, if he means true state; but if
he means false, and formal, and corrupt, it may be true. 3. That he had rather
have Popery restored, at least the hopes of its restoring, continued by keeping
up her Ceremonies, than they abolished. 4. That he makes the state of Religion
to consist in, at least to depend upon Romish Ceremonies, and not the natural
and true beauty, and simple purity of the Gospel. 5. That he with the great
Whore of Rome seeks to please fond lovers (they being best pleased with whorish
attire and painted Shows) and not Jesus Christ, who is best pleased with simple
honest plainness. 6. That he suggests a most false position, that if Romish
Ceremonies be removed, Paganism will re-enter, whose contrary is most true, as
common experience, and all the Reformed Churches can witness. 7. That he makes
Popish Ceremonies, and Popery, and Barbarity, to be but evils of punishment,
and not evils of sin; for of two evils of sin, neither is to be chosen. 8. That
Popery being Antichristianism made up of superstition, idolatry, blasphemy,
heresy, usurpation, etc. it is unlawful to give men any hopes of restoring it.
true beauty, and great loathsomeness, which of her self she has, does after
the custom of such Harlots, paint her self with gold, pearl, stone, and all
kind of precious jewels, that she shining with the outward beauty and glory of
them, may please the foolish fantasy of fond lovers, and so entice them to
spiritual fornication with her, who if they saw her but in simple apparel would
abhor her, as the foulest and filthiest Harlot that ever was seen, Apoc. 17.
But the true Church of God as a chaste Matron espoused to one husband, our
Savior Jesus Christ, whom she is content only to please and serve, and
delights not to delight the fantasy of any other lovers or woers, is content
with her natural ornaments, not doubting by such sincere simplicity, best to
please him, who can well skill of the difference between a painted visage, and
true natural beauty. St. Jerome upon Jer. 10. says thus: Though Images be
decked with gold, yet good or profit is there none in them. And such deckings
of Images are tokens of Antichrists Kingdom, who as Daniel says, shall worship
God with gorgeous things. Lactantius says, that as little Girls play with
little Puppets, so be these decked Images great Puppets for old fools to play
with.

Homily of the p^ril of Idolatry, Part 3. p. 71. But away with these colored
cloaks of Idolatry, of the books and scriptures of Images and Pictures to That
the Papists Doctrine of Images, that they are Laymens Books, is directly
contrary to the word of God, and therefore as false and erroneous to be
detested of all Gods children, Habbak. 2. 18. Teachers of lies. Jer. 10. 8. The
stock is a Doctrine of vanities. Isa. 40. 10. It Is profitable for nothing. It Is
forbidden in the second Commandment, says A. B. Usher in his Sum of Christian
Religion, p. 230.
teach Idiots, nay to make Idiots and stark fools and beasts of Christians.
Ibid. Godly men will respect not only their own city, country, time, and the
health of men of their age, but be careful for all places and times, and the
salvation of all ages at the least, not lay such stumbling blocks and snares
for the feet of other countrymen and ages, which experience has already
proved to be the ruin of the world. Wherefore I make a general conclusion of
all that I have hitherto said. If the stumbling blocks and poisons of men's
souls, by setting up of Images will be many, yea infinite, if they be suffered,
and the warning of the same stumbling blocks and remedies for the said poisons
by preaching, be few; if the stumbling blocks be easy to be laid, the poisons
soon provided, and the warnings and remedies hard to know and come by; if the
stumbling blocks be continually in the way, and poison be ready at hand every
where, and warning and remedies but seldom given; and if all men be more ready
of themselves to stumble and be offended than to be warned; all men more ready
to drink of the poison, then to taste of the remedy, and so in fine the poison
continually and deeply drunk of many, the remedy seldom and faintly tasted of a
few; how can it be but that infinite of the weak and infirm shall be offended,
infinite by ruin shall break their necks, infinite by deadly venom be poisoned
in their souls? And how is the charity of God, and love of our neighbors in
our hearts then, if when we may remove such dangerous stumbling blocks, such
pestilent So Mr. Hawks, Martyr, called the Popes Traditions and Ceremonies. Fox
his Book of Martyrs, p. 1504.
poisons, we will not remove them? what shall I say of them which lay
stumbling blocks where there were none before, and set snares for the feet, nay
for the souls of weak and simple men, and work the danger of their everlasting
destruction, for whom our Savior Christ shed his most precious blood? So the
Homily.

2. Images are not to be tolerated in Churches* 1. Because they are occasions
of Idolatry, as the Homily of the Church of England against the peril of
Idolatry abundantly shows. Now occasions of Idolatry are to be avoided, as
may be gathered from Deuteronomy. 7. 3, 4. Neither shall thou make marriages with
them, thy daughter thou shall not give unto his son, nor his daughter shall
thou take unto thy son. Now mark the reason why the Israelites were forbidden
to marry wives of the Idolaters daughters, which God cast out before them: for
they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods.
Lo here you may see, that though it should be granted, that it were lawful in
it self for any of Gods Church to marry with Idolaters, which is thought to be
utterly unlawful: 1. Because it is expressly forbidden, Deuteronomy 7. 34. Ezra 9. 12,
13. not only to the Israelites, but also to the Christians, 2 Cor. 6. 14. Be
not unequally yoked with unbelievers, for what fellowship has righteousness
with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with darkness? Idolaters
are Whosoever seeks righteousnes^ by works without faith denies God, and
makes himself god, and they are not only Idolaters, but very Infidels, says
Luther upon Gal. 3. 10. p. 125, 128.
unbelievers; though they may make a kind of profession of faith in Christ, yet
they virtually deny him to be God by their worshipping of his Creatures with
Religious worship, and by their worshipping of him, not as he has appointed,
but after their own inventions they make an Idol of him. And you know, that our
Homily of Salvation of Mankind. p. 16. 17. says, That he is not to be
accounted a Christian man that denies this truth, that faith alone does
justify. And if they are not to be accounted Christians, then they are not to
be accounted Believers. 2. Because it is not only acknowledged to be a sin, yea
a great trespass, Ezra 9. 13. Ezra 10. 2, 10. but they that were guilty of it,
entered into a Covenant to put away their strange wives, and swore to perform
their Covenant; and they performed it, Ezra 10. 3, 9, 12, 16, 19. Yet upon this
account only it would be unlawful, because they will provoke to Idolatry, or
occasion their serving of other gods, or the true God after an idolatrous
manner, which God abhors. So though it should be yielded, that it were lawful
in it self to set up and suffer Idolatrous Images in the public places of Gods
worship, yet they are not to be erected or tolerated in them, because they are
scandalous objects, they are provocations to, and occasions of committing
Idolatry, forbidden in the second and sixth Commandments, and also in Romans 14.
13. Let no ma^^ a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way.
And Mat. 18. 6. and 'twas observed before, that Images are directly forbidden
in Gods Word, because they are occasions of Homily against peril of Idolatry,
p. 44.
idolatry. Which plainly shows, that occasions of idolatry are directly
forbidden in Gods Word. And so says Bishop Bishop Andrews upon Com. p. 109. A
B. Usher's Sum of Chapter Religion, p. 206.
Andrews, and A. B. Usher, Cum quid prohibetur, prohibentur illa omnia per quae
p^^venitur ad illud: When any thing is forbidden, all things which lead
thereunto are also forbidden. Bonae legis non est solum tollere vitiae sed
etiam occasiones vitiorum: It Is the part of good Laws not only to take away
vices, but also to take away the occasions of vices; and therefore to take away
Images, if the Lawmakers really intend to prevent Idolatry, and so for other
sins, and this was the wisdom and piety of good King Hezekiah, when the people
fell to worshipping of the Brazen Serpent. which Moses at Gods command set up
for the curing of the people that were stung with Serpents: He set not up
declarations of the use of it, and preachers against worshipping of it, but he
took the best, surest and Frustra sit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora.
readiest way to hinder the peoples idolatry, he brake it down, 2 King. 18. 4.
So if Magistrates will prevent Idolatry and superstition in their subjects,
they must pull down Popish Images, Altars, and abolish all Popish Ceremonies
and occasions of idolatry and superstition. Otho's showing his fair Wife
Poppaea naked to lustful Nero, was not more actively scandalous, than men's
setting up and willing permitting of such Images as have been and may be abused
to Idolatry in public places of Gods Worship, are, or may be. They show that
they have neither such zeal for God, nor love to their neighbors as they ought
to have. 2. God has commanded all Idols to be broken down, Exodus 23. 24. Thou
shall not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works, but
shall utterly overthrow them, and quite break down their images. So Exodus 34.
13. Numb. 33. 52. Deuteronomy. 7. 25, 26. Deuteronomy. 12. 2, 3. 3. Good Kings have been
highly commended for destroying the Images and Altars of Idolaters, as Asa in 1
King. 15. 13. and Hezekiah, 2 King. 18. 4. and Josiah, 2 King 23. 24. 4. They
do not only offend Papists, but professed adversaries without the Church; they
do not only allure Papists to commit Idolatry, but they so offend Jews and
Turks, that they will not embrace Christian Religion, because some who profess
themselves to be Christians, set up Images and Pictures in their Churches. 5.
We are all commanded to keep our selves from Idols, 1 John 5. ult. The word
(...) in St. John's time, signified generally an Image; for Idol and Image
signify the same thing, only one is a Greek word originally, and the other is
a Latin word. If you will keep your selves from Image Worship, you must keep
your selves from Images, especially in public places of worship. 6. The
Temples of God were not built to that end that the Images of the Creatures
should be placed in them, but that they might serve for the public performance
of that worship which is appointed and approved of God: Mat. 21. 13. My house
shall be called the house of prayer. 7. Images in Churches have a show of evil,
which ought to be abstained from; 1 These. 5. 22. A Papist, a stranger coming
into one of our great Churches, where Images were, (...) said aloud, Profecto
hic est facies ecclesiae nostrae, how truly I determine not; but the learned
Speech in Parliament, p. 3. 4.
Lord Faulkland said of some of our late Bishops, that under the pretense of
adorning our Churches, they have defiled our Church. Our 35 Article of Religion
says thus: Our Books of Homilies contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and
necessary for these times. And that against the peril of Idolatry speaks
notably against setting and suffering Images in Churches.

ART. XVI.
That those Books which are commonly To ordain any other Word or Sacraments
than those which God has appointed, is Will Worship forbidden in the second
Commandment, says A. B. Usher in his Su^ of Chapter Religion, p. 228. Homily for
Almesdeed^, T. 2. p. (...)* is quoted Tab. 4. in the Margent.
called Apocryphal, as Tobit, Judith, Esdras, etc. are the pure word of God,
and in all things agreeable thereunto. THis ^^ Because it is contrary to the
sixth Article of Religion of, the Church of, England which exclude^^m out of
the number of Canonical Books of Scripture 2. Because many things (...)
contained are contrary to Canonical Scripture for Doctrine and manners, as is
showed in the following; Appendix (intended first for another Book) and
therefore cannot be fit for confirmation of Doctrine, nor instruction of
manners.

Obj. But they are often allege in t^^ ^^ok of ^^ili^s, as Scripture which the
Holy Ghost does teach.

Answ. It Is answered, that they are not used as Canonical Scripture.

Object. But it is a rule in reasoning, Analogum per se positum stat pro suo
famosiori significato. Sanders. Log. l 1. c. 6. par. 4.
That an analogal put by it self stands for the most excellent significate.
Here Scripture put by it self, without any Epithete, stands for Canonical
Scripture, the most famous significate of Scripture.

Answ. To this I say, that if there be Canonical Scripture producible to prove
the thing, it was ill in the Margent to quote an Apocryphal Text, and not it;
but if there be no Canonical Scripture for it, it was ill to call it Scripture
in the Text without any Epithet or adjunct, and worse to say Vide appendicem.
the Holy Ghost does teach it.

Obj. But they are called part of the Old Testament in the order for reading
the first and second Lessons in the Common Prayer Book.

Answ. To this I must leave the Bishops to answer, or confess the error, and
amend it. For I profess I know not how to answer for them, if I What I can do,
I have done in the Appendix, but I fear that will not satisfy all.
could I would. Papists will, notwithstanding Dr. Cozens his Allegations, prove
from our own sayings, that they are Canonical Scripture, because they are by us
called the Old Testament, and so are appointed to be read. I pray read my
Appendix intended for another use.

An APPENDIX concerning Apocryphal Scriptures appointed to be read in Churches
and Chapels, etc.
Quest. 1. BEcause you are so full of your Questions, I ask you. Whether the
Apocryphal Scriptures appointed in the Calendar in the Common Prayer Book to be
read, the first Lessions at Morning and Evening-Prayer, be part of the Old
Testament?

The reason of asking this Question is this, because it is said in the Order how
the rest of the holy Scripture is appointed to be read; the Old Testament is
appointed to be read for the first Lessons at Morning and Evening-Praye^. And
in the following part of that Order, it is said thus: And to know what Lessons
shall be read every day, look for the day of the Month in the Calendar
following, and there ye shall find the Chapters that s^all be read for the
Lessons both at Morning and Evening-Prayer. Now in the Calendar (to pass by the
many Chapters that are culled out of the Apocryphal Books of Wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus, and appointed to be read upon Holy Days throughout the year;
though there be many good sayings in them, yet they have some Wisd. 19.
appointed to be read upon Mathias day, how properly let the world judge. And
Popish Expositors will no doubt make good Divinity and sense of it, which would
not please you if a Nonconformist should essay to make. Episc. Prideaux,
sascic. controv. c. 1. q 2. p. 14.
failings, and some that do not tend to edisication, and such as you would
exclaim against, if you should find them or the like in Mr. W. B's, or Mr.
T^^'s, or in any Nonconformists Sermons or Writings; and yet you have given
your assent and consent unto them, and have promised to read them upon the days
appointed) all the Chapters in Tobit (except the fifth Chapter) and of Judith,
many of Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, Bell and the Dragon, the History of Susanna, in
which are many false and ^angerous things appointed to be read. Now if they are
not part of the Old Testament, why do you say they are such, and give your
assent and consent that they shall be read in all Churches and Chapels, and
promise that you will read them in yours, contrary to the Doctrine of the
Church of England, to which you have (I suppose) subscribed too; and contrary
to the Doctrine of the Protestant Churches, seeing none but Papists hold them
to be parts of the Old Testament? I pray, Sir, give such an answer as may help
us to satisfy our people, whom you would have us to persuade to comply with
you in your public service; and answer the subtle Papists, who will be ready
to alledg your public Order and Calendar, and other things, as that concerning
the Service Book, Par. 1, 2, 3. and that direction which follows, line the
last, to prove that they are Canonical Scripture, because parts of the Old
Testament, as you plainly say in the said order and direction, and Calendar.
And I foresee that 'twill be but in vain to say, that our Church in her
Articles holds no such thing, but rather the contrary. For besides, that they
imply a contradiction, the appearance of which you are ready to carp at, and
exclaim against in Nonconformists. they will say, that that Order and Calendar
was made since the XXXIX Articles of the Church of England; and the last Law
they will say, either virtually repeals, or at least expounds the former. You are
(as you say) a Rational Divine; pray give a solid and sufficient reason of this
thing, of which we need not be ashamed, that may stop the mouths of our
dissenting Protestant friends, and opposing Popish enemies. If you cannot do
it, I hope you will ingenuously confess your error, and use your best and
utmost reason, interest, and endeavor with all sort; of men to reform it.

Q. 2. Whether you do indeed think that those Books or Chapters, or Histories,
(call them which you will) do indeed and in truth directly tend to the
edification of the Church, as you say Of Ceremonies in Preface to the Book of
Common Prayers.
, that all things; that are done in the Church ought to do? as the Apostle
teaches, 1 Corint^. 14. 26.

The reason of this Query is, because there are erroneous, frivolous and
dangerous things appointed to be read in Churches and Chapels to the people,
in some of those Chapters which do not tend to their edification, but rather to
their destruction, and others too. As for example, in Tob. 4. 10. (which is
appointed to be read September the 30th) it is said thus, That alms do deliver
from death, and suffers not to come into darkness. And Tob. 12. 9. (which is
appointed to be read the third of October) it is said thus, That alms does
deliver from death, and shall purge Which is contrary to Homily of Salvation,
page 16, 17. which says, that that were the greatest arrogance and presumption
that Antichrist could set up against God, to affirm, that a man might by his
own works take away and purge his own sin, and justify himself.
from all sin. Which may induce many, especially ignorant people, to swallow
the Doctrine of Popish Merits without a grain of salt, and deny or undervalue
the inestimable merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, contrary to 1 John
1. 9. Who cleanses us from all unrighteousness. And 1 Pet. 1. 18. Forasmuch as
we know that ye are not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold
(and therefore not with alms) from your vain conversation, received by
tradition from your fathers, but with the precious blood of Christ. And Tit. 2.
14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. And also contrary
to Heb. 9. 14, 15, 22, 26, 28. I know that this place of Tobit is alleged in
the ^ ^ Homily of Almesdeeds, Tom. 2. p. 159, 160, 161. where it says thus:
The same Lesson does the Holy Ghost also teach in sundry places of the
Scripture, (quoting Tob. 4. in the Margent,) saying, mercifulness and
almesgiving purges from all sins, and delivers from death, and suffers not
the soul to come into darkness. Now to this the Chapter of England there answers,
That Almesdeeds purge not from sin, as the the original cause of our acceptance
before God; or that for the dignity or worthiness thereof our sins are washed
away, and we purged and cleansed of all the spots of our iniquities, for that
were to deface Christ, and defraud him of glory; but they mean this, and this
is the meaning of those and such sayings, that God of his mercy and of his
favor toward them whom he has appointed to everlasting salvation, has so
offered his grace, especially, and they have so received it fruitfully, that
although by reason of their sinful living outwardly, they seemed before to have
been the children of wrath and perdition; yet now the Spirit of God mightily
works in them unto obedience unto Gods will and commandments; they declare by
their outward deeds and life, in the showing of mercy and charity (which cannot
come but of the Spirit of God, and his special grace) that they are the
undoubted children of God appointed to everlasting life. 2. That the words are
to be understood of the judgment of men: as the following words do declare, for
that speaks of the judgment of charity, and of men. The meaning of Tobit' s
words are these, that we doing these things according to Gods will, and our
duty, have our sins indeed washed away, and our offenses blotted out, not for
the worthiness of them, but by the grace of God, which works all in all, and
that for the promise that God has made to them that are obedient to his
Commandments. Almesdeeds do wash away sins, because God does vouchsafe to
repute us as clean and pure, when we do them for his fake, and not because they
do merit or deserve our purging, or for that they have any such strength or
virtue in themselves. Homily of Almsdeed, Tom. 2. Part 2. p. 160, 161.

I have alleged these words to vindicate the Doctrine of the Church of
England, and to show that the Church of England is in the main sound in the
Doctrine of Justification. Yet if I may be so bold, I humbly conceive:

1. That this Quotation of Tobit in the Margent might well have been spared to
prove, That the Holy Ghost in sundry places of Scripture, says, that
mercifulness and almesgiving purges from all sins, etc. Because I fear, that
our watchful adversaries will catch at it, and make their advantage to prove
that Book Canonical Scripture. For Analogum per se positum stat pro^suo
famosiori significato seu analogato. Scripture put by it self is presumed to
Sanders. Log l. 1. c. 6. par. 4.
stand for its most famous significate; and there by Scripture, they will
presume is meant Sacred and Canonical Scripture.

2. I know and acknowledge that the sense given by our Church is good, and
agreeable to that which our sound Divines do give of that of the wise man in
Prove. 16. 6. Junius, and Dod, and Cartwright in loc.
By mercy and truth iniquity is purged. But I know also, that they expound this
place of Gods mercy and truth, and not of man's. And so it does not make good
Tobit's of Almsdeeds. But there is no need of alleging an Apocryphal Text so
much abused by professed Papists, to prove and provoke their Disciples to do
meritorious works, and then be forced to put our selves to much trouble to
explain our honest meaning, and caveat our people against Popish false
exterpretations (which whether all do or will understand, is very doubtful)
especially if that neglected place of Solomon's Proverbs, Prove. 16. 6. be so to
be expounded as the Church of England expounds that of Tob. 4. 10. and 12. 9.
which she must do, else Papists will clearly get advantage by that expression
in the Homily above recited, The same Lesson does the Holy Ghost ^lso teach in
sundry places of the Scripture. But to proceed, Solus sanguis Christi nos
purg^t ab omni peccato, only the blood of Christ purges us from all sin, says
Johannes Maccovius, Red. c. 23. de Elemosin^, cont. prima falsa Pontif. p. 51.

And Tob. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. appointed to be read the 30th day of September at
Evening-prayer. The Angel Raphael, who told Tobit a lie in Chap. 5. 6. (for
which Bishop Prideaux among other things rejects Fascic. Controv. de Scripture.
c. 1. q 2. p. 14.
the Book) viz. That he had lodged with our brother Gabael. And v. 12. That his
same was Azarias the son of Ananias the great, and of thy brethren.) taught him
a For which A. B. Usher's Sum of Ch Rel. p. 15, and Bishop Prideaux Fascic.
controv. c. 1. q 2. p. 14. reject^ the Book as false and frivolous.
Magical spel or trick to Concilium non divinum aut coeleste, sed plane
magicum, as Junius proves in locum.
conjure away the wanton Devil Asmodius, (who was (forsooth) in love with
Sarah, the daughter of Raguel, and had killed her seven husbands on their
Weddingnight, as it is said. v. 14. with which she was reproached by her fathers
maids, Chap. 3. 7. 8. appointed to be read also on September. 28. at
Evening-prayer) in these words, v. 16. And when thou shall come into the
marriage-chamber thou shall take the ^s^es of perfume and shall lay upon them
some of the heart and liver of the fish (spoken of before Chap. 6. 4, 7. where
he first taught him the spell) and he said unto him touching the heart and the
liver, if a Devil or an evil spirit trouble any, we must make a Is this for
edification in good manners.
smoke thereof before the man, or the woman, and the party shall be no more
vexed; and the Devil shall smell it, and flee away, and never come again any
more. Which device he accordingly put in practice, as you may read in Tob. 8.
1, 2, 3. appointed to be read October the first, at Evening-prayer: And when
they had supped, they brought Tobias in un^^ her; and as he went, he remembered
the words of Raphael, and took the ^stes of the perfumes, and put the heart and
the liver of the fish thereupon, and made a smoke therewith; the which smell
when the evil spirit had smelled, he fled into the utmost parts of Egypt, and
the Angel bound him. Which counsel and practice some men may teach some people
to use and trust in Magical and Diabolical spells and charms, and seek to
Conjurers and Witches, and Devils, for which Bishop Bishop Prideaux Fascic.
controv. c. 1. q. 2. p. 14.
Prideaux condemns and rejects the Book, forbidden (say our learned and sound
Divines Perkins in his order of Causes, p. 63, to 66. A. B. Usher's Sum of
Christian Religion, p. 229.
) in the second Commandment; and is judged to be contrary to our Saviors
Doctrine in Mat. 17. 21. Mark 9. 29. and in many other places of Scripture:
Howbeit this kind goes not out but by prayer and fasting. And to pass over
Tob. 10. 6, 7. appointed to be read October the second at Evening-prayer, which
may teach women to contradict their husbands; and if it be not, yet looks like
scolding: Hold thy peace, said Tobit to his wife; for he is safe. Hold thy
peace, said she to her husband. And that frivolous story of his Dog following
after them (with which some have made vain sport, and others may again) in Tob.
11. 4. appointed to be read at Morning-prayer, October the third. I come to
Tob. 12 12. appointed to be read at Evening-prayer October the third, where
this is appointed to be read of the Angel Raphael: Now therefore when thou
did pray, and Sarah thy daughter-in-law, I did bring the remembrance of your
prayers before the holy one; and when thou did bury the dead, I was with thee
likewise. And verse. 15. it is appointed to be read thus: I am Raphael one of the
seven holy Angels which present the prayers of the Saints, and which go in and
out before the glory of the holy one. Which words imply two gross errors: 1.
That there are but seven holy Angels that wait upon God, and go in and out
before him; which is contrary to the Canonical Scriptures, which say, that
thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times (...) Cornel a Lapid^.
Junius, Diodate, Willet in locum.
thousand stood before him, Dan. 7. 10. which is generally by Papists as well
as Protestants understood of holy Angels. See also Heb. 12. 22. Apoc. 5, 1^ See
also A. B. Usher his Sum of Christian Religion, p. 118. where (...) says, that
all the Angels do wait upon the Lord their God in heaven to ex^cute his will.
2. That those seven Angels are Gods remembrancers, (...) mind him of the
prayers of his Saints, and presenters of their prayers be^^ him. A kind of
Heavenly Courtiers or Officers that do present to, as remember God of the good
works (prayers and alms, etc.) of (...) holy ones; as if God did not regard or
remember their prayers (...) services without these seven Angels mediations
intercession. Which office (says learned J^^ Jun. in Tob. 12. 12.
the Scripture does no where give to created A^g^^ but maintain to belong only
to Christ; and which ^l^^ if there were nothing else, is enough to prove the
(...) Upon the 15 ver.
bulousness and impurity of the Book; and to reje^^ as evil and unfit to be
read in public, yea to be bound up with the Sacred Word of God. And learned A.
B. Usher (where before) reckons up all the offices of the Sum of Christian
Religion, page 118.
good Angels to the souls and bodies of good men, but mentions not their
presenting of the Saints prayers before God, nor remembering God of them And
it is a Doctrine and place of Scripture (as you call it) that makes much for the
Which is a good argument there is no such thing, Bishop Prideaux Fascic. cont.
c. 4. S. 2. q. 1. p. 169. Article 7th.
Papists Idolatrous invocating of Angels. And it is contrary to the Doctrine of
the Church of England, and of other Reformed Churches, and of the Canonical
Scriptures, which say, That Jesus Christ the second Person in the Sacred
Trinity, the Angel of the Covenant, (as he is called Mal. 3. 1.) is the only
person that does present the prayers of the Saints to God, and that he is our
only Mediator of Redemption and Intercession, as may be fully proved by Romans 8.
34. 1. Tim. 2. 5. Heb. 7. 25. 1 John 2. 12. Revel. 8. 3, 4. And the last
Collect in the L^tany, and the Collect for St. Stephens day, which prayers say,
That Christ is our only Mediator and Advocate. And by the Homily of Prayer,
Tom. 2. Part 2. p. 115. and Part 3. p. 118. where it is said thus: In the word
of God the Holy Ghost does plainly teach us, that Christ is our only Mediator
and Intercessor with God, and that we must not run or seek to another. See also
A. B. Usher's Sum of Christian Religion, p. 166, and p. 176. where he shows,
That one part of Christ's Intercession for us, does consist in his presenting
our prayers unto God, and making them acceptable in his sight. And it is
contrary to Psalm. 8. 4. Psalm. 111. 5. Psalm. 112. 6. Levit. 26. 42. Luke 12. 6,
7. and many other places of Sacred Scripture; where it is said, That God is
mindful of his people, and of his Covenant made with them. Yea, that he does
hear what his people say, and take special notice of what they do; yea, and
record what they say and do. Read Mal. 3. 16. Then they that feared the Lord,
spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of
remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon his name. If God take notice of, and record what his people say
one to another, then without doubt he takes notice of, and remembers the
prayers which they make unto himself; and therefore he needs no such
remembrancing Angels as this feigned Raphael speaks of, to put him in mind of
his Saints prayers. And he has appointed Jesus Christ to present the prayers
of, and make Intercession for his people, Joh. 6. 27. Him has the Father
sealed, and appointed, Heb. 3. 12. to the office of a Redeemer, and of making
satisfaction for the sins of his people, and Intercession for them; as Bishop
Reynolds very learnedly shows upon Psalm. 110. page 383, 384. 387, 388, etc.
And Christ has undertaken the work of our Redemption, and making Intercession
for his people. He was not only made a surety to us of a b^tter Covenant, Heb.
7. 22. but he also is said to come to do the office of a surety, Lo I come to
do thy will O God, Heb. 10. 5, 7, 9. God fitted him, and prepared him for the
work of our Redemption, v. 5. and Christ voluntarily undertook it. Then said I,
Lo, I come (in the volume of thy Book it is written of me) to do thy will O
God, v. 7, 9. Hence does he call himself the good shepherd that does lay down
his life for his sheep, Joh. 10. 11, 15. which Doctrine is (says the Reverend
Bishop) the rock and foundation of all the Churches comfort; and therefore the
Doctrine held forth in the foresaid feigned story of Tobit, is the more
pernicious and abominable, being so destructive of our Lord and Saviors right,
and of all good Christians sure and solid comfort; and those men that refuse to
give their unfeigned assent and consent thereunto, and to its use and public
reading, are the more excusable, not to say commendable. for denying themselves
so far as they have done, rather than do that, or consent to the doing of that
which is (as you see) so much conducing to Popish Doctrine and practice, and
contrary to Gods sacred and precious truth, the honor and interest of Jesus
Christ, and the comfort and welfare of all good Christians.

In the Months of September and October all the Book of Judith is appointed to
be read in public in Churches and Chapels. Where, to pass by many of the
falsities that Orthodox learned Divines (both ancient and modern) do find in
the History, if it may be so called (for the Text says, that 'twas acted, and
therefore penned, after the captivity, yea after the return of the Jews to
Jerusalem, as is clear in chap. 4. 3. and chap. 5. 19. and then there was no
true Nabucodonosor King of the Assyrians, as may be gathered from the Books of
Daniel, Ezra and Nehemiah. And it is therefore thought to be but a Bishop
Prideaux, Fascic. controvers. c. 1. q. 2. p. 16.
fiction or mere Romance, and was intended to procure favor from the Roman
Emperor or his Deputy in the Jews Country; for the distressed Jews, which was
the drift of Achiors good speech and counsel, or else to work their ruin by
some such crafty and deceitful and bloody woman as Judith was, and by such
wicked practices, as she is said to use, (as may be gathered from Chap. 8. 35.)
in chap. 9th.

2. Judith prays unto God, and therein commends the deceitful and cruel fact
of Simeon, Genesis 34. which God the Holy Ghost by righteous Jacob condemns, Genesis
49. 5. And also prays God to prosper her feigned tales and lies, Give into my
hand the power that I have conceived: smite by the deceit of my lips, the
servant with the Prince, and the Prince with the servant; break down their
stateliness by the hand of a woman; and make my speech and deceit to be their
wound and stripe, who purposed evil things against thy Covenant, Chap. 12. 3,
4, 9, 10, 13. And chap. 10. 12, 13. she tells two or three lies to compass her
design: And she said, I am a woman of the Hebrews, and am fled from them, for
they shall be consumed. There is one lie at least. And I am come to Holophernes
the chief captain of your army, to declare words of truth. There Is another lie.
And I will show him a way whereby he shall win all the Hillcountry without
losing the body or life of any man. There Is another lie. And in chap. 11. there
are many more lies, yea a most abominable series of treachery, swearing,
flattering, aequivocating and dissembling, and all covered with the fair
pretense of Religion, to the great dishonor of God, and the scandal of
Religion, the opening of the mouths of the wicked to blaspheme, and speak evil
of God, Religion, and good men. I pray read the words, and seriously consider
them, and then judge whether they do not tend more to the destruction than the
edification of the ignorant hearers and readers, and teach more evil than good
manners. verse. 5. Then Judith said unto Olophernes, receive the words of thy
servant, and suffer thine handmaid to speak in thy presence, and I will declare
no lie unto thee this night. v. 6. And if thou will follow the words of thine
handmaid, God will bring the thing perfectly to pass by thee, and my Lord shall
not fail of his purposes. v. 7. As Nebucodonosor King of all the earth lives,
and as his power lives, who has sent thee for the upholding of every living
thing; for not only men shall serve him by thee, but also the beasts of the
field, and the cattle, and the fowls of the air shall live by thy power under
Nebucodonosor, and all his house. v. 8. For we have heard of thy wisdom, and
thy policies, and it is reported in all the earth, that thou only art excellent
in all the Kingdom, and mighty in knowledge, and wonderful in feats of war. v.
9. Now as concerning the matter which Chap. 5. 18, 1^^
Achior did speak in thy counsel, we have heard his words, for the men of
Bethulia saved him, and he declared unto them all the words that he had spoken.
v. 10. Therefore O Lord and Governor, reject not his word, but lay it up in
thine heart, for it is true, for our Nation shall not be punished, neither can
the sword prevail against them, except they sin against their God. v. 11. And
now that my Lord be not defeated and frustrate of his purpose, even death is
now fallen upon them, and their sin has It meets, not overtakes them, if this
be true.
overtaken them, wherewith they will provoke their God to anger whenever they
shall do that which is not fit to be done. 12. For their victuals fail them,
and all their water is scant, they have determined to lay hands upon their
cattle, and purposed to consume all those things that God has forbidden them
to eat by his Laws. v. 13. And are resolved to spend the first fruits of the
corn, and the tenths of the wine and oil which they had sanctified and reserved
for the Priests that serve in Jerusalem, before the face of our God, the which
things it is not lawful for any of the people so much as to Did not David and
his men eat the shewbread, and did he sin in so doing? did not our Savior
justify them in eating of it in that extremity? Mat. 12. 3, 4. and were not
these besieged Bethulians in as great extremity as David and his men were.
Which place plainly shows that a rigorous observation of Ceremonies must give
place to necessity, says Diodate upon the place.
touch with their hands. v. 14. For they have sent some to Jerusalem, because
also they that dwell there have done the like, to bring them a license from the
Senate. 15. Now when they shall bring them word, they will forthwith do it, and
they shall be given thee to be destroyed the same day. But now comes the double
iniquity. 16. Wherefore I thine handmaid knowing all this, a^^ fled from their
presence, and God has sent me to work Had King James who discovered the
Papists Powder Treason, heard her, he would have examined her a little, and
found out her dissimulation. Had any Nonconformists uttered such words in any
of their works, Mr. Debater would no doubt have cried out Treason, treason,
etc. and yet to the reading of this he gives assent and consent for instruction
of people in manners. Art. 6. B. Prideaux. Fasc. cont. c. 1. q. 2. p. 16.
things with thee, whereat all the earth shall be astonished, and whosoever
shall hear it. 17. For thy servant is religious, and serves the God of heaven
day and night. Now therefore my Lord, I will remain with thee, and thy servant
will go out by night into the valley, and I will pray unto God, and he will
tell me when they have committed their sins. v. 18. And I will come and show it
unto thee; then thou shall go forth with all thine army, and there shall be
none of them that shall resist thee. v. 19. And I will lead thee through the
midst of Judea, until thou come before Jerusalem, and I will set thy throne in
the midst thereof, and thou shall drive them as sheep that have no shepherd,
and a dog shall not so much as open his mouth at thee: for these things were
told me, according to my foreknowledg, and they were declared unto me, and I am
sent to tell thee.

Now I pray seriously consider all-her words, and search whether you can find
so many lies told at one time by one person (except in the Popish Legends) and
all hid under the cloak of Religion, prayer, revelation and affection, when
nothing was intended but murder and mischief, as the two next Chapters plainly
show, was her design. I know there may be good use made of this story or
fiction, to teach Kings and great men, Generals and others, to take heed of
entertaining of fair-faced and smooth-tongued Women, lest they be deceived,
shamed, yea ruined by them; and it is to be feared some persons may (the Lord
restrain them) take example by Judith to lie, swear, dissemble, equivocate, and
do any thing to compass their bloody designs against the Princes and Potentates
of the world, and may think it lawful to use unlawful means to obtain (as they
judge) a good end, (as the Monk of Swinstead-Abby did against King John, who
poisoned him in the Chalice; and those wicked wretches that poisoned the
Emperor Henry the seventh in the Host, and those wicked bloody Papists that
stabbed King Henry the If I mistake not (says Dr. Jer. Taylor's Sermon at St.
Mary's in Oxford upon November 5th, p. 19.) it was Pope Sixtus Quintus, who
sometimes pronounced a speech in full Consistory, in which he compares the
assassinate of J^ques Clement and Judith, where after having aggravated the
faults of the murdered King, he concludes him to have died impenitent, denied
him the solemnities of Mass, Dirge and requiem for his soul; at last he ends
with a prayer, that God would finish what in this bloody manner he had begun.
third of France with a knife, in the belly; and King Henry the fourth his
successor in the mouth, and at the heart. All which Mr. Prin speaks of in his
Rome's Masterpiece, p. 34. and an Indian nut, that the confederate Papists had
prepared for King Charles the first. From which and the like bloody designs and
practices, the Lord in mercy preserve King Charles the second, and all his
Royal Relations and loyal subjects) especially when they shall hear and read
that her treacherous and bloody fact is so much, and by such men commended, and
held forth for peoples example of life and instruction in good Art 6.
manners, and as part of the Old Testament, at least See Preface to the
Common Prayer Book, Parag. 4.
agreeable to the will of God. I beseech you to read over all this, and examine
and consider it well, and then I make no question but you will see cause enough to
tear these two fabulous, erroneous, and dangerous Books out of our Bibles, and
cast them out of our Churches.

Methinks, seeing the ancient Fathers so ordered the matter, that the whole See
Preface concerning the Service of the Church, Parag. 1.
Bible, or the greatest part thereof should be read once every year; and seeing
that Order is called a Ibid. Parag. 2.
godly and decent order, and fault found that it has been altered, broken and
neglected by planting in Are not the stories of Tobit, Judith, Susanna, Bell
and the Dragon, as uncertain, Ex Historicis Apocryphis, incertum est an Tobias
and Judith cum fragmentis de Susanna, Bell and Dracone habeantur pro Dramaticis
potius quam v^ris narrationibus? Bishop Prideaux Fascic. cont. c. 1. q. 2. p.
16.
uncertain stories and Legends -- that commonly when any Book of the Bible was
begun after three or four Chapters were read out, all the rest were unread;
this corruption should not be continued still, as the directions for proper
Lessons plainly shows it is, so does the Calendar. For there is not one Chapter
of either of the Books of Chronicles, in which Books are many things that are
not so plainly and fully set down in the Books of the Kings. And also the whole
Book of the the Canticles (which shows the excellency and mutual love of Christ
and his Church) is neglected, and but twelve Chapters of the Prophecy of
^zekiel are appointed to be read in the whole year; the other thirty-nine,
especially that exceeding profitable and remarkable Chapter, Ezekiel. 16. wherein
God takes special care, and gives a special charge to have Jerusalem know her
abominations, v. 2. and to take notice of his extraordinary love toward her*
v. 6.) are left out, and several other Chapters in other Books of the Old
Testament, in which are things very profitable to be read for the understanding
of other places of Scripture, confirmation of Doctrine, and instruction in good
manners. And there is appointed to be read as a Lesson, but one piece of a
Chapter of the Book of the Revelations (that excellent Book, which has so much
concerning the Church of God in this latter end of the world, and discovers so
much of the Antichrist and other enemies of Christ and his true and pure
Church; of which Book Christ says, Blessed is he that reads, and they that
hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those* things that are written
therein, for the time is at hand, Revel. 1. 3. And that if any man shall take
away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part
out of the Book of Life, and out of the holy city, and from the things that are
written in this Book, Revel. 22. 19.) and that is the 19th Chapter, and that
but to the 17th verse, and that as obscure and mysterious, and as hard to be
understood as most of the rest of that holy Book, and the rest that is omitted
more easy (most of it) to be understood than that; and to be sure much more
profitable for the Church of Christ than the 24th Chapter of Ecclesiasticus is,
which is appointed to be read by special order upon the 24th of August, St.
Bartholomews day; and to be more sure, than those that are appointed to be read
out of Tobit and Judith; and yet there are above 120 Chapters of Apocryphal
Books appointed in the Calendar, to be read in one year. And whether appointing
them, and punishing Ministers for reading those other of the Books of
Scriptures, be not a virtual taking away the words of that Book, I humbly leave
to your consideration.

And seeing your Convocation-men (who Can. 139. call themselves the Church of
England) say they have ordained nothing to be read but the pure word of God, or
that which is agreeable to the same. If a great part of the pure word of God,
must give place, as less Except certain Books and Chapters which be least
edifying, and might best be spared, and therefore are left unread. Vide, Order
how the rest of the holy Scripture is appointed to be read. Parag. 1.
conducing to the instruction of people in good manners, than the Apocryphal
Scriptures do, methinks they might have done well to have left out all such
parts, and passages, and expressions of them, as are not agreeable to the pure
Word of God, as they do in Ecclesiasticus 25. which is appointed to be read
only to the 13 verse. And in Eccl^s. 30. which is to be read only to 18th
verse. And Eccl^s. 46. which is to be read only to v. 20. where the 20th verse,
which says, That Samuel prophesied after his death, and showed the King his
death, and lift up his voice from the earth to prophecy, to blot out the
wickedness of the people; is omitted, because as I suppose, the ancient Fathers
have judged it to be contrary to the pure Word of God; and if upon that account
that be left out, it is thought that upon the same account, Chap. 48. should be
cut off at v. 13. or that left out which says, that nothing, as the old
Translation, and as Junius has it, ulla res, or as the last has it, No word
could overcome Elizeus, and that after his death his body prophesied. For every
Book of the Apocrypha has falsehoods in Doctrine or History, as the learned Sum
of Christ. Relig. p. 14. 15.
A. B. Usher says, and shows in many particulars in every Book; where it is
observed by him and Jerome, and Bishop Fascic. controv. c. 1. q. 2. p. 14.
Prideaux, that Philo the Jew, who lived since Christ, is judged the Author of
the Book of Wisdom, though he would make the world believe that See the Title,
and c. 9. the old Translation.
Solomon was the Author of it.

Now I pray give me leave to propose to the godly wife some few passages I have
glanced upon in reading that Book, whether they are agreeable to Gods pure Word.

1. Whether that be true and agreeable to Sacred Scripture, That God made not
death, Wisd. 1. 13. seeing it is said, Genesis 2. 17. In the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely die. And Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed unto all men
once to die, and after that to judgment. Pray who but God has appointed it?
and whether God may not as well be said to make death as darkness? Genesis 1.
Exodus 10. 21, 22. Josh. 24. 7. Psalm. 104. 20. Thou make darkness.

2. Whether there be no poison of destruction in any of Gods creatures, as it is
said there is not, Wisd. 1. 14. seeing Adders, Asps, Serpents, Toads, Spiders,
etc. have poison in them? as is evident, Deuteronomy. 34. 24, 33. Job 20. 16. Psalm.
58. 4. Psalm. 140. 3. Romans 3. 13. And was not King John poisoned to death?

3. Whether that be a true and a good expression, and agreeable to Gods pure
Word, which is in Wisd. 2. 2. For we are born at all adventures? in the Latin
it is thus, Casu nati sumus; i. e. We are born by chance? Seeing the expression
sounds very ill among Christians, who deny chance, and ascribe all events to
Gods Providence, the Scriptures indicted by the infallible Magic. Phis. l. 1. c.
3. p. 57.
Spirit of God, being the rule alone for Doctrine and manners to them; saying,
That a sparrow does not fall to the ground without the Providence of God, and
that our hairs are numbered, Mat. 10. 29, 30. And that God begat us, and formed
us, Deuteronomy. 32. 18. Isa. 44. 2. And Job tell us, that God brought him out of the
womb, Job 10. 18. Now I hope you will not say, that God does cause any thing by
chance, or at all peradventure; because all things are ordered and come to pass
according to the counsel of God, Act. 2. 23. Act. 4. 28. and the Sum of
Christian Relig. p. 109, 110.
Reverend and learned A. B. Usher, (whom we Christians should credit more than
Philo the Jew) says expressly, That nothing comes to pass by mere hap or
chance, but as God in his eternal knowledge and just will has decreed before,
should come no pass. And that of wise Solomon, Prove. 16. 33. is very
remarkable, The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of
the Lord.

2. The words are not true, quoad nos homines, but sound very ill in the School
of Philosophy as well as of Divinity; for Philosophers tell us, That chance is
a cause by accident of those things which are undertaken without election or
counsel; and an effect by accident is that which does happen besides the
intention of the agent. And they make this difference between Fortune and
Chance, That fortune is ascribed to those things that are endued with reason
and will; as when a man digs a Well and finds a treasure, finding the treasure
an effect, they say i^ by accident, and is by them ascribed to Fortune. And
Chance they say, is a cause of the events which do happen about things that are
destitute of will and reason; as when a glass falls from a table upon the
ground, yet is not broken; this, they say, is an effect by accident, and is by
them ascribed to Chance. But now we have reason and will when we are born; and
our parents also, who are the chief agents in our birth, have reason and will,
and do act in our births, not only as natural agents; but also as rational
creatures, and are causes by themselves of our births; for they do effect
Causae per se.
our births by their own faculty, that is, by nature or counsel; and they do
not effect our births by accident, by a strange faculty, that is, besides the
propension of nature, or purpose of mind; neither do we our selves in our
births so act; for we have a natural inclination when our Months are finished,
to be born; and our Parents have the like natural propension to bring us forth;
and therefore we cannot be truly said to be born by chance, or at all
adventure, or by fortune; and if so, then our births should be effects by
accident, that is, happen besides the intention and expectation of the agent,
which cannot be, for our birth is intended and expected.

3. Besides too, I do not remember the word applied to all among us, but only
to bastards, who indeed in our common discourse are said to come, or to be born
by chance, but untruly too, as is showed above. But this sense would sound very
ill among us, if applied to all persons; how to make a true and good sense of
the words I know not.

4. Whether that be an universal truth and agreeable to Gods word in Wisd. 3.
12, 13. to be read October 14. speaking of the ungodly that despise wisdom,
thus: Their wives are foolish, and their children wicked, and their offspring
cursed. Was not Abigail the wife of churlish drunken ungrateful Nabal, a wise
and chaste woman, who by her prudence pacified incensed David, and saved her
husbands and servants lives, and restrained him from shedding innocent blood?
And was Jonathan the Son of Saul, a wicked man and cursed? was King Hezekiah
the Son of wicked King Ahaz, a wicked and cursed child? Is it not directly
contrary to Gods pure Word, which shows that Ahaz was a wicked man, and that
Hezekiah was an eminently godly man and King, as may be seen, 2 King. 16. 20. 2
King. 18. 2 Chronicles. (...). ult. 2 Chronicles. 29. 2 Chronicles. 30. 2 Chronicles. 31. 20. And
was Abijah the Son of wicked Jeroboam who made Israel to sin, a wicked child,
and curse^ offspring? Does not the Lord say of him thus, That all Israel (...)
mourn for him, for he only shall come to the grave, because in him there is
found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam? 1
King. 14. 13. Does it not hence follow, that none of the wives of wicked men
are wise, and none, of their children shall be saved? and it will not shift it
off, by saying that the words are only indefinite, and sound no more but this,
that some wicked men's wive^ are foolish, that is, light and wanton, and that
some of wicked men's children are wicked and cursed; for so it may be said of
truly godly men's wives and children, as we may see in David's and Solomon's; and
then what punishment or discouragement is this more to the ungodly than to the
godly? and therefore that is not the sense, and was not the meaning of the
Author, but the former, which is false, and not agreeable to Gods pure word of
truth.

5. Whether that in Wisd. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19 verses, be agreeable to the pure
word of God, which is, As for the children of adulterers they shall not come to
their perfection, and the seed of an unrighteous bed shall be rooted out; for
though they live long, yet shall they be nothing regarded, and their last age
shall be without honor; or if they die quickly, they have no hope, neither
comfort in the day of trial. For horrible is the end of the unrighteous
generation? Now I pray are these things universally true of Bastards or not?
that they are not so, (...) A. B. Usher says of this, see his cruel sentence
against Bastards. Sum. of Chapter Relig. page 16.
consider.

1. That Jephthah was a bastard, Judge. 11. 1, 2. and yet he came to his
perfection; and though he was cast out, so as he did not inherit his fathers
land, yet he lived long, and he was regarded, and his last age was with honor;
for he was a valiant, virtuous, and victorious man, and was chosen first by the
Gileadites to be General of all their forces, and afterward he was chosen Judge
of all Israel, and he ruled Israel six years, and he had hope and comfort in
the day of trial; for he is reckoned by the Apostle amongst those believing
worthies, of whom he says, that the world was not worthy of them, Heb. 11. 32,
38. he was endued with the spirit of prudence and fortitude, yea and was a
truly godly man, as appears by his prudent and just dealing with the Ammonites,
and his conscientious keeping of his rash vow, though 'twas so much against his
own interest, and disadvantageous to his only child. And his death was not more
horrible than other men's; the Scripture speaks no evil of his death, (as it
does of several wicked men's, Saul's, Ahabs, Achitophels, Jehorams, Jezabels, and
Judas's, and others) but only that he died after he had judged Israel six
years, and that he was buried in one of the cities of Gilead, his own country.

2. It Is against the express Text of Scripture and scope of the Spirit of God
in Ezekiel. 18. 4, 8, 17, 20. which says, That it shall be no more said, that the
parents have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edg. For
the soul that sins it shall die. The children shall not be punished for the
fathers fault.

3. Adulterers and Adulteresses, that were infamous by their own fault, have
had hope, and have been saved, as we may see in K. David and Rahab, and
therefore sure Bastards that are not infamous through their own default, but
only (as such) through the sin of their Parents, may have hope, and may through
Gods mercy upon their repentance for their own sins, and faith in Christ, be
saved too eternally.

4. If this of Philo were universally true, then no man could ordinarily be
fully persuaded, and sure of his Salvation; which is a Doctrine that may bring
true born children into an uncomfortable condition, and make them almost
without hope, and bring them to a terrible end.

5. Pharez the son of Judah, begotten adulterously upon ^is Daughter-in-law
Tam. r, was a bastard. Ce^ 38 and yet was no (...) miserable person as the
Author of the Book of Wisdom describes a bastard to be. For he was a hopeful,
yea a blessed man: God so blessed Pharez, that among the Posterity of Judah it
was said, in craving a blessing on a family, Let thy house be like the house of
Pharez, whom Tamar bare unto Judah, Ruth 4. 12. Yea, he was honored with being
one of our Lord and Savior Christ's Progenitors, according to his humane
nature, as ye may see by comparing Ruth 4. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. 1 Chronicles. 2. 4,
5. Mat. 1. 3. Luke 3 33.

6. Whether that in Wisd. 8. 19, 20. (said to be spoken of Solomon, as the The
ninth Chapter is called Solomon's Prayer in the old Translation.
words preceding and succeeding show) be agreeable to Gods pure word, viz. For
I was a witty child, and had a good spirit; yea rather, being good, I came into
a body undefiled? and do not rather savor of much base pride, and be not
directly contrary to true Solomon's Doctrine, Prove. 27. 2, Let another man
praise thee, and not thy own mouth, a stranger and not thine own lips: and do
not smell very rankly of the Upon this account Bishop Prideaux condemns this
Book, Fascic. controv. c. 1. q. 2. p. 14.
Pythagoreans, and the Pharisees error, who held, That the souls of good men
when they die, go not immediately to heaven and there remain, but into the
bodies of other good men, as De Bello Judaico. l. 2. c. 7.
Josephus relates of the Pharisees: Yea, and do not virtually deny original
sin? for he says, that he had a good spirit, which I take to be meant of his
soul; for it is in the Latin, Bonam animam fortitus eram; and that he was good,
(i. e.) of a good soul, and that he came into a body undefiled, (i. e.) with
sin. what else is or can be the meaning? For I am of their opinion, that hold
that the first sin of Adam, our common father, was and is imputed to all us his
posterity descending from him by ordinary generation, and that we naturally
want that original righteousness which was in Adam, and that we are prone to
sin, which proneness to sin is propagated to us by or with the seed of our
Parents. Of which to discourse here would take up too much time and paper, but
this I do but hint. I intend the Pharisees error, which I conceive is not
agreeable to the pure Word of God, in Zach. 12. 1. which says, That God
forms the spirit of man within him, that is, in medio, in the midst of man,
as the Junius in Locum.
Hebrew and Latin has it; and it accords not with Luke 23. 43. where Christ
said to the penitent Thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, that
is, in Heaven. And it is contrary to Luke 16. 22, 25, 26. which shows that the
soul of Lazarus was carried into Abraham's bosom immediately after his death,
and that there it remained, and Of this largely before in Article 13.
was to remain. And not agreeable to Mat. 25. 46. which says, That the
righteous go into everlasting life. Yea, and not consonant with Phil. 1. 21,
23. where the Apostle says thus: For me to live is Christ, but to die is gain.
What gain, if his soul went into another body, and not into Heaven?

And if any should say that Philo's opinion was, That all souls of all men,
were made together by God in the beginning of the world, and treasured up until
bodies be prepared for them, which was the opinion of many Jews, and of Origin,
as Peter ^oc. com. claf. prim. C. 12, Sect. 23. p. 82.
Martyr, and Pareus In Gen 2. 7.
inform me; I answer, that we have cause also to reject it: For,

1. I ask where the treasury is where these Souls are kept? in Heaven it cannot
be, for there evil souls are not kept, for the evil Angels were cast out of
Heaven as soon as they sinned. In Hell they cannot be neither, for there good
souls that do Gods will are not cast. I might ask again, where then are they
kept?

2. I ask, whether those souls, so long since made, have been idle, or active?
if they have been idle and doing nothing, it seems absurd to say, that God
should make so many souls so long time beforehand, to do nothing for his
honor, seeing he made nothing in vain; and can as easily make them when bodies
are prepared for them to act. If it be said they have been active and doing
something, then that is either good or bad. Pareus informs me, that the Jews
held that these souls were kept in Gods treasury until they were infused into
bodies according to their merits; which implies, that some did good, and
deserved to be put into good bodies, and others did evil, and deserved to be
put into evil bodies, and so were by God disposed accordingly. An ingenious
witty soul was put belike into an undefiled body, as Philo seems to imply by
his words.

But to this I answer, 1. That it seems the Heathens were not of this opinion;
for they say of Galba, Ingenium Galbae male habitat.

2. This conceit has no foundation in Sacred Scripture. For,

1. That which is alleged for their opinion, That God rested from all his
works, Genesis 2. 2, 3, 4. is easily answered thus: 1. That Christ says, My
Father works hitherto, and I work, Joh. 5. 17. 2. That God rested from making
more or new species or kinds of Creatures, but not from making more or new
Individuals or Particulars of those kinds which he had made.

2. In the History of the Creation (no, nor any where else in Canonical
Scripture) there is no mention or intimation made of any such making all souls
together; which being a thing of so great moment, would not be concealed, if
any such thing had been.

3. But that the soul of Adam was made in the act Augustine de Civit. Dei, l.
12. c. 23. and Vi^es upon him.
of its inspiration into the body of Adam, Genesis 2. 7. And there is the same
reason of our souls and his, Creando infunditur, and infundendo creatur.

4. It Is said in Zach. 12. 1. That God forms the spirit of man within him;
that is as Junius observes it is in the Hebrew, In medio, is the midst of him;
and therefore not made some thousands of years before 'twas infused into him.

5. Their conceit of being disposed according to their merits, is not agreeable
to Sacred Scripture, which Romans 9. 23. says plainly of those Twins, that God
loved (i e. chose Jacob to life everlasting) and hated Esau, (i. e. reprobated
him) before they had done either good or evil: Therefore their doing good or
evil was not the meritorious cause of putting them into either good or bad,
clean or unclean bodies.

Lastly, His body undefiled, is such another Judaical conceit or Poetical
fiction; for what body of man, ordinarily begotten by man, is undefiled? Job's
question, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? includes this
affirmative, That no man can do it: 1. It participates of Adams first sin, and
it is Romans 5. 12. vide Hilders^am upon Psalm. 5. Lect. 55. p. 259.
imputed to it. And 2. it is prone and disposed to sin as a leprous seed is to
leprosy. Though it be said that spiritual infection, which is in semine, be
not sin formaliter and actu, yet it is a certain occult disposition to sin,
from which it comes to pass, that the soul created in the body, as a flower in
a Vide Baron. Exer 2. de origin anim^^ Art. 6.
stinking place, does contract from the body habitual and culpable viciousness
even from its first union with it; so that the body is defiled participative
vel imputative, and dispositive, and therefore not undefiled, as he speaks:
Subjectum quo, peccati est caro, Vide Article 9th of the Church of England.
subjectum vero quod, person^: quia peccatum primo intravit ratione corporis ad
inficiendam animam. Bishop Prideaux Fascic. controv. c. 3. de peccato, q. 5. p.
126. ad 5 and ibid. q. 3. p. 112, 113. and p. 117. Semen That is, the seed is
infected as a stinking torch, to which if fire be put, that stink which before
lay hid does appear; so the soul joined to the Embrio, and informing it, it
actuates that poison which before lay hid in the seed, whereby the whole
compositum or humane nature is infected.
infectum esse, tanquam funale faetidum cui si flamma admoveatur, prodit (quae
autea latebat) totius facis graveolentia, sic anima embrioni copulata, eamque
informans, actuat in semine latens virus, quo fiat corruption totius compositi.

I might except against Ecclesiasticus 1. 14. where it is said, That the fear of
the Lord was created with the faithful Which is conceived to be contrary to
Psalm. 50. 5. Ephesians. 2. 1, 3, 5. the Exhortation at Baptism in C. P. B.
in the womb, and many other passages in the Apocryphal Books; but these may
suffice, and make men look more narrowly into the errors and contradictions
that are in them to Gods pure word, yea in some parts of those Chapters that
are appointed to be read publicly in our Churches, and methinks should cause
them all to be turned out of the doors of our Churches and Common Prayer Book,
especially seeing Reverend Bishop Jewel in his Defense of his Apology, c. 3.
divis. 10. tells us, That the old Council at Carthage commanded that nothing
should be read in Christ's congregation, but the Canonical Def. of Apol. p. 571.
Scriptures. Which words (says he) are to be found in the Council of Vide,
Homil. for Rogationweek, Part 3. p. 230.
Hippo, which is the abridgment of the third Council of Carthage, in these
words: Scripturae Canonicae in ecclesia legendae quae sunt, and praeter qua^
alia non legantur, that is, the Scriptures Canonical which are to be read in
the Church, and besides which nothing may be read. Et non oportet libros qui
sunt extra canonem, legere, nisi solos canonicos veteris and novi Testamenti.
That is, we may not read any Books that be without the Canon, but only the
Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament. There ye may find the Decrees of
two of the Kings of France, Lewis and Charles, In Templis tantum canonici
libri, id est, sacrae literae legantur. That is, Let there be read in the
Churches only the Canonical Books, that is to say, the holy Scriptures; and
many other good sayings and testimonies to the same purpose. And Harding's
shift or addition to, or exposition of the Decree of Carthage, viz. That
nothing be read in the Church but the Canonical Scripture, sub nomine divinarum
Scripturarum under the name of the Divine Scriptures, will not help our
Bishops; for they have appointed those Apocryphal Scriptures, which they have
appointed in the Calendar to be read, as parts of the Old Testament; for they
say expressly, in their See the order in the Book of Common Prayer for reading
the first and second Lessons. It Is probable that by this order our Bishops have
deceived our Parliaments, who believing them, searched not, and knew not that
Apocryphals were to be read as Canonical Scripture.
order for reading the Lessons, That they have appointed the Old Testament to
be read for the first Lessons, and the New Testament for the second Lessons,
throughout the year. And in their Calendar to which they specially direct us
for the finding of those Lessons, they appoint (as was said before, and is
there to be seen) above 120 Chapers of Apocryphal Books to be read in our
Churches and Chapels for the first Lessons, many of which (as I have
manifested) are contrary in many things to the pure word of God.

Obj. But Bishop Prideaux in answer to the Papists, (who say that the
Apocryphals are called by the Fathers, Scripture, and Canonical) says, with
the Fathers, there is a twofold Canon: 1. Morum, of manners.

2. Fidei of faith; these, says he, are sometimes called Canonical in the
first sense, not in the second.

Answ. To which I answer thus: 1. That the Fathers were but mere men, and not
infallibly guided by the holy and unerring spirit of God. 2. That they had
their errors, and did contradict themselves.

3. That Mr. Hildersham (though he speak well of the Fathers) whom you say was
a Conformist, proves by three good reasons, That our learned Divines in these
days may know more, and have better judgment in Religion than the Fathers had:
as, 1. They are born and bred in the knowledge and profession of the truth, and
have known from their childhood the holy Scriptures, which are able to make
them wise unto salvation, as the Apostle speaks of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
Whereas most of the Fathers were bred and had lived long in Gentilism and
beresie, before they came to the knowledge of the truth. 2. They enjoy the
benefit both of all the Fathers own labors, and of the writings of many other
learned men also, which the Fathers themselves could not do. A Dwarf may see
farther upon a Giants shoulder than the Giant.
3. They have the help both of far better Translations of the Scripture than
the Fathers could have, and of the knowledge of the Tongues also, which the
chief of the Fathers are well known to have been wanting in. 4. The Bishop
says nothing to that, that they are called Scripture. 5. That there are many
erroreous Doctrines contrary to the Canonical Scriptures in those Books, and
some in those appointed to be read, as I have showed before, which may do much
mischief to the true Church of Christ, and teach false Doctrine instead of good
manners. 6. That they are not a good Canon for manners, as I have showed in
Tobit's wife her passionate bidding her husband, (who gave her good counsel) to
hold his peace, and immoderate bewailing her Son, who was well. Tob. 10. 6, 7.
(to which may be added Raguels swearing, that Tobius should stay with him
fourteen days), and in teaching Tobias to conjure, or spell away the Devil,
Tob. 6. 16, 17. which Tobias practiced, Tob. 8. 2, 3. and in the Angel Raphaels
lying, in saying, that he was Azarias the son of Ananias the great, and of
Tobits brethren, Tob. 5. 12. and in saying, that he was one of the seven Angels
that did bring to remembrance Tobias and Sarahs prayers, and that did present
the prayers of the Saints before the holy one, Tob. 12. 12, 15. And in Judiths
lying, hypocritical dissembling, and swearing, to compass her treacherous and
bloody design, and praying to God for to bless her deceit, and commending the
wicked and cruel fact of Simeon, which God by Jacob condemned, Judith 9. 2, 3,
4, 10, 13. Judith 10. 12, 13. and Judith 11. Judith 12. which may, and no doubt
will teach evil men and women more evil than good manners; and this too, not so
much accidentally, as by themselves and their own nature. 7. The Canonical
Scriptures are a sufficient Canon for Doctrine of faith and Homily for Rogation
week. Part 3d, p. 230. And no where can we more certainly search for the
knowledge of this will of God (by the which we must direct all our works and
deeds) but in the holy Scriptures.
manners, and therefore there is no need of reading these Books to teach men
good manners. 8. If the Popish Legends are not to be read in public, because
full of lies and fictions; then by the same reason should not Tobit, Judith,
the History of Bell and the Dragon, be read, which are full of such things.

Obj. But Bishop Prideaux says, That the Apocryphal Books are read for their
conformity for the most part with the Canonical, as ancient and sacred
Homilies, to inform and teach good manners, not to confirm Doctrine, Fasc.
cont. c. 1. q 2. p. 16. and loc. 4. Sec. 3. q 6. p. 237.

Answ. To this I answer, as before, 1. That the word of God is a perfect and
perspicuous rule for Doctrine of faith and good manners. 2. That there are many
things in those Books inconformable to the Canonical Scriptures both for
Doctrine and manners, as the Bishops answer (maxima ex part) implies, and as I
have plainly showed, and therefore they are not sacred Homilies fit to be read
in public to teach people manners. 3. That they do not explain Ecclesiasticus
or the Book of Wisdom says, the first Prologue to it contains many dark
sentences and parables.
many things in the Canonical Scripures, but are as obscure, as I hinted
before, the 24th Chapter of Ecclesiasticus is, and might be manifested in many
more; yea they obscure the holy Scriptures, and render them doubtful; yea they
are contrary to the Canonical A. B. Usher Sum of Ch Relig. p. 15. and Diodate,
say and show that Baruch is contrary to Sacred Scripture: and in 2 Mac. 12. 42,
43, 44, 45. is prayer for the Dead, which is condemned by all our sound Divines.
Scriptures. 4. If their conformity to the Canonical Scriptures, for the most
part, be a sufficient reason for their appointment to be read in public, I
humbly conceive that there might be found many Nonconformists works, as Mr.
Allen's Vindiciae Pietatis, Mr. Ball's Catechism, a Treatise of the Covenant,
Mr. Borough his four Treatises, Mr. Dod upon the Commandments, Dr. Jacomb upon
Romans 8. Mr. Jeanes his mixture of Scholastical, with Practical Divinity,
wherein he has clearly worsted your great Goliahs, Dr. Hamond, and Dr.
Tailor), Dr. Manton's work upon James and Jude, Dr. Spurstow of the Promises,
Mr Watson's Sermons, and many others, (which I name not, because I have not
read them) more conformable to the pure word of God than these Apocryphal
Books, but especially the learned Assembly of Divines, their larger and shorter
Catechisms, and Confession of Faith, (commended by learned A B. Usher, as the
best that ever were made by any Church since the Apostles times) in which I
believe the severest Conformist that is, cannot by all his wit and learning
clearly prove by Canonical Scripture any error either concerning Faith or
manners, and therefore sure (if the Bishops reason be good) they are more fit
and profitable to be appointed to be read and taught in public than the
Apocryphal Books that are appointed by our Bishops. 5. Papists ('it is to be
feared) will say that Th. Aquinas his Sums, and Pet. Lumbard his Sentences
collected out of the ancient Fathers, are for the most part conformable to the
Canonical Scriptures, and that therefore by our Bishops reason, they may be
read as well as the Sacred Scriptures, at least for instruction for manners;
what they will say for their lying Legends (as Protestants commonly call them)
I know not; but I am sure, that several of our learned Protestants as well as
Jerome and Augustine of old, look upon Tobit and Judith, the History of
Susanna, Bell and the Dragon, to be but Comedies, Romances, or feigned Stories,
such as the Popish Legends are. A B. Sum of Christian Relig. p. 15, 16.
Usher calls many of the Apocryphal Books, fables. Bishop Fascic. contr. cap.
1. q. 2. page 16.
Prideaux says, it is uncertain whether Tobit, Judith, the fragments of
Susanna, Bell and the Dragon, are not rather to be taken for Comedies or
fictions, than true Narrations. Diodate in his Advertisement concerning
Apocryphal Books, says. That the matter of the Book is full of strange
Narrations, that have neither ground nor conformity with Authentical Scripture,
as those of the love of a Devil to a chaste and holy maiden, of the death of
her husbands, of the manner of driving him away, of binding him to a certain
place, of the long convers^^^ of the holy Angel with him, things which do
savor of a Jewish fable, composed for delight, to give some instruction of
virtue, according to the manner of that Nation; which seems to be confirmed,
because neither in Josephus (a curious searcher of Jewish Antiquities, (as
Bishop Prideaux assures me) nor any other Jewish Author, there is any tract of
this History. That Judith is a feigned Narration, he proves by undeniable
Arguments. The Additions to Daniel, of which the Song of the three Children is
part, (part of which was gotten into our Common Prayer Book in the Benedicite),
and the History of Susanna; and Bell and the Dragon, are other parts: Aman.
Polanus affirms, that St. Jerome Polan. Syntag. l. 1. c. 34. p. 63.
and Augustine call them Fables.

Obj. But Bishop Prideaux says further, in answer to this Objection, [That
Canonical Scriptures are laid by, and Apocryphals substituted in their stead to
be read in public.] That in eading, that is not always proposed, which (...)
Bishop Prideaux Fasc. Controversiarum, cap. 1. q. 2. p. 16.
in it^s self most excellent, but that which does most serve to the edification
of the hearers, 1 Cor. 14. 26. That when their Apocryphals are read they are
not equalled with Canonicals, but are interposed as certain easy institutes,
which excite the slower hearers to embrace the Canonicals, as Homilies and
Sermons do.

Answ. To this I answer: 1. That these things are said, but not proved. 2. That
if the Bishops Answer be to the Objection, his words imply, That the reading of
the Apocryphals (which are fabulous, erroneous and contrary to the word of
truth) is more inservient to the edification of the hearers than the reading of
Gods holy and pure word of Truth is; which I deny, and prove to be false thus
(...) That which is either the pure Word of God, or is consonant thereunto, and
so free from fabulousness, falseness, approbation of toleration of evil, must
needs be more conducing to edification of the hearers than that which is
fabulous, false and contrary to the Word of God, both for Doctrine of faith and
manners, and approves of, and tolerates sin; but that the latter is so of
Apocryphals, I have proved, and the former you dare not deny of Canonicals:
Ergo, your Apocryphals do not conduce more to the edification of the hearers
than the pure and true Word of God does. 2. Thus, that which teaches false
things, and evil manners, does not edify the hearers more than that which
teaches nothing but the truth and good manners. But, Ergo, your Apocryphals do
not build upward, but downward; they do edificare ad Gehennam, as Tertullian;
ad ruinam, as another speaks; they build men down to Hell, and prepare men to
destruction. Their public reading actively scandalizeth; for a scandal is a
word or deed spoken or done, yielding to another occasion of ruin; and you
cannot Aquinas 22. q. 43. a. 1. c. Scandalum est dictum vel factum minus rectum
praebens alteri occasionem ruinae.
plead, that it is accidental, as it is said of Gods Word; for the reading and
preaching of Gods Word is commanded, and so necessary; but reading of
Apocryphals is not commanded by God, and is therefore unnecessary, and being
erroneous both for matters of faith and manners, is of it self Aquin. 22. q.
43. a. 1, ad 4.
inductive to sin, to sinful opinions, affections and practices, as may by any
understanding Christian be evidenced in those Particulars I have instanced in
before. 3. It Is evident, that if not for authority, yet for edification they
are made rather superior than equal to the Canonical Scriptures, that are laid
aside to make room for those Apocryphals as more edificative than they. 4.
Apocryphals are not more easy institutes, exciting to the embracing of the
Canonicals, but rather to the rejecting of them in the matters of faith and
good manners. 5. Suppose they were such institutes, yet it will not follow that
such erroneous Books should be publicly read, because of the greater parts
easiness and conformity to the word of Truth; for they may Let us cast from us
corrupt Doctrine that will infect our Souls. Homily of the Resurrection, p. 196.
corrupt their souls with erroneous opinions and affections, and lives with
wicked practices. 6. No corrupting-Homilies or Sermons are to be appointed to
be read or preached in public in the Church; for all things are to be done to
the edification of the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 26. 7. Apocryphals are appointed to
be read in Cathedrals as well as in Country Parochial Churches. Now you will
not say, that in Cathedrals where the Bishop, Dean, and Prebends sit and hear,
are the popular and duller or slower sort of hearers. This therefore is no true
and satisfactory answer, but a mere pretense and put-off.

ART. XVII.
That the Pope or Bishop of Rome is the supreme Head of the Universal Church of
Christ above all Emperors, Kings and Princes, Pastors, People and Churches.
THis I renounce, because it is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of
England, which in Article of Religion 37, says thus: The Queens Majesty has
the chief power in this Realm of England and other her Dominions, unto whom the
chief Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical
or Civil, in all causes, does appertain, and is not, nor ought to be subject to
any foreign jurisdiction, Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty the chief
Government, by which titles we understand the minds of some slanderous folks to
be offended, we give not to our Princes the ministering either of Gods word, or
of the Sacraments, the which things the Injunctions also lately set forth by
Elizabeth our Queen, do most plainly testify: But that only prerogative which
we see to have been given always to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures, by
God himself, that is, that they should rule all Estates and degrees committed
to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or temporal, and
restrain with the civil sword the stubborn and evil doers. The Bishop of Rome
has no jurisdiction in this Realm of England. And I add (as Dr. Reynolds
offered at the Conference at Hampton Court, page 37.) that be ought not to have
any here. Of which God willing and permitting I shall say more hereafter,
though much be said already in the 11th Article of Popery renounced as before.

The Articles of Lambeth, the Doctrine of the Church of England and Ireland.

THe Articles of Lambeth made by Dr. John Whitgift A B. of Canterbury, Dr.
Fletcher Bishop Elect of London, Dr. Vaughan Bishop Elect of Bangor, Dr.
Tindale Dean of Eli, Dr. Whitaker, Dr. Chaderton, and Mr. Perkins, etc. as I
find them in Dr. Heylin's Cyprianus Anglicus, l. 3. p. 204. and as I find them
among the Articles of Ireland.

1. God from all eternity has predestined certain men unto life, certain men
he has reprobated.

2. The moving or efficient cause of Predestination unto life is not the
foresight of faith, or of perseverance, or of good works, or of any thing that
is in the person predestined, but only the good will and pleasure of God.

3. There is predetermined a certain number of the Predestinate, which neither
can be augmented nor diminished.

4. Those who are not predestinate to Salvation shall be necessarily damned for
their sins.

5. A true living and justifying faith, and the Spirit of God sanctifying, is
not extinguished, does not fall off or vanish in the Elect either totally or
finally.

6. A man truly believing or endued with justifying faith, is certain, or with
full assurance of faith of the remission of his sins, and of his everlasting
Salvation by Christ.

7. Saving Grace is not given, nor communicated, nor granted to all men, by
which they may be saved if they will

8. No man can come to Christ unless it be given unto him, and unless the
Father shall draw him; nor are all men drawn of the Father, that they come to
the Son.

9. It is not in the free choice and power of every man to be saved.

These Nine Articles or Conclusions, And when the Articles of England were
received in the Church of Ireland, the Title of the Canon is thus: Of the
agreement of the Church of England and Ireland, the profession of the same
Christian Faith. Which shows that the Churches of England and Ireland, did
agree in those Articles, etc.
in the Convocation held at Dublin, Anno 1615, were resolved upon and agreed to
by A. B. Usher, and the Bishops and Clergy, as the public Confession of the
Church of Ireland, as may be seen in the Articles of Ireland, and in Dr.
Heylin's Cyp. Angl. l. 4. p. 271.

And moreover these Nine Articles of Lambeth were declared to be the Doctrine
of the Church of England by the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament
about June 14th, Anno Domini 1628, as Dr. Heylin informs me in his Cyprianus
Angiicus, l. 3. p. 197.

And it is observable, that though Dr. Heylin affirms, that the five Arminian
points, condemned in the Synod of Dort, are the Doctrine of the Church of
England, and though Dean White licensed Moungues Armin an Popish Books, and
affirmed that there was nothing in it but what was agreeable to the profession
of Faith, and Doctrine of the Church of England, Cypr. Angl. l. 2. p. 135. and
the three Arminian Bishops, Buckeridg, Corbet, and Laud, that wrote and pleaded
for him, affirmed the same; in which Books the five Arminian points were
maintained by Mountague, and Limbus patrum, and many Popish points more, though
they clamoured very much against the Parliaments declaring, That he had in his
Books, (viz. his Gagg, and his Apollo Caesarem) disturbed the peace of the
Church by publishing Doctrines contrary to the Articles of the Church of
England, and the Book of Homilies; and that the whole frame and scope of his
Books was to the discouragement of the well-affected in Religion from the true
Religion established in this Church, and to incline them, and as much as in him
lay to reconcile them to Popery. Cypr. Angl. l. 2. p. 155, And labored by the
authority and interest of the then King to have those points referred to the
decision of the Convocation, to whom they said they did belong, though all the
knot Cyp. Angl. l. 1. p. 59.
of Arminians, (except Mr. Barlow) that met at Bishop Neils, and many more,
were promoted and dignified persons, and Mountague Cypr. Angl. l. 3. p. 185.
himself made Bishop in Orthodox Carleton's place at Chichester, who wrote
against Mountagues Books, and Popish Goodman (who Cyp. Angl. l. 4. p. 446.
lived and died a Papist) was made Bishop of Gloucester in Orthodox Smith's
place, who opposed Laud in his Altarworship there; yea, though A. B. Abbot was
by Laud's means sequestered from the execution of his office, and his authority
committed to such hands as were no favorers of the Genevean faction (they are
Heylin's own words) of which Bishop Laud (as Heylin Cypr. Angl. l. 3. p. 170.
says) informed the King that A. B. Abbot was the head, viz. to Mountain
Bishop of London, Neile Bishop of Durham, Buckeridg (Lauds Tutor) Bishop of
Rochester, Hows^^ Bishop of Oxford, and himself, Bishop of Bath and Wells, or
any two of them; yea, when Laud was gotten uppermost, and had gotten
stout-hearted Williams Bishop of Lincoln into the Tower, and had his Spies upon
Orthodox Hall Bishop of Exceter, and Davenant Bishop of Salisbury, (two of
those learned Divines which were sent by King James to the Synod of Dort) and
had almost, and did what he listed in promoting those of his party, and
suppressing those of the Genevean party, as Dr. Heylin evidenceth, yea brags in
his Cyprianus Anglicus; yet I say, he never durst put those five Arminian
points to the hazard of decision by the Convocation (though he had a great mind
to it, as appears by his moving the Duke of Buckingham about it, and his
consulting with Bishop Andrews about it, as Dr. Heylin relates in his Cyprianus
Lib. 2. p. 133. It Is probable he first advised, and then ordered the Catalogue
of the most eminent Divines, distinguished according to their persuasions, by
the Letters O and P made him fear the Convocation, and therefore take his other
courses, which brought himself and others to ruin. Cyp. Angl. l. 2. p 133. And
the eighth Article objected against him, viz. That there must be a blow given
to the Church, such as has not been yet given, before it would be brought to
conformity. Cyp. Angl. l 5. p. 512, 513. might be brought to prove his fear of
the Convocation, as is said.
Anglicus) least they should be condemned by our Convocation, as well as they
were by the Synod of Dort; and by Bishop Carleton, Dean Sutcliff, Dr. Featly,
Mr. Goad, Mr. Yates, Mr. Ward, Mr. Burton, Mr. Rouse, and Mr. Pryn asunder,
that the encounter seemed to be betwixt a whole army, and a single person, as
Heylin writes in his Cyprianus Anglicus, l. 2. p. 155. and by Dr. Prideaux in
the Chair in the Divinity School at Oxford, as they had been by learned Dr.
Humphries, Dr. Holland, and Dr. Abbot before him, and by Dr. Whitaker, Mr.
Perkins, Dr. Davenaut, and Dr. Ward, and many more at Cambridg, and by many
more in the Universities, and elsewhere in Cities, Towns, and Country Parishes.
And were never declared either by any Convocation, at or since the first
reformation, or by any Parliament, (except in Queen Mary's reign) to be the
Doctrine of the Church of England. And for further confirmation of this truth,
that those five Arminian points condemned by the Synod of Dort, (to which Synod
King James sent several Learned and Orthodox Divines, who joined with the rest
of that Learned Synod, in condemning and rejecting all those five Armanian
points (which sure neither he nor they would have done, if they had been the
Doctrine of the Church of England) were not the Doctrine of the Church of
England; read King James his Declaration against Vorstius, wherein he writes
thus to his Ambassador, Sir Ralph Winwood, Trusty and Welbeloved, etc. You
shall repair to the States General with all possible diligence in our name,
telling them that we doubt not but that their Ambassadors which were here about
two years since, did inform them of a forewarning that we wished the said
Ambassadors to make unto them in our name, to beware in time of Arminians
called seditious and heretical Preachers.
seditious and heretical Preachers, and not to suffer any such to creep into
their State. Our principal meaning was of Arminius, who though he were late
dead, yet had he left too many disciples behind him. Declarat. page 350. of his
Works: That Vorstius has published such monstrous blasphemy and horrible
Atheism in a scandalous Book fit to be burnt, and the Author punished; and that
Arminius late Divinity-Reader at Leyden, was but of little better stuff, who,
though he be dead, has left his sting yet living among them, Ibid. p. 350,
351. And in page 355. he says thus in his Letter to the States General: We had
well hoped that the corrupt seed of that enemy of God, Arminius, did sow
amongst you some few years since, had given you sufficient warning to take heed
of such infected persons, seeing your own Countrymen divided into factious;
upon this occasion, a matter so opposite to unity (which is indeed the only
^ro^ and safety of your State next under God) as of necessity it must by little
and little bring you to utter ruin, if wisely you do not provide against it,
and that in time. Ibid. p. 355. It is true it was our hard hap not to hear of
this Arminius before he was dead, and that all the Reformed Churches of Germany
had with open mouth complained of him. But as soon as we understood of that
distraction in your State, which he left after his death behind him, we did not
fail to use some such speeches to your Ambassadors as we That is those above
named to beware of seditious and Heretical Preachers.
thought fittest for the good of your State, which we doubt not but they have
faithfully reported unto you. For what need we make any question of the
arrogance of these Arminians called Heretics or atheistical Sectaries.
Heretics, or rather Atheistical Sectaries among you, when one of the^ at this
present (that is, Bertius a Scholar of Arminius, as he described and called him
in his former Letter to his Ambassador, Ibid. p. 354.) remaining in your Town
of Leyden, has not only presumed to publish of late a blasphemous Bertius his
Book de Apostasia Sanctorium, called a blasphemous Book.
Book of the Apostasy of the Saints; but besides, has been so impudent as to
send the other day a copy thereof, as a goodly present to our Archbishop of
Canterbury, together with a Letter, wherein he is not ashamed (as also in his
Book To say that the Doctrine therein contained is agreeable to the profession
and Doctrine of the Church of England; a gross lie!
) to lie so grossly as to avow, that his Heresies contained in the said Book are
agreeable with the religion and profession of our Church of England; for these
respects therefore have we cause enough very heartily to request you to root
out with speed those Arminianism, Heresy and Schism.
Heresies and Schisms, which are beginning to bud forth among you, which if you
suffer to have the reins any longer, you cannot expect any other issue thereof
than the curse of God, infamy throughout all the Reformed Churches, and a
perpetual rent and distraction in the whole body of your State. Given at
Westminster, October. 6. 1611.

And Sir Ralph Winwood, his Majesty's Ambassador there, in his Remonstrance to
the States General by his Majesty's approbation, says thus: If therefore
Religion be as the Palladium of your Commonwealth; and that to preserve the one
in your glory and perfection, be to maintain the other in her purity, let your
selves then be judge in how great a danger the State must needs be at this
present, so long as you permit these Schisms of Arminius to have such vogue as
now they have in the principal Towns of Holland, and if you suffer Vorstius to
be received Divinity-professor in the University of Leyden, (the Seminary of
your Church), who in scorn of the holy Word of God, has after his own fancy
devised a new Sect, patched together of several pieces of all sorts of ancient
and modern Heresies. Ibid. p. 358, and p. 361. he says further thus: His
Majesty does exhort you, that you having gotten the upperhand of your miseries,
you would not suffer the followers of Arminius to make your actions an example
for them to proclaim throughout the world, that wicked The Doctrine of
Arminians of the apostasy of the Saints, a wicked Doctrine.
Doctrine of the Apostasy of the Saints. To be short, the account which his
Majesty does make of your amity, appears sufficiently by the Treaties which he
has made with your Lordships, by the succors which your Provinces have
received from his Crowns, and by the deluge of blood which his subjects have
spent in your Wars Religion is the only sowder of this amity; for his Majesty
being by the Grace of God Defender of the Faith, does hold himself obliged to
defend all those who profess the same The Protestant Hollanders of the same
Faith and Religion with us.
Faith and Religion with him. Ibid. p. 361. And p. 365. King James himself
says, If the subject of Vorstius his Heresies had not been grounded upon
questions of an higher quality, than touching the number and nature of the
Sacraments, the points of Justification, of Merits, of Purgatory, of the
visible Head of the Church, or any such matters as are in controversy at this
day betwixt the Papists and us; Nay more, if he had meddled only with the nature
and works of God ad extra; if we say he had soared no higher (although we
should have been very sorry to see such Mark it, he calls those points also
Heresies.
Heresies begin to take root among our Allies and ancient Confederates) we
should not have been so zealons as we have been in this business. -- And p.
368. he says thus of the main point of Arminians: The nature of man, through
the transgression of our first Parents, has lost free will, and retains not
now any shadow hereof, saving an inclination to evil; those only excepted, whom
God has sanctified and purged from their original Leprosy. And p 366. he
says thus: The principal bond of our conjunction, is our uniformity in
Religion. King James was of a mind better than, and different from, A. B. Laud.
He, you see, thought himself obliged to help the Hollanders, as being of the
same Profession and Religion with him, yea and uniform in the same Religion for
substance; though they and he differed in Discipline, mode of Worship, and form
of Church Government; but A. B. Laud would not acknowledge the Protestant
Ministers of the Palatinate Churches to be of the same Religion with us here in
the Church of England Cypr. Anglicus, l. 4. p. 305, 306. where you will find that
he caused the Letters Patent for a Collection for those Orthodox Protestant
Ministers, though procured by the Queen of Bohemia of K. Chapter her Brother, to be
cancelled, and new ones drawn, and those expressions expunged, etc.
, and that because they received the Doctrine (and rigors, as Heylin calls
them) of Calvin in the point of Predestination, and the rest, depending
thereupon as Orthodox. And also, for that they maintain a parity of Ministers,
and hold not our Episcopacy essential to the being of a Church, as A. B. Laud
plainly did; and also, for that they called the Doctrine and Government of the
Church of Rome an Antichristian yoke. King James called and proved the Pope of
Rome to be Antichrist, and the Doctrines of Arminius and his followers, wicked
and heretical; and held those of Calvin to be Orthodox in those points, and
uniform with our Profession here in England, as may be seen by his Declaration
against Vorstius, by his procuring the Synod of Dort, and sending Orthodox
Divines to it, who condemned the five Articles of Arminius or Arminians, and by
his ratification of the nine Articles of Lambeth, in the Articles of Ireland.
And for further proof of King James his judgment against Arminianism, take and
read a Jesuits Letter to the Rector at Bruxells. Father Rector, The Jesuits
Letter.
etc. We have now many strings to our bows, and have strongly fortified our
faction, and have added two Bulwarks more; for when King James lived, WE KNOW
HE WAS VERY VIOLENT AGAINST ARMINIANISM, and interrupted with his pestilent wit
and deep learning our strong designs in Holland; now we have planted the
Sovereign drug, Arminianism, which we hope will purge the Protestants from
their Heresy. This Letter was seized in A. B. Laud's Study, Vide Prin's
Introduction to A. B. Laud's trial.
and attested against him at the Lords-Bar, as Mr. Hickman informs me in his
Justification of the Fathers and Schoolmen, page 63. To which purpose the The
Commons Declaration.
Commons of England assembled in Parliament declared to his late Majesty thus:
The hearts of your Subjects are perplexed when with sorrow they behold a daily
growth and spreading of the faction of Arminians, that being (as your Majesty
well knows) but a cunning way to bring in Popery; and the professors of those
opinions, the common disturbers of the Protestant Churches, and Incendiaries of
those States in which they have gotten any head, being Protestants in show, but
Jesuits in opinion and practice. Of which growing faction Neile Bishop of
Winchester, and Laud Bishop of Bath and Wells are named particularly for the
principal Patrons, as Dr. Heylin says, Cyp. Angl. l. 3. p. 181.

And though Dr. Heylin and Bishop Mountague stand much upon King James his
words at the Conference at Hampton Court, yet being well considered, they make
nothing for their false Doctrine, [That truly justified persons may totally and
finally fall away from the acts and habit of saving Grace] but rather against
it. For,

1. King James, though he did not yield (as they say) at the Conference at
Hampton Court, that those words [totally and finally] should be added to the
sixteenth Article of our Church; yet he yielded to it, and to all the Articles
of Lambeth afterward, when A B. Usher drew up the Articles of Ireland, to which
all the Clergy there in Convocation assembled yielded, assented and subscribed,
as was showed before. And the reason why he yielded not to them at the
Conference at Hampton Court, was because he did not understand what they were.
Conference Ibid. p. 40.

2. He wished that the Doctrine of Predestination might be very tenderly
handled, and with great discretion, lest on the one side, Gods Omnipotence
might be called in question by impeaching the Doctrine of his eternal
Predestination; or on the other, a desperate presumption might he arreared, by
inferring the necessary certainty of standing and persisting in grace, Conf. p.
30.

3. He says, That Predestination and Election depends not upon any
qualities, actions, or works of man, which be mutable, but upon Gods eternal
and immutable decree and purpose, Conf. p. 43.

4. This (I suppose) was one great reason why learned King James called
Arminius his Scholars, Atheistical Heretics, in his Declaration against
Vorstius: Because, 1. Their conditional and incomplete Election of singular
persons, and not peremptory, until at the last they do persevere, does by
necessary consequence deny Gods nature. For let it be granted, as they
distinguish and say, That Gods eternal Decree of Election of particular
persons, be not absolute, but only conditional, if they do believe; and not
peremptory and complete, till they do believe and persevere in believing, and
to the hour of death; and that this their faith and perseverance does depend
upon man's Free Will, which is very corrupt, uncertain, and changeable, and
which they say may and does determine it self always as it pleases, and may
finally resist Gods will, and offers of Grace, then it will follow, that Gods
knowledge is very confused and uncertain; that he does not distinctly and
certainly know whether this or that man will or shall believe in Christ, and
persevere in holiness; and that therefore he does but conditionally elect him
to eternal Salvation, viz. if he do believe in Christ, and persevere; and not
peremptorily, until he see him do so; and then it will follow that God is not
omniscient and that there is a separable accident in God; and that God is
compounded of subject and accident, and not a perfect and simple essence, and
so not God; which is contrary to Sacred Scripture, Job. 6. 64. But there are
some of you that believe not; for Jesus knew from the beginning who they were
that believed not, and who should betray him. And 2 Timothy 2. 19. Nevertheless
the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them
that are his. Which two places of Scripture do plainly show that the Lord does
distinctly and certainly know who are elected, and who are reprobated, and who
would believe in Christ, and who would not believe in him, and this too, from
the beginning. And their Doctrine of resistibility, viz. that the will of Gods
elect can finally resist Gods will, denies consequentially Gods Omnipotence,
and makes man stronger than God, which is contrary to that of our Savior, Joh.
10. 29, 30. My Father which gave them me, is greater than all, and none is able
to pluck them out of my Fathers hand; I and my Father are one. And so they run
directly against King James his words, which they have brought out of the
Conference at Hampton Court before mentioned; where he willed, That the
Doctrine of Predestination should be handled tenderly, lest Gods Omnipotence
should be called in question. 3. Their Doctrine of Gods incomplete and
revocable decree of Election, makes God mutable, which is contrary to Mal. 3.
6. I the Lord change not. Jam. 1. 17. With God there is no variableness nor
shadow of turning.

To this may be added that which the industrious and judicious Author of the
Book entitled, the C. 7. S. 6. p 210, 211.
Practical Divinity of the Papists, tells us, that Papists have too much of
forcery and enchantment in their Sacramentals, and such like things, as in
Consecrated water, Salt, Oil, Bread, Waxen-tapers, branches of Trees, Roses,
Bells, Medals and Agnus Dei's. To such things as these they ascribe marvelous
and supernatural effects, a virtue to save and sanctify fouls, to blot out
sins, to expel Devils, to cure diseases, to secure Women in travel, to preserve
from burning and drowning. Pope De Consecrat. D. 3. C. aqua.
Alexander in the Decrees which they ascribe to him, asserts that water mixed
with salt and consecrated, does sanctify the people, purify the unclean,
break the snares of the Devil, and bring health to body and soul.

The form of exorcising salt, which we have in their authorized Books, tells
us, it is exorcised that it may be to all that take it both health to body and
soul. The exorcised water is to take away all the power of the Devil, and root
him out. Pope Urban the fifth, lib. 1. de Ceremoniis, cap. ult. tells us, that
an Agnus Dei drives away Lightning, and all malignancy, delivers pregnant
Women, destroys the force of fire, secures from drowning, and (which is more)
destroys sin, even as the blood of Christ does. Bellarmine De cultu Sanctor. l.
3. c. 7. p. 1594.
says they are of power for blotting out venial sins, for the chasing away
Devils, for the curing of Diseases, Others Tribuitur Thom; Cajetan. Soto in
Suarez. T. 3. Disp. 15. S. 4.
ascribe to them a power to excite gracious motions, even ex opere operato. Now
it is acknowledged that the natural power of these things cannot reach such
effects, and that there is no virtue in or of themselves to produce them, no
more than there is in such things by which Magicians and Conjurers work their
strange seats. Nor has the Lord instituted them, or any where promised to
empower them for such purposes, no more than he has promised to make the charm
of any sorcerer effectual for marvelous operations. Bellarmine Ibid. ubi supra.
confesses that such things have their force, not by any promise of God
expressed. And Suarez Ib. p. 187.
says the effect thereof is not founded in any special promise of God, because
(as he had said) it does not appear there is any such promise. And they confess
there is a tacit Invocation of the Devil in using things for effects to which
they have no power natural or Divine. There is such an Invocation of the Devil
says Cajetan Sum. verbo Divinatio.
, when one uses any thing or word as having power for an effect, for which it
appears not to have any virtue, either natural or Divine. And so Silvester Sum.
verbo supers^^cio.
after Aquinas; if the things made use of for such effects appear to have no
power to produce them, it follows that they are not used for this purpose as
causes, but as signs or Sacramentals, and consequently they belong to some
compact with the Devil. And this even the Jesuits will acknowledge. Thus
Cardinal Tollet; it is to be generally observed, that there is a tacit
Invocation of the Devil, when a man attempts to do any thing by that which
neither of it self, nor by Divine power produces such effects. And Filliucius
Tract. 24. c. 7. n. 170. p. 82.
declaring the several ways, whereby a Magical operation may be discerned (most
of which are applicable to their Sacramentals) gives this as the reason of them
all, Because when the effect cannot be expected from the power of such causes,
since they have it not of themselves, neither from God, who has not instituted
them, it follows, that it must be expected from the Devil, who is therein
tacitly invocated. They take it for evident, that the efficacy of such things
is not from God, if he did not institute them; not from God, says Filliucius,
seeing he is not the institutor. So Silvester will have the Magical signs
referred to Diabolical compact, because (having no such power of themselves)
they are not of Divine institution; plainly signifying, that if their
Sacramentals were not instituted of God, they could be no better than what he
refers to the Devil Now what evidence is there, that their Sacramentals are of
Divine institution, and appointed by God for such purposes?

Now if any indifferent man should apply that, which declares that those
learned Papists have written of above, to two of those Ceremonies which they
use, and we have retained, as much abused, and such virtue ascribed to them,
not only by them, but by Bishop Mountague in Orig. p. 82. says, the sign of
the Cross has power to work Miracles, to make the Devil to fly, and that it is
a sword and buckler, and the chief armor of the soul against all spiritual
enemies.
many in our Church also, viz. the Surplice, and the sign of the Cross in
Baptism. I know not well how to free them that attribute such supernatural
virtue to them, and so use them from the same offense that is charged upon them
in their use of their Sacramentals; for they are retained and enjoined as (
Vide of Ceremonies, why some be retained, before the Book of Common Prayers.
) means apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to
God by some notable and special signification, whereby he might be edified. The
Surplice is retained either to stir up the dull mind of the ( Dr. John Burges
of the lawfulness of Kneeling, c. 17. p. 52. says, the Surplice signifies the
pureness that ought to be in the Minister of God. So do the Episcopal
Commissioners in answer to Presbyterians, p. 108, 109.
) Minister that wears it to innocence and holiness, as if he alone needed such
excitation, or were alone of a dull mind in the congregation; or to stir up the
dull minds of the people to reverence the Surpliced Minister as more holy and
innocent than others. And the pleaders for it say, 'twas retained to signify
and teach Pastoral holiness. And so it is made a new Sacrament, and a new word,
forbidden (says Archbishop ( Sum of Christian Relig. p. 222. Bishop Morton
says, that the Cross is a sign of constant profession of Christanity. Pat.
def. c. 1. S. 6.
) Usher) in the second Commandment; and the sign of the Cross in Baptism,
though most grossly abused by Superstitious and Idolatrous Papists, is retained
to signify and teach constancy in the true Faith of Jesus Christ, and is by
Mr. Hooker called as a Sacrament, a quasi Sacrament, and by another a
semi-Sacrament. Yea, Mr. Hooker ( Eccles. Pol. l. 5. p. 353.
) calls it a mean where nature does earnestly import aid, and that ready
assistance, than which there can be no help more ( What more forcible than the
Sacrament of Baptism, and the Word of God preached and applied? etc.
) forcible, serving only to relieve memory, and to bring to our cogitation that
which should most make ashamed of sin. Yea, does he not say plainly, that the
sign of the Cross (as we use it) is in some sort a mean to the work of
preservation from reproach? surely the mind which as yet has not hardened it
self is sin, is seldom provoked thereunto in any gross and grievous manner, but
natures secret suggestion objected against it, ignominy, as a bar. Which
conceit being entered into that palace of man's fancy, the gates whereof It Is
observable, that Hooker pleads for the sign of the Cross as Papists do for
their Crucifixes: to put men in mind of Christ's Passion, and their duty to him
for it. Of which Crucifixes are as effectual as the sign of the Cross; and so
he cunningly overthrows the Doctrine of the Church of England, in her Homily
against the peril of Idolatry, and secretly bring in Idolatry by our
Ceremonies. Eccles. Pol. l. 5. Sec. 65. p. 343.
have imprinted in them that holy sign, which brings forthwith to mind
whatsoever Christ has wrought, and we vowed against sin; it comes hereby to
pass, that Christian men never want a MOST EFFECTUAL THOUGH SILENT TEACHER, TO
AVOID WHATSOEVER MAY DESERVEDLY PROCURE, SHAME. So that in things which we
should be ashamed of, we are by the Cross admonished, faithfully of our duty,
at the very moment when admonition does most need. Thus Hooker.

By which it is clear, that he ascribes a very great virtue to the sign of the
Cross, and that equal to, if not greater than is in the Sacrament of Baptism,
or the Word of God preached, etc. For he says, It Is a mean most ready, and a
most forcible help to work preservation from sin and reproach, which brings
forthwith to mind whatsoever Christ has wrought, and we have vowed against
sin; and a most effectual teacher, which does most faithfully admonish us of
our duty, etc.

Now this Yea, it is said virtually that they have a power in them to reduce men
to a perfect and godly living, without error or superstition. See ubi supra of
Ceremonies in the end.
virtue to do these things, they have not either naturally in themselves, or by
Divine institution. They were never intended by nature, or the God of nature
for such purposes; and God has no where promised to give such virtue and
efficacy to these humane Ceremonies; and men have not power to give them such
great virtue as is ascribed to them by the pleaders for them; and therefore I
dare not undertake to clear them from the charge and judgment that is above
given against those other forementioned Sacramentals by those learned Papists.
Learned Festus Disp. Theol. adversus Pontificios 37. These. 6. p. 266.
Hommius says thus of the sign of the Cross, That it is Magical and
superstitious to attribute to the sign of the Cross, made by the hand or finger
in the air, or any other thing, a supernatural and divine efficacy of
sanctifying us or our things, of avoiding Devils, and of curing Diseases; and
that it ought to be abrogated for this superstitious and truly Magical abuse of
it. And Disputation the 38. These. 2. p. 208. he says further thus: For seeing
that Idolatry is nothing else than to attribute to the Creatures that honor
that is due to God alone; and those virtues which are proper to God, it is
manifest that all they, whosoever they be, that ascribe to Creatures, and most
of all to Inanimate Creatures, the Divine Properties, and the proper effects
and benefits of God or Christ, do manifestly make Idols of those Creatures; and
whoever they be that do earnestly desire or expect these benefits from them, do
commit gross Idolatry: And Mr. Perkins in his Order of Causes of Salvation and
Damnation, upon the second Commandment, p. 63. in 4to, says thus: Satanical
means I call those which are used in the producing of such an effect, to the
which they neither by any express rule out of Gods Word, nor of their own
nature were ever ordained.

I pray let these things be humbly and meekly considered; and withal remember,
that there is an Amen said to the use of the sign of the Cross, which is a
prayer, as appears in the Office of public Baptism, and the Church-Catechism.
I do not charge our men with it, but humbly submit it to their serious
consideration, and desire them if any shall think they are concerned hereby to
go about to clear themselves from that is here charged upon the Papists, they
do not (as the practice of some has been) answer so, as to acquit the Papists
too, and justify the ungodly; but rather abstain from all appearance of evil,
1 These. 5. 22. and abolish that which is amiss, or has but the real appearance
of that which is evil to godly, sober, judicious and conscientious men.

Upon the whole matter it is Queried:
I. WHether among the Conformists to the Discipline and Ceremonies, there be
not as many Nonconformists to the Doctrine of the Church of England that is
against Popery, holding, if not all, yet many of these false Doctrines
renounced, as there are Nonconformists to the Discipline and Ceremonies of the
Church of England?

II. Whether those Conformists in name that are Nonconformists in deed to the
Doctrine of the Church of England that is against Popery, be not more dangerous
and likely to disturb the peace of the Church and Kingdom by Preaching and
Printing, and endeavoring to bring in Popery, than those Nonconformists to the
Rites and Ceremonies, and Declarations enjoined, but are real Conformists to
the Articles of Religion of the Church of England, which only concern the
Doctrine of Christian faith and the Sacraments, which is all the Subscription
was enjoined by the ancient Law, 3 Edw. 6. c. 11. 13 Eliz. c. 12.

III. Whether the twentieth Article, of the Authority of the Church, since the
first clause has been added by the Bishops, and the thirtyfourth Article of
Traditions, especially seeing Dr. Heylin says in his Introduction to his
Cyprianus Anglicus, page 20, 21. That authority to decree Rites or Ceremonies,
and authority in Controversies of Faith contained in the twentieth and
thirtyfourth Articles of Religion, the Church of Rome never challenged more;
and the third Article concerning Christ's descent into Hell, if it be expounded
other way than that of the Apostles Creed, to which assent is given in the
eighth Article, and the thirtysixth Article of ordering (the consecrating)
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, (seeing the Order of Diocesan, Provincial and
Ecumenical Bishops distinct from, and superior to Preaching-Presbyters has
been by Papists contended for to be of Divine right or institution, and yet
has been denied by sound Protestants, (as appears by the History of the
Council of Trent) and is by Archbishop Laud and his party made essential to the
being of a Church; which says Adam Coutzen (a Romish Priest) in the second
Book and eighteenth Chapter of his Politics, is the readiest and easiest way
to cheat the Protestants of their Religion; and Ordination by Protestant
Preaching Presbyters is denied to be valid, and yet Ordination of Popish
Priests is allowed to be good) be against Popery, or may not in fine bring in
the whole body of Popery, if not timely prevented, especially when that which
Mr. Fowler Free Discourse, second Edition, page 2. p. 191,
says shall be seriously considered (viz.) that those Divines of his opinion
do heartily subscribe to the Thirtynine Articles of our Church, taking that
liberty in the interpretation of them that is allowed and p. 2. p. 305.
by the Church her self, though it is most reasonable to presume that she
requires Subscription to them as to an instrument of peace only. And that the
What liberty is that? to interpret them as they please, and contrary to the
Grammatical and common sense of them, as Dr. Jeremy Tailor did the Ninth, and
Johannes de Sancta Clara, (Archbishop Laud's Fovourite) did all the Thirtynine?
Governors of the Church require not their internal assent to the Articles of
the Church of England, and yet require an unfeigned assent and consent to the
Ceremonies and Declarations by them invented, and injoined, as the Act for
Uniformity shows? as if they were more necessary and essential to the being of
the Church of England, than those substantial and fundamental Truths that are
contained in the other Articles of our Christian Religion. Most especiall^
seeing Gretzer de Festis, l. 1. c. 2.
Gretzer (a Romish Priest) calls the conforming part of the Clergy of England
Calvino-Papistae, Calvin-Papists, as was noted before in the Epistle to the
Christian Reader.

IV. Whether for the prevention of Popery it be not necessary to authorize some
known Orthodox Nonconformists (who stand not in awe of Bishops as Conformists
do) to license Books against Popery, Arminianism, Socinianism, and Anabaptism,
and for defense of the Articles of Religion of the Church of England? at least,
whether it be not more convenient and safe to authorize such Nonconforming
Divines than it is to authorize Bishops Chaplains to license Books, seeing in
A. B. Lauds time they suppressed the printing of many Orthodox Books and
Sermons, and licensed many Heterodox and Popish, Arminian and Socinian Books,
as may be seen in Dr. Heylin's Cyprianus Anglicus, and they may do the like or
the same, or worse hereafter?

FINIS.
The Christian Reader is humbly desired to correct these ERRATA'S which escaped
in the Printing in the Authors absence.
IN the Epistle, p. 1. l. last in the Marg. r. Presbytery. p. 11. l. 32. r.
riots. p. 12. l. 29. these words he faith it is a dangerous decert to say that
Creatures may be adored, and is contrary to Exodus 20. 5. Thou shall not bow
down to them, which are not the words of Bishop Sparrow, but of Thomas Rogers
upon Art. 31. and should have been put in the Margent against Bishop Sparrow's
former words, then should follow what Bishop Sparrow says, p. 391. thus, and
hs calls the Sacrament, etc. p. 20. l. 5. marg. r. Balduin. l. 12. for dixerit
r. dierum. Article 12th for unregenerate r. regenerate. In the Book p 5. add
due. p. 7. l 25. r. adgeniculari. p. 13. r. omnis. p. 15. l. 2. F. utimini
tanta. p. 20. 12. r. adorare. p. 27. l. 4. r. accusatis. p. 49. l 16. r. nuda.
p 51. r. appear. p 52. l. 6. r. the. l. 27. make at us a comma. l. 33. r.
Threlcatius. p 57. l 7. add in. p. 60. l. 25. r. ubi. p. 61. l. 3. r.
Mediatory. l. 37 r. such. p 64 l 24^ r. or. p. 67. l 24. add a after and. p. 68
l. 18. r. 132. p. 70. l. 19. r. pervenimus. p 71. l. 11. r. gratiae. p. 75.
marg. r. deter 33. p. 83. l. 6. marg. r. evil p. 98. l. 23. dele John Bradford.
p. 103. l. 26. r. Father. p. 107. l. 17. r. fawtor. p. 112. l. 37. r. (...). p.
198. l. 16. marg. add of. p. 207. l. 9. r. of. p. 210 l. 3. r. peccati. p. 211.
l. 2. marg. r. deter. 33. p. 215. l. 3. r. 3. p 217. l. 8. add ad before
efficatiam l. 12. r. rigore. l. 21. make a Parenthesis after brains thus) p.
220. l. 18. Hom against willful Rebellion. p 310. belong to the former. and l
23. Hom. for Salvation. p. 16, 17. belong to the words foregoing. p. 226. l 25.
r. Paul's. p. 23 1. l. 16. add him after followed. p. 233. l 3. r. Balaeus. l.
1. marg. r. Clementis. p. 234. r. fannell. p. 137. r. vitis degeneris. p. 250.
l. 12. r. seven. p. 253. l. 4. r. general. p. 254. marg. r. p. 258. l. 26.
after some make, l. 29. r. antinumerus. p. 261. l. 36. add number before 25. p.
262. l. 2. r. Bongus p. 269. l. 26. r. Catholicam. l. 30. r. caetera. p. 307.
that which is set against the Articlee should have been set lower against the
Renunciation of it. p 309. l. 3. r. Prayer Book l. 24. for this) make a period
thus. p. 312. l. 8. r. Gabrael. l. 3. marg. r. reject. p. 316. l. 21^ make a
comma thus, p. 323. l 29. add is. p. 325. marg. dele see. p. 326. l. 26. r.
sortitus. p. 338. l. 11. r, them. p. 346. l 36. make a comma after them thus.

BOOKS Sold by Tho. Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultry, over against
the Stocks-Market.
THE Morning Exercise at Cripplegate, or several Cases of Conscience
practically resolved by Sundry Ministers, in Quarto, Price bound 8 shill.

A Supplement to the Morning-Exercise at Cripplegate, or several more Cases of
Conscience, practically resolved by sundry Ministers, in Quarto, Price bound 12
shill.

A Discourse of Patronage, being a modest Inquiry into the Original of it, and
a further prosecution of the History of it. By Zachariah Cowdry, in Quarto*
Price stitcht, 6 d.

The Poor-Mans Family-Book, by Richard Baxter, in 8vo. Price bound 4 shill.

Precious Faith considered in its nature, working and growth, by Edward Polbill
of Burwash in Sussex, Esquire in 8vo, Price bound 3 sh. 6 d.

The Faithfulness of God considered and cleared, in the great events of his
Works; or a second part of the fulfilling of the Scriture, by the same Author,
in 8vo, Price bound 2 shill. 6 d.

A New Spelling-book with Syllables, or an Alphabet in a plain pathway to the
faculty of reading the English, Roman, Italian, and Secretary hands, with
several Copies of the fame; devised chiefly for Children, that hereby with the
less loss of their time they may be able to pass from reading to the Latin
Tongue. Also this Book is very necessary for the ignorant, to teach them to
write true Orthography in a short time. Price stitcht, 6 d.

The Divine Will considered in its Eternal Decrees and holy execution of them,
in 8vo.

An Answer to a Discourse of Mr. William Sherlock, touching the Knowledge of
Christ, and our Union and Communion with him, in 8vo.

The Court of the Gentiles in four Parts, by Theophilus Gale, in 4to.

A Week of Soliloquies and Prayers, with a preparation to the holy Communion,
and other Devotions added to this Edition, in two parts, by Peter du Moulin, D.
D. in 12s.

De Causa Dei, or a Vindication of the Common Doctrine of the Protestant
Divines, concerning Predetermination (i. e. The Interest of God as the first
Cause, in all Actions as such of all Rational Creatures) from the invidious
consequence with which it is burdened by Mr. John How, in a late Letter or
Proscript of Gods Prescience, in 8vo.

A Dialogue between a Romish Priest, and an English Protestant; wherein the
principal Points and Arguments of both Religions are truly proposed, and fully
examined, by Matthew Pool, Author of the Synopsis Criticorum, in 12s.

The Spiritual Remembrancer; or a brief Discourse of the duty of those who
attend upon the Preaching of the Gospel, by Samuel Welley, in 8vo.

God a Christians Choice, completed by particular Covenanting with God,
wherein the Iawfulness and expediency is cleared, by Samuel Winney, in 12s.

The reuniting of Christianity: Or, the manner how to rejoin all Christians
under one sole Confession of Faith, in 8vo.

The Life of Donna Olympia Maldachini, who governed the Church during the time
of Innocent the X, which was from the year 1644, to the year 1655. Written in
Italian by Abbott Gualdi; and faithfully rendered into English.

The Christian Pattern; or a Divine Treatise of the Imitation of Christ.
Written Originally in Latin by Tho. Kempis, above two hundred years since.

The Jew turned Christian; or, the Cornerstone, wherein is an assertion of
Christ being the true Messiah, by John Jacob, formerly a Jew, but now turned a
Christian, in 4to. stitcht.

The Romish Priest turned Protestant; with the Reasons of his Conversion,
wherein the true Church is exposed to the view of Christians, and derived out
of the holy Scriptures, sound Reason, and the ancient Fathers: by James
Salgado, a Spaniard, formerly a Priest of the Order of the Dominicans, 4to
stitcht.

Poese^s Grecae Medulla; in qua continentur Insigniores. Poetarum Graecorum
gnomae, versus Proverbiales, and Epigrimmata quaedam selecta, and in memoriae
subsidium Alphabeticae disposita; cum versione latina. In usum Scholarum per
Johannem Langston. 8vo.

Poems in two Parts. First, an Interlocutory Discourse concerning the Creation,
Fall, and Recovery of Man. Secondly, a Dialogue between Faith and a Doubting
Soul. By Samuel Slater, 8vo.

Mr. Edward Wests Legacy, being a Discourse of the Perfect Man. In Twelves.


