THE SIXTH PART OF THE Christian-Quaker, Distinguished from the Apostate and
Innovator, BEING A JUST DEFENSE Against the Reproach of Scandalous Tongues and
Pens, AND A PROPER LOOKING-GLASS for a Meeting in London, termed The
Second-days Meeting, who are reputed the Approvers of three Books, or Papers
against a Treatise Entitled, The Christian-Quaker, etc. in Five Parts given
forth by W. R. on behalf of himself and other Friends in Truth concerned.

By W. R.

2 Timothy 3.13. But Evil Men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving,
and being deceived. London, Printed for W. R. In the Year, 1681.

The SIXTH PART OF THE Christian-Quaker, Distinguished from the Apostate and
Innovator, etc.
The INTRODUCTION.
DID my own Reputation as a Man, or Christian, lie only at Stake, I might the
sooner satisfy my self to remain in silence, patiently to undergo the unjust
Reproach of scandalous Tongues and Pens; and solace my self with the Enjoyment
of that Inward Peace, which the Lord through his Mercy has (in the midst of
all my Exercises, for the clearing of my Conscience) made me Partaker of.

But, when I consider what Multitudes of the weaker sort of People are apt to
be deceived, by embracing Shadows instead of Substance, and Lies for Truth,
taking their measures of some Friends more from the reproachful and scandalous
Terms, undeservedly given by our Opposers, than from Matter of Fact committed,
or any real ground of Conviction, that such have merited our Opposers
recriminating Reflections, it has been one Motive amongst others, occasioning
me once more to appear in Print: and one part of my end therein is, that some
short discovery (in a few Lines) may be made (so far as at present I find
freedom in the Truth) of the ways and means by which some simple-minded
Friends have been betrayed to reproach their Friends and Neighbors, when in
reality they have had no just cause so to do, unless a declared Dissatisfaction
touching George Fox, or others of Party with him, on just occasion, shall,
without any manner of Examination, be deemed such.

In order to what I have premised, I shall take a little notice of three
Printed Books, or Papers against the Book Entitled, The Christian-Quaker, etc.

The First, In the Name of Christopher Tailor, contains two Sheets three
Quarters, and is Printed for John Bringhurst.

The Second, In the Name of Thomas Laurence, contains a part of a Sheet, and
the price thereof (as he tells his Roader) is an halfpenny, Printed for
Benjamin Clark.

The Third, Is partly in the Name of John Pennington, and partly in the Name of
his Mother Mary Pennington, and contains two Sheets, Printed also for Benjamin
Clark.

Before I take notice of any thing therein contained, I think meet to inform
the Reader, that the scope of their writing, Note, A Reply to the said Book, is
ready for the Press.
and Names of Persons for whom they are Printed, compared to what I find
written in the 12th. Page of the Immoduction of a Book against the
Christian-Quaker, in the Name of the Second-days Meeting, are sufficient
Evidence to Intelligent Persons among the People called Quakers, that they are
given forth by the Approbation of a Meeting usually consisting of uncertain
numbers of uncertain qualified Persons, called the Second-days Meeting in
London; who though they may pretend themselves to be invested with Spiritual
Power to correct or suppress what is brought before them; yet let all Friends
know that these few Lines will remain as a Record to the Infamy and Shame of
such as have approved such undeserved unchristian-like Language and Treatment,
wherewith the aforesaid Books or Papers are stuffed, as by these few Lines is
made appear.

The Consideration hereof occasions me to signify that one part of my Concern
to take notice of the aforesaid Books or Papers, is more to discover what is
acted under Pretense of that Church Government, whereof the said Second-days
Meeting is a part, than to detect the Persons whose Names are subscribed to
them, and so leave every Readers Judgment free, how far this Discovery renders
them guilty of abominable Wickedness and Deceit.

It Is frequently brought to my Ears, that our Opposers common Discourse is,
That I have written a wicked Book against the Faithful Friends of Truth, that
if all I had therein written were true, yet the Spirit that gave it forth, must
be wrong, and the same with Hams, because it discovers the Nakedness of a
Father, and publishes it in Gath and Askalon, to make the Uncircumcised
rejoice: and such as dislike it on this ground, have desired that it might be
called in again.

This Discourse I am willing first to take notice of, because by the scope of
the aforesaid Books, it seems to be the sense of the Givers forth, and
Apprevors there of.

If the mere discovering of Nakedness by one Note, John Pennington in the first
page of his Complaint, acknowledges me a Professor of Truth.
Professor of Truth against another be a Sin, then doubtlese Paul was such a
sort of Sinner in leaving it on Record, That he withstood Peter (the Eldest
Apostle) to the face, because he was to be blamed for his Dissimulation: [Read
the 2d. Chapter to the Galatians] and if any say, Paul published it not in Gath
and Askelon, To this I answer, that from the 14th. verse of the said Chapter,
we learn, that Paul's Reproof was before all men, his words are these, But when
I saw that they went not the right way to the Truth of the Gospel, I said unto
Peter before all men, If thou being a Jew, live as the Gentiles, and not like
the Jews, why constrainest thou the Gentiles to do like the Jews. I shall now
leave it to the consideration of such as are acquainted with George Fox's
Actions, whether Peter's Dissimulation be not a proper Looking-Glass for George
to behold his Face in, witness his Advice to Mary Pennington to secure
Worldly-Estate from the Spoiler, when 'twas likely to be seized for Obedience
to Christ's Command, compared with his reflecting Paper, touching making away
Estates from the Spoiler in time of Persecution for Worship of God, according
to the Apostle's Counsel: witness his advice to Nathanael Crips and Robert Arch
to buy their Tithes, compared with his known Severity at other times against
Payment of Tyths. Witness his Advice to Friends in general, not to Judge one
another, nor to lay open one another Weakness behind one another back, nor
yet to Back-bite, and yet behaves himself in his Travel, as if 'twas great
part, if not the chief part of his Business so to do. Witness his Counsel to
follow Reports until the Original Reporter was found, and yet take liberty to
hear and receive Backbiting Reports against his Friends, and not only so, but
to hide the Reporter when the Matter has been denied, that this has been his
State, I am capable for to prove, see Christian-Quaker, 5th. Part, Pages 42,
43, 44, 45, 46, 24, 25, 54, 55, 8.

It Is also observable, (as appears in diverse Parts of the Christian-Quaker)
That George Fox, and diverse others of Party with him have endeavored to
discover Nakedness in their Brethren, which being to my knowledge very
publicly known amongst the People called Quakers, I think it the less needful
to cite Instances hereof: And though 'twas from a wrong Spirit in Ham to
uncover his Fathers Nakedness, yet it is a false Application to me, etc.
concerned in the Christian-Quaker. For Note, See Christian-Quaker 5th. Part,
Pages 85, 86, 87, 88. and the Preface. Many other Instances might be cited.
George Fox's endeavoring to uncover pretended Nakedness in his Brother, or
Brethren, and sending abroad Certificates thereof to be spread amongst Enemies
as well as Friends, was one occasion that we did proceed to pross, thereby to
act the part (not of Cursed Ham) but of that Man of God who committed Ham's
Action (even as we have done the like of George Fox's) to Posterity.

Object. Some may say, That neither George Fox, nor his P^^ty have published
the Nakedness of any Brethren amongst such (...) professed not the Truth. But
if Report be true, thine has been published amongst Priests and others, not
reputed Friends, or so much as owning the Principle of Truth in which we have
believed.

Answ. If any shall so object, I may reasonably suppose that they are such as
have sucked in such Advice as John Bringhurst gives in his Preface to
Christopher Tailors Epistle, viz. Not to read The Book Entitled the
Christian-Quaker, and not only so, but may be at Unity with a new sort of
Doctrine published in some public Meetings for Worship of God, to this effect,
that as in the natural Body, the Eye is placed to see for the rest of the
Members, so in the Spiritual Body, God has placed one Member as an Eye, to see
for the rest: And on the Foot of this Doctrine, and the aforesaid Advice,
approved by some termed Brethren, (unto whom also we have been exhorted to have
an Eye) may not da^e to read the said Book, which if they had, they might in
the 11th. page of the Preface, have been informed that George Fox sent abroad
three Certificates touching John Story, with direction to show them both to
Enemies and Friends, which doubtless were in order to discover some pretended
Nakedness in him, and that Joan (...) (whom I may term George Fox's Factor in
Bristol (if it be proper to speak in his own Language) showed a Letter written
by Glorge Fox to defame me undeservedly unto one Jeseph Forest, Who was never
accounted as I know, or ever heard to be of the People called Quaker) as in the
18th. page of the the 5th. Part of the Christian Quaker does appear. Moreover
in the 28, 29, 30 Pages of the Postscript to the Preface of the
Christian-Quaker, are cited diverse Passages out of some Printed Papers
published in the Name of Ann Whitehead and Mary Elson, which import a
Publication of Division in Print particularly relating (as Mary Elson's words
are) to her Native Country Wiltshire, and this before the Publication of the
Christian-Quaker, for it was not then wholly Printed, if it had, it could not
have contained any Citation thereof. I also well remember (being an
Ear-witness) that Robert Langley of Naylsworth vilified and desamed John Story
by Name, end that in the presence of George Fox, on the First Day of the week,
in a public Meeting for Worship of God, within the City of Bristol, some years
past, before (as we supposed) 1500 People, of whom many were no Professors of
Truth (it being then the time of a Fair) and yet no Reproof from George Fox, or
any of his Party was then manifested, nor yet at any time after, so far as ever
I did hear; it is to be doubted that he well approved that Action, for I could,
and doubt not, but yet can bring Testimony, that George Fox suddenly after his
Departure out of the said Meeting, (...) to a Friend of John Stories, to this
effect: If John Story be your Christ, then take him: 'twas an unsavory
Expression in him in many respects, and seems to import that at that time, some
outward Man, visible to Carnal Eyes (as John Story was) was reputed at that day
to be Christ; those who are Friends to John Story, as well as to the Truth,
detest the thoughts of owning any mortal Man to be the Christ of God: and since
the weakness of Solomon Eccles (to go at present no farther) has given very
public occasion of discourse touching George Fox, as if he were the -- it is
become Cause of Admiration to some, that George Fox has not more publicly
than is yet known, and that by Print too, declared himself to be a mortal Man:
his Pen would have been far better exercised in such a work, than it was in
giving such an idle flouting, or scornful Answer to John Wilkingson as he did
on the occasion of his saying that George Fox's Body must turn to dust, see the
4th. Part of the Christian-Quaker, page 48, 68, 69, 70.

As to the Publication of my Book, as in the Objection, I have this to say;
though 'twas never my practice, order, or advice to publish it amongst Priests:
yet it is impossible for me to prove that it has not a Such sort of Negatives
under my Circumstances cannot be proved. However I must acknowledge it has
been at some time under my Consideration, that considering the Case in all its
Circumstances, it would have been no Breach of Christianity if I had proclaimed
it even in Gath and Askalon, because I did discharge my Duty toward such as
once I accounted my Brethren, as may be seen at large in my Book, and in
particular, in the Preface and Postscript thereto. And on the whole Matter, it
appears to me that they are so far from acknowledging their Error, as that
they persist therein like Persons hating to be reformed; and not only so, but I
have been evily entreated for so doing, and Endeavors have been used to shut
the Door amongst Professed Friends against me, so as that my just Complaint
should not be heard. And in as much as Bristol was threatened to be an Anvil to
beat upon, and since has been so made, and my self by Name in a public
Meeting reflected on, even in the same Language as Eli^as the Sorcerer was, and
by that means become the Subject of diverse sort of Peoples Discourse, both of
Professor and Profane, in public Coffee-Houses, and other public Places, I
thought it but just that some particular Friends that were sober Persons, and
with whom I had dealing should have the sight of my Defense, and on that Foot I
assented that two or three Persons might have the opportunity to have them, if
they would, but when I understood that that very Assent might become an Offense
to some, I for their Sakes, more than any other Obligation on my self, as a
Christian, did give order (which I can prove by many Witnesses) that none
should be disposed or lent to any that Professed not the Truth, and to this
day, I have not, neither is it in my Thoughts at present (without some further
Motive) to contradict it, notwithstanding I have been reflected upon as a
Person hiding my Talent in the Earth, because I would not assent to the sight
thereof, when desired. Let the ingenious Reader now consider, whether what I
have done amounts to a Publication thereof in Gath and Askalon.

I now come to show that if I had published the said Book amongst the
Uncircumcised in a general way, yet the allusion to what was forbidden to be
published in Gath and Askalon, is very improper in my Case.

From the Scripture of Truth we learn (2 Samuel 1.20.) that David's Counsel was,
That the Death of Saul should not be published in Gath, nor in the Streets of
Askalon, lest the Uncircumcised should rejoice: but yet we also learn (1 Samuel
28.18, 19. 1 Samuel 31.8. compared with 1 Samuel 15.24, 25.) that though Saul's
Kingdom was rent from him, and he slain, because of his Rebellion, yet he
acknowledged his Sin, and prayed that his Sin might be taken away: but as for
George Fox (touching whom a Concern of Conscience for Truths Sake, was with me
to treat as I have done) I understand not that he is in any wise come to an
acknowledgment of his Sin, as Saul was, much less to pray that it might be
taken away. Oh that the day were come wherein he might have a real Sense
thereof: and if it were so, that the Lord suffered Saul for his Rebellion, to
fall on the High Places, notwithstanding he hearkened to the Word of the Lord,
through the Mouth of his Prophet Samuel, so as to acknowledge his Sin, and pray
that it might be taken from him; methinks it should be a warning to George Fox
and others of his Party, to hearken unto the Word of the Lord that came unto
his Servant John Wilkingson, the 20th. day of the 6th. month 1675, which was on
this wise, viz. To repent and turn from their Proceedings, and leave Gods
People to the Order of his Gospel and Command, and that if they would not, then
the Lord himself would break them, and turn them one against another about
their Orders.

I am well sensible to what a height of Confidence our Opposers are ascended,
and do heartily breath unto the God of Heaven, that they may be humbled before
the Lord; and in particular, for that high and lofty one George Fox, that so he
may not utterly fall in the height of his vain Imagination, even as Saul did on
the High Places for his Rebellion.

It Is next with me to treat a little on the advice of some to call in my Book,
which occasions me in the first place thus to premise.

There are Times and Seasons wherein (in a more than ordinary serious manner)
my heart is even ripped open, naked and bare before the Lord, and in a sense of
his Love in calling me (amongst many others) to the acknowledgment of the
Truth, has it pleased the Lord to tender me, and in that Frame of Spirit I
have most seriously examined my self, with respect to the Work I have been
exercised in, and called unto, and for which I now suffer Reproach
undeservedly: and this I in the Truth can say, that of all the Actions of my
Life, since the day of my Remembrance, I know not of one in which I have more
Peace, and Content, and Satisfaction than in the preparing, printing, and
publishing, so far as I yet have, the Book Entitled, The Christian-Quaker, and
therefore I dare not call it in on the Foot of such Advice, as aforesaid.

I remember the Apostle Paul's Counsel to the Romans of different Persuasions in
some things was, To follow after the things which make for Peace. This Counsel
has been very effectually followed on our Part, Witness a Letter written by
John Story to two Meetings in the North, viz. That called Quarterly, and that
called Separate, a Letter written by William Ford and my self, and another by
Arthur Eastmead and John Mattraverse at Bristol-Fair, when George Fox, and many
others at Unity with them were there. The Testimony given by my self at the
House of Simon Clements, before eighty Persons at a Meeting occasioned by
reason of Differences: the Import of some part of all being to manifest, that
on our Part, we were desirous that all Offenses might be forgiven and
forgotten, and that Friends might embrace each other in that ancient Love which
was witnessed in the Beginning, being no way desirous to exalt our selves above
our Brethren, or to condescend to no other Terms of Peace, than such as should
tend to the Exaltation of one Party above another.

Moreover when I was last in London, I made a Proposition to several Friends in
words to this Effect, that I was ready to assent unto a Meeting of both
^arties, for two limited ends.

First, To Invocate the Name of the Lord for forgiveness of all Offenses and
Trespasses committed against him on either side.

Secondly, As we might expect an Answer from God, so to be ready to forgive
each other all manner of Trespasses respectively apprehended to have been
committed each against other.

Who can deny, but that the first proposed End is a Christian-Proposition on
our Part: perhaps some proud Pharisee may, I mean, such as may be apt to say,
Stand off, I am more Holy than thou. If the first be a Christian-Proposition,
the second cannot be less, except it may truly be termed Christian Fruit to
expect Forgiveness of God, and not be ready to forgive one another.

Object. If any object, We are ready to forgive Personal Trespasses, but yet
that will not tend to make a perfect Peace between us, because you are not in
Unity with the Brethren touching necessary things prescribed in the Church
since Church Government has been established amongst us.

Answ. Note, I use the word Established for that I find the Word Established
used to that purpose in the Writings of our Opposers.
This Objection hints not at any Differences touching Principles and Doctrines
held forth amongst us before Church Government was pretended to be Established,
and may very properly be compared to the Difference signified of by Paul
amongst the Believing-Romans. If our Opposers believe the Apostle, as we do,
they will then find in the 14th. Chapter to the Romans, that he describes two
sorts of Believers, but does not signify, that for their Differing Persuasions
they were out of Amity with the Body; but rather the contrary is imported by
his Saying, Let every man be fully persuaded in his own Mind, Let us not
therefore Judge one another any more. Verse 2d. of the said Chapter- Paul's very
Words run thus, One believes that he may eat of all Things, and another which
is weak, eats Herbs. The scope of that Chapter clearly shows, that he which
limited himself to the eating Herbs, was but the weak Brother, and that the
Brother differing from him, was the stronger, as by these words are signified,
v. 14. I know, and am persuaded through the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
unclean of it self. By this (it seems to me) that such as limit themselves to
one Outward Method touching proceeding in a Marriage, or relieving the Poor,
are but the weaker Brethren, and therefore very unfit to pretend themselves
Church Governors, or to quote any of Paul's Words, as an Argument to invest
themselves in such an Office; but yet may be apt to tell us, as in the
Objection, We can have no perfect Peace with such as are out of Unity, etc.

The word Peace, used as aforesaid, occasions me to enquire whether such a
Sense be not expressly contrary to Paul's Testimony and Counsel on the occasion
of two sorts of Believers, as aforesaid. Paul's words are these, The Kingdom of
God is not Meat nor Drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost. Let us then follow these things which make for Peace; this clearly
shows that such as had, or should Judge each other about Meats and Drinks,
(which were Outward Things) were such as did not follow Peace, and not only so,
but that Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost might be witnessed by
such as were of different Persuasions touching these Outward Things. And if
George Fox did in years that are past, write as he meant, 'twas then far from
his thoughts to set up Outward Things, much less endeavor to force a
Conformity thereto; else he would not have testified in Print on this wise,
They that set up Outward Things, gathers People to themselves, not unto God,
and that it is below Wisdom to jangle about Outward Things. See his General
Epistle Printed for M. W.

To return, I shall now say something further touching the advice to call in
the said Book Entitled the Christian-Quaker, though as I said before, I dare
not call it in on the Foot of that advice, given as aforesaid, yet if the
occasion wherefore it was published, be removed, I should therefore, so far as
concerns me, be ready to assent that all things therein relating to matter of
Difference and Reflection be called in, and buried in the Grave of Oblivion;
first taking liberty to collect and publish (if it should be so with me) what
is therein Doctrinally written.

To give an account of all the Occasions wherefore it was Printed; and
afterward Published amongst Friends, is too large, and therefore I do refer
the Reader to the Book it self (especially the Preface and Poscript thereto)
for Satisfaction in that, nothing doubting but that whoever shall peruse it
through, and not in Spirit of Prejudice, will easily discern, that sufficient
occasion was given to Justify my so ding, and that all the Revilings of my
Adversaies on that account, may worthily return as so many Darts to pierce the
Bowels of their Cause.

However it is with me further to add, That if our Opposers are for Peace, we
are so to, let them give but the like Demonstration for it as we have done, and
I doubt not but it will ensue, and though one Expedient frequently proposed by
us, has been to forgive all apprehended Offenses against each other, as
aforesaid, yet let the Reader know that we have not at any time proposed any
thing on our part, to shun a Just Trial of any thing that has, or may be laid
to our charge for that we have called for, desiring that Christ's Rule might be
exalted as a Standard, to Try us and our Opposers, viz, By their Fruits ye
shall know them. And when we have proposed Forgiveness of all apprehended
Offenses, as aforsaid, it has been chiefly to show how willing we were to
forbear any further discovery of Nakedness in our Opposers; but since our
Adversaries seem to be such a sort of People, as that nothing but Summum Jus
(and that according to their own sense of Justice (against those with whom they
are not at Unity) will serve their turn^: what is the reason that so much
Partiality has appeared amongst them, as that a Cry for Justice against George
Fox cannot be heard, as well as against any other Person? Alas! can such think
us so besotted, as to give heed to Exhortations for excluding Jealousy whilst
the Cause thereof remains: If our Opposers are really willing that we should
embrace that Counsel, we propose as an Expedient thereto, as follows,

First, Let a Testimony from the chief of our Opposers be drawn up when they
are Assembled at their Second-days Meeting in London, against the Imposition of
Outward Forms and Orders, under the Notion of an Established Church Government,
by one or more Members of Christ's Body, to be a Bond upon other Members of the
same Body to perform, whilst otherwise persuaded in their own Minds, unto
which let George Fox, as well as others, subscribe, with a Declaration by
George Fox, that he neither did, nor does design by any thing given forth by
him, any such Imposition as by these Lines we desire may be declared against.
This is now proposed, because Just See Christian-Quaker the 4th. Part.
Occasion of Jealousy has been given that he has designed to impose a strict
Observance of his Outward Orders, and that under as severe Penalties as his,
and his Adherents Power will admit and extend to.

Secondly, Forasmuch as George Fox stands charged with diverse things
reproachful to the Truth, and that Jealousies have entered many, that no Cry or
Call for Justice against him, will be hearkened unto by his Party, for fear of
his severe Censures, as if what he binds in Earth, is bo^nd in Heaven. Let a
Testimony as aforesaid be drawn up, that it is but Just, that George Fox should
abide a Trial in such a Case; and not only so, but let us be informed, before
whom such a Trial ought to be, and thus may our Opposers in some measure, lay a
Foundation to exclude Jealousies that have entered.

I now come to take some particular notice of the aforesaid Books. The Title of
that given forth under the Name of Christopher Tailor, runs thus. An Epistle of
Caution to Friends, to take heed of a treacherous Spirit that is entered into
William Rogers, and his Abetters, as appears in his malicious Book, falsely
called the Christian-Quaker, etc. who under the Profession of primitive Truth,
are betraying it to the World, and putting Truths Lambs into their Bear-Skins
for the World to worry, because they have no Power to do it themselves, who
have published their wicked Book in Askelon, the Fire of their Infamy, and have
told it in Gath, the Wine Press to press out their sour Grapes, to set the
Peoples Teeth an edge against the Lambs of God, with wholesome Advice and
Counsel by way of Information, that the Simple-mindded may not be ensnared by
the Crafts and Wiles of Satan, through such fallen Antichristian Instruments as
William Rogers, and such as are entered into the same malicious Spirit with him.

What ingenious Reader from so large a Title, could expect less than one
Citation out of what I published, being above fourscore Sheets, to manifest the
reasonableness (at least) of one recriminating part of his Title, but that he
has not done; nay, he is so far from it, that he does not pretend to cite one
word out of all my Book, more than the beginning of my very Title, viz. The
Christian Quaker distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator, and yet his
Impudence is so great, (as page the 3d.) to accuse me, that my end in writing
and printing, is to abuse and misrepresent the faithful People of the Lord (and
especially such as have been Faithful) Especially that Dear and Eminent Servant
of God George Fox, and to contradict his Blessed Life, in which ( says
Christopher Tailor) he is still made Instrumental in the Hand of the Lord, to
bring forth Blessed Things for the Service of God and his Truth, from the
Oracles of the Divine Breath, to the Praise of his Name for ever. As to
Christopher Tailors last cited word, for ever, if his meaning be with relation
to George Fox, I say, that if he had added, if he keeps his Place and
Habitation in the Truth to the end, it would have showed a better
Understanding, since we learn from the Holy Scriptures, That if a Righteous Man
turn from his Righteousness, and commit Iniquity, his Righteous Deeds which he
has done shall not be remembered. To be plain, if his meaning be as aforesaid,
Note, his Brother John Blaykling ascribed Eternal Honor to George Fox. See the
Fifth Part of the Christian-Quaker, page 77.
it is cause of Jealousy that Christopher Tailor thinks that George Fox is
more than a man (as a public Preacher, on Discourse had touching George Fox,
once told me) and not only so, but such an one as shall never err nor fall,
else what is the meaning that Christopher Tailor should, not only use the word
for ever so unwarily, if he spoke it with relation to George Fox, but also
reflect upon me at that ungodly rate, as he has, and yet not mention any one
particular thing distinct from a general Reflection, more than what he says of
me touching George Fox as aforesaid; for if a mere Opposition to George Fox, or
some other Man against whom I have written be not in it self Evil (even as a
mere Opposition to the Son of God that never erred is) there is no reason for
any one to take notice of one word written by Christopher Tailor against me;
especially since what I have brought forth in Print touching George Fox, was
after I had written to him many Letters of my Dissatisfaction concerning him,
and used my utmost Endeavor by writing to the General Meeting, by speaking and
writing to many Eminent Friends in the City of London, and at length by Travel
into diverse Parts of the Nation on purpose to manifest the necessity that lay
upon me to clear my Conscience in Print, unless Satisfaction might be so far
given, as that I might obtain a hearing before Friends in Truth; but that could
not be obtained, and my naked end was, that if my complaint should appear to
them to be just, even as it was in it self, it might without respect of Persons
be taken notice of accordingly. For a more particular account of my Christian
Proceedings and Reasons for appearing in Print, I refer to the Preface and
Postscript to the first five Parts of the Christian-Quaker.

It Is worthy Observation, that there is a Preface to Christopher Tailors
Epistle, subscribed by John Bringhurst, wherein he thus says, To all such who
have, or may have itching Ears to read the Book ( meaning the Christian-Quaker)
it rises in my Heart to caution you to forbear, satisfying your Minds therein,
for the Enemy may take advantage upon you, thereby to draw out your Minds to
take every thing for granted that is therein Inserted, and so cause you to look
out at others instead of looking after trimming your own Lamps.

The Consideration of these Lines compared with one Part of Christopher Tailors
Title, viz. with wholesome Advice and Counsel by way of Information, that the
simple-minded may not be ensnared, leads me to observe,

That the best way, (as to me appears) that our Opposers have to keep the
Simple-Minded from being ensnared, is to pin their Faiths on such as John
Bringhurst and Christopher Tailor are, and an uncertain number of uncertain
qualified Persons, called the Second-days Meeting. It Is easy to discern what a
Body of Darkness is comprehended under such sort of Council, for if it take
place, then those who are Simple-minded are no longer to see and hear for
themselves, but in the most favorable Construction, must, according to a late
Doctrine, have their Eye to the Brethren: and yet methinks I behold a
confusion amongst our Opposers, even relating to this matter; for the Substance
of this Doctrine has been of late also published in public Meetings for
Worship, as before is hinted at, viz. As in the natural Body the Eye is placed
to see for all the rest of the Members, so also in the Spiritual; and has been
explained, so as that it has sometimes been taken, That George Fox is an Eye
for the whole Body, and other times, As if some other Person were an Eye for a
Meeting, neither of which Explanations agrees with this Doctrine, Have your Eye
to the Brethren. Many Heads and Horn^ may be exalted with such kind of
Doctrines as these, by which the Preachers of the Light of Christ, as in the
beginning, may become a scorn and dirision. Oh Babylonish Building, the God of
Heaven, says My Soul, appear in his due time, to pull it down Root and Branch,
that so that bright and glorious day wherein we were made Partakers of a
measure of Christ's Light, Spirit, and Grace, renewing the Mind unto God by the
virtuous Operation thereof in our own illuminated Hearts (whereby we came to
drink clear and pure water out of our own Cisterns) may not at length be so
obscured and overshadowed with such a Vail of Darkness, as that any one of us
may be zealously affected to partake of the muddy waters of another Cistern,
and reject our own that is pure. So much at present may suffice to say on the
occasion taken from Christopher Tailors Epistle.

I now come to take a little notice of Thomas Laurence's Sheet, the Title runs
thus, William Rogers his Christian-Quaker manifested to be Antichristian, he
tell the Reader, That he has written a Book against Seperatists, That the
Price thereof is a Halfpenny, That he is 81 Years of Age, and that two chief
Points in Writing, is to be Plain and Short, That mine is neither Plain nor
Short, but Ambiguous, Tedious, Doubtful, loaded with many Lerters,
Suppositions, and Jealousies, Reiterations, and Parenthesis, many and long
Objections, that will both trouble and weary the Reader. I confess Thomas
Laurence has avoided the Rock that I by his Account have run upon, however, as
short as he is, he is not free from many Mistakes, I will not call it, his
Brethrens Method of Lying, because Charity ob^iges me to think Thomas Laurence
makes Conscience not to tell a wilful and known Lie, and I am the more engaged
to call them by the name of Mistakes, because of his Age, which he says, is 81
Years, and that in the numbering the Sheets of my Book, he has mistaken many,
for he says they are 100 Sheets, when as they want of 90.

A part of his Mistakes in his own words, are these,

First, Thou have abused George Fox double, 1st. Judged him by Hearsay, 2dly.
Judged him for advising to hide Goods in any Case.

Secondly, You Preach up Doctrine, but leave out Christs-Government, and so you
are rightly called Seperates, putting asunder what God has joined together,
parting Husband and Wife, cutting off the Body from the Head, as if they were
all Traitors.

Thirdly, That we have asserted many things that are not true, but proves it
not.

Fourthly, That George Fox was the first that did begin the difference amongst
Friends by setting up Monthly and Quarterly Meetings.

Fifthly, That the Seperates (a nickname put upon us) will have no increase of
Christ's Government,and yet in the 28 p. of the Third Part of my Book, I assert
in these words, And since it is undoubtedly so that of the Increase of Christ's
Government there shall be no End.

Sixthly, That we charge our Opposers with Folly and Hypocresy, that profess
themselves Members of the True Church, and Believes as the Church Believes.

Thomas Laurence quotes the Words of Christ as cited by me, viz. As I hear, I
Judge, that is, says Thomas Laurence, hear the Party, not report, and so by
his own false Construction of Christ's words cited by me, gives himself trouble
to no purpose, he further cites these following words, That the Lord has
anointed and chosen George Fox to be in that Place amongst the Children of
Light in this our day, as Moses was amongst the Children of Israel in his day,
to set up Forms of Church Government. The Substance of the Words are laid down
by me as seeming to be deducible from an Objection raised in the 9 page of the
First Part, he also says that in the 29th. page of the First Part, I assert
That the Place of Christ's Government is only within in the Heart: and further
also, that I assert It is repugnant to the Light in our Consciences to believe
that Christ's Government should rest upon any Man or Men to be Rulers over
others. He quotes not the Page, that I may examine whether these last words are
so laid down or not.

At present, I have no Concern to trouble the Reader with what he says
thereto, nor yet the rest of his Sheet, which for the most part, is touching
his sense of Christ's Government, and to exalt the Service of George Fox above
the Service of John Wilkinson and John Story, his own Lines compared with his
Title Page, and my Book, is, without any further Reply, sufficient to show his
weakness, my end in citing what Thomas Laurence has cited of my words, is
chiefly to signify that what I have so noted, is all that he has cited out of
my Book to prove it Antichristian, which when compared with the aforesaid
Catalogue of Mistakes, will no way erect the Title Page, Note. A very Eminent
Preacher as Tho. Laurence has said, dictated that Title unknown to him, and
contrary to his Mind.
nor yet the Person that was Dictator thereof, nor yet the Second-days Meeting
at London.

Observations on the Book, partly in the Name of John Pennington, and partly in
the name of his Mother Mary Pennington.

The Title Page runs thus, John Penningtons Complaint against William Rogers,
relating to the Abuse and Injury done to the Memory of his worthy Father Isaac
Pennington, in misrepresenting and perverting some of his Writings in his Book
Entitled the Christian-Quaker, etc. Whereunto is subjoined somewhat to
manifest his Mother Mary Penningtons not shunning Sufferings for Truth, etc.
occasioned by William Rogers his suggesting the contrary. From the Title Page
two things may be expected by the Reader to be proved, First, That I
misrepresent some of his Fathers Writings, and Secondly, That I pervert them.

They are both notoriously false, and so will appear to any unbiassed
Understanding Reader, the Proof given by John Pennington, is words of mine
which he cites out of the 88 page of the Third Part of the Christian-Quaker,
viz. We think it necessary to cite a Testimony published in Print by Isaac
Pennington the Younger in the Year 1660, being part of a discourse, Entitled
the Authority and Government which Christ excluded out of his Church. As it
lies altogether word for word, and not taken by Parts and Pieces here and
there, these are all the Words of mine which he quotes for Proof, and having
done, he treats thereon, as if my words imported, that I here would cite the
whole Testimony of the said Isaac Pennington word for word, and not by Parts
and Pieces here and there, when as my very words, as they are cited by the said
John Pennington, clearly show that my Intent and Purpose was to quote only one
part of his discourse, Entitled, The Authority and Government which Christ
excluded out of his Church; as it lay altogether word for word, and not taken
by parts and Pieces here and there, which I faithfully performed, beginning at
the beginning of a Paragraph after a full stop, and so quoted about eight or
ten sides, without adding or deminishing a word, and at length left off at a
full stop, nothing said by Isaac Pennington contradicts this, the reason
occurring in my Mind wherefore I so worded my meaning, could not be to
insinuate that I cited the whole Testimony, because my very words declare that
'twas but a part, and the Motive wherefore I inserted these words as it lay
altogether, and not by parts and Pieces here and there, was chiefly to quit my
self from Jealousy that I had acted according to the Example of one of my
Opposers within the City of Bristol, who on a certain occasion had taken out of
my writing a part of a Sentence in one place, spoken on an occasion administered
one day, and a part of a Sentence in another place, on an occasion administered
another day, and renders them in Manuscript as one entire Sentence spoken by me.

And forasmuch as John Pennington has not laid down any of my words, to show
wherein I have perverted some of his Fathers Writing, I think it necessary to
cite all that I say in relation to that Part of his Fathers Testimony which I
have cited; out of which words Perversion must be proved against me, or else
none can be proved at all; the words do immediately follow what he has cited
to show Misrepresentation, and are these, Our End in citing this Testimony is,
that the Impartial Reader may consider whether the said Testimony has any
Coherence with that part of the Note, meaning Rob, Barclais 's Book of
Government, wherein he writ of a sort of Persons that would be Innovators, and
given to change, and introducing New Doctrines and Practices, not only
differing, but contrary to what were delivered in the Beginning, reflectingly
treating on such kind of Language as this, I must stay until convinced.
Book of Government which is objected against by us, or does contradict any
Subject Matter that we have treated upon: which clearly show that we put no
Constructions on his Fathers words; but left the Reader free without
endeavoring to impose any sense relating to these words.

And yet his weakness (if not wickedness) is so great as to declare that my
Deduction (which in reality was none at all) was not genuine, but forced, and
that my Inferences are not true.

But suppose that I had not worded my meaning so cautiously, as to have
signified 'twas only a part of his Fathers Discourse, I appeal to all men of
Understanding, whether in that very case, all Christian Professors that ever
appear as public Preachers, or Writers, might not by the same Rule be
reflected on when they have quoted by way of Testimony or Illustration, a part
only of another Testimony, but that which yet seems to aggravate John
Penningtons abuse of me, Note, John Pennington cites not all the rest of his
Fathers Testimony, but a part thereof, I therefore query, whether by his Rule
he has not proved himself worthy of worse Reflections than he gives me, since
he informs not his Reader, that what he has written to mend the matter, as he
may think, is only a part of the rest of his Fathers Testimony.
is this, after he had cited what he thought meet of his Fathers words to
manifest that I misrepresented and perverted his Fathers words; he then in the
6th. page of his Book thus says, Now let us see, whether even out of that very
Part, William Rogers has quoted, there be not words to the same effect, as
where Page 94, Part 3d. of William Rogers 's Book. My Father says, Care must
be had, that nothing Govern in the Church of Christ, but the Spirit of Christ,
that nothing else teach, nothing else exhort, nothing else admonish and
reprove, nothing else cut off, and cast out, again, every Member is to wait in
that Measure of the Spirit which he has received, to feell the going forth of
the Spirit in him that teaches and governs, and so be subject, not to Man,
but to the Lord, to receive from the Lord, to obey the Lord.

To every unprejudiced Reader, that may rightly weigh what I have now written,
and compare John Penningtons Lines with the pretended occasion thereof, I doubt
not but it will be manifested that I have not misrepresented, nor perverted his
Fathers Writings, and yet John Pennington, for no other cause than already
mentioned, reflects on me on this wise, That I do not through Ignorance, but
wilfully, and designedly endeavor to smite and vilify such as were, and are
honorable, that I am guilty of premeditated and palpable Falsehood, that I have
traduced his Father, and so proceeds to charge me with down right Falsehood, and
impious Prevarications, and with a Judas Kiss, (meaning as he says, a show of
Candor, etc.) I labor to betray the Truth and its Sincere Professors into the
Hands of the Wicked and Ungodly, that I was untrue to my word, further adding
on this occasion, these very words, viz. These base and underhand Dealings are
so far from becoming a tender Friend, that they are not like a fair Adversary,
and so unsuitable to a Christian-Quaker, that they would be cause of shame to a
Mortal-Heathen, and that I prevericate in the Face of the World, and so appeals
to any Vnbyased Judicious Reader, whether I have not dealt fallaciously,
deceitfully, and surreptitiously, as well as unrighteously, that I appear
against the Truth, and them that are in it. All which undeserved Reflections,
together with the heaps of the like in Christophers Tailors Epistle, seem to
show that the Approvers and Subscribers act like such as have had their
Educations at Billings-gate amongst the Scolds, rather than under the Roofs of
sober Families. One thing I have yet omitted, that was with me to take notice
of. John Pennington in favor, as he supposes, of his Father, tells his
Reader, that I have leapt over some Leaves at the beginning, explanatory of the
rest, and left out an entire Sentence at the close, from whence I observe, that
what I quoted might reasonably be termed Explanatory of that which did proceed,
and not that which proceeded be explanatory of what I quoted, which did follow.
The Sentence left out at the Close was this, And the Unity being thus kept, all
will come into one Outwardly at length, as the Light grows in every one, and as
every one grows into the Light, but this must be patiently waited for from the
Hand of God, who has the right way of affecting it, and who alone can do it,
and not harshly and cruelly attempted by the rough hand of man. Touching this
Sentence, John Pennington says, that I knew it would not serve my turn, but if
fairly and impartially set down, would have both mended my Work insignificant,
and detected the falseness of my Dealing, as it could not but have manifested
to every considerate Reader that my Deduction was not genuine, but forced; to
this I say, First, That I made no Deduction or Inference from his Fathers
words, as I have already proved. Secondly, His Fathers words are Prophetical,
signifying what will come to pass, not what was come to pass, and since the
occasion of my citing his Fathers words, was only in relation to a Discourse
touching what had been, I should have shown my self very impertinent, to quote
his words Prophetically spoken, of what should be: However, since John
Pennington is pleased to say, I knew it would not serve my turn, but would have
rendered my Work insignificant; I shall take the liberty to tell him that those
very words may justly be termed to be a sufficient Testimony against some
Actions whereof George Fox and some of his Party are guilty in an high degree.
Witness, the Persecution raised against P.S. and I.W. whereof some mention is
made in the 1st. and 4th Parts of my Christian-Quaker, and Proceedings against
John Ainloe at a Quarterly Meeting in the Isle of Ely.
For it is certainly known that he and some of his Party have harshly, and (so
far as was in their Power) truly persecuted some Persons for not conforming to
the Outward Prescriptions of others, but had they instead thereof, exhorted
them to wait on the Lord for a further growth in the Light, in order to the
being led into an Outward Unity, or Conformity to such Prescriptions by the
Hand of the Lord, who alone (as John Penningtons Fathers Testimony is) has the
right way of effecting it, it would have more agreed with his Fathers
Testimony, and the Principle of Truth.

To conclude my Observations on John Penningtons Book, I have this to add, that
John Pennington declares that the drift of the 3d. Part of my Book, as the
Title Page imports, Is to tie up all to an Inward Government of Christ,
exclusive of any Outward Form of Government, Order, or Descipline. This it so
notoriously false, that my very express words in diverse places of that very
part does contradict it; 3d. P. page 24. I thus write, Though the Principle of
Truth in these latter days has, and may further lead into the Practice of
Outward Orders in Discipline, with Relation to the Church of Christ. And page
25. thus, For though some Outward Form or Appearance may be according to the
Order of the Gospel. And in page 19. thus, And yet I am abundantly satisfied
that Set and Appointed Meetingt on certain prefixed days, being with the joint
concurrence of those Members assembling, and from time to time to be assembled,
to take care of the Poor, to inspect Marriages, that none come together
disorderly, and to take care that Truth may not be scandalized through the
Backslidings of such who have been in Fellowship with the Children of Light,
are not inconsistent with that Form that the Powor of God may lead into; for I
am a Witness for many years past, even to this day, that such Meetings have
been serviceable to answer those righteous Ends.

My Observations on what is written in relation to Mary Pennington.
The Title Page Imports, That I have suggested, that Mary Pennington did shun
Suffering for Truth. It Is a very false Representation of what I have said
concerning her: For there cannot be a shunning of Suffering for Truth, unless
one shun that Suffering which Truth requires, which I never did charge Mary
Pennington with.

However I think meet to signify the Occasion of my using her Name.

George Fox sends a Paper of Queries to be read in diverse Meetings, reflecting
so far as Queries could, on such as secured any part of their Estates from the
Spoiler, and being informed that he advised Mary Pennington to secure hers from
the Spoiler, I sent unto him this Query, Whether thou George Fox, whilst Isaac
Pennington was in Prison, and in expectation of being premunired, did not
advise, or at least encourage Mary, the Wife of Isaac Pennington, to secure
her, or their Estate, if thou deny it, I shall undertake to prove it, or bring
Testimony under the hand of a credible Friend in Truth that Mary Pennington did
signify so much? this I did to manifest at least George Fox his changeableness
in his Answer to the said Query: He denies not the Matter, and Mary Pennington
relates something of it more at large, Saying, That she never had any Advice
from George Fox contrary to her own Conscience, and at last says thus, And now
I have given the tr^e relation, I sum up all that, what I have here asserted to
be done by me, was no shift nor carnal hiding from Spoil in that. That was a
Testimony, which being compared with that part of her Relation, where it is
signified, That when Sufferings for Meetings by Imprisonment gave way to
proceedings by Fines upon Preachers, Hearers, etc. The Lord gave me a clear
quiet submitting to it, though I had in my view the Ruin and Havoc that 40 l.
a week would procure to us, etc. Shows that a Suffering for Meetings is in her
sense a Suffering for a Testimony, and that she was not free to avoid that, but
a Suffering for not Swearing, she was free to avoid, which occasions me to add
that Pursuant to the Apostles Counsel, we cannot forsake the Assembling of our
selves together, and in pursuance of Christ's Command, we cannot Swear, and in
both these our Testimonies for Truth is concerned; and therefore I cannot but
conclude, that as it related to avoiding Sufferings, by reason of Obedience to
Christ's Command, George Fox's Counsel to her was not Justifiable in him,
whilst be condemned the Practice in another, as it related to Sufferings in
pursuance either of his or the Apostles Counsel; and whereas Mary Pennington
has accused me, that I have aspersed innocent Servants of the Lord, and have
brought forth nothing to prove that I have so done, I return it as a false
Charge, unbecoming the Pen of one that pretends to an innocent and righteous
Conversation, as she does.

BRISTOL, the 9th. Month, 1681. William Rogers

FINIS.

