THE HISTORY OF INFAMOUS IMPOSTORS. OR, THE Lives and Actions Of Several
Notorious Counterfeits, Who from the most Abject, and Meanest of the People,
have Usurped the Titles of Emperors, Kings, and Princes.

Written by The Sr. J. B. de Rocoles, Historigrapher of France and Brandenbourg.

And now Done into English.

London, Printed for William Cademan, at the Pope's-Head, in the Lower-Walk of
the New-Exchange, in the Strand, MDCLXXXIII.

THE PREFACE.
THE Intention of this Preface, is not to make any Apology for the ensuing
Treatise, since it needs none: My Author being well qualified for the
Undertaking, and having Learnedly and Judiciously Collected these Lives, from
most Authentic Historians, except that of Don Sebastian, wherein he has
assisted himself, with part of the Fancy and Tale, from the curious Pen of
Mademoiselle des Jardins, as he there acknowledges: All the rest, are backed
with good Authority; for I have taken the pains to inspect many of the Authors
herein in cited, and sometimes made bold a little to Enlarge or Explain, as the
Passages required.

But I was glad to have the occasion in the Reading this small Piece, to
observe and expose how restless a Passion Ambition is, and what different Ways
it treads to compass its Designs; Though amongst all the Methods that are
used, none is more Plausible, and in a fairer way of Success, than this kind of
Artifice, where the Impostor, upon his own Fund of Confidence, by personating
Another, sets up for Himself, and a Kingdom: And with such Art and Subtilty,
puts on his borrowed Plumes, that the Fraud has not been soon, or perhaps never
fully discovered: But the End has generally proved Unfortunate.

Here are represented almost all that History furnishes of this kind, except
the late Demetrius's of Russia, and very few more; which may possibly be added
to This hereafter, in Case it be worthy of another Edition. But what Volumes
might be made, should an Historian undertake to Describe the Arts and Tricks of
our Modern Impostors, who to arrive at their Ambitious Ends, far outdo the
villainies related in this Book.

Where can we parallel such an Impostor? Who had been long sensible of the warm
Influence of Royal Favor, and had all his former Crimes buried in Oblivion;
and yet that he should return to his Vomit, by animating his Princes greatest
Enemies to his Destruction; and most ungratefully, when the Snuff of his
detested Life is almost extinct, still delude the World with his borrowed
Shapes and Disguises; seducing his Countrymen from their Duty and Allegiance,
with groundless Fears and Jealousies: And then, with the specious Pretenses of
Liberty and Property, so charm the Multitude, that he becomes not only the Idol
of the Clowns, but of many others, who are ready to raise Altars to Him, having
made Medals in his Honor; till, at last, he hurries them into Riot, Sedition,
and their dismal consequences. Strange Contradiction! That Vigor, and Decrepit
Old Age, should consist for Rebellion: And when Life is on Tilt, New Plots
should be tapping, to stum the Nation, and intoxicate the weaker Sort to their
Ruin.

Nor can I less admire the Imposture of his Clyents, who being a Scandal to
Debauchery, cry out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians! Our Religion! Our True
Protestant Religion! To follow the Scent, and to keep up the Chase, One can
even prostitute his Wife to another, and be basely branded vigilanti stertere
naso: And to give a Specimen, that All things should be in Common, in an
Honorable way, make bold with a Sister. Who cannot easily detect such an
Impostor, that would make us believe, he can be just to Oaths and Sacraments,
when he has abused them, and mimickt the most Sacred Mystery, with the
Diversion of a Christmas Fire? And who in the Fraud of an Employment, by the
Letting out of Prisoners, foretold he would be a Patriot for the Liberty of the
Subject?

Lord, how it shocks me! to think, that a Publican, and a Sinner, One that from
Leathern Breeches should by indirect means, so fill his Canvas, with the Stamp
of Majesty, that he should aim at a Peereage, and missing of it, should then
forget his Allegiance to Caesar. Sure, it is no small Artifice must make this
Man appear a Saint, and an Assertor of his Country's Rights. And that a Wise
City, worthy of Bedlam, should fancy him the Chaste Guardian of Widows and
Orphans, who used to make private Assignations, with their Wives and Daughters
in Moore-fields; and then, at last, modestly absconded, hoping to defraud them
of their Portions.

But those who most raise my Admiration, move in a Lower Orb; yet are no less
Eminent in their proper Sphere, than the Former; These, like the Moon, though
enlightened from another, yet have great Influence, and are very Instrumental in
the Flux and Reflux of our Troubled Waters. Great Zealots for a Religion, which
is yet to be chosen. Hypocrites, always stigmatized for Atheism: Cowards to
every one, but God, and their Prince; both whom, they dare Lampoon in Taverns,
and impudently Defy; because, they know, their greatest Attribute is MERCY.
It Is a mad World, my Masters! When One sets up for a Protestant Pillar, who by
his Bulk perhaps might be thought so, to hear him mouth out PROPERTY and
RELIGION; whose Estate, like his Poetry, lies in Terra Incognita; and his Piety
such, that he scarce ever Names his Maker, but to Profane Him. One, worse than
a Pharisee, neither Clean within, nor without,; who bauls for a Dole, and is
chosen by his Worthy Patrons, not for his Brains, but his Lungs. The Devils
Maxim holds true; That no Man serves God for naught; and he, to invert the
Case, serves not his Masters for naught: Though, when these Distractions shall
be quite Composed, and the Delirium of the Nation abated, his Patrons may
discard their Tool; which being without an edg, rather Bruised than Cut: And so
at length, in imitation of a Playhouse, retrench their Expenses, and deprive
their Lumber-of-a-Writer, of his Pension. This Man was a Papist by his
Education; a most scandalous Libertine, in course of Life; and a professed
Atheist is his Conversation: No doubt therefore, but he must be a fit Champion
for the Protestant Religion, and the Laws, against Popery, and Arbitrary
Government.

And since we are in, let us not forget another Impostor, whom Nature never
designed for a Man, but said, Be thou always a Boy. A strange Mixture of a
Creature, who learnt in his Father's Shop to be Pragmatical and Fantastic; and
thinks it as easy a Task to Cleanse, and take off all the Stains and Spots,
which he with his False Glass can represent in the Face of the Established
Government, as for his Sire, in a Checquered Apron, on a Saturday Night, to
scowre the Face of a Plowman. Sure, in all reason, 'twas enough for him to have
imitated Soap-Bladders in Poetry, and not to have been set on work about
Trimming up a New Successor; where, like his own Rockets on a Pope-Night, he
Rambles extravagantly, and Whisks this, and that way, to no purpose; and his
best Reasons, as once his Squibbs, destroy themselves, and endanger no Body so
much as their Author. If he could possibly be made capable of Good Advice, I
would counsel him only to play the Fool in Bartholomew-Fair; there let him be
Laureat to King Oberon; and at his own Booth, be Zany and Poet. But let not his
own Life and Manners be the Subject of his next Puppet-Show; lest it Debauch
the Rabble, his great Admirers.

These, and many other Scriblers, have been Selected, as the Propogaters of the
Cause; but they are generally so Vile and Inconsiderable, that I choose to
despise them, and scorn to do them the credit of Remarking.

I would stop here; but, Difficile est Satyram non Scribere; as fast as I cut
off, New Heads arise from my Hydra; Legion, of Old, left Man for Swine, and now
for Swine enters Man again. Such Impostors have appeared amongst us of late,
that it is incredible to think, that our Senses and Understandings should have
been so much imposed on, as they have. Wretches, most profligate in all sorts
of Wickedness; as Cheating, Thieving, Forgery, Coining, Lying, Perjury; nay,
Sodomy; have on a sudden been entertained and credited, as most Pious, Sober,
Virtuous Christians, and True Protestants. What greater Prodigy, than that such
Spirits of Darkness, should pass for Angels of Light? Yet in respect to the
Sense and Justice of my Country, I will keep in bold Truths, and spare even the
Impostor with a Witness. But when any Man shall think it convenient, in proper
Colors, to draw the true Lineaments of some of these Counterfeits, the History
of their Lives, though writ with the greatest Impartiality, will appear as
improbable as Rablais his Garagantua. In the mean time, let them be tormented
with their Secret Crimes; and in their Consciences, which are as a Thousand
Witnesses, confess,

-- Ambiguae si quando citabere Testis
Incertaeque rei. Phalaris licet imperet, ut sis
Falsus, and admoto dictet perjuria Tauro.
Summum creed nefas, vitam praeferre pudori,
Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causas.
Juvenal Sat. 8. I could have Paraphrased this into English, but will content
my self with Doctor Holliday's Translation.

When in a Doubtful Cause, thou needs must stand
A Witness, should Phalaris bid thee be
False, show his Bull, and dictate Perjury.
Life, before Virtue, count it lewd to choose;
Do not, to save Life, the Ends we live for loose.
A TABLE OF THE Histories contained in this Book.
Chap. I. THe False Smerdis, only Brother of Cambyses King of Persia, and of
the Medes. Page 1. Chap. II. The False Nero. Page 26. Chap. III. The False
Messiah, called Bencochab, Chief of the Revolted Jews. Page 30. Chap. IV. The
False Moses. Page 33. Chap. V. John Bulchold, King of the Anabaptists, called
John of Leyden. Page 35. Chap. VI. The False Clotaire, called Gondoald. Page
38. Chap. VII. The False Baldwin, Emperor of Greece, and Earl of Flanders.
Page 58. Chap. VIII. The False Richard, Duke of York, and pretended Son of
Edward the Fourth King of England, called Perkin Warbeck. Page 76. Chap. IX.
The False Don Sebastian, King of Portugal. Page 113. Chap. X. The False
Voldemar, Marquis and Elector of Brandenbourg. Page 139. Chap. XI. The False
Mustapha, Son of Bajazet, the First of that Name, Emperor of the Turks. Page
154. Chap. XII. The False James Heraclides, Despot of Moldavia and Wallachia.
Page 179.
A LIST OF INFAMOUS Impostors: OR THE LIVES Of Several Notorious Counterfeits,
who from the most Abject, and Meanest of the People, have usurped the Titles of
Emperors, Kings, and Princes.
CHAP. I. Of the False Smerdis.
ONE of the most Profligate Impostors I can write of, is the Counterfeit
Smerdis, who was a Magus; which, taking the word in its most favorable
Acceptance, signifies a Scholar, an Astrologer, or Philosopher: But I am more
inclined to believe he was a Magician; who for some Crime, escaped the Justice
of Cyrus, with the loss of his Ears. The Frenzy and Distraction into which
Cambyses, King of Persia, and Son of Cyrus the Great, fell, gave this Impostor
an Opportunity to show himself; and, for eight Months, to ascend the Throne of
one of the Greatest, and most Potent Empires in the Universe. For the King,
when fallen into this Distemper, caused his only Brother to be put to Death, he
being then Governor of Persia: Whose Person this Magician so acted, as
obtained him the Quality and Empire of Smedis. The untimely Death of this
Prince, gave him the Opportunity of being so great an Impostor; the Distraction
of Cambyses, was the cause of his Death; and the Sacrilege of Cambyses, in
mortally wounding the God Apis, of Epaphus, the Occasion of that Punishment.
This Apis the Egyptians blinded with Idolatory, adored in the Figure of a
Calf. The Fable of this Divinity is known to proceed from Jupiter's loving the
Princess Jo, Daughter of Inachus, King of Phoenicia; Juno contrived to surprise
him with her: wherefore Jupiter turned her into an Heifer, to secure her
against the Revenge and Jealousy of the Goddess: But that was not sufficient
to extinguish her Jealous suspicions, which prompted her to beg that beautiful
Cow of Jupiter, who could find no excuse to deny her. Juno committed her to the
keeping of Argus with his hundred Eyes; at which, Jupiter being extremely vexed,
sent Mercury his Bastard, and stole her away while Argus slept: This so engaged
Juno, that her Revenge fell on Jo, whom she commanded the fury Erinnys to make
distracted, and possess with wild Fancies, which made her wander about the
World; until grown weary and Faint, she stopped in Egypt, where she was
restored to her former Shape and Person, and brought to Bed of Epaphus; The
Egyptians Worshipping both her, and her Son. Ovid tells this Story at the end
of his first Book of Metamorphosis.

Cambyses, although the eldest Son, and Successor to so great a King, and in
the Possession of such mighty Provinces as the Persiaen Empire contained,
burned with an unlimited Ambition to extend his Conquests, which he did over
Egypt; stripping Psalmneticus the King, Son of Amasis the Usurper, of all
Regal Power: But this not being enough for his vast Thoughts; he undertook
three great Wars, at the same time, though very unseasonably, and to his
disadvantage; making the Carthaginians, the Aethiopians; and the Arabians his
Enemies. Against each of these he had ill Success: He could not attack the
Carthaginians, but by Sea; and the Phoenicians, his only Subjects that could
assist him with Ships, mutin'd, and refused to lend him any; belleving it
unnatural to contribute toward the Ruin of the Carthaginians, who proceeded
from them. To advance toward Aethiopia, the Army had vast Deserts to march
over; and this young unadvised King took so ill Measures, and made so small
Provisions, that he hardly got the Fifth Part of the way, ere his Army wanted,
and were forced to eat their own Horses, and Camels; and afterward, by
Decimation and Lot, to feed on every Tenth Man; till at last, he, with the
Wrack of this miserable Army, got back to Thebes in Egypt. The Third, which
was of Fifty Thousand Men, was commanded to waste the Country round the Temple
of Jupiter Hammon, and to burn that famous Temple, with the Statue of Jupiter.
When they had advanced as far as the City Oasis, seven days Journey beyond
Thebes, being the midway to the Town of Dasis, (the Country they were to
attack) they halted in a Valley; where an impetuous Wind, blowing Mountains of
Sand from all parts, buried them together, not one escaping; so that Cambyses
could have no other News, but only the probability of this Accident.

The God Apis, so much adored by the Egyptians, showed himself that Year,
which he had not done along time before. These blind People, when they found a
Calf of extraordinary Largeness and Beauty, made it their False God, using all
Shows of public Joy they could express. Cambyses, being angry, and ill
humored with his late Disasters, believed they rejoiced at his ill Fortune,
and took a Pretext to do it for the Apparition of their God. He was then at
Memphis; where he commanded the Magistrates to come before him, and give an
Account, why they took so ill a Conjuncture for their Mirth and Feasting. No
Excuses would serve, nor no Submissions prevail; but he caused them all to be
put to Death. He also commanded the Priests of Apis to be brought, with the
Calf they adored; which was black, and had a large square Spot in his Fore
head; another in the resemblance of an Eagle on his Back; a Cross under his
Jaws; and at the End of his Tail, a thick forked Tuff of Hair. Cambyses drew
his Sword, and wounded him in the Ham, though his intention was to have killed
him; calling the Priests contemptuous Names, saying, You deserve no better
Gods, than Flesh and Blood, that can feel and smart with a Wound. Then, in
derision, caused them to be cruelly beaten, commanding his Guards to kill
whoever they found rejoicing on that Occasion. This severe Order soon put an
end to their Feasting: The God Apis was carried into the Temple, where he
languish't till he died, and was privately buried by his Priests. Heaven, as
the Egyptians believed, punished Cambyses for these Sacriledges, taking away
his Reason, and making him distracted. One of the saddest Effects of his
Frenzy, was, the Death of his own Brother Smerdis, a very accomplished Prince,
and of so extraordinary Strength, that it caused his Brother's Jealousy so far,
as to deny him Access to his Person, by sending him into Persia while he
remained in Egypt. His Ambassadors, or rather his Spies in Aethiopia, amongst
other Rarities, brought home with them a Bow, of so large a size, that no
Persian had strength enough to bend it, but Smerdis only, who did it with two
Fingers; which was the first subject of his Disgrace, as that which follows was
the cause of his Death.

Cambyses dreamed, that a Courrier came in great haste, and brought him news,
that Smerdis sat on his Throne, and that his Head reached Heaven. This made him
resolve his Death; and gave Prexaspes, one of his Officers, Orders to see it
done; which he did near Susa, as he accompanied him a Hunting: Others say, It
was by throwing him into the Red Sea, as he walked on the Cliffs. I need but
mention the other Cruelties of Cambyses; The Murdering one of his Sisters,
whom he had Married, kicking her many times on the Belly, when she was with
Child, of which she died: The Occasion she gave him, was wittily reproaching
him of his Killing Smerdis. He shot the Son of Prexaspes with an Arrow, and
then rip't him open; so paying his Father for Murdering Smerdis. He put twelve
of his great Lords to a cruel Death, burying them alive, with their Heads
downwards; and would have killed the best of his Counselors, the wise and
famous Croesus; who lost his Kingdom of Lydia, with his immense Riches; on whom
Cyrus, his Father, had pity. These were the Praeludes, or rather the Causes,
which preceded and encouraged this Impudent Impostor, of whom we treat.

During the time Cambyses committed these Excesses of Cruelties, and that his
Frenzy made him more hated, than a wild Beast; there were two Brothers, by
Profession Magicians; One of them, called Patazithes, was an Officer of his
House: These conspired against him. Patazithes, knowing the Death of Smerdis,
which was hid from the Persians, had Insolence enough to undertake this
Enterprise, which follows: He had a Brother of the Age and Features of Smerdis,
and of his Name also; him he contrived to set on the Throne, and instructed him
in all the Arts he should use. He sent Heralds into Egypt, commanding the
Officers of the Army, for the future, to obey Smerdis, the Son of Cyrus; and no
longer to own Allegiance to Cambyses: These Heralds so well acquitted
themselves of their Commission, that one of them met Cambyses with his Army at
Echatana in Syria, to whom he boldly showed his Order; who was astonished at
his Resoiution; and turning toward Prexaspes, spoke to him in these words: Is
it thus, you have executed the Commands I gave you? No, Sir, (replied
Prexaspes) it is not true, that your Brother can ever Rebel, or Fight more or
less against your Authority; for with my own Hands I obeyed your Orders: And if
those who are out of the World can fight, you have more reason to apprehend
Astyages, King of the Medes; but if your Majesty have no cause to think of him,
you have no other to fear your Brother Smerdis. I beseech you, Sir, (continued
he) grant me some of your Guards, to pursue this Herald, and bring him back,
that you may learn from him, if he have seen, or spoke to Smerdis. This Advice
pleased the King: The Herald was brought back, and ask't, If he received his
Orders from the Mouth of Smerdis, or from some of his Ministers only? He
ingenuously confessed, he had not seen him, since the War Cambyses made in
Egypt; but had his Orders from the Magician, whom his Majesty made Intendant
of his Affairs in Persia; who said in these words: Smerdis, the Son of Cyrus,
commands this to be done. Cambyses was satisfied by this Answer, that Prexaspes
had obeyed him; whom he otherwise had certainly put to Death. He ask't him, If
he could conjecture, who were the Authors of this Rebellion and Imposture? I
doubt (said Prexaspes) they were the Magicians Patazthes, Governor of the
Household, and Smerdis his Brother. When Cambyses heard the Name of Smerdis, he
seemed Thunderstruck, remembering the Truth of his Dream; and knowing too late
his fatal Error, wept bitterly for his double Murder, of his Brother and
Sister: In this transport of Grief, hastily mounting his Horse, to chastise the
Rebels at Susa, the Scabbard of his Sword dropped off, and he found himself
wounded in the same Place, with the Point, where he hurt the God Apis. It
surpised him more, when they told him, He was in Echatana in Syria: The Oracle
of Butis having foretold he should die in Echatana, he believed it the great
City of that Name in Media; where he kept his Treasure, and commonly resided:
Flattering himself he should end his days there, in his old Age; but troubled
at the Imposture of the Magician, and grieved for the Excesses of his past
Life, his Wound having made him languish twenty days, he sent for the most
considerable Officers, and spoke thus to them: Fate will, that Cambyses, the
Son of Cyrus, die here; and now I am constrained ( my dear Persians) to
discover what I have hid from you hitherto. When I was in Egypt I dreamt a
Dream, which made me fear my Brother should usurp my Crown: This Fear made me
act with more Precipitancy, than Reason; (I find Man has not the Power to
hinder what shall happen) I too rashly sent Prexaspes to kill Smerdis at Susa:
After which Crime, I thought my self secure; not imagining, when he was out of
the World, any mortal Creature dared to rise up against me: But I see I am
miserably abused, and have been, to no purpose, my Brother's Murderer: For,
notwithstanding I am robbed of my Empire, it was this Smerdis the Magician, the
Doemon showed me in my Sleep; and it is he, was to take Arms against me. Think
not, when I am gone, to have Smerdis, the Son of Cyrus, for your King: They are
two Magicians, would have the Empire; One I made Governor of my House; the
Other is Smerdis, his Brother. But, Oh deplorable unhappiness! He that should
have revenged his Insolence, is basely murdered by his nearest Relations.
Next, I conjure you in the Name of the Gods, in whose Protection Crowned Heads
are, and which I hope to obtain of you, my most dear Ackemenides, since the
Kings of Persia proceed from you; never suffer such a Meanness of Spirit, as
may let the Empire, and Sovereign Power return to the Medes: If they obtain it
by Fraud, or Force, use the same Methods to tear it from them; and if in this
you obey my Orders, I beseech the Gods, your Fields, your Wives, and your
Cattle may be fruitful: But if you do not as I command; on the contrary, may
all Miseries fall on your Heads, and your Ends be unhappy as mine.

Having ended this Discourse, he wept abundantly, deploring his so early Fate:
The Persians that were by, found his griefs so moving, they tore their
Garments, and shed many Tears, crying out for sorrow. His pain augmented till
the Wound gangreen'd, and perish't the Bone: Death giving a Period to his
Reign, which was Seven Years, and Five Months, without any Children.

The truth of the Imposture, and Usurpation of the Magicians, could not enter
into the minds of the Persians; it seemed incredible to them; They thought the
Death of Smerdis, of which Cambyses informed them, was only a Pretext to make
the Name of the Persians odious, and believed firmly that Smerdis, by this
Rebellion, had placed himself on the Throne: Which opinion they continued in
the longer, by Prexaspes's utterly denying the Murder, though if he had owned
it, he had certainly been destroyed, when Cambyses was Dead, who authorized and
avowed it; for the Persians would have been very rigorous with him, that had
dared to shed the Blood of that Great King Cyrus.

The Magician, after the Death of Cambyses bearing the Name of Smerdis, Reigned
without trouble or contradiction, Seven Months together; during which time, he
exercised his Liberality and Munificence, to the Subjects of the Empire; which
were so extraordinary, that after his Death, the People of Asia, (except the
Persians) lamented his loss extremely. He sent his Proclamations through all
the Provinces, to exempt the People from Taxes, promising them Peace, and Rest;
Declaring he he would List no Soldiers for the War, in three Years: But in
Eight Months his Villainy was in this manner detected.

Otanes, Son of Pharnaspes, who was one of the greatest Lords of Persia,
suspected the Magician not to be Smerdis, the Son of Cyrus, and his suspicion
was grounded on his recluse way of Living; for he never came out of the Palace,
nor gave Audience or access to any Persian Lord. This just doubt made him send
a faithful Servant to Phedina his Daughter, who with the rest of the Wives of
Cambyses, was in the possession, and enjoyment of the Magician, to ask what
kind of Man lay with her, if it were Smerdis the Son of Cyrus, or some other?
She sent him word by the Messenger, she could not resolve him, because she had
never seen Smerdis, nor could she describe what kind of Man he was, that had
access to her. Upon this, her Father desired, she would ask Attossa, the Sister
and Wife of Cambyses, and now in the Number of those, in the Possession of the
Usurper. To which she replied, She could not speak to Attossa, nor any other
Woman the King lay with; for this Man, whatever he be, since he became King,
keeps us all in different Apartments.

Otanes being confirmed in his suspicion, by these Answers, sent his faithful
Servant a third time, to propose what follows; That she being of a Noble
Family, should not fear exposing her self in a danger her Father advised her
to; for if this Man were not Smerdis, the Son of Cyrus, but he whom he
suspected, she ought not to be enjoyed by him, nor he possess the Sovereignty
he Vsurp't over the Persians, but be punished as his Insolence deserved:
Therefore she should endeavor to feel his Head, when he was asleep, and if she
found his Ears, he was undoubtedly Smerdis the Son of Cyrus; if not, he must as
certainly be Smerdis the Magician. Phedina could not dissemble her
apprehensions of the danger; for if he surpised her in that curiosity, she
could expect nothing but Death: nevertheless she promised to venture, and obey
her Father. Cyrus had cut his Magicians Ears off, for some Villainy committed in
his time; and she feeling when he was asleep, found he had none, and early in
the Morning gave her Father notice. Otanes informed Aspathines and Gobrias of
this affair, who before extremely suspected it; therefore were easily persuaded
of the Truth: 'Twas their opinion, each of them should choose a Colleague, able
to Act, and advise with them. Otanes took Intaphernes; Gobrias, M^gabysus; and
Aspathines chose Hydarnes. They were six in Number, when Darius arrived from
Susa, the Metropolis of Persia, of which Hystaspes his Father, was Governor:
They joined him to their Number, being now seven of the Greatest Lords in the
Persian Empire; They consulted, and reciprocally gave their Faith to each
other. When it came to Darius his turn, he spoke in this manner. For my part, I
believed no body knew the Magician Reigned; but my self; and that Smerdis, the
Son of Cyrus, was not in the World. I came hither on purpose to exterminate
this Impostor; but since I find you are all equally informed of it, I think it
convenient now to agree, what is to be done, and not defer it a moment; for
there can be no advantage in long debates. Otanes replied, My Dear Son, thou
speak like the Son of Hystaspes, a Man of Gallantry and Honor, with whom
thou do equally possess Prudence and Courage; however let us not precipitate
the Execution of such an affair, but with mature deliberation let us undertake
and proceed in it. Then Darius replying, said; Know my Lords here present, that
if you follow the opinion of Otanes, you are all ruined: For some body, for his
particular intent, will discover this matter to the Usurper: and therefore you
that first began to execute the business, because you have thought sit to trust
several Persons, and me also, let us go through with it this Day: For know,
that if you resolve to pass it, I will prevent my being the Sacrifice of
another Man's Peace, and first discover to the Magicians, what will destroy you
all.

Otanes, considering the determination of Darius, said, Since you so much
resolve to hasten this affair, tell us how we shall get armed into the Palace,
and attack the Impostor? You know (at least, by Fame) the Guards about his
Person are very strong; How then shall we make our way to him? Darius answered,
There are many things, ( my dear Otanes) that are more easily executed than
projected; as there are also several, which seem plain in the discoursing of
whose Success is doubtful. You may reasonably suppose, we shall find no great
difficulty in passing his Guards, being so many of the chief Persons in the
Empire; we shall meet no Man dare stop us; but rather give us place, either for
Fear, or Respect. I have, at least, a pretention not to be denied: I came now
from Persia, and can tell them, I have Affairs of the greatest consequence to
acquaint the King with, from my Father, who is Governor there: A Fiction may be
allowed, when Necessity requires it: Truth and Falsehood have often the same end;
For who uses the former, aims at their own Advantage, and the latter serves to
persuade what we desire. As to the Guards of the Pretended King; If they let us
pass quietly, and without resistance, they will have no occasion to repent it;
and we shall have an opportunity to reward them, as they merit: But if any
resist our intent, we must use them like Enemies; and being entered, resolve to
execute our great design.

Gobrias extremely approved this Discourse; and further added, My Dear and
Honored Friends, It will be much more glorious for us, to tear the Empire from
this Usurper, or if we cannot, to die in so noble an Action; than for us
Persians to obey a Mede, whose Ears have been cut off for his Crimes;
especially if we call to our remembrance, what Cambyses recommended to us on
his Deathbed, with all the Imprecations imaginable; if we suffered such an
Ignominy, and lost the Empire to the Medes. We then believed not whathe said,
we could not persuade our selves, neither of his Brothers Murder, nor of the
Magitians insolence, to gain the Crown by so base an Imposture. I am now
convinced by Darius; and am of the Opinion, That immediately, and without
separating, we should go from this place to the Palace, and execute our design.

They all agreed to what Gobrias proposed. But while these seven Illustrious
Persian Lords were consulting, the Magicians Patizithes and Smerdis, were
thinking how they might strengthen their Usurpations, by obtaining the
Friendship of Prexaspes, in whom they believed great dispositions toward it.
Cambyses having shot his Son with an Arrow; his excess of Cruelty not satisfied
with that, used him yet more barbarously, ripping him open, to show his skill
in shooting through his Heart, boasting his nimbleness and dexterity. Prexaspes
only had the certain knowledge of Smerdis's death, having murdered him with
his own hands, to obey the impious and unnatural Cruelty of Cambyses, which
made; him odious to all the Persians that suspected it. They sent for him to
the Palace, promising him Wonders, and obliging him to take an oath of Secrecy,
not to discover how they had Usurpt the Persian Monarchy. Prexaspes promised
them all they desired. The Magicians finding him so much inclined to their
purpose, told him their Intention to assemble the Persians, at the foot of the
Castle, and that he should go with them, and from the top of a Tower assure the
People, no other than Smerdis the Son of Cyrus, was their present King. They
chose him rather than any other, because of his Authority, and his often
Protesting, on several occasions, he had not killed Smerdis, as he was
suspected to have done; even this also he promised them. They assembled the
Persians, ordering he should ascend the Tower, to make his Speech, as they had
agreed: But he forgot, on purpose, what the Magicians desired him to say, and
discoursed of Achemenis, the first of the Persian Line; declaring the Progress
and the Particulars of that Illustrious Family; and coming to Cyrus, he showed
them the great things he had done for the Persian Nation. After this, he told
them the truth of all, alleging for his Excuse, the fear he had of Death, if
he had opened his lips; but being then forced to speak, he declared the real
truth, that he had murdered Smerdis, the Son of Cyrus, by the most express
Command of Cambyses; and that those who now possessed the Regality, were
Magicians, and Impostors, calling for Curses on the Persians heads, if they did
not tear it from them, and take Vengeance on their deceit. After which he threw
himself down from the Tower on the Pavement. To give him his due, he was a man
of extraordinary Merit, excepting his guilty Obedience to Cambyses.

These seven Lords resolved, to attack the Magicians immediately, after having
recommended the Success of their Enterprise to their Gods. They knew nothing
that had arrived to Prexaspes, till by the way, they heard the surprising
Catastrophe; and going to a private place, a little out of the street,
discoursed what was to be done, since this last Conjuncture: Those who had been
of the same Opinion with Otanes, persisted in their first Sentiments to defer
the business, because of this Accident; But they who agreed with Darius,
persevered that there was no time to be lost; but immediately to advance to the
Palace, and finish their Resolutions in so just a design. While they were in
this Debate, they observed seven Faulcons pursuing two Vultures: This they took
for a good Augury of the happy Execution of their Enterprise, and went boldly
to the Palace. When they came to the outward Gate, it happened, as Darius had
foreseen; The Guards having so much respect for the great Lords of the Empire,
suspected no Accident from those who appeared in so much Pomp and Majesty; not
so much as asking, If they were sent for? or, What they desired? When they
entered the Court of the Palace, they met several Eunuchs that went on
Messages, and introduced those who had any affairs in the Court: These demanded
the occasion of their coming, chiding the Porters, and threatening a severe
Punishment for suffering any to pass; and at the same time, putting themselves
in a posture, to hinder their advancing further. Whereupon these Illustrious
Confederates gave each other the Signal, and drawing their Swords from under
their Vests, soon laid the Eunuchs on the Ground, running with all the have
imaginable to the Magicians Apartment; where they found them together,
consulting on the last Accident of Prexaspes. When hearing the Cries of the
Eunuchs, and perceiving what was done, they made a Virtue of Necessity, and
stood upon their Defense; one seizing a Bow, and the other a Lance: The first
was useless against men that were so near, and aimed at their heads; the other
defended himself valiantly with the Lance, or rather a Halbeard, with which he
wounded Aspathynes in the Thigh, and struck out one of Intaphernes his Eyes;
but none of these seven Lords were killed. He that could not use the Bow, sled
into a Chamber, where he lay endeavoring to barricade the Door; but Darius and
Gobrias, entering at the same time with him, prevented his Intentions. The Room
was dark, and the Windows shut; this pretended King affecting obscure places.
Gobrias closed with him, and Darius feared to run his Sword into the Magician,
lest he should kill his Friend by mistake; but Gobrias calling to him, chid him
for his delay, choosing rather to be killed himself, than save the Impostor.
Darius either by his Voice, or his own good Fortune, took his measures so well,
that he only wounded the Magician, with that stroke laying him on the Ground.

Five of these Lords, Deliverers of their Country, went out with the Heads of
the Magicians, leaving Aspathynes and Intaphernes wounded in the Palace, to
secure that, whilst they showed the People what they had done, telling the
reason of their Exploit, and killing all the Magicians they met. The Persians
were Ravished for Joy of his Heroic Action, being enraged at the same time
against all they thought Magicians, they destroyed many; and had not the Night
hindered them, none would have escapt. Afterward they kept that day a
Festival, called Magophonia, or The Destruction of Magicians; which Day none of
them durst appear in public, but shut themselves up in their Houses.

This History is taken out of Herodotus, one of the ancientest Historians,
whose Works have been preserved and transmitted to our Times; and who
flourished about the Year of the World 3573. This is in his Third Book,
Entitled Thalia. It Is 2213 years since it happened, counting to this present
year 1682. and 5655 years since the Creation of the World, according to the
Chronology of Conradus Functius: For almost all Chronologists vary about the
number of Years, counting either some few more or less. And this was in the
year of the World 3442. that this Impostor, the Magician, thus showed himself.

I might have begun my History long before, and have spoken of the famous
Semiramis, Wife of Ninus, the Son of Belus, the second King of the Assyrians,
or Caldeans. Some there are that confound him with his Father Belus, since this
crafty Queen had the subtilty to disguise her Sex, and usurp the Throne of her
Son Nynias; so that she might pass for an Impostor. Nevertheless, because she
had been the Wife of a mighty Monarch, and that she made her self as famous, as
any other of the Kings of Assyria, by her Victories in Asia, Media, Persia,
Egypt, Lybia, Ethiopia, and the Indies, during her long Reign of Forty two
years; which began in the year of the World 1959. and also by the memorable
Building of Brick, which encompassed the City of Babylon of 480 Stadia or
Furlongs: And that I have not undertaken to speak of any but Infamous
Impostors, who being descended from Base and Contemptible Parentage, have
aspired to the Dignity of Princes and Sovereigns, to make themselves the
Possessors of their Estates; and which Imposture of theirs, has been punished
with some Ignominious Death.

Nor will I less rank, among these Notorious Impostors, the Patriarch Jacob,
Father of the Twelve Tribes of Israel, the Person in whom were deposited the
great Blessing which God had promised to his chosen People; though he feigned
to be Esau, covering his Hands and Neck with the Skin of a Kid; and although he
had told more than one Untruth, That he came from Hunting, where he had killed
Venison, and that he was his Brother Esau: For in the bottom, Rhebecca his
Mother, who had put him upon practicing this deceit, did not sin in the main;
and, by consequence, he was no Impostor. An eminent Action, when it is Just and
Honorable, ought not to be condemned, for one that is small and imperfect. So
the Body ought not to be rejected, because one Member is out of order. The
promise of God must have been accomplished, That the Elder Brother must serve
the Younger.

Herodotus gives an Account immediately after this History, of the Consultation
what Government should be established in Persia; Otanes spoke in favor of
Democracy, for the People; Megabysus for Oligarchy, or the Nobles; and Darius
for Monarchy, whose Opinion prevailed; as also his Fortune: for the Choice fell
on him.

CHAP. II. THE Counterfeit NERO.
THE Emperor Nero, that Monster of Cruelty, the Horror and Aversion of
Mankind, believing himself condemned, by the Senate, to a Cruel and Ignominious
Death, though not proportionable to his Crimes, found one of his Free Men,
called Epaphroditus, to encourage and assist him to choose one more mild; which
he gave himself in the Thirtieth Year of his Age, and of the World 4033; of our
Lord the Seventy first.

About two Years after, when Otho bore the Name of Emperor, an Impostor
appeared in the East, who had Insolence and Ambition enough, to persuade the
People, he had a Title to the Imperial Crown; which he said, was torn from him
by the unjust and villainous Attempts of the Senate. Cornelius Tacitus gives us
this Relation in the Second Book of his History; whom I will endeavor to
follow.

When Otho governed Rome, both Greece and Asia were alarmed with the
Apprehensions of Nero's being alive; many and different were the Stories of his
death; some reporting, others, believing he was yet living.

A Slave who came from Pontus in Asia, or (as others say) an Italian Freeman,
who could sing, and play on the Harp; which, with the Resemblance of his Face,
did not a little serve to persuade the World he was the true Nero. He gathered
many Fugitives, and Vagabonds, that knew not where to go, overcome with Want
and Poverty, to whom he made mighty Promises. Taking shipping with them, he was
driven by a Storm on the Isle of Cynthus, or Delos; where the Mountain Cynthus
was consecrated to Apollo, or to Diana. There he got more Soldiers, who were
coming from the East; destroying those who refused his Service. He plundered
all the Merchants in the Island, giving Arms to the most vigorous Slaves he
could find. But he tried by all possible means, to gain Sisenna, a Centurian in
the Syrian Army, and sent part of that Army to Rome, to make a Treaty of Union
with the Pretorian Cohorts, or Regiment of the Guards; carrying with them, for
the Symbol of that Unity they desired, the Figure of Right Hands joined
together. This Captain he tried so many ways to make of his Party, as obliged
him to steal privately out of the Island, for avoiding the Violence and Danger
that threatened him. These Proceedings carried the Terror and Fear of the
supposed Nero very far; many unquiet Minds taking this occasion of disturbance;
some through the desire of Novelty, others in dislike of the present
Government, dispersing the News of Nero's Return.

The Emperor Galba had given the Government of Galatia and Pamphilia, to
Calpurnius Asprenas, and two Galleys were ordered to conduct him. These casting
Anchornear this Island, the Impostor much desired to be Master of; which, not
being able to effect openly, he tried to accomplish by Art; and putting himself
into a small Vessel, not knowing any thing of a Roman Governor, desired he
might come on Board and transport himself into Syria or Egypt. Standing on the
Prow of his Ship, looking sad and disconsolate, he admonished the Soldiers to
think of the Oath of Fidelity, they had sworn to him heretofore. Then directing
himself to the Pilots, they made some difficulty to receive him, saying, They
were not Masters, but would ask their Commander; doing this for an Amusement,
that they might the better surprise him. They informed Asprenas of what had
past, who considering the Vessel the Impostor was in, not to be of any great
Force, immediately commanded to attack her; but he took her not without a smart
dispute, the false Nero Valiantly fighting till he dyed. His Body, remarkable
for his fine Hair, and great Eyes, but above all, for the Fierceness of his
Countenance, was carried to Asia and Rome, where it lay exposed to every ones
Admiration, and to consider his Insolence, that durst attempt to usurp the
greatest Emprire of the World.

CHAP. III. THE False MESSIAH, CALLED Benchochab, Head of the Revolted Jews.
ADrian having succeeded Trajan the Emperor, in the 4080th Year of the World,
and of Jesus Christ, the 118th, found the same Dispositions of Revolting in the
minds of the Jews, that his Predecessors had done. So he recalled Jul. Severus
from Britain, who was reputed one of the Wisest, and most Valiant Captains of
his time, in the Roman Empire; and him the Emperor sent into Syria, to quell
the Mutineers: But he found them so well on their Guards, and so strongly
fortified, as made him avoid coming to a Battle, or hazarding his Troops
unequally, against such desperate Vagabonds. Therefore spent time, and
prolonged the War; which gave the Jews opportunity to augment their Strength.

The better to increase their Army, and heighten their Courage, they took
Religion for a pretense; the Head of the Seditious calling himself the Messiah;
and to make the nearer Allusion to the Prophecy in the 24th of Numbers, where
the great Legislator (Moses) says, A Star shall come out of Jacob, he took the
Name of Benchochab, Son of the Star, or (as some will) Barcochab; but it is all
one: for Ben and Bar both signify a Son. This Impostor possessed, for six years
together, fifty Castles besides four hundred and eighty Towns and Villages. He
fortified so strongly the Castle of Bethoron, seituated by the Tribes of
Benjamin, and Ephraim; which Castle Solomon chose to make a strong Fortress,
that it held a Siege of three years and a half. The Emperor Adrian coming in
person against it; it is hardly to be believed what Resistance the Besieged
made, how many Sallies, and what Blood was spilt: We find written, that three
hundred thousand Jews were slain, besides vast numbers who perished by Plague,
and Hunger; It Is said to the number of 500000 Men, if we may believe Carion's
Chronicle. Bencochab was killed in a Salley, after whose Death Bethoron was
taken. The Jews, instead of Bencochab, call him Benscosba, or the Son of
Deceit, having falsely called himself the Messiah. The Emperor writ excellent
Letters on this occasion, of his Victory, as equal with the greatest had ever
been obtained, since it gave Peace to all the East. This Impostor had such an
inveterate hatred to the Christians, that all those who fell under his power,
he put to cruel Deaths.

The Emperor Adrian, having razed the City of Jerusalem, resolved to rebuild
it, calling it Elia Adriana; he forbad entrance into it, or habitation there,
to the Jews; but allowed both to the Christians.

Thus ended this Impostor, who did just contrary to the true Messiah, whose
Name he usurpt, viz. Led the people into Servitude and Misery.

CHAP. IV. THE Counterfeit MOSES.
IN the time of Theodosius the Emperor, who Reigned from the year 412, until
454, a wicked Jewish Impostor appeared in Candia, calling himself Moses;
promising the Jews, who were in great numbers in that Insulary Kingdom, he
would lead them through the Sea on foot, without the help of Ships, into their
old Country Judea, as he had formerly done their Fathers, in the time of
Pharaoh King of Egypt, and by the same means, deliver them from Servitude;
that he had already done it, in the year of the World 2454, being 2050 years
before this Counterfeit appeared; the present Story happening in the 4420th
year of the World.

He further persuaded them, he was the same Prophet Moses, whom God had sent
from Heaven, to be their Guide. He went about the Island for a year together,
inculcating these Persuasions into the People, and assigned them a certain Day
to begin their Journey. He pretended to prophecy, and gathered Money on all
hands; and at the day appointed, led Multitudes of People to the Seaside;
where commanding several to leap in, their Folly and Blindness was so great, to
obey him; many of them being swallowed by the Waters: and if some Fishermen
had not been near, and charitably saved several with their Barques, calling to
those on the Shore, not to venture, they had many of them perished, who by their
means were saved. The Impostor escapt, and I find not what became of him; but
his Villainy opened the Eyes of many of those poor People, who embraced the
Christian Religion.

Socrates a Greek Author, writes this History.

CHAP. V. John Bulchold, KING of the Anabaptists.
THE Conformity of this Impostor, with those two preceding, persuades me to
break the Order of Time I had prescribed my self. This Wretch, of whom the last
Age talked so much, was a Hollander, born at Leyden, a Tailor by his Profession:
He appeared at Munster in the year 1534. and took the Name of King of the
Anabaptists, saying, He was sent by God to Extirpate all other Princes, and
Potentates of the Earth. John Sleidan, in his Tenth Book of his History
touching the State of Religion, declares the Excess, Extravagance, and Cruelty
of this Impostor. He caused two Crowns to be made of massive Gold, a Sword, a
Chain, and Scepter, with other Jewels, and Marks of Royalty. He appeared in
public, accompanied with his Officers, and Gentlemen of his Court, having two
Pages on Horseback; One carried his Crown, and a Bible; the Other, his Sword.
He caused a Throne to be built in the most public place, hung with Cloth of
Gold, on which he sat, as in his Court of Justice. He created twelve Judges,
to whom he gave so many Imaginary Kingdoms. He married several Women, who were
dressed like so many Queens. He sent twenty eight Disciples, Teachers of his Law,
about (...) World, who were all executed and put (...), but one, who cunningly
made his (...) ^^^^rd ^^^ppe^doling, who be^^^ (...) C^nsul, or Magistrate of
the (...), would needs be the Executioner: He ^^^mitted many Cruelties, and
Extrava^^ncies, and the King as many in his turn, (...) heading People himself,
not sparing one (...) his Wives, who was grieved to see the ^^^eries, the poor
People endured by the ^^tremity of Famine, the City being be^^ged by Francis
Count of Waldeck, their ^^^hop, assisted by the Circles of the Em^^re.

His False Doctrine was, To deny Infants ^^otism: To Rebaptize those who had
been so already: To have all things in common: ^o marry several wives: He
denied that Jesus Christ took Humane Nature from the Vir^n Mary: He denied the
Pardon of Sinners, abolisht Magistracy, took Others Goods by Force, and
Extirpated those who believed not his Foolish Doctrine.

The 24th of June 1535. the City was taken by the skill of two Fugitives, who
did that good Service for the Bishop, and the Besiegers. John Bulchold, the
Impostor King, Bernard Knipperdoling, both Magistrate and Hangman, and
Crechtineh, were all three Executed the 25th of Jannary 1536. being torn to
pieces with Red-hot Pincers. Bulchold repented, and implored the Mercy of God.
Their Bodies were bound in Iron-Frames, and hung on the highest Tower of the
City; the pretended King being placed in the middle, a man's height above the
rest.

CHAP. VI. THE False Clotaire, CALLED GONDOALD.
THis Impostor appeared a second time in France, under the Kings of the first
Race, in the year 586. calling himself the Son of Clotaire, the first King of
Soissons, and by consequence Grandson to Clovis the Great.

I will observe what two Historians say of him; those are, Robert Guaguin, and
Paulus Aemilius, both having writ the History of France. His Mother Educated
him from a Child, like the Son of a King; above all things preserving his Hair,
which was a Mark of the Royal Family, amongst the Old Frenchmen. Clotaire his
pretended Father would not own him when his Mother brought him to Soissons;
which persuades me, that he was Illegitimate: But Childebert, his Uncle, King
of Paris, who had no Child, took pity of him, and bred him in his Court; At
which Clotaire was angry, and writ to him in these terms.

Send back to me Gondoald, that I may take care of him my self, and breed him
up, if I find him my Son: for if he be not, the Education of a Prince, which
you give him, may be the occasion of Error, and Illusion, in the World, who
may show him those Honors, which are not his due.

Clotaire, when he had him in his power, shaved his Head, and shut him up in a
Monastery. This pretended Father dying in the year 564. Cherebert, or
Childebert, King of Paris, his elder Brother, took a Kindness to him, and was
careful of him for some time: But Cherebert was an Effeminate Prince,
abandoning himself to Debauchery and Women, which extremely altered his Health;
so that Gondoald's Happiness had but a short date: For after the Death of this
generous Brother of Clotaire, which was in the year 565. Sigebert, another of
his Brothers, King of Austrasia, the Country which is now called Lorrain, sent
for him to his Court, without saying, how he intended to treat him, and leaving
him altogether in uncertainty; which he nevertheless construed to his own
advantage. And this unhappy man no sooner arrived at the Court, but he shaved
him a second time, and put him into a Monastery at Collein: So that finding
himself thus tossed about, he made an Escape, and fled into Italy; where Narses,
that famous Eunuch, General of the Emperor Justinian's Army, with admirable
success, made War against the Goths. This was no small advantage to Gondoald,
to make a Friendship with one of the most Valiant and most Illustrious Captains
mentioned in History. Totila, that Generous and Magnanimous King of the
Ostrogoths, whom Bellisarius, the indefatigable General for the same Justinian,
could not entirely overcome, lost both his Diadem and his Life, by the Conduct
of this Little Old Man of three Cubits stature, who wanted one of the most
Essential Parts of a Man.

I will only use the words of Paulus Jovius, in his Elogies of Illustrious
men, speaking of him; Narses, says he, deserves an Admiration extraordinary,
and above all other men; who being born a Slave in Persia, and bred in the
Seraglio or Apartment of the Empresses Women, being but half a Man, deprived of
that Part which both Sexes most value; became the Imperial Treasurer, and was
the only accomplished General, not only for all Military Virtue, but likewise
for his good Fortune, whoever suffered so great a Deprivation. E tanta ereptae
virilitatis calamitate unicus prope cum Virtute, tum fortuna Imperator
extiterit. It had been incomparably a greater Advantage, if Gondoald could have
been with this Captain, in the height of his Favor: for at that time, viz. in
the year 566. Justin the Second succeeded his Maternal Grandfather, the
Emperor Justinian, who extremely loved Narses, for his Merit, and the good
Service he had done him; having Extirpated two powerful Kings of the
Ostrogoths, Totila and Teias, and defeated an Army of Seventy two thousand
Frenchmen, commanded by one Bucelin, General for Theodobert, King of Mets.
Gornandes, Archbishop of Ravenna, and born a Goth, is mistaken in his History,
when he reckons Two hundred thousand men killed, and attributes the Victory to
Bellisarius.

Sometime after Gondoald's Arrival, the Empress Sophia, persuaded by the
Enemies of Narses's Glory, recalled him into Italy, and also treated him with
great Scorn and Contempt; saying, He was sitter to distribute Wool to her
Women, and to the Maids of her Seraglio to spin, than to command an Army. Which
Expressions he so much resented, that he called Alboin his Friend, King of the
Lombards, out of Hungary, to come into Italy; who made such a Progress there,
that this most wise Empress was not able to put a stop to. Gondoald hoped
considerable Assistance from Alboin, with which he designed to take from his
Brothers, Sigebert, Chilperic, and Gontran, who bore the Titles of Kings of
Mets, Paris, and Orleans (the Cities where they lived, and kept their Courts) a
more considerable Kingdom, than either of them possessed. Narses being naturally
Merciful, and Religious, was persuaded by the Entreaty of Pope John the Third,
who came to meet him at Naples, how pernicious the consequence must be, of
Alboin's coming into Italy, and conjured him to countermand and hinder it all
he could. When the Pope and he were returned to Rome, and considering how they
might remedy this Misfortune, Narses died, whose body was carried to
Constantinople, and there magnificently buried.

Gondoald, after this Accident, crossed the Sea, and made his Court to the
Emperor Justin, and the Empress Sophia his Wife, an Ambitious and Airy
Princess: His good Mien and Intriguing Humor made him extremely considered in
that Court. Venerationem sibi ac Majestatem conciliarunt; says Paulus Aemilius.
He remained at Constantinople all the time of Justin the Second, a
pusillanimous Prince, who suffered his Wife to govern the Empire, contrary to
his Honor and Interest.

During the Reign of Tiberius, which was seven years, he made several Campaigns
in the Wars of Persia, under Mauritius, who was after chosen Emperor, and
Successor to Tiberius: for Gondoald dared not to venture himself in the Court
of France, where he had been so ill treated, having many sad Examples of his
Relations Cruelty, even to their own Blood. Clotaire, his Father, without Pity
or Mercy, burnt Cramnus or Granus, his own Son, with his Wise, and Children, in
a House where they Fled for Refuge: He overcame, and killed in Battle Senabut,
Duke of Britain: He Burnt Conobald, Duke of Guienne, in the Chapel of S.
Martin, where he ran for safety; because he had assisted Granus, in his Revolt;
to whom he Married his Daughter.

This Clotaire also was Guilty of that abominable parricide, of dipping his
hands in the Innocent Blood of his two young Nephews, Theobald and Gontier,
Sons of Cladomir, his Brother, King of Orleans. Gondoald, considering he had
little Reason to expect a better Treatment from his Fathers Brothers, Sigebert
and Chilperic, chose rather to Live quietly in Justin's Court: But when he was
Informed how matters went in France; he resolved to hasten thither, encouraged
by the Empress Constantina, and the Emperor Mauritius, Son-in-Law to Tiberius;
who promised him their Assistance. His two Sisters-in-Law, Brunechilde, the
Daughter of Athanagilde, King of the Wisigoths in Spain, Married to his Brother
Sigebert, and Fredegonde, Woman of the Bedchamber to the Queen Galsond, Wife
to Chilperic, his other Brother, King of Paris, who first became Mistress, and
then Wife to that King. These two Women disturbed all France; Their Husbands
having been Traitorously Murdered, which was the occasion of his Return, after
having been Twenty Years in the East. He Landed at Marseilles, with a splendid
Equipage; where Theodore, Bishop of that Diocese, received him with much
Honor, it being reported he brought Vast Riches along with him, and was able
to give great Rewards, having made the best Advantage of his Happiness in the
Eastern Court; besides the finding a mighty Treasure, hid by Narses the Eunuch.
His Royal Qualities, and Majestic Person, were admired; The Fame of his
Actions having gained him the Reputation of a good Captain, and Scholar, to
the Incomparable General Narses. Didier, who absolutely Commanded the Countries
adjacent, to Toulouse; Mummol; much talked of for his Service in the Wars
against the Greeks and Lombards, and thought one of the best Soldiers in his
time, (besides many Lords both Visigoths, and Romans, who kept the Frontiers of
Spain) declared for him. Thus having acquired such powerful Friends, and
reduced to his Obedience, a great part of the People, and Cities of Guienne,
the Peregordins, and Bourdelois, those of Toulouse and Anjou, followed his
Fortune.

Childebert, King of Mets, the Nephew of Gondoald, was then angry with his
Uncle Gontran, King of Orleans, for refusing to deliver into his hands, his
Mother-in-Law, Queen Fredegonde, the Murtheress of King Sigebert his Father;
which reason persuaded him to declare for Gondoald, sending him Ambassadors,
and stiling him King, to give him the more Majesty, for the obtaining the
Hearts of the French; advising him to take the Name of Clotaire, his Father.
The occasion of Gontrans refusing to deliver to him the Queen Fredegonde, was,
that young King Clotaire the Second, her Son, was under his Tutelage; and he
thought it below a Generous Prince, to give up the Mother of him, whom he
intended to make his Successor. Gontran was a Prince extremely Good, Pious, and
Charitable: I can find no other Reason, why he preferred Clotaire his Nephew,
who was but Four Months Old, when his Father Chilperic, was Assassinated, by
the Infidelity of Fredegonde his Wife; Gondoald, having before so much cause to
doubt whether Clotaire were Lawfully begot or no, his Mother being of a very
scandalous Life, in her Husbands time, abandoning her self to the Maire or
Stewards of the Palace, Londry de la Tour. Unless he thought the Decision of
the Laws sufficient, that Filius est quem nuptiae demonstran; That Child is
Legitimate who is Born of a Woman who has a Husband. He hoped to give good
Impressions to the young Prince, being like soft Wax, capable of any he would
make. But Gondoald's Humor he extremely apprehended, for his fierceness, and
resentment of the usage he received in his younger Days. That Divine Quality,
so Admirable in a Prince, to forget Injuries received, when it is in his Power
to Revenge them, never having been exercised by Clotaire his Father, who always
preferred his own private Resentments. This made him not acknowledge Gondoald,
that came from the Court of Constantinople, when the Grecian Artifices,
Treachery, and Cruelty, were much in use.

The Affection, and tenderness he had for the Innocent Child, prevailed over
his aversion to the Vices, and conduct of Fredegonde his Mother. Raymond,
Bishop of Paris, a Person of an Exemplary Life, first spoke to the good King,
in Favor of this young Prince; he having before, saved Fredegonde from the
Fury of the People, enraged by the Death of their King Chilperic; of which she
and her Gallant Landry, were shrewdly suspected, he giving her with her Son,
and Treasure, refuge in his Church. The Merciful King continued his Clemency to
his Death, which happened the 28th. of March, 594. Still assisting the Queen,
with his Council and Protection; He persuaded her by his remonstrances, with
the fear and respect she had to offend him, to Live a more retired Life; He
caused what the Courtiers, and Domestics of his Brother Chilperic, had
unjustly taken from several particular Persons, to be restored; He did many
Favors to the Church, making those dues to be paid, which Chilperic had
suppressed, or diverted; and largly assisting the Poor. All which he had reason
to believe, Gondoald would not do, being greedy of Money, wanting all the
Treasure he could get to recompense his Creatures, and support the Luxury he
had Learnt at Constantinople. I will not stop to relate the Encomiums, which
Gregory of Tours, and Fredegarius, in their Chronicles give this King Gontran;
only say, it was the greatest misfortune, or if you please, an effect of Gods
Judgment, to want his protection, and be rejected by him. Though Gondoald did
all he could to obtain his Favor; He chose two Priests of Cahors (as Guaguin
Relates) of the most Pions he could find, hoping for that quality they would be
well received, by his Brother King Gontran, he gave them his Letters, written
on Tablets covered with Wax, and Directed to the chief Men of France. These
Priests were surprised by Gontrans People, who understood by the Contents, and
the Confession of the Bearers, what Gondoalds Thoughts, and Correspondence
intended.

He left not off for this misfortune, but persisted in his endeavors, to gain
the kindness of Gontran; He sent Ambassadors to him, carrying Olive Branches,
that with the Symbol of Peace they might pass every where, and get admittance;
Being brought to his Presence, after he had demanded their Names and Country,
they made this Speech.

We are come toward your Majesty from Gondoald the Son of Clotaire, who with
Justice demands a part of his Inheritance, which if your Majesty refuse, he is
resolved to do himself Right by force of Arms: He has already a numerous Army
in Guienne, and Childebert will join him with considerable Troops. Gontran was
so displeased with their Discourse, that he violated the Law of Nations,
ignominiously using the Ambassadors, causing them to be tied with their Bellies
to two Horses, and whipped through the Streets. The Persons of Ambassadors have
always been Sacred, they came desiring Peace, and carried the Symbol of it.
The Renowned Aeneas received the first marks of Friendship in Italy.

Jamque Oratores aderant ex urbe Latina, Velati ramis Oliae. Antiquity allowed
none but the Gods to use it, and their right devolved to Kings, who are their
Images; for which reason, as a Note of Dignity it was called Jus Regium. The
Injuries received by Ambassadors have ever been esteemed done to the Persons
that sent them; all Nations agreeing to Revenge a common injury. Si Civis
Pulsatus actio est Injuriarum, si Magistratus Majestatis, si Legatus bello and
Jure gentium agitur.

It is no wonder, after this Procedure of Gontrans, if they both made War with
the extremity of violence. Paulus Aemilius, in an excellent Style, writes of
the dismal Examples of Wars Domestic and Foreign; Civil Wars filling the
minds of Men, with Distractions. But Gontran soon delivered his Subjects from
those Alarms, by adopting Childebert for his Heir, who was a Young Ambitious
Prince, desirous to augment his Dominion. The Good Old man had no Children
Legitimate, nor natural, so chose this way to make him depend, in hopes of the
Succession.

Gontran called an Assembly, or Parliament, to Celebrate this Solemn Action, of
Adopting his Nephew Childebert, the better to separate his Interest from
Gondoald. I can hardly believe what Guaguin, the same Author that writes the
cruel affront done to Gondoalds Ambassadors, reports; which is, that he made
them be brought into this Assembly, and show their Commissions, as they had
done to him already, where they owned and confirmed the Truth of a Report, had
been discoursed before; which was, that Gondoald had robbed the Princess
Rigonde, Daughter of the Deceased King Chilperic, taking away her Money, and
Jewels, as she went to her new Husband in Spain: And that some of Childeberts
Courtiers were in the Action, who absconded from the Assembly on that Occasion.
However Gontran proceeded to effect what he intended, Adopting his Nephew
Childebert, and using certain ceremonies, presenting the point of a Lance to
his Breast, giving him advice to make his Kingdom Flourish, and at the same
time, Restoring those Towns and Places, his Uncle Chilperic had taken from him.

The Allies of Gondoald, Didier, Momol, Landase, Valden, and Sagittaire Bishop
of Gap, a Turbulent Man, who had been Banished from his Diocese, being Informed
of the Agreement between the Uncle and the Nephew, and knowing that by this
Adoption, he would quit the Interest of Gondoald, resolved all to do so at the
same time; Yet his unhappiness made him not loose Courage, he retired to
Comminges beyond the River of Dordogne, caressing the Citizens, Living
Familiarly with them, and making great Protestations of Friendship, he
persuaded them to carry all their Riches into the Castle, for fear of loosing
them, if the Town were Besieged, but the Castle he esteemed Impregnable.
Sometime after, making them believe that the Enemy was near; he caused them to
take Arms, opening the Gates, and encouraging them to make a Sally; but as soon
as they were gone, he shut them out, driving their Bishop after them, because
he was of the contrary Party. The Lords, of whom we spoke, still kept fair with
him, though they intended to leave him, they had not yet broken all measures.

This place was so strongly sci^uated, and so well provided of all things, that
Gontran dispaired to take it by force, and therefore had recourse to an
Artifice; he persuaded the Queen Brunechilde, Mother-in-Law of Childebert, whom
he had newly Adopted, to write to Gondoald, as if she were still for his
Interest, advising him to leave that Place, and strengthen himself in
Bourdeaux, which was the Metropolis of a great Country, and had an excellent
Harbor; persuading him to carry his Treasure with him. Gondoald was deceived
by her, whom he believed advised him heartily. It was a strange oversight to
trust a Woman, and of so ill Fame. However he sent his Equipage, with his Money
and other Treasure to Bourdeaux. But the Men whom Gontran had laid in Ambush
beyond the River Gironde, eased his Mules of their Burden, and carrying off
this Rich Booty, rejoined the Army which Marched strait to Comminges.

Landegesille, General of Gontrans Army, Invented a sort of Chariots covered
with large Oziers, which defended those that dug Mines, for the better
taking the Town; they also cut down great quantities of Wood in the Forest
there abouts, and endeavored to fill the Ditch. The Besieged on the other
side, with Boats, great Stones, Pitch, and Firebrands, endeavoring to burn the
Wood, and hurt the Besiegers. These attacks taking small effect, Landegesille
Tried another way to accomplish his Design, he desired to speak with Momol,
and giving him a Friendly reproof, for quitting the Service, and interests of
King Gontran, to assist Gondoald, assured him if he would cause the Town to
fall into the Power of the King his Master, he would for certain liberally
acknowledge that Service, and pardon all that was past. Momol desired time to
consider this Proposal, and declared it to the Bishop Sagittaire, Landase, and
Valden his intimate Friends, showing them the eminent danger they were in, if
the place should fall by force into the Power of Gontran, and that therefore
they ought to think of their safety. They all gave attention to Momol's advice,
and followed it; Resolving to fire a Church, and while the People should run to
quench it, take that opportunity to deliver one of the Gates, and receive
Landegesille into the Town. They made Carulfe their confident, who was one of
the richest Citizens there, and their Landlord. After this Resolution taken,
and the Day pitched upon, on which the Church was to be burnt, and the Town to
be delivered to Landegesille; Momol went privately to Landegesille, and showed
him the places where his Men should enter, provided he kept his word, and
promise with him, and obtained him the Kings Favor. Landegesille overjoyed to
take so strong a place, and save the effusion of more Blood, confirmed all he
had said with an Oath, and that at least if he could not immediately gain the
Kings Pardon, he would, in the mean time, procure him a Church for his refuge,
till he had compassed his Mercy. Things being thus agreed, Momol changed his
Intention of burning the Church, and went to Gondoald with great deceit, and
artifice, assuring him that his Fidelity, and zeal to serve him, were not in
any sort diminished; which obliged him to represent, the deploreable Condition
his affairs were reduced to, from which he could conjecture no hope; That this
had persuaded him to sound the Inclination of Landegesille, whom he found
extremely well disposed to serve him, and to endeavor a good Peace between him
and King Gontran, his Brother; That nothing shockt him more, than to perceive
he had not that Trust and Considence he desired, in the Tenderness and
Generosity of the King, and that if he could have so good an Opinion, without
difficulty to meet Landegesille, he did not doubt to give him all satisfaction
Imaginable; And, continued he, It Is my Opinion, that you should deliver your
self from all these Miseries and troubles, and let us go together to King
Gontran. Gondoald distrusted the Fraudulent Discourse of Momol, yet so great
was his Unhappiness, he did not give himself Power to help it, believing it
impossible, to avoid the Malice and Treason of those Persons, he had so long
trusted and confided in.

While these things were agitating; Landase, one of the Conspirators against
the unhappy Gondoald, put Fire to the Church, and while the People ran to
quench it, went secretly out of Town where Bolo, and Bolon, Count of Bourges,
stood ready with their Men before the Gates, to seize Gondoald, as soon as he
should be delivered to them; which Momol, being the stronger Man, did not fail
to do, and gave the wretched Gondoald into his Power, he re-entring the Town
immediately, and causing the Gates to be shut. The Prisoner, Gondoald, was
abused by the Soldiers that Guarded him, who carried him to a Descent between
the Town, and the Camp of the Besiegers. Belon, one of the Generals, tumbled
him down the Hill, and Boson barbarously knocked out his Brains, as he rolled to
his Feet. So dyed this Unhappy Prince, or this bold Impostor, who persisted to
mount the Throne of France, in spite of those who had Power to grant him that
Advantage.

Momol did not prosper in his Treason and Avarice; for while he plundered the
Equipage and Money of Gondoald, pillaged and fined the Citizens; the Soldiers
of the Army, enraged at their losses before the Town, through the long and
vigorous Resistance of the Inhabitants, forced the Gates, and put all to Fire
and Sword, without distinction of Age or Sex. The Walls were razed, and the
City entirely Burnt. Momol thinking he had done great Service by his Conduct,
came to the General Lendegesille his Quarter; who commanded him to go out of
his Tent, and retire some where else, till the Soldiers rage against his
Person, was appeased: He perceived, if he went out, he should dye, the incensed
Soldiers flock't about him, giving him reviling Language; therefore he
resolved to defend himself so long as he was able, and sell his Life dearly.
The General being thoroughly Informed of the Kings Pleasure, who commanded that
he should have no Quarter, made a Sign for the Soldiers to dispatch him:
Momol valiantly defending himself a great while, Fought like a Lion; but could
not avoid falling under such a Multitude, all covered with wounds; so receiving
the reward of his double Treasons. And for the Bishop Sagittaire, a Soldier
perceiving him Fly, cut off his Head with his Sword, not knowing who he was.
The Riches Momol had gotten, were carried to Gontran, where he found a Thousand
Pound weight of Gold, in that Coin which they called Besans, and 250 Pound of
Silver. Gontran giving a good part of it to the Poor, divided the rest, with
his Nephew Childebert. Among the Spoils of Momol, there was led a Giant three
foot higher than ordinary Men, as Robert Guaguin, from whom I have taken great
part of this Story, says. After this War, according to Paulus Aemilius, the
Limosins, those of Quercy, and Auvergne, received Earls for their Governors.

CHAP. VII. THE Counterfeit Baldwin, Earl of Flanders.
THis Impostor pretended to no less than the Empire of the East, with the
Earldoms of Flanders, and Haynault. Zeal for the Christian Religion, and a
Desire to drive the Infidels out of the Holy Land, persuaded many generous
Princes of Christendom, to forsake their Countries, and expose their Lives in
this Enterprise. Of which Number was Theobald, Count Palatin of Champagne, (who
dyed by the way); Baldwyn, Earl of Flanders; Boniface, Marquis of Mount-ferrat;
Lewis, Earl of Blois; John, Earl of Brienne, and Guy Earl of St. Paul; with the
Bishops of Soissons and Troys. Pope Innocent the Third, of the House of Signia,
show'ring his Indulgences, and Encouragements on their design.

In the beginning of this War, (which was in the Year, 1203.) a Young Grecian
Prince, of 23 years of Age, called Alexis, Implored the Assistance of these
Christian Argonautes, while they were Besieging the City Zara, in Dalmatia,
which the Hungarians possessed, and they undertook in lieu of their expenses at
Venice, before their Departure. Isaac Angelo, of the House of Comnenes, Emperor
of Constantinople, was the Father of this Prince Alexis, and Father-in-Law to
Philip, Emperor of Germany, by his Daughter Irene. He was deposed from his
Empire, deprived of his Sight and Liberty, by his only, (though unnatural, and
ungrateful) Brother Alexis; to whom he had always shown the Marks of a more
than Brotherly kindness. After the taking of Zara, restored through the Valor
of the Confederates, to the Obedience of St. Mark's Lion; the Generous Warriors
embarkt on 250 Ships, in which were 20000 Foot, and 8000 Horse. Henry Danduli,
the Doge or Duke of Venice, though almost blinded by the cruelty of the Grecian
Emperor Emanuel Commenes, who caused a burning Plate of Copper to be held to
his Eyes, went in the Head of many Noble Venetians, persuaded by the same Zeal,
which made them equip a Fleet for this Expedition.

They drove the Usurper Alexis from Constantinople, taking the old Emperor
Isaac out of Prison, and Establishing him with his Son, the young Alexis in the
Throne. But the old Prince died in a few Days, not being able to suffer so
great a change of Life and Fortune, without a mortal Alteration of his Body,
through excess of Joy, for so unexpected a Felicity. A Villain called also Alexis
Ducas, surnamed Murzuphle, from his large spread eyebrows, suddenly seized the
Person of young Alexis; and, after having twice made him swallow Poison without
effect, strangled him with his own hands; reporting he had destroyed himself;
when he had Reigned Six Months, and Eight Days. The French and Venetian Army,
by Land and Sea, continued in the Neighborhood, expecting the effect of young
Alexis Promises; which he not being able to perform in the time agreed on, too
earnestly endeavoring to raise the Money, fell into the hatred of the People,
and was thus deprived of his Diadem and Life. So bloody a Regicide, deserved
the Chastisement our Warriors intended him; who, drawing their Army down,
Besieged Constantinople for 72 Days. Geofry de Vilhardouin, writ the Story of
this Siege, and the particular Actions of the Heroes. Murzuphle fled with his
Treasures, abandoning the City, which was taken the 12th. of April, 1204.

The Princes, and other Lords, resolved to choose an Emperor amongst them: The
Earl of Flanders, with the Count of St. Paul, named Five, to give their
Suffrages: The Marquis of Montferrat, and the Earl of Savoy, other five: The
Venetians choosing the like Number: In all, 15 Voices. The Plurality were for
Baldwyn. This Prince was very powerful, and a Great Soldier; of which he had
given many Proofs, in the Siege: He was Uncle, by the Mothers Side, to Lewis,
designed Successor to Philip the August, King of France. He was Crowned by
Thomaso Morosini, newly created Patriarch of Constantinople. Boniface, Marquis
of Montferrat, had from young Alexis, for a Recompense, the Island of Candia;
which he sold the Venetians, for a great Sum of Money, and was nevertheless
made King of Thessaly. Godfry, Lord of Champagn, was made Duke of Athens, and
Prince of Achaia; John, Earl of Brienne, was sometime after made King of
Jerusalem. Baldwin had scarcely possessed this new Dignity a Year, before he went
to Besiege Adrianople, three Days Journey from him, and possessed by his Enemies,
who very much annoyed him. That Success he had in the beginning, did not
accompany him in this Affair; since by the profound Secrets of the Divine
Pleasure, being attackt with great Numbers of his Adversaries, Greek Fugitives,
Bulgarians, and Tartars, he was defeated, and supposed to be killed in the
Plains of Orestes. A nostris pro Mortuo deploratus est, says Paulus Aemilius;
His Brother Henry Succeeding him in the Empire. This Disaster happened in the
Year 1205, though some Chronologists antidate it, two or three Years.

Twenty Years after, This Famous Impostor, calling himself by the Name of this
Emperor, appeared in Flanders: Jane, eldest Daughter of this Baldwin, by Mary,
the Daughter of Henry Earl of Champagne, was at that time Countess of Flanders,
and Married to Fernando, Infant of Portugal. She had great Wars, her Husband
having been taken Prisoner, at the Famous Battle of Bovines, which King Philip
the August, gained over the Emperor Otho the 4th, in year 1214. And was long a
Prisoner in the Louvre at Paris. Although this had been some Years past, she
still felt her losses, and that great Consternation. Robert Son of Peter de
Courtenay, Earl of Auxerre, and Prince of the Blood of France, and Yolente only
Daughter and Inheritrix of the Emperor Henry Earl of Flanders, then possessed
that Throne, to which this Impostor pertended.

One would have thought, he should first have gone to the place, where he was
taken Prisoner; but he could hope no assistance from the Greeks: On the
contrary Theodore Lascaris, who resided at Nice, and always took upon himself
the Title of Emperor of Constantinople, would have used him worse than the
Bulgarians, if he had fallen into his hands. As for Robert de Courtnay, whose
Mother Yolente, was his pretended Niece; he was no ways inclined to yield him
the Empire; he had too much difficulty in obtaining it. His Father, the
Emperor Peter, falling into the Hands of Theodore, was cruelly put to Death by
him: So that, this Impostor thought his Affairs would advance better, and he be
more kindly received in his Native Country. The Earldome of Haynault was his
first Inheritance; for this Baldwin, was Son to an Earl of Haynault, of the
same Name, Surnamed The Magnanimous, and of Margaret of Alsace, Heiress of
Flanders. For this Reason he was Joyfully received there, and with more
satisfaction to those Martial People, who hated the Dominion of a Woman:
Besides, it was Independent on the Kings of France. The Flemings received him
very coldly, seeing but a small Train with him, nor would they own him for
their Earl, or Emperor of Greece.

This Impostor affected an extraordinary Gravity in his Meine, the better to
draw Veneration, and acquire the Majesty of an Emperor. The Countess Jane
refused to see him; but was advised to interrogate him, for the better
discovery of his Practices. The President of her Council of State, summoned him
to appear, asked him many troublesome Questions, Gravibus fatigare
percontationibus ausus est; and spoke to him in this manner:

If it be true, that you are the Earl Baldwin, and assume not a False Title to
the Empire of Greece; I demand of you, Why you have abandoned your Subjects in
that Country? Even those poor People, laden with Miseries, whom the Divine
Providence, by the Suffrages of so many brave Men, had committed to your
Protection? Why forsake you them in their greatest need of your Conduct and
Care; having so many Generous, and Experienced Captains, to whom you owed the
last and greatest Obligations, for choosing you among the most principal Men in
the World, to be their Chief, and set the Imperial Diadem upon your Head? Why
have you thus neglected them, exposed to the rage of Barbarous Nations? For
this reason, although you were the true Baldwin, we have sufficient Cause to
dissemble our knowledge of you; sure then we shall not own you, who are but a
false and a counterfeit Badlwin. Why, when the Affairs of all the East were
laid on your shoulders, to be supported, and sustained by you; when they were
in disorder, and lost by your misfortune, have you feigned to be dead, and
concealed your being alive? What could you expect from so strange a Deceit? Or
what could be the reason of such a supposition and imposture? If you would so
long dwell among the Dead, why should we now believe you are alive, not having
appeared in any place these twenty years? And had you been what you pretend
now, why did you not come in the time of Philip the August, your Brother in
Law, (who Married Alix, one of your Sisters) and in the life time of so many
persons of Honor, who might either have proved your Imposture, or authorized
your Title? Why came you not sooner out of the Grave? In what darkness have you
hid that Glorious Face, known to the whole World? And with what new one do you
pretend to Enchant the eyes of Men, after so many years? I ask, if you believe
your self, that we ought to give faith to a Man, who after so vast an Interval,
shall say, I am the Emperor Baldwyn. Have we never seen nor heard, that there
have been Impostors, who have falsely Usurped the Quality of Kings and Emperors?
Haynault has suffered many Revolutions and Calamities, since the departure of
the true Baldwyn: And Flanders has done the same. We have all been oppressed with
misery; have you given us any assistance in our Wars, or any help in our
Afflictions? Ought this Country to own you for their Prince, since in their
trouble you have not considered them, who gave you Birth, and Nursed you in your
tender years?

This Man heard, with attention, these Remonstrances, showing a great assurance
and courage, speaking in his turn; but not as if he would answer these
Reproaches, but reprove and condemn them; dissembling by this procedure, his
boldness and grandeur of mind: And told them That his Countrymen and Subjects
were more Inhumane than his Enemies; that Fighting before Adrianople, for the
glory of that Country, which now disowned him, being overpowered, and made
Prisoner by the unequal number of his Enemies, as often arrives in the chance
and fortune of War; yet notwithstanding he had not suffered so much Contempt,
nor so extraordinary Opprobry, either by reason of the Majesty of his Person
and Name, or else in consideration of his Subjects in Flanders, but was kept
and maintained moderately; till by length of time, his Guards were not so
strict, but he found an opportunity to save himself, by the extraordinary
favor of Heaven: And that returning to his Country, he had been retaken by
other Barbarians, who did not know him, nor to whom he did not discover
himself; they carried him into Asia, and used him like a miserable Slave; sold
him to the Syrians, where he dwelt two years in a Barn, with other Captives,
sometimes driving the Plow, and breaking the Clods of Earth with those hands
with which he had held the Scepter; till during a Truce between the Christians
and the Barbarians of Asia, some German Merchants Traveling by the place where
he was at work, he spoke to them in the German Tongue, and made himself known
to them, telling them his unhappy and miserable Adventures; who bought him at a
common price: And that now after this good fortune, his own Subjects affronted
him, so as neither the Greeks nor the Inhabitants of Thrace, their cruel
Neighbors the Scythians, nor the Barbarians of Syria, had ever used him. As to
Flanders it was never more happy, nor more flourishing, than when he possessed
the dignity of Earl. Their glory had never been greater at home nor abroad,
than when they owned him for their Prince. He always styled himself August,
Chosen or Elect of God, and used a Seal of massive Gold. He termed them
ungrateful Subjects, and Countrymen, to reproach him with provoking questions,
after having suffered so many Vexations and Miseries: Surely they had changed
their Inclination, and degenerated from the Virtue and Justice of their
Fathers, by whom he was made Sovereign and Emperor of Greece, and had made and
given Laws to all the People of the East. But he wondered not that Flanders had
fallen into all these disorders, and had renounced the good and commendable
qualities of their Fathers, to embrace those which were new and pernicious;
that on the contrary, in his Government, they were extraordinary flourishing.
He would have continued speaking much longer, and made them greater Reproaches,
if the Lord Treasurer, who was also President of the Counsel, had not broke it
up; saying, It was not fit for them to conclude any thing in Affairs of that
Importance, without knowing the good pleasure and determination of their
Countess. This Princess had an extreme aversion to this Pretender, whether it
might not be because she really thought Baldwyn her Father was dead; but she
effectively sent into Greece, John Bishop of Mutelan, (that, without doubt,
which is now called the Isle of Mytelene) and Albert, a Religious man of the
Order of St. Bennet, both of the Greek Nation, to enquire and inform
themselves, if Baldwyn were dead or alive: The Annals, or Histories of
Flanders, written by Jacobus Meyer, Adrianus Barlandus, and others, which
furnish me with the greatest part of this Story, observe; That it was not
certainly known, whether in the unhappy Battle of Adrianople he was killed or
taken, only that he could not be found; but these two Envoys were upon the
place, and being Arrived in Bulgaria, they made so exact an enquiry, that they
were informed of his being taken by John, King of that Country, and was by his
order carried to the Queen his Wife, to the Town of Cernoa; who following the
nature of an enraged Barbarian, cruelly put him to death, chopping his Limbs to
pieces, and throwing them to the Fowls of the air. Meyer writes these
circumstances in the 8th. Book of his Annals of Flanders.

Besides she that had been accustomed to command, and had long been Mistress,
must needs think with much grief, of delivering the Sovereign Power to another,
of which she had so long thought she should never be deprived, but by Death.
Notwithstanding all this, a great part of the Flemish Nobility received this
Man for their Sovereign, and Emperor of the East, and submitted to his
Obedience; and the more readily by his subtilty in Authorizing their Cognizance
of him, and the Veneration they had to his Person, by his telling them their
Names and Extractions, which he readily did to a great part of the Nobility of
Flanders, with the glorious Actions of their Ancestors; showing their Arms,
Blasons, and Devices of their Families, and all their Genealogies. He
understood the Country very well, having lived several years a Hermit in the
Forest of Glaucone, near Valenciennes. He appeared in a strange habit, like
the Armenians, wearing a great rufled beard. The common People, who being
Ignorant, and love Novelty, believed his Impostures; and the rather, for his
being of the same Stature, and having several features, like the true Baldwyn.
He found himself so well assisted, that he designed to seize the Countess Jane,
and wanted very little of surprising her in Quenoy; but she was fled to a
strong Castle, and had sent Ambassadors to Lewis the 8th. King of France for
assistance. The Historian Guaguin (who was a Subject of this Princess, and born
at Preaven near Cassel, and gives her the Character of a very Wise Princess)
says, she came in Person to the King for succor, against the Insolence of this
unknown Impostor, entreating his Favor and Assistance in this Conjuncture, as
Sovereign of Flanders, and she one of the Nobles Feudatories of the Crown of
France; to which she was so nearly related. The King came as far as Campaign,
where he appointed the Impostor to meet him, who came extraordinarily
accompanied: He was Clothed in Scarlet, having a white staff in his hand:
When he was Introduced to the King, he saluted him very slightingly; to whom
the King said; I know not in what manner I should Salute you, nor what Title to
give you: Baldwin, Earl of Flanders and Haynault, was my Uncle, and a most
Generous Prince; He was also Emperor of Greece: Whose Death I have lamented,
when I was in my Youth. When first the unhappy News arrived, his Son Henry, a
Valiant Prince, succeeded him in the Empire, and his Eldest Daughter Jane, in
his Earldom of Flanders. Their Country holds of me, and is a Feudatory of my
Crown, as the Earl is a Peer of my Kingdom. I wish, I could alter the Course of
Nature, and that what has happened, had not been; that my dear Uncle, the
Father of my Cousin-German, whose Name and Memory is of admirable Veneration in
Greece, could return to Life. But I cannot lightly be persuaded, from the
belief I have of his death, and the report which has been confirmed, through
the course of so many Years: Most humane things, especially Empires, subsist by
the Testimony of men. Tell me then, for whom you would be received? If for my
Uncle, show it us, by some authentic proof; and because the thing is
unexpected, it will be so much the more agreeable, and give me transports of
joy and satisfaction; when I am convinced I have wept for my Uncle without
cause, and for a false Opinion; whilst he that I should Reverence like a
Father, is restored to me. I am glad that a few short questions will make your
self judge, and witness in your own Cause, which the World must needs know, is
of the greatest Importance. I ask you then, If my Father King Philip, treated
you as his Homager, and whether he gave you the Investiture of the Earldom of
Flanders? In what place; at what time; in what manner; and before what
Witnesses did he gird on your Sword, and made you a Knight? And of what Order
was it? Who was the Wife you Married in France? Who treated the Match? In what
place, and with what Ceremonies did you Marry her? for the true Baldwyn cannot
be ignorant of these matters.

I have exactly made a Recital of all the Questions, from Paulus Aemilius, that
admirable Historian.

It is very strange, that he, who had so well studied the Genealogies of the
Flemish Lords, could not tell what Wife he Married, which was Margaret,
Daughter to the Earl of Champagne. The Annals of Flanders say, it was the
Bishop of Beauvais, President of the Kings Counsel, that asked him all these
questions; which may be reduced to three. 1. In what place he did Homage for
his Earldom of Flanders? 2. By whom, and in what Place he was made a Knight? 3.
In what Place, and on what Day he Married Margaret of Champagne? But this
Impostor, as surprised with all these Questions, asked three days to answer
them: Perhaps one might excuse a Man for not remembering several Circumstances
of the principal Actions of his Life: Besides, such an August Assembly, before
so Great a King, and Magnificent a Court, a Subject of such consequence, before
an Audience no ways favorable, with the Apprehension of the Danger, might
distract him, and hinder his answering pertinently. Guaguin says, That speaking
Haughtily, to the Points in question, without sufficient Proofs of what he
pretended to be, the King commanded him to go out of his Realm, in three days;
but doing him no hurt, because he had given him his safe Conduct. This Impostor
being thus shamefully Driven away, retired to Valenciennes in Haynault; where
being abandoned by those, whose hopes of advantage by this Novelty, had made
them promise him great assistance, he disguised himself, like a Tradesman,
intending to have past into Burgundy, hoping to find countenance and support
there; but he was watched, and taken on his way by a Burgundian Gentleman, Erard
Castenac, who sold him to the Countess Jane for four hundred Marks: She put him
to the torture, and forced him by his torments, to Confess his Imposture: He
said he was Born in Champagne, and his name was Bertrand de Rayns; he was led
through all the Cities of Flanders, and Haynault, where after having been
showed to the People, he was publicly hanged at Lisle in Flanders.

Fama ancipiti, jurene an injuria. The greatest part of Europe, was in doubt
whether the Countess justly put this Impostor to Death. The example of Peter
Courtney, Successor of the true Baldwyn, and Henry, in right of his Wife
Yolante, persuaded the possibility of so straight a Prison, as might not give
him Opportunity to inform his Subjects and Friends what misfortune had befallen
him. The Catastrophe of this false Baldwyn happened in the year of Christ,
1225. and of the World, 5186.

CHAP. VIII. Perkin Warbeck, OR, THE COUNTERFEIT Duke of York. Son of Edward
the Fourth, King of England.
THis Impostor continued longer than any of the rest, and had more Chances, and
happy Hours. The Cruelty of Richard Duke of Gloucester, Son of Richard Duke of
York, and Brother of Edward the Fourth King of England, gave Henry Earl of
Richmond, Grandson of Owen Tudor, and Catharine of France, a Pretension to Arm
against him, for the Recovery of the Kingdom of England, which Edward the
Fourth, before Duke of York, and Head of the Red-Rose, had usurped from Henry
the Sixth. Richard Duke of Gloucester, had also usurped the Crown from Edward
the Fifth, a young Prince of Twelve years old, Eldest Son and Successor to King
Edward the Fourth; as likewise from his Brother Richard Duke of York, his two
Nephews, whom he unnaturally and cruelly murdered in the Tower of London, in
the year 1483. It was the Person of this last Richard Duke of York, and only
Brother of King Edward the Fifth, that this Impostor, Peter Warbeck, commonly
called Perkin Warbeck, so artfully imitated, for Five or Six Years time, from
1494 until 1499, putting all England into combustion, and perplexity on that
Subject: and giving much trouble to the new Conqueror, Henry the Seventh, who
was before Earl of Richmond.

Margaret, Sister to King Edward the Fourth, Widow of Charles the Hardy, Duke
of Burgundy, and Sovereign of the Seventeen Provinces of the Lower Germany,
produced, and instructed this Counterfeit, to take the Crown of England, (if
she could have effected, what she had often endeavored) from Henry the
Seventh, Chief of the House of Lancaster, or the White-Rose, whom she mortally
hated. This is the Truth of the Story, as Polydore Virgil, Historiographer to
Henry the Eighth, relates it, in the Twenty-sixth Book of his History of
England.

This Princess, (a Woman of an Ambitious and Intriguing humor) had conceived a
great Aversion to Henry the Seventh, Exterminator of the Usurper Richard Duke
of Gloucester. The principal cause of her Hatred proceeded from the long Enmity
between his Family of Lancaster, and here is of the House of York; which made her
continually endeavor, by all means imaginable, his extirpation, with the
satisfaction of her own Revenge, in the removal of the Crown to One of her own
Party: But finding all her endeavors miscarried, and those of John Earl of
Lincoln were come to nothing, her old Inveterate temper prompted her with new
Expedients, more difficult for Henry to prevent.

She met a young man at Tourney, who was handsome, of a subtle with and quick
Apprehension, his name was Peter Warbeck, but the English, in Derision, after
called him Perkin. He understood English, and some other Languages, was very
little known, being of the meanest Birth, and in extreme Poverty. He had
Traveled through diverse Countries like a Beggar and a Vagabond. Him, the
Duchess Margaret, thought a sit Instrument, to Counterfeit the Duke of York,
second Son of Edward the Fourth. She hid him in her House, and instructed him
in the affairs of England, and the particular Interests of the House of York,
till he perfectly understood his business; Imprinting her Maxims in his memory,
and talking properly of them, persuading all that he was the Real Prince of
that Illustrious Family. Persons of that Quality and Birth have an Instinct not
to be described, to follow the steps of their Glorious Ancestors, that they may
deserve the same admiration, and even in this she had informed him. And now
she, understanding that King Henry was raising Men for France, to assist
Francis Duke of Britain, (his old Benefactor) believing this a favorable
occasion to set her Engines at work, and cause a disturbance in England, she
sent Perkin privately into Ireland, that so this young and well-instructed
Adventurer, might sow the Seeds of Rebellion amongst those unciviliz'd People,
who were always inclined to Mutiny.

When he Landed in Ireland, he so well employed his time and favor there, that
many of the principal Irish believed his deceit, and gave him the same Honor,
as if he had really been what he pretended, promising to Arm, and follow him
with all Necessaries for the War.

This News being spread abroad, Francis, the Eighth King of France, invited him
to his Court, that he might oppose him to Henry his declared Enemy, who was
then ready to Land in France. Perkin overjoyed at this News, believing himself
Blessed, to enter into the Familiarity of Kings, repassed the Sea, and came to
the French Court, where he was Magnificently received, and had a Train of
Guards appointed him: But suddenly after, a Peace was concluded between France
and England, and the King finding him no longer useful for his Purpose, dismissed
him the Court. Being thus disappointed of his hopes, he went to the Duchess
Dowager, into Flanders.

This Princess longed to know how he had been Received and Entertained, but the
disappointment sensibly afflicted her; yet she Treated him, as if she had never
seen him before; which she cunningly endeavored to persuade, being overjoyed
to see him; publicly Congratulating his happy return, and taking a singular
pleasure to hear him tell, how nearly he escaped in several Countries, which he
Traveled. This she did, the better to persuade the World, he was the true Son
of Edward the Fourth, her Brother; and showed him extraordinary Respect, as
likewise did the Flemish Lords on her account. The Deceit being hid under so
much appearance of Truth, as persuaded them that he escaped death by the
particular Providence of Heaven; and when he was in the Power of his Uncle
Richard, a faithful Servant of his Fathers had conveyed him privately beyond
Sea, so Rescuing him out of his cruel hands, and that now he would attempt to
regain the Kingdom of his Ancestors. The Story of so strange an Adventure was
soon spread over all the Country, flying into England, where it past for Truth,
not only among the common People, but even with several of the Nobility.

When the News came that Richard Duke of York was alive, the number of the
Seditious increased abundantly. They, whose Crimes or Debts made them abscond,
or whose Poverty hoped advantage, fled into Flanders to Perkin; and soon after,
many of the most considerable Lords entered into the Conspiracy, and believed
the Impostor; swayed by their own rashness, or by a false persuasion that this
young Man was Prince Richard, Son of King Edward, and having a blind affection
for the House of York; Others through Disgust, believing themselves ill
rewarded by Henry the Seventh, whom they had ventured their Lives for, to set
him upon the Throne: Many through Avarice, and a desire of change, were driven
into this Conspiracy. Thus the News of Richard Duke of Yorks being alive,
divided England. Hopes and Fears filled the minds of all men, none were
exempted from Trouble, each measuring his Danger or Advantage according to his
Interest, Fancy, and particular Opinion.

It was an extraordinary astonishment, to the King, and his Friends, that there
should be any Man in the World, who had the Impudence to invent and discourse
so Pernicious an Imposture; which was not only improbable, but looked
impossible; and under the color of Truth, concealed a most Subtle and
Implacable piece of Malice, which he already knew many great Men in the Kingdom
had a mind to give Credit to, (though he dissembled his Information:) And he
foresaw this Fable might endanger the Ruin of the State, if it were not early
discovered to the Nation, for no other than a fictitious, most wicked, and
dangerous Counterfeit.

Those who delighted in War and Trouble, embraced these Novelties, persuading
themselves there was no deceit in them, and that the News was all true;
believing they should reap both Honor and Profit, by Fomenting the Hopes of
their Party: And this being a Point of so much Importance, the Conspirators
sent into Flanders to the Duchess Dowager, to know of her, when she thought
fit that Richard Duke of York should pass over into England, that they might
the sooner Advertise their Friends, and have them ready to give him all
necessary Assistance.

Sir Robert Clifford, and William Barklay, were deputed for this, by the
general Consent of the rest; They gave the Duchess Margaret an account what
the Creatures and Favorers of this New Duke had agreed to do, which gave her
an extreme pleasure: She assured them, all that had been advantagiously
discoursed of Richard Duke of York, was really so, showing them the Impostor,
who Counterfeited the Person of Richard to a wonder: Then she extolled his
Virtues to the Skies, and made admirable Report of his Princely Inclinations,
which were to imitate the Actions of his glorious Ancestors. When Clifford had
seen the Youth, he really believed him of the Blood Royal, and so writ to his
Correspondents in England: And the better to make himself be believed, he
assured them, he perfectly remembered his Face. After the delivery of these
Letters, they contrived a new Motive, to excite the People to favor their
Party: They assured them nothing could be more True, than the News of Richard
Duke of York; and this they so cunningly spread, that no Author could be
produced for the Report.

The King perceiving these Deceits, not to diminish in the Peoples minds,
thought himself absolutely obliged to provide for the Public Safety, in which
his own Interest was so deeply engaged: He knew where this design was laid, and
understood Cliffords Secret Departure, sending Officers with some chosen Men,
and approved Soldiers, to the Seacoasts, for the preventing any Men's Landing
in, or going out of the Kingdom, except with good Passes, and to hinder all
great Assemblies. For the better disabusing the English from their false
opinions; he sent his subtlest Spies through all the Towns of Flanders, to
understand the Birth and Original of this Counterfeit, promising large
Recompense to those that could discover it; Writing to his Friends on the same
Subject. These Emissaries exactly obeyed their Orders, some of them coming to
Tournay, found the false Richard was Born there, of the Meanest of the People,
his name being Peter Warbeck, of which they brought very authentic
Attestations.

Upon this the King sent a solemn Embassy to young Earl Philip in Flanders, of
which Sir Edward Poinings, and William Warham, Dr. of Laws, were chief: The
latter of these was also a Churchman, of extraordinary Parts and Modesty: He
made a Speech to the Lords of the Young Princes Counsel, who was not of Age yet
to take the Government upon himself. He laid the impiousness of the Impostor
before them, putting them in mind of the like happening in their Country, about
250 years before, in the time of their Countess Jane: Likewise telling them,
that the Effects of the King his Masters Friendship, to Maximilian, Father of
the Prince, in the War of France, should not be so quickly blotted out of their
memory; sharply reflecting on the Conduct of the Duchess Margaret, who brought
forth in her elder Years, not a Child at nine Months, but a Prodigy of nine
score Months old. The Council, after a long Debate, replied, That to gratify
the King, their Earl would give no assistance to Perkin: But for the Duchess
Dowager, She was Mistress of her Jointure, and her Actions; and they would
neither prescribe, nor forbid her any thing. The Ambassadors being returned,
Henry sent diverse Emissaries; some to discover the Names of the Conspirators,
by feigning to enter into the design; others to endeavor the persuading Sir
Robert Clifford, and William Barklay to return, with the assurance of their
Pardon. Clifford was prevailed on; but Barklay continued obstinate, not
returning till two Years after, and till he was certain of the Kings Mercy.
Some of the Kings Messengers came back, after having discovered many of the
Conspirators: Others staid longer, to accompany Clifford, whose coming home, so
much discountenanced the Plotters, that they knew not whom to trust.

The King being informed, who several of the Conspirators were, caused them to
be Seized and Committed to Prison in London; the Chief were John Ratclif, Lord
Fitz-Walter, Sir Simon Montfort, and Sir Thomas Thwaites, Knights; William
Dawbeney, Robert Ratclif, Richard Lacy, with diverse others: Some Priests:
William Richeford and Thomas Ponys, Dominican Friars; William Sutton, Robert
Laybourn, and William Worsley Dean of St. Paul's. The rest finding their
practices were discovered, fled to several places of Refuge: They were all
Condemned as Traitors, but only these Principal were Beheaded, Robert Ratclif,
William Dawbeney, and Simon Montfort. John Ratclif, Lord Fitzwalter, was
carried to Calais, where for endeavoring to make his Escape, he lost his Head
likewise: The rest the King Pardoned.

Not long after Sir Robert Clifford Arrived, and the King chose to speak with
him in the Tower, that in case he accused any Great Men about his Person, he
might secure them there. Much discourse there was touching Cliffords Conduct;
some thought him all along to have been employed by the King, to discover the
rest. This was occasioned by the ready obtaining his Pardon, and his Return
made him equally decry'd by both Parties; his Friends believing him a Cheat,
but the small consideration the King had of him generally, convinced People, he
acted as he thought, through his Inclination to the House of York, being
deceived into the persuasion it was the true Prince. He threw himself at the
Kings Feet, giving an account what passed in Flanders, and naming amongst his
Accomplices Sir William Stanley: It much astonished the King, he being his Lord
Chamberlain, to whom he trusted his most Important Affairs, and who had gained
him the Crown, which was wore by his assistance, in the Battle against Rich.
the Third, the Usurper. Clifford pretending to know his ill will to the King,
from the beginning, he having declared, He would never bear Arms against that
Young Man, if he were convinced he was the Son of King Edward. Polydore Virgil
says, his Resentment proceeded from his not being rewarded, as he thought he
had deserved to be. Benesicium post hominum memoriam Maximum, per quod Henricus
a periculo vitaeliberatus, conservatusque Regnum sibi quaesivit. For when the
King was overpowered at the Battle of Bosworth, and like to be torn in pieces
by that Squadron where his Enemy Richard was; Sir William Stanly, by order of
his Brother Thomas, who Commanded the Reserve, effectually helping where he
found most need, charging Richard, he disingaged the King, and gave him the
Victory.

These Considerations made him in some suspense, but the consequence of the
Example prevailed, and he was Beheaded as the rest were. The King was under a
necessity to use that Rigor, for hindering the Insolent discourses of the
common People, who talked Maliciously, and Cursed him at their little Meetings;
saying aloud, They expected every day the Duke of York, and to see him on the
Throne. But these Executions, and the Method he used in his Affairs,
extinguished great part of those Heats, and restored many People to their Duty.
Giles Lord Dawbeney, whose Prudence and Fidelity, the King was well assured of,
possessed the Place of Lord Chamberlain, Vacant by the Death of Sir William
Stanley.

The Irish more than ever persisting in their rash unadvisedness, it was
resolved to endeavor to crush those Seeds of Sedition Perkin had sown amongst
them, the precedent Years: For which Intent, the King sent Henry Denny Abbot of
Langton, a Wise and Contriving Man, whom he designed to make Chancellor of that
Kingdom, making Sir Edward Poynings, his Colleague, who was to command the
Army. These two Persons representing the two Arms of Justice, one holding the
Scales, the other the Sword; showing above the Cheats of an Impostor, the
Majesty of a Lawful King, Non solum Armis decoratam, sed and Legibus armatam.
They had order to go where he had been, and take an exact account, who they
were, that resolved to assist him, and to Arm all they could, to pursue the
Accomplices.

Ireland was divided into two sorts of Inhabitants, the one Civilized through
the converse with other Nations, but especially the English: The others Wild
and Savage, as any upon Earth, living by Theft, inclined to Rebellion and
Novely, destroying one another, according to the Inclinations and Avarice of
those they follow. Perkin knowing the Genius and Turbulent Spirits of the
latter, addressed himself to them: These Sir Edward Poynings attackt chiefly,
knowing them most Guilty; but they would never stand the shock, always flying
to their Boggs and Mountains. The other Irish did not obey his Orders, nor send
him Succors as they promised, which made him give over the Pursuit, believing
the old Governor Gerald Earl of Kildare favored them underhand; wherefore he
cunningly seized his Person, and brought him to the King; before whom, this
Earl so pleaded his Cause, that he was sent back, and restored to his
Government, being thought the most prudent way in that Conjuncture, because of
his great Interest and Authority with the Irish.

While these things were transacting in England, Warbeck was extremely grieved,
his Conspiracy was discovered, and many of his chiefest Friends Executed: Yet
he, notwithstanding, resolved to cross the Sea, accompanied by a great number
of Vagabonds, such Fugitives as would follow him. It Is true he had some Lords,
and good Captains in his Train, to strengthen his hopes of the Crown. His Fleet
came upon the Coast of Kent, where the weather being calm, he Landed some of
his Men, for the better securing or persuading the Country People to his Party:
But the Impostor was already known every where, and they had suffered much
Misery and Desolation in the late Wars. They knew the Soldiers of this false
Richard were all Strangers, who would make no distinction of Friends or
Enemies, where they were strong enough to Plunder and Pillage, nor have respect
to Churches, or Places Sacred; believing God had left them, since several of
their Party had been put to shameful, deaths, as a punishment of their Guilt.
Wherefore these Inhabitants endeavored to destroy this Counterfeit, by
persuading him to Land all his Men; promising to give notice to their
Neighbors, and make a considerable body, while he prepared for his March.
Perkin distrusted their Intentions, knowing the common People use no Ceremony
in their Emotions, but run on without Reason or Deliberation: Therefore he
resolved not to Land himself, but to venture part of his Men, who were no
sooner out of sight, when the Country People Charged them; driving them back to
the Sea, so that only the most Nimble and most Cowardly escaped, the Stoutest
and Robust were killed or wounded: The latter were not treated as Prisoners of
War, but like Pirates and Thieves, 150 being Hanged along the Shore. The King
himself was on his March from London, against these Vagabonds; till meeting the
news of their Defeat, he returned; sending only Sir Richard Guilford to thank
the Kentishmen for their Loyalty, and assure them of his Grace and Favor;
encouraging them to persist in the same Fidelity and Zeal for his Interest.

Though this ill success troubled Warbeck, and his Friends, who returned to
Flanders, they gave not over for it, taking new Resolutions of Landing in
Ireland, and Levying Men there, for the Invading the Western parts of England:
And if that failed, to go for Scotland; which Nation had never Peace long with
the English: His Aunt giving him Money for the equipping a Fleet, and making
some Levies. He Sailed with good Weather, to the Irish Coasts, where he soon
found the inequality between those unarmed, unexperienced People, and the,
English Forces; yet not daring to expose his Men to the Slaughter, he rather
chose the other Project of passing into Scotland, where James the Fourth was
not displeased at the Arrival of a Person so much discoursed of through all
Europe, out of the Aversion his People had for the English, giving him Access
to his Royal Person, where Polydore Virgil says, he made this Speech.

I know (Great Prince) you cannot be Ignorant what Calamities have late
befallen the Family of Edward the Fourth, King of England, whose Son (I assure
your Majesty) I am; having by a Miracle escaped Death. My Father, e're he dyed,
made Richard Duke of Gloucester my Uncle, Guardian to Edward my Elder Brother,
and my self; hoping the great kindness he always favored him with, would
oblige him to more tenderness of us: But alas! how was he deceived, for our
Guardian became our Murderer: Transported by his Ambition of Reigning, he gave
his positive Commands for our Destruction. The Person he instructed with his
Orders, frighted with the horror of the Crime, obeyed but half his
Instructions: For after he had taken away my Brother's, sparing my life, he
suffered a faithful Servant to convey me out of the Kingdom, who left me not
till I was past all danger. By these Methods my Uncle Richard seized the Crown,
as if it had been the Reward of his Crimes, whilst I (after this Deliverance)
wandering about the World, almost forgot who I was. At last coming to my Aunt
Margaret, Widow of that most excellent Prince, Charles, late Duke of Burgundy;
she received me with unspeakable joy, as risen from the dead: But that Princess
having only her Jointure in Flanders, and not able to assist me with Force
enough, for the recovery of my Kingdom, I have been constrained to have
Recourse to other Princes: And by her advice, I am come to Your Majesty, though
slenderly accompanied: Yet knowing your Princely Generosity, which has filled
the World with your Glory; particularly for your Inclination to protect the
Unhappy, Dispossessed of their Rights; who becoming Objects of the Cruelty of
wicked Men, are so much the greater of Your Royal Clemency. This encourages me,
to implore Your Majesty's Assistance, for this Unhappy Prince here before You,
for the Recovery of his ancient Kingdom: And I assure you, I and my Successors
will so acknowledge Your Majesty's Grace and Favor, that this Crown will not
repent the Kindness; though, to say truly, it is above all we can do, to
express our Gratitude as we ought.

King James answered his Speech very civilly, exhorting him to take Courage;
and assure himself, he should not repent his coming thither. He Assembled his
Council, who were much divided in their Opinions; some taking him for an
Impostor; others (whose Advice prevailed) affirming, that if he were the true
Duke of York, both He and all his Posterity must acknowledge this Favor, and
for it, be obliged to Scotland: Or although he should prove a Counterfeit, this
Pretense of War would make the English treat with more inclination, to grant
what they desired, for the dis-engaging the Scots from his Interest. This last
Advice was followed by the King, who showed Perkin extraordinary Respects,
stiling him Highness, and Duke of York: And to advance his Credit, he married
him to his Kinswoman Katharine, Daughter of Alexander Earl of Huntley; a Lady
of incomparable Beauty and Virtue, whose Obedience to the King, rather than the
Ambition of having her Head Crowned one day with a Royal Diadem, o're-came the
Repugnance she had in her Heart, to marry a Man so unknown, whom many called an
Impostor. The Motives which persuaded the King to this Match, were for a
specious Pretext of War, and breaking the Truce with the English; He being by
this obliged to protect his new Kinsman and Ally, without being accounted rash
in his Assistance, if the Deceit should be discovered; for this Marriage must
needs persuade the World, he thought him the true Duke of York.

King James raised Men, and formed an Army; which, you will suppose, gave the
Impostor great Satisfaction. And now his Senses were charmed with the Sound of
Warlike Music, as well as with the softer Concerts of his Wedding. Courriers
were sent into England, to observe what Preparations were making for
Resistance. But all being quiet; the Scotch Army, with their King at the Head,
entered Northumberland; where they pillaged, burnt, ravished, and killed,
sparing neither Age nor Sex; behaving themselves, without Humanity: Till the
Soldiers, laden with Plunder, refused to March further, pretending no English
joined them. The Counterfeit Richard, one day hearing the Cries of the poor
plundered English, seemed much afflicted; saying, Oh! how wretched am I, and my
Heart as hard as Steel, not to be troubled at the Misery of my People!
Entreating the King, to prevent the Cruelty of the Soldiers, and not suffer
them to destroy his unhappy Country; feigning great Commiseration and
Tenderness: Who answered him very coldly; He might concern himself with his own
Affairs, and not with other Men's; calling England his Country and People; where
none came to his Assistance, though a War was undertaken for his Cause. So
chiding this Mock-King's Dissimulation, and changing from that time, his
Respect to him; Neglecting, and contemning him, when he found neither his
Actions, nor the Event of things, correspond with his former Promises.

King Henry prepared to meet, and repel the Scotch-Men, at the News of this
their Cruelty and Infidelity; when the Lords on the Marches, informed him of
their Retreat; They having done the best they could, by Intrenching and
Fortifying themselves, with an Intent, as they did, by their frequent Allarms
and Skirmishes, to wast and tire out the Enemy. Just before this Advice, he
Summons a Parliament at London, where several good Laws were made, for the
Public Safety: But Money being the Sinews of War, they concluded on the
Methods of raising it. Giles Lord Dawbeney, who was General of the Army, had
Orders to begin his March for the Frontiers of Scotland: But he had scarce set
forward, when the Cornish Men took up Arms, alleging for their Pretense great
Taxes laid on them (as they said) for an Inconsiderable Scotch-War, which was
ended already; when indeed it was but just begun: And then their Barren Land,
and hard Labor of Mineing, making them Incapable to pay them. Thomas Flammock,
a Country-Lawyer, and Michael Joseph a Farrier, two bold Fellows, being at the
Head of the Rebels, they Marched toward London, and demanded the Heads of John
Morton, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Sir Reynald Bray, both
Privy-Counsellors; And at Wells, they were Joined by James Twichet, Lord
Awdley, and some other Gentlemen. King Henry considering these Troubles should
be first appeased, recalled the Lord Dawbency, with his Army, sending Thomas
Howard, Earl of Surry, in his stead, a most experienced Soldier; To whom he
had given his Life and Liberty, after the Famous Battle of Bosworth-Field,
which he had won of Richard the Usurper; afterward honoring him with the
Office of Lord High Treasurer of England, upon the Death of John Lord Dinham.
This Earls Commands were, to raise what Men he could, about the County of
Durham, and oppose the Incursions of the Scots, till Giles Lord Dawbeney should
have Dissipated, and Chastized the Rebels of Cornwall, and Joined him with his
Army. Polydore Virgil Names the Lords, and the Gentlemen, who met the Royal
Army, commanded by Dawbeney, increasing it with their Tennants.

About this time, Charles the 8th. of France, sent an Ambassador to give the
King an Account of his Conquering the Kingdom of Naples, and to renew his
Alliance with England: Henry sent some Lords to meet them, so soon as he knew
they were arrived at Calais, and also to amuse them at Dover, that they might
not understand the Revolt in the West, till it was suppressed: in which he was
exactly obeyed.

In the mean time, the Rebels decamped from Wells, Marched to Salisbury, and so
to Canterbury, hoping those People would Join with them; but they were much
deceived; for they found them Armed, and ready to oppose them; being Commanded
by George Earl of Kent, and John Lord Brook, with Fifteen or Sixteen other
Lords. The Resolution, and Fidelity, of these Men, so astonished the Rebels
Army, that many abandoned them, Running from their Camp in the Night: But they
were too far advanced for a Retreat; so continued their March to Black Heath,
near London; where they drew up themselves, in Order to a Battle, upon the
Hill. Thither, the King sent, Henry Bourcheir Earl of Essex, Edmund dela Pool
Earl of Suffolk. Sir Richard Thomas, and Sir Humphrey Stanly, all Great
Soldiers, with detached Parties, to encompass them, and hinder their Flight;
whilst he Marched straight to charge them, with Dawbeney, followed by the best
Men of his Army: Commanding Sir Richard Thomas, to attack them, at the same
time, from his Post; which was so vigourously executed, that notwithstanding
all their resistance, the Rebels were broken and lost Two Thousand Men, besides
vast Numbers of Prisoners; the King missing but Three Hundred: He pardoned
those wretched People, only making their Chiefs, Examples; among whom was the
Lord Audley, who was drawn from Newgate to Tower Hill, and there beheaded;
Thomas Flammock, and Michael Joseph, were Hanged and Quartered, and their Heads
and Limbs set up in London, and several places of Cornwall; for the Terror and
Example of others. They admired the Constancy of Michael the Smith, who
contented himself, that he should always be talked of: A Deo (says Polydore)
Medios ac insimos viros, perinde ut Summos, Gloriae cupiditas incendit.

The Scotch King, taking Advantage by these Disorders, entered the County of
Durham, giving his Men all manner of License: With some of his Troops he
Besieged Norham, a Castle of Great Importance, on those Frontiers; into which
Richard Fox, the Vigilant Bishop of Durham, had put a strong Garrison, and well
fortified the Place, having foreseen the Siege: He then advertised Thomas Earl
of Surry, who had already raised a considerable Army in Yorkshire; and hearing
the distress that Norham was in, he Marched with all speed, having a Great
number of Gentlemen, and Knights with him, and a Body of near Twenty Thousand
Men, besides a considerable Fleet at Sea. King James informed of his Advancing,
being within Two Days March, Hastily raised his Siege, and retired into
Scotland, where he was followed by the Earl; who being in the Enemies Country,
plundered all he could and took several Towns: But having no opportunity to
furnish himself with Provisions, he returned into the County of Durham.

During the War, about this time, Peter Hyalas, a wise and prudent Man, came
Ambassador, and Mediator from Ferdinand, and Isabella of Spain, a most
Incomparable Princess. King Henry appointed for his Ambassador, Richard Bishop
of Durham, who was near the Place of Treaty; where they met the King of
Scotlands Privy Counselors, and treated of the Conditions of Peace. The
greatest difficulty arose concerning Perkin Warbeck; Henry Positively
persisting, to have him delivered up, as being the Disturber of his Kingdoms
Peace, and the Occasion of so many Rebellions. The King of Scotland could not
in Honor, yield to deliver up a Man to Death, whom he had raised, and made his
Kinsman. So, at last, it was agreed, that he should quit his Interest, and
command him out of his Dominions. These Articles were agreed on, and a Peace
was made between them in the Year, 1498. Henry King of England, sent home this
Spanish Ambassador, Laden with Presents, and with great Thanks to his King and
Queen.

Then was the Marriage projected of Prince Arthur, the Kings Eldest Son, and
Katharine the Infanta, afterward Married to Henry the VIII. his Second Son;
whose Famous Divorce, caused so many Revolutions in the Kingdom. About the same
time, King Henry Received two other Embassies; One, from the King of France;
the Other, from Prince Philip, Earl of Flanders, Son to the Emperor Maximilan,
who renewed his Alliance with Him. The King of Scotland exactly observed the
Articles of Peace, touching Perkin Warbeck; being wholly disabused concerning
him. He sent for him, and told him in short, what he had done in his Favor;
but he found himself obliged to conclude a Peace with England; and now was no
longer in Circumstances to give him assistance, or allow him his Court for a
Retreat: Therefore, advised him to retire, and hope a better Fortune. Though
this was a Fatal Blow to Warbeck, it came not unforeseen by him, who wanted not
Understanding, but extremely thanked the King; assuring him, he could never
acknowledge his Favors as he ought, and desired acquiescing in his Orders.

After this, with his Wife he went for Ireland, with Intention either to go for
Flanders, to his Aunt; or head the Cornish Malcontents: But resolving on the
latter, he found the Minds of those People, irritated by their Losses, and
easily engaged them to Mutiny. He then gave out his Commissions, and Formed his
Army, with Design to surprise some considerable Towns; which might serve for a
Refuge, in case of ill Success. With this intent, he Besieged Exeter, using all
Endeavors, to carry it by Assault, and trying to seize the Gates; for Petards
nor Rams were not then in Use; he brought Great Stones, and Axes, instead of
those Engines; which not taking effect, he employed Fire; and heaping Wood
against the Gates, endeavored to burn them: The Besieged used the same
Expedient, Fireing great quantity of Wood, within their Gates; by Flames
preventing their Danger by Fire. He then raised his Scaling Ladders, and
commanded the Attack to be made, which was better repulsed, many of his Men
being left dead under the Walls, the very Women throwing Stones, and Scalding
Water on the Besiegers.

King Henry being Informed, what Danger the Besieged were in, advanced with
great Marches to their Assistance; sending Detached Partys, to declare His
Coming. In the mean time, several Men of Quality got into the City, with
supplies. Amongst whom, was Edward Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, and several of
his Family; Peter Edgcomb and William St. Maure and other Men of Noto: This
extremely perplexed Perkin; he could not cover his Men in any strong Place; who
for the most part of them, were ill provided of Arms, as well Offensive as
Defensive; and considering he was not able to resist so Powerful Enemies, as
were advancing toward him; he raised the Siege, and Marched to Taunton; where
he Mustered his Men, and drew them up in Battalia; of which the King hearing,
directed his March that way; many Lords Joining Him, and giving Demonstrations
of their Zeal, to express and Signalize their Loyalty on that Occasion. The
King Commanded my Lord Brook, my Lord Dawbeney, and Sir Richard Thomas, with a
Party of chosen detached Men, to begin the Charge; but both his Orders, and
their Resolutions were needless: For Warbeck, through his own Natural
Cowardice, or believing himself betrayed, ran away, and left his Army; flying
into the Monastery of Beaulieu. His Officers seeing themselves abandonned, lost
their Resolution, and tried to save themselves by Flight. The wretched
Multitude, being left without a Head, knew not what to do; whether to resolve
to dye Fighting, or to Implore the Kings Mercy: But choosing the latter, they
threw down their Arms, and on their Knees, begged Pardon; which the King
granted them: For certainly, if their Officers had not left them, it would have
cost him very dear, they being resolved to overcome or dye. Parties of
Light Horse were sent every way, for the Apprehension of Warbeck, and the Chief
of his Gang: But though they missed him, they took most of the others his
Accomplices: Some of the Searchers found Katharine Huntley, Wife of Perkin,
with her Women; Her they brought to the King; who was much furprized to see so
Beautiful a Lady; extremely pitying her Misfortune: And considering such a
Noble Prize, was not fit to be the Soldiers Prey, but worthy an Emperor; He
sent her to London, where he presented to the Queen this unfortunate Lady, so
unhappily Sacrificed to the Humor, or Interests of the King her Uncle: and
Matched to a Villain, and Impostor, instead of a Legitimate Prince, whom she
justly Merited, and not the extreme Grief, of seeing this Counterfeit, her
Husband, suffer the deserved Reproaches, and Calumny, of the Basest Profligates.

The King Encompast the Monastery of Beaulieu, with his Army, for the better
securing Perkin: Not being willing to Violate the Sanctuary; he himself having
been protected the same manner in Bretagn, when Richard the Usurper, demanded
him. Besides, such was the Custom of those days. Wherefore, he sent him word
by the Religious Men of the Monastery, that he would spare his Life; assuring
him of his Clemency: yet nevertheless, at Exeter, he beheaded several of the
Principal Rebels, punishing many of the rest, which were taken in their Flight;
thanking that City for their Zeal and Fidelity. With Warbeck in his Power, he
returned for London, where the People, in Multitudes, Flock't to see Perkin,
with astonishment; admiring, that a Forreigner, of so mean Birth, should
undertake by his Impostures, the Overthrow of so great a Kingdom; and persuade
so many Princes, Lords, and People, (to the Destruction of many) of the Truth
of those Falsehoods, he till then spread abroad, both of his Person and Birth.

There is no doubt, but that the King kept him close Prisoner, and justly
punished those remarkable Rebels of Cornwall, Devon, and Sommersetshire; for
which Service, he sent Thomas Lord Darcy, Sir Anyas Pawlet, and Robert Sherburn
Dean of St. Paul's, with his Commission into the West, where they soundly Fined,
and Amerced every one, that had Assisted or Favored the Rebels, before or
after their Defeat at Black Heath: But yet with consideration of such Persons,
who either through Fear, or by Force were compelled to do it.

There happened about this time, a Quarrel between the English and Scotch, that
had like to have renewed the War. Some Scotch were observed to walk under the
Walls of Norham, which a little before they had Besieged; and the next day
doing it again, the English Garrison, fearing they had some Design, sent out to
know their Reasons, and whether they came not as Spies. From Words, they soon
came to Blows; which put the Scotch, who were fewer in Number, to Flight,
leaving several Dead on the Place. At this, the King of Scotland was incensed,
demanding the Violaters of the Peace, in his Letters, where he highly
complained of them. The King of England tried to appease Him, promising
exemplary Punishment on the Aggressors. Richard Fox, Bishop of Durham, (being
extremely displeased, that the Garrison he had placed there, should give
Occasion of Variance, between those two Monarchs, who with so great Difficulty,
were brought to an Accord,) sent his Letters to King James; assuring him, he
might expect all possible Satisfaction. This Prince, who very much esteemed
him, honored him with an Answer, and an Invitation to come, and discourse of
Matters. The Bishop immediately informed the King, his Master; who permitted
him to go. It was in this Visit, that King James told him, If He did not fear a
Denial, he would ask the Princess Margaret, his Master's Eldest Daughter, in
Marriage. The Bishop encouraged his Hopes, undertaking to sound the Affair,
without engaging His Honor in it. King Henry rejoiced at the Overture, and
accepted it with all His Heart. It was from this Marriage of the Princess
Margaret, to James the Fourth King of Scotland, that James the Sixth of
Scotland, and since King of England, as next Heir, Inherited the Crown of
England, after the Death of Queen Elizabeth, in the Year 1603.

Now, we will declare the Catastrophe, and Death of the Impostor Perkin;
together with that of the Unfortunate Prince Edward, Earl of Warwick.

Warbeck's Turbulent Spirit, ill brooking so strait an Imprisonment,
endeavored to make his Escape; and finding his Guards to abate something of
their first strictness, got out of Prison, directing his Flight toward the
Seaside, for Shipping off privately; which in England, after Proclamation to
the contrary, is very difficult. He was quickly missed, and every way pursued:
He carefully watching, hid himself in Ditches, and behind the Hedges; till the
Horsemen that sought him, were past: When despairing to get out of the Island,
and finding himself reduced to the utmost Distress, he waited the Obscurity of
the Night, and got to a Monastery; where asking for the Prior, and throwing his
Arms about his Neck, he declared his Misfortune. The Father touched with his
Misery, promised to speak to the King; which accordingly he did; whose Piety
granted his Life, without other present Punishment; provided he no more
attempted to escape.

The Counterfeit was then led in Chains to London; where before
Westminster Hall, he was, in a pair of Stocks, exposed a whole Day, to the
Scorn and Mockery of the People. The next day, enduring the same in the City;
where he declared his Parentage, the Place of his Birth, and all the Passages
of his Life; and by what Means he was induced to make this Attempt: and from
thence he was conveyed into the Tower.

As for Young Edward, Earl of Warwick, he had been a Prisoner from his Cradle;
bred up out of the Sight of Men or Beasts: So that he could not distinguish a
Goose from a Hen, and incapable of doing any thing worthy of death: He was
nevertheless brought to it by the Crimes of Others.

That Age being Fruitful in Impostors, an Augustine Monk, called Patrick,
suborned a Youth, whose Name we find not, with Promises of Raising him to the
Crown, and to better Fortune than Perkin Warbeck's, provided he would pass for
the Earl of Warwick, and but leave him alone to Act the rest. Ambition had such
Charms with the Young Man, that he undertook it, and hazarded all was desired
of him. So they came to Canterbury, where they told their forged Adventure: The
Friar declaring how dexterously he had got the Earl of Warwick out of Prison;
and some credulous People believing the Story: But before they had time to
cheat the World, the King sent, and apprehended the Two Sparks; Hanged the
Youth, and Immured the Monk; according to the Custom of those Times.

Perkin continued still the same, contriving and endeavoring to break loose
once more; and having corrupted some of his Guards, designed to Murder the
Lieutenant of the Tower, and carrying the Earl of Warwick with him, to get out
by Force; which being discovered, he was by the Judges condemned for this last
Action only; and a few days after, hanged accordingly.

As for the Earl of Warwick, he lost his Head, for listening to him, and
intending to Escape with him. This Unhappy Prince bearing the Iniquity of his
Father, George, Duke of Clarence, who was the Barbarous Murderer of Prince
Edward, only Son, and designed Successor of Henry the Sixth.

You may imagine the Astonishment and Affliction the Duchess Margaret was in,
for the Unfortunate End of her Pretended Nephew, whom she had taken such Pains
to set on the English Throne, by so many Impostures.

CHAP. IX. THE COUNTERFEIT Don Sebastian. KING of PORTVGAL.
THe first Prince, that gave Beginning to the Royal Family of Portugal, was
Henry, who Married Teresa, or Taresia, Alphonso King of Castile's natural
Daughter, in the Year 1090, having the Earldom of Portugal, for her Portion.
The King hoping he would make as Vigorous a War against the Moors, as his
Brother Hugh Duke of Burgundy, had done; giving him that Country for a Bulwark,
to defend his own from those Infidels; toward whom, it was the Frontiers. He
was the Son of another Henry Duke of Burgundy, Grandson of Robert Duke of the
same, who was Grandson to Robert, King of France, Successor to Hugh Capet. I
do not mind the Opinions of several Historians, who are much perplexed to find
out of what Family, and Country this Henry was. Theod. Godefroy, one of the
most Learned, and most Curious Persons of his Time, first discovered this
Original of the Kings of Portugal; and those Famous Twins, Scevola, and Lewis
de St. Martha, have Authorized it, in their Genealogical History of the House
of France.

The Princes of this Race, have held the Royal Dignity, and Signalized their
Conduct by many Victories, over the Unbelievers, even beyond our Hemisphere:
But to give an Account of their Actions, is no part of my Subject; therefore, I
will only say, They have generally held the Scepter with Great Glory, and
without any Interruption, in the Royal Family, to this very Don Pedro, who now
Reigns with the Title of Prince Regent; no Objection being to be made, except
two or three suspicions of Illegitimacy; so that it has always been supported
by the same Blood Royal.

Don Sebastian, whose misfortune we treat of, (which gave an opportunity for an
Impostor to aspire, and pretend to his Diadem, persuading the World he Escaped
from the Unhappy Battle of Alcazer) at three Years Old, which was in the Year,
1557. Succeeded Don John the Third, his Paternal Grandfather: He was Grandson
to the Emperor, Charles the Fifth, by his Mother Jane. In his Youth, he had
been under the Tutulage of Donna Catharina of Austria, his Paternal
Grandmother, Sister to the same Emperor; and of the Cardinal Henry, his Great
Uncle.

A Desire to Augment his Glory, by setting a Moorish Prince on the Throne of
Fez in Africa, (imitating Alexander the Great, who at his Age passed the
Hellespont, for the Conquest of Asia) Persuaded him to do the same over the
Straights of Gibraltar, for the Subjugating Africa; his Ancestors having showed
the way, especially King Don Emanuel; whose Heroic Virtues, frequent
Prosperities, and Signal Victorys, had vanquished, and made Tributary several
Kings, in those Extreme Parts of the World: Chiefly by the Conduct of the
Famous Don Alphonso Albuquerque; and also through his Care to plant the
Christian Faith, which Justly made him esteemed one of the Greatest, and most
Happy Princes, in the World. The same Motives of Religion, and Glory, with the
Hopes that Muley Mahomet, or Muley Hamet, King of Fez, whom he undertook to
re-establish in the Throne, would according to his Promise, embrace the
Christian Religion; persuaded him to this most Unhappy Enterprise; and, as the
Marquis of Pisani, then Ambassador for the Crown of France, in the Spanish
Court, declares, That he was also push't on to this Engagement, by the Unsound
and Pernicious Counsels of the Jesuits. I have Read in their Catechism, That
this Prince, being a Jesuit in his Heart, would not Marry; they having often
solicited him, to make a Law, That for the future, none should be King of
Portugal, but a Jesuit; and Elected by their Order, as the Pope is by the
Cardinals: And because this young Prince could not, or to say truly, durst not
condescend to it, (though Superstitious enough) they assured him, that God had
so ordained it, as he should understand by a Voice from Heaven, when he came to
the Seaside, so that he several times expected it; but these good Apostles,
(for so they called them in Portugal) could not so well carry on their Mummery,
to procure the Voice: However, they so followed these Impressions, as carried
him into this unhappy War, in the Flower of his Age, being about Twenty Two
Years Old.

This Disaster, one of the most terrible, that ever the Sun beheld, was
presaged the Year before it happened; that is, in 1577. by the Appearance of a
Prodigious Comet, seen in the Air, when all Portugal was in Arms: Nunquam
visus Terris impune Cometes; if you believe the Poet. I will not leave my
Subject, to seek further any Reasons of the War, That having been at large
declared by Giovanni Botero Benese, Abbot of St. Michael de la Chiusa, in his
first Volume of his General Description of the World, which was augmented by
Pierre Daviti of Tournay, and continued by Me in the Year 1660.

Cherif Xeque, King of F^z. and Morocco, gave his Kingdoms to his Sons
Successively, excluding his Grand-sons. Abdalla, Successor of Xeque, to
Frustrate his Fathers Will, put all his Brothers to Death, who were very
Numerous, being born of many Wives, after the Mahumetan Fashion: Only Muley
Moluc, or Abdelmeleck, and Hamet, sled to Constantinople, for the saving their
Lives: and for a better Expectation of the Crown, to exclude their Nephews, the
Sons of Abdalla, according to their Father's Establishment. Muley Mahomet, the
Son of Abdalla, tried to secure his Fathers Scepter, to the Prejudice of the
Substitution, made in his Uncles Favor: And in truth, Justice was on his side,
it being the Natural Order of Succession. However, his Uncle Muley Moluc, or
Abdelmeleck, assisted by the Turks; beat him three several times.

This made him Cross the Sea, to Implore the Assistance of King Don Sebastian,
who, moved with hopes of converting the Moors, through more Zeal than
Prudence, and heightened by his Desire of Glory, heard the Affrican Kings
Protestations; from whom he promised himself great Advantages, for the
Christian Religion, for the Reputation of his Name, and the Utility and Profit
of his Subjects. With these Notions, he passed the Seas, at the Head of a very
Powerful Army; and joining with Muley Mahomet, he gave Battle to Muley
Abdelmeleck, near the City Alcazer, on the Plains of Tamista, in the Year 1578.
where, to his great Unhappiness, his Army was defeated, with an extreme
Slaughter; and he, doing the Office of a Valiant Captain, was there killed:
Though the Portuguezes have always believed, and yet affirm, his Escape from
the Fight, into Italy, where many saw him as we shall after declare. Muley
Moluc, or Abdelmeleck, in the Beginning of this Action, was taken with an
Appoplexy, and carried to his Tent, where he dyed, just when his Enemies were
upon the Point of Flying: Hamet, his Brother, Reaping the Sole Fruit of this
Victory. Mahomets Body was carefully sought for, by his Order; and being found,
his Skin was slayed off, and stufft with Straw, to be carried before him, at
his triumphant Entry into the City of Fez.

This Mahomet left a Son called Chirissi, whom his Uncle Albequerin brought
into Spain, where turning Christian, by the Munificence of Philip the Second,
he was made Commendator of the Order of S. James, though commonly called the
Prince of Morocco.

Some years after this, King Don Sebastian came back out of Africa: But
whether he were the True, or an Impostor, the World seems yet divided in their
Opinions. Daniel Hawley, an Irish Man, of the Order of St. Dominick, called
Archbishop of Goa; when he was Ambassador in France, from Alphonso, the Sixth
King of Portugal, told me in Paris, That he was fain to refuse the Licensing a
Book, which said, This King Don Sebastian, had lost his Life in that Battle of
Alcazer, till he had Obliged the Author, to change his Language and Opinion.
And, at this present, to say, That he was an Impostor, and not the true Don
Sebastian, that returned from Africa, is forbidden, and Criminal in Portugal.

Peter Math^^a, in his History of Henry the Great, in the Third Book; and
Mademoiselle des J^^^^as* in the Seventh Part of her A^nales Gallantes, in the
Eighth History, tells, by what good Fortune, this young Prince got from among
the Dead, and how he wandered from the Field of Battle. I will not determ^ne any
thing on the likelihood, or real Truth of the Action. She says, That this King,
though he were promised and engaged, to Many the Princess Mary, his near
Kinswoman, Daughter of Edw. Duke of Braganza, and Isabel one of the Daughters
of King Don Eman^eb, fell so much in Love with Xerine, Daughter of Muley Moluc,
who being born of a Greek, was much whiter than Affricans commonly are, that he
promised to Marry her, and underhand bring what Obstacles he could, against the
Dispensation to Marry his Cousin German.

This Moorish Princess, understanding Don Sebastians Defeat, whom she dearly
Loved, despiseing the Crowns of Fez and Morocco, for the Hopes of that of
Portugal, and Transported with a Grief, even to Despair, Rann, ere the
Day-brake, to the Plains of Tamista, only accompanied with Laura, a Christian
Slave, her Confident; resolving to Sacrifice her self, with her own Hand, on
the Body of her Loved Sebastian; whom she sought amidst the Horrid Numbers of
the Dead and Dying, with which the Plain was covered. Some of the Wounded Men,
who had yet a Glimmering of understanding left them, told the Place where Don
Sebastian Fought; and carefully observing those Bodies, she espied one extremely
resembling her Lover; and with great Cries, she embraced, and moved him,
resolving to Dye there; when the supposed Dead Man came to himself, a little
opening his Eyes, and spoke a few words imperfectly.

Xerine, being Transported with Joy, by the help of her Slave, carried him to
the Bank of the River Mucazen, which runs through those Plains; where she
washed, and bound up his Wounds, sending Laura to a little house hard by, for
some body to remove him from thence. A Mariner did that good Office, carrying
him with his Boat into a small Island, but Inhabited, at the Mouth of the
River; for which she well rewarded him.

The Alliance, which Don Sebastian had with Muley Mahomet, made his Death
necessary to the Peace of the new King Hamet; so the Xerine feared equally the
Life, and Liberty of her Lover, if he fell into his hands: she tended, and
dressed him, till his Recovery; One Day saying to him; Heaven will not deprive
Portugal of it is King; But has made your Xerine happy, in saving her Dear Don
Sebastian 's Life. The Wounded Man soon found the Princesses Error, without
intending to undeceive her; but using his Endeavor to confirm her mistake,
from which he foresaw such happy Consequences: Therefore, gave her Infinite
Thanks, desiring she would inform him, how she distinguished him among the
Dead; of which she told him the Particulars. This showed him Xerine's Birth,
and Engagement with Don Sebastian, whom he studied to personate, which he might
with Impunity; for he resembled him much (a Prodigious and incredible thing!)
even to several Moles, and Natural Marks on his Body.

Xerine, understood by those, whom she had sent to enquire for News, that King
Sebastian was drowned, in his endeavoring to save himself; but none could find
his Body. This Truth she thought an Error; as she believed her own Error true;
promising her self no less, than to be Queen of Portugal; and thinking her
Care, kind Words, and obliging Promises, well bestowed on that Subject.

The Portugueze having spirit enough, to support this Caprice of Fortune, soon
perceived by the Princesses Discourse, that Muley Boabdelin, a Prince of the
Blood Royal of Morocco, had always been a Friend to Don Sebastian: He sent him
word, that the King of Portugal was not dead; and if he would come to the
Island of Mucazen, he should hear of him. Maley Boabdelin came in great haste,
with the Envoy Xerine sent, leaving the farthest Part of the Province Hoscore,
whither he was sled, to avoid the Tyranny of Muley Moluc, generally called
Abdelmeleck: When he Arrived, he was deceived by the resemblance, as the
Princess had been. There was great Embracing, caressing, and mutual kindness
betwixt them: By him, the False Sebastian was informed, That his Uncle, the
Cardinal Don Henry, Reigned in his stead, by the consent of the People. This
News much disturbed him; believing it very difficult to dispossess him. Muley
Boabdelin was of his Opinion; they both concluded it proper to sound the
Inclinations of the Portuguezes, and try to Oblige the Principal Ministers of
State, to Assert and Maintain their Monarch's Right, before he should expose
himself to the Policies of the New King, This Moorish Prince, at the same time,
offering Xerine, and her Lover, a retreat in Hoscore, where he was so well
fortified, that he had no occasion to fear any thing.

They all agreed not to Publish any report of Don Sebastian's being alive, till
he were in a Condition of Possessing his Crown: But to Authorize what the
Princess had done in his. Favor, Muley Advised him to marry Xerine, which she
also wished; believing by that tie, her hopes secured. This Effect of his
likeness to Don Sebastian, made him desirous to taste the Fruit of it; he was
charmed with the Beauty, and Passion of the Princess; and had Reason to be so:
Therefore fulfilled her desire, with as much Joy, as Speed: By this becoming
Victorious, and the most happy of Mankind. But when he had thus made what
Advantages he could, the private Negotiation of Portugal seemed too slow; so he
resolved to go, and manage his Affairs there in Person: Upon which, Xerine and
he had many Discourses. Europe, (said she, one day to him) Asia, or Afric,
are all equal to me, provided I have you with me: Do not then refuse me the
Pleasure of following you: It Is a Debt to my Love: Let me not be so unhappy, to
find any other thing more Powerful in your Soul; since I have the Glory of
Contributing to your Establishment, when Pretentions had been Vain, without me.

These tender Expressions seemed Reproaches to Sebastian; they offended him,
which troubled Xerine, at last they differed, and that Difference gave him an
opportunity which he looked for: He had Learned from her, the most Particular
Affairs of the true Sebastian; and in these Transports of their Love, he ask
her, What Part of his Conduct, had most sensibly touched her; that, (as he
said) he might often repeat, what he had Practiced with Success? The Princess
ingenuously told him, It was the slighting Mary of Portugal, whom he refused to
Marry, for her sake: Besides (said she) that Princess was very Beautiful, and
Loved you much, as you did her, before you knew me.

He well might Love her, for she was a Princess of Infinite Wit, whose Body and
Mind were equally Admirable; her Mien was modest, and yet Majestic; she was of
a most accomplished Beauty; and indeed, the most admirable of that Age. I
cannot Read her Character, in Fam. Strada's History of the Wars of Flanders,
without being charmed with the Merit and Virtue of this Princess; whom, in the
absence of Don Sebastian, the King of Spain, Philip the Second, gave to her
Cousin-German in Marriage, being Brother and Sister's Children: This was that
Great and most Renowed Soldier of his Time, Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma,
the King's Nephew; who did him those Eminent Services, as Governor of the Low
Countries. This Princess spoke Latin Elegantly, understood the Greek Tongue,
was perfectly Mistress of the Mathematics, a Great Judge of Philosophy, and
Familiar in the Holy Scriptures, of both Testaments: And with all this, was of
an admirable Innocence of Manners, and a Holy Life. Of all which, the said
Strada gives us the Relation.

The Pretended Sebastian, being furnished with these Instructions, and above
all, with those he had cunningly drawn from Xerine; took an Opportunity to
cross the Sea, about Fourteen or Fifteen Years after the Battle of Alcazer,
Landing in Italy; where the Princess was then a Widow; The Hero, her Husband,
dying at Arras, in the Six and Fortieth Year of his Age, the Second Day of
December, 1591. People of this Sebastian's Character, use not to be ignorant of
any Circumstance or thing, which concerns their Relations. He came to Parma,
where he sent the Duchess word, that a Gentleman of Portugal had something to
tell her, which he could declare to none but herself.

The Duchess had lately received an account by a Courrier from Lisbone, of the
Death of the Cardinal Don Henry, who last filled that Throne, which she now
demanded for her Son Rainuccio; she being the Daughter of Edward, one of the
Sons of King Don Emanuel.

There were also other Pretenders to this Crown of Portugal, such was Emanuel
Philibert, Duke of Savoy, by his Mother Beatrix, a Daughter of King Don
Emanuel. Katharine, the Sister of Mary, joined her Right, with that of the Duke
of Braganza, a Prince of the Blood Royal of Portugal, for her Son Theodosio;
and who indeed, by the Law of Lamega, which (as they affirm) excludes a
Forreigner from the Throne of Portugal, had the most just Pretense to it.
Catharine de Medicis, Queen of France, claimed it, though at greater distance.
And Pope Paul the Fourth, came in with his Title; saying, That Crown was a Fief
of the Holy-See, and therefore at his Disposal. Philip the Second, King of
Spain, was Son of Isabel, Daughter of the same King Don Emanuel, and Mary his
Wife, was yet nearer, being Daughter of Don John the Third, Son and Successor
to Don Emanuel. He was the nearest in Blood, the nighest Neighbor, and the
most Potent; so got Possession of the Crown; but not without fighting for it,
by Sea and Land. The Naval-Fight, which his Admiral, the Marquis de Santa Cruz,
obtained of Peter Strozzi, a Florentine, and Marshal of France; who undertook
by Force, to dispute the Title of Catharine de Medicis, his Mistress, and
kinswoman, was no small Part of Philip's good Fortune.

The Three Estates of the Kingdom of Portugal, were Assembled, to determine
this great Controversy, when Don Sebastian appeared in Italy.

The Duchess of Parma had also her mind filled with these things; but when she
perceived Him, she gave a shrieck, and ran to the Other end of her Closet, much
astonished. I bring you (Madam, said he, approaching her) Extraordinary news,
which will much surprise you; the King Don Sebastian is alive, and not far from
hence, not much distant from you, for he now speaks to you. What Madam,
(continued he, without hesitating) does then Don Sebastian Fright you? He
hoped, that a better Reception would have been the reward of those pains, he
has endured to find you. At the tone of his Voice, the Dutchesses trouble was
so great, she could neither speak, nor move out of her place. Recollect your
self, my dear Cozen (said he, with a Passionate Air) I am no Phantasme, but the
same Don Sebastian, you once honored with your Favor; and now returned, as
full of your Idea, as I was before I went to Africa.

With these Discourses, the Duchess came to her self, and suffered the False
Don Sebastian to approach nearer, giving him her hand; and when she was
assured, that this pretended Monarch, was a Man, and no Ghost; Ah, my Lord!
(said she) Whence are you come? where have you been so long hid? And by what
Miracle are you among the Living? When you are in a Condition to hear me
(replied Don Sebastian) I will answer you all this: But first, be not so
disturbed; and believe, that I am really the King of Portugal, and if neither
my Stature, nor my Face assure it, let the Passion of my Eyes convince you. I
have now recovered my Spirits (said the Princess, sitting down by him) and
confess your Sight did affright me, above my Power of commanding my
Disturbance: But, Sir, all is now dissipated: Therefore, pray tell me, to what
Wonder we owe your Life, and return to Love. Madam, (answered Sebastian) a
Passion, that had once made me touch your Heart, must needs defend me from all
Accidents. Then he told her, how Xerine found him among the Dead, his getting
into the Isle of Mucazen, and his Living at Hoscore; but carefully concealed,
how Don Sebastian had Loved Xerine, before that Action; and more, his Marriage
to her, in Africa: Though that Princess used her utmost Power with Muley
Boabdelin, her Cozen, and a Prince of the Blood Royal, to oblige him to it, by
assuring him, the Princess Mary was Married to the Duke of Parma: But said,
that sometime after, being informed she was a Widow; He escaped (as he
pretended) with difficulty, out of Prison, and came to lay himself at her Feet,
so full of Love, that he had Lived on the very Thoughts of being esteemed by
her. Why then (said the Duchess) did you not Write to me? That I did many
times (replied he); and doubtless, Xerine, who hoped that from my Misfortunes,
which she could not expect from my Re-establishment, gave such Orders, as
prevented their coming to your hand. My Restraint was very severe; I was
treated like a Valued Lover, and had no Opportunity, or Liberty to deliver my
self from that Title.

The Duchess must needs be Transported at the Recital of a Constancy, so well
invented. She Ordered an Apartment for him, whom she thought the King (her
Cousin) together with an Equipage, in all respects suitable; and sent for the
most Intelligent Persons, to depute to the Estates of Portugal, on his behalf;
which Deputation extremely surprised them. They sent Six of the Chief in their
Assembly (of whom some had been Ministers to Don Sebastian) to see their
Monarch. Their Eyes assured them, he was the same; they ask't him several
Questions, which they thought Don Sebastian only could Answer: But he was so
well instructed by Xerine, as convinced the Ambassadors, that none but He in
the World, could so reply: Insomuch, that they assured the Estates, he was
really their King. Those who were interested against him, accused him of being
a Counterfeit, and Practizer of Deceit, requiring this Sebastian to go, and be
present in Person, at the General-Assembly of Estates, to be Interrogated there
in Form concerning his Pretentions: While those who were affectionate to the
Memory and Person of Don Sebastian, thought there was no Security in that
Demand. The Kingdom was hereupon divided; Those were called Royalists, who
adhered to the King; and Those who declared for the several Princes, pretending
to the Crown, Leaguers.

During these Disorders, he that caused them, lived at Parma, expecting an Army
should take the Field for his Interest: At the Head of which, he intended to
demand, what he said was his Right.

This supposed Prince, after some time, fell into disgrace with the Duchess of
Parma; I know not whither or no, by the Accident, which Mademoiselle des
Jardins relates on this manner: That one Day, walking with her by the side of
that Canal, which is one of the most Beautiful Things, belonging to the Palace
of Farnese, she observed the Ribbon of a Letter-Case hanging out of his Pocket,
which she softly pulled out; wherein she found Letters, and Verses, that
discovered his Love, some of them having the Greatest Liberties of his Marriage
with Xerine, for their Subject. This so possessed the Duchess with Rage, and
Jealousy, that she destroyed all she had before done for him, and declared him
an Impostor.

Xerine came soon after into Portugal, to solicit the Establishment of her
Husband; purely moved by her own Conjugal Affection, notwithstanding his
Ingratitude; and had she come before he had left the Duchess, her Resentment
might have been more Fatal. Mademoiselle des Jardins, contrary to the Idea that
Strada gives of her, says, Her anger was the more Justifyable, having granted
this Counterfeit Sebastian, many innocent Favors, which this Accident made her
think Criminal.

Her Aversion bearing a Proportion to her Former Kindness, made her fly from
one Extreme to another. She sent, and declared to the Estates, That he was a
Counterfeit, which she had discovered by the many Contradictions, and different
Stories, she found him in; Making a Voyage into Portugal, more to raise him
Enemies for his Perfidiousness, than for the obtaining her Son Rainuccio that
Crown. And as her Anger saw plainer, than her Love; so it was more Active.

The Circumstances of the true Sebastians Death, were examined by the Assembly
of the Estates: His defeat at Tamista, was not so general, but that several
Persons of Note could give an Account of their Princes Fate. They all affirmed,
They had followed him to the Side of the River Mucazen: Some added, They saw
him drowned there: And others said, They had like to have perish't, by
endeavoring to Save him. This Story no way agreed with what Xerine affirmed,
of finding him in the middle of the Battle. But that which made most against
him, was, the Account she gave of the Cloths he was wounded in. The King's
Officers affirming, that they were no way like those he had on that Day. But
Nature had made the Subject, so like the Prince, and he so supported the
Resemblance by his Wit, and Courage, that they knew not what to resolve. The
more they examined, the greater Difficulties arose. It was a horrid Crime, to
refuse their Lawful Prince, his Crown: And it could be no less, to give it to
an Impostor. But the Death of the Counterfeit, determined the Matter.

The Politicians looked on this Union, of Don Sebastian with the Moors, as very
dangerous to Portugal: He had Married Xerine, by a most Signal Infidelity,
charmed with her Beauty, before he came to Africa: She drew him from among the
Dead, and was Married to him, before the Old Prince Boabdelin, at Hoscore; and
it was impossible to bring any Obstacle, by reason of the Difference of
Religion; she having promised to become a Christian, and kept her word as soon
as she Landed in Portugal. Mademoiselle des Jardins, says, The Pretended
Sebastian was, with an Army raised in his Favor, upon the Frontiers of
Portugal, where it is separated from the Kingdom of Oviedo; and that, being
obliged to Fight, his Ambition made his Courage so rash, that he was made a
Prisoner, and carried to Lisbon; where his Adversaries talked of no less, than
punishing his Insolence by a shameful Death. But this supposed King died in
Prison, leaving great Suspicions, that his Death was hastened. He desired to
see Xerine, before he dyed; and the last Breath being a Touchstone, to the
Artinces of Life, he confessed to this Princess of Morocco, That he was not the
King of Portugal; and Conjured her, not to disturb the Election, after his
Death.

This Declaration he found necessary, for the Peace of his Conscience; Xerine
having had a Son by him, who might have caused much disturbance. He could not
make such a Confession, without great Signs of Remorse; Crying, Ah, Madam! I
have deceived you more ways than one; yet I can but weakly reproach my self for
the Deceit, which made me your Husband: I should do it more, not to have used
it, when in my Power, than I can think my self Guilty, for the accepting so
great a Glory. But Madam, That which makes me Dye in Despair, is, That once I
ceased to Love you, for the hopes of a Crown, which I obtained not; and which a
Thousand Accidents might take from me, if I had gained it: I was on the point
of Renouncing a Heart, that all the Diadems upon Earth could not justly Merit^^
Afflict not your self, (said the Generous Princess) with (...) too late, and
unuseful Repentance: I Loved the Person of Don Sebastian, more than the
Splendor of his Condition. I thought, I had met that Person in you: Those
charms, which first touched me, have lost none of their Privilege, because
they were not placed in a Monarch: though I confess, I should never have
observed them in an Ordinary Man: Neither my Spirit, nor my Birth, would have
permitted me to Consider whom I had not thought a Prince; but my Error became
dear to me; and is so still, for all it is Fatal to my Peace. The Name of
Husband is so sacred to a Woman truly Virtuous, that it wipes out any Stain,
which accompanies it: Therefore, try to overcome your Illness, my dear Prince,
(pardon that Name!) Fortune, (said she, lifting her Eyes to Heaven) might have
given it, where she gave me. Rescue your self from the Arms of Death, if it be
possible; it may be, we may find you a Happiness more serene and easy; than
that which is denied you in Portugal.

He was so moved with this Excess of Generosity, that he could no longer suffer
the Transports of it: But expired in the Arms of the Passionate Xerine, whose
Soul, with much difficulty, staid behind.

This Man had, in the highest Degree, abused the Princesses mistakes; and the
unconstancy which followed the first Fault, was more Injurious, than the Crime
it self. But Xerine truly Loved the Counterfeit Don Sebastian, and religiously
fulfilled his Desire, as soon as her Grief permitted; retiring into Africa,
without giving the least Disturbance to the Competitors of the Crown.

I acknowledge to have borrowed the most agreeable Part of this Relation, from
Mademoiselle des Jardins, her Annals Gallantes. P. Mathieu, in his History of
Henry the Great, says, That Sebastian wandered through many of the Courts of
Italy, till he fell into the hands of the Viceroy of Naples; who sent him to
Philip the Second King of Spain: By an Effect of whose Policy, he dyed in
Prison, out of the sight of the World, and without Witnesses. He passed through
all Christendom, except in Portugal, since the late Revolutions in 1639. for an
Impostor.

CHAP. X. THE LIFE OF THE COUNTERFEIT Voldemar, Elector and Marquis of
Brandenbourg.
THis Man has past for an Impostor, in the Opinion of most Historians; as Hen.
the Monk of Rebdorff, in his Chronicle; John Cuspinian, in his Lives of the
Emperors; Nicholas Lutinger in his Life of Frederic, the First of that Name,
Elector of Brandenburg; and John Leunclavius, in his Pandects of the Turkish
History, etc. For my own Part, after examining the Circumstances of his Story,
I am apt to conclude in his Favor, and pity this Princes Disafter, in losing
his Country, and being decryed by so many Pens, for a Counterfeit, and placed
in the number of Notorious Impostors, whose Lives we treat of. But this is the
true History.

Voldemar the Second, Marquis and Elector of Brandenburg, was the Thirteenth
descended in a Right Line, from Albert de L'Ours, of the Family of the Earls of
Ascagne, who bore that Dignity: From which Albert, are also descended the Dukes
of Saxon Lavemburg, and the Princes of Anhalt.

Voldemar was the Son of Henry, styled Without Land, who dyed in 1313. and of
Agnes, or as others say, Matilda de Sangerhuse; the two Electors, John the
Third, and Voldemar the First, who preceded him, were his great Uncles, whom he
Succeeded.

He had scarcely been three years Elector, when a Fit of Devotion, according to
the Custom of those Times, persuaded him to go a Pilgrimage, to the Holy Land.
He left his Brother John the Fourth in Possession of his Country; and
discharged all his Servants, except two, whom he reserved for his Voyage; not
giving his Brother, his Relations, nor Subjects, any Account which way he
traveled, nor what adventures befell him in his Journey. For indeed, there
were then no Posts in use, it being difficult sending from Foreign Countries,
unless by express Messengers.

Voldemar believed he had taken sufficient Care of the Succession, his Brother
being only left alive, of the Eldest Branch; though in a short time, there had
been Nineteen Persons of the same; who by Wars, and Inveterate contentions, for
Avarice and Ambition, drew God's displeasure on the Family, and were suddenly
scattered, like the Dust of the Earth. He obliged his Subjects, not to receive
the Princes of Anhalt, who were of their House of the Counts of Ascagne, for
this Sovereigns, in Case his Brother and He should dye without Heirs. This
their Subjects had Sworn justly to obey and execute: But it not being
Authorized by the Electors, nor approved in the Empire; the Emperor Lewis
thought he had Power to dispose of it, when he should receive News of
Voldemar's Death.

He left his Country in the Year, 1322, and appeared not till Three and Twenty
Years after, being in 1345. His Brother, who governed in his Absence dyed Four
and Twenty Days after he departed: I know not whether by Sickness or Poison.
However, Lewis of Bavaria, then possessing the Empire, disposed of the
Electorate, investing in it his Eldest Son Lewis, by his First Wife Beatrix of
Poland, as a vacant Fief of the Empire.

Most of the German Histories tell this much in Favor of the House of Bavaria,
as follows.

Rodolph, Duke and Elector of Saxony, designed to take the Electorate of
Brandenbourg, from Lewis of Bavaria, Son to the Emperor Lewis the Fourth, who
had Invested him in it, after the Death of John the Fourth, State-holder, and
Governor of Brandenburg, in the Absence of Voldemar, his Elder Brother. Rodolph
pretended, that being of the House of Ascagne, of which Voldemar was the Head,
He ought to possess it, before any Other; or, at least, some Prince of his
Family, since Two Electorates could not possibly be in one, and the same Person.

The better to compass his Design, he reported his Cousin, the Elector
Voldemar, was alive, who had not appeared in Twenty Three Years; Till
understanding how matters went, after many Pilgrimages to Holy Places, like an
ordinary Man, and having escaped from the Captivity, and Imprisonment of the
Infidels, he was now returned to his Country; and to personate this Prince, he
brought on the Stage, for a Principal Actor in this Tragedy, a Miller of
Landrestaw, or as others say of Beltztize, called James Rebok, a Cunning
Fellow, and a Subtle Liar, being near the Age of Voldemar, with something of
his Mien, and Shape; as much as so many years absence, the changing of his
Hair, the Misery and Trouble he had suffered, with the Weakness of Age, could
allow or persuade. He had Lived many Years in Saxony, where he was thoroughly
instructed, in the Life and Family of Voldemar. His Application and Address,
made his Deceit very Successful; for to all Persons he seemingly gave eminent
Proofs, that he was no Counterfeit, but the true Marquis Voldemar.

The noise of his Return from Palestine, and Turkey, where he had so many Years
been detained, spread through the Country, and all Germany over; he being
assisted by the Emperor Charles the Fourth, who was also King of Bohemia,
Grandson of the Emperor Henry the Seventh, who brought that Dignity into his
Family, of Luthzelburg. This Prince recommended him to the Cyrcles of the
Empire, and severely treating many of his Enemies. The Occasion of his Enmity
to Lewis the Elector, was, because he got from his Brother Henry, Margaret
Countess of Tyrol, with her vast Fortune.

His other Friends were the Dukes of Brunswick, Pomerania, and Mekelbourg, the
Archbishop of Magdebourg, Primate of Germany, besides Fifteen others: The most
Zealous for his Interest, being those of his own Family, the Duke of Saxony,
and the Princes of Anhalt; so that he wanted very little, of expelling the
Elector Lewis of Bavaria.

Voldemar* presently Summoned an Assembly, in the Year 1348. The Circle, and
near all the Nobility of the Marquisate, acknowledging him for their Prince,
reiterated their Loyalty and Homage, being transported with Joy to see their
Ancient Master.

His Old Subjects, either touched with the Misfortunes, and Calamities, which
he had suffered; or pleased with Novelty, being weary of the Bavarian Dominion;
after having Experimented the Glory and Justice of Voldemars Family, the space
of One Hundred and Eighty Years; They lent him Money, to acquire his Right, and
drive out Lewis. All the Citys in the Marquisate declaring for him except
Francfort on the Oder, Spandaw, and Brizack.

Lutinger observes in the Two and Twentieth Book of his Commentarys of
Brandenburg, that the Family of Lockhow, one of the Greatest in the Marquisate,
continued on Lewis's Side; having the Principal Commands in his Army, during
the War, which lasted Nine Years, with various Success, according to the Chance
of Fortune.

Voldemar King of Denmark, whose Name seemed a good Augury to Voldemar the
Elector, was nevertheless quite contrary; for Carrion, in the Fifth Book of his
Chronicle, says, He was the First that stopped the Course of his Victorys, and
prevented his absolute Repossessing his Country.

Cassimir, King of Poland; Lewis, called the Roman, for his being Born at Rome,
Brother by a Second Venture to the Elector Lewis; the Duke of Stetin, (that
Duchy being then separate from Pomerania) with many Lords of Poland and
Silesia, then assisted Lewis: Notwithstanding which, Voldemar the Assailant,
gained a very Signal Battle, absolutely defeating the Army of Lewis his Rival,
commanded by Lewis the Roman his Brother; who very hardly himself escaped: The
Duke Rodolph, Palatin of the Rhyne, with Seventy nine Gentlemen, bearing
Shields of Arms; of which number were Forty of Poland; Fourteen being of the
Family of Lettizia, he ma^e Prisoners of War, and Trophies of his Victory.

This Blow extremely lessened Lewis's Courage, and reduced his Affairs to such
a Point, that many Cities opened their Gates to the Governor.

Lewis, tired with the War, (which, according to Carrion, in his Life of the
Emperor Lewis of Bavaria, lasted Nine whole Years; though Lunclavius, in his
German History, mentions Three only) went into his Earldom of Tyrol, which he
had had by his Wife Margaret, Daughter of Henry Duke of Carinthia, and Earl of
Tyrol, leaving the Marquisate and Electorate of Brandenbourg to his Brothers,
Lewis of the same Name, surnamed the Roman, with Otho his Youngest: The
Emperor Charles the Fourth confirming by his Letter Pattents at Budissine, in
the Year 1350. his Transferring the Electorate to his two said Brothers.

This Emperor Charles had (as we may say) extremely longed for the
Electorship; being vexed, that the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria had been more
Fortunate than he, in disposing it to his Eldest Son, when the Death of
Voldemar was reported. Lewis, the Eldest of the Three Brothers, in Possession
of Brandenbourg, deceased in 1361. and Maynard, his Eldest Son, left the World
before he was Fourteen Years old, though Married, yet having no Heirs: He was
born in 1349. and dyed in 1363. The Two remaining Brothers, the Roman and Otho,
consented by their Agreement with the Emperor Charles, to exclude their
nearest Relations, if they dyed without Heirs Male; and substitute Winceslaus,
his Eldest Son, Elector: But if neither He, nor the Emperor left a Son, then
it should pass to John, Marquis of Moravia. They allowed Winceslaus to use the
Arms and Title of Marquis of Brandenbourg; obliging their Subjects to swear
Allegiance to him. This Agreement was signed at Nuremberg, in 1363. where it is
still to be seen.

Now the Roman dying without Children, in 1366. left in possession hereof Otho
his Brother, Son-in-law to the Emperor, by the Marriage of his Daughter Agnes;
who being also without Children, consented to sell the Marquisate and
Electorate of Brandenbourg, in his Lifetime, for Two Hundred Thousand
Hungarian Ducats, to the same Emperor Charles, his Father-in-law, and to his
Eldest Son Winceslaus; there being delivered to Otho several Towns in Bohemia,
as Pawns for a Security till Payment of the whole Sum.

Thus the Electorate of Brandenbourg, after having (with various Fortune) been
One and Fifty Years possessed by Voldemar, and his Party; was, by the Three Sons
of the Emperor Levis of Bavaria, conveyed into the Family of Lutzelbourg;
where it remained Four and Forty Years, being governed by State-holders, in the
Reigns of the Emperors, Winceslaus and Sigismond; which last sold, and
absolutely disposed of both this Marquisate and Eleotorate to his Favorite
Fredrick de Zoltern, the Burggrave of Nuremberg, whom he had before made
Governor: Giving him the Investiture, at the Council of Constance, with great
Ceremony, the last Day of April, being the Eve of St. Philip and Jacob, and the
Year 1415. Since which time, the Heirs-Male, descended in a Right Line, from
the beforementioned Frederick, have justly possessed, and gloriously governed
the Countries of the Marquisate and Electorate of Brandenbourg.

But let us return to Voldemar. What Lunclavius says of his being Condemned,
and Burnt alive for his Imposture, is not true; though he affirms it in the
Chronicle of Germany, Translated by him: But it is most certain, that he died
of a Natural Death; not at a Place called Korckei, or at Stendeil, in 1322; but
at Dessaw, in 1354, Nine Years after his Return; and was buried in the Chapel
called The Holy Ghost, which is the ordinary Place of Sepulture for the Princes
of Anhalt, as is testified by the Chronicle of Magdebourg.

The Reasons, which oblige me to believe he was the True Voldemar, contrary to
the Opinion of those Historians whom we have cited, are the Attestations of the
Princes of his Family, who then were the Electors of Saxony, the Dukes of
Lavembo^rg, and the Princes of Anhalt; which two last Branches are still in
being.

These Princes would not have so much abused themselves, to give such Honors
to an Impostor, nor have mingled his Ashes with Theirs; who, without doubt, are
one of the most Illustrious Sovereign Houses of Europe. I have heard John
George, Head of the House of Anhalt, Earl of Ascagne, Lord of Zerbst and
Bernberg, Governor of the Provinces of the Marquisate of Brandenbourg, say,
That he kept his Seal, and believed him the True Elector.

Secondly, The Archbishop of Magdebourg, Primate of Germany, a Man of great
Virtue, would never have owned him; there being no Advantage in doing it, and
giving an ill Example to so many People: Nor would the Emperor Charles the
Fourth, (of whom we have been speaking) and those other Princes, have exposed
their Lives, and caused the Effusion of so much Blood for an Impostor.

Thirdly, The ill Agreement where this pretended Counterfeit was born:
Sometimes he was a Miller of Landreslaw; at other times, of Beltzize: which
convinces me, it is rather an Imposture to persuade it.

And further, There was a Letter from the Electoral College, writ to the Pope,
at that time, who had been a Cisterian Monk, named James Tournier, but then
Bennet the Twelfth, born at Saverdun, in the Earldom of Foix. This Letter was
sent Sixteen Years after his Absence, and Seven before his Return; in which his
Name is with the rest of the Electors* Henry, Arch Bishop of Mayence, Dean of
the Electoral-Colledge, is the first after him; Baldwin Archbishop of Treves,
Walram of Collen, and this Voldemar, the First of the Secular Electors; that
is, before Rodolph Palatine, and Rodolph Duke of Saxony, contrary to the common
Method of Precedence; for sometimes the Younger let the Elder precede them, out
of Respect, as the Elector of Saxony did to Joachim, the Second Elector of
Brandenbourg, whom he always called Father. Though there is no Date to this
Letter, it declares, That they agreed on the Fifteenth of July 1338, to meet at
Rinsse on the Rhyne, near Franckfort, and treat of Affairs of Importance; which
was to advertise the Pope, that neither He, nor his Successors, could have any
thing to do in the Election of Emperors, either by their Consent, Approbation,
or Confirmation, or any other Matter belonging to it: as likewise, to oblige
him to revoke his Excommunication against the Emperor Lewis. This Letter is to
be seen in the Archives of the Elector Palatine. The ingenious Marquard
Freherus, one of his Counselors, has inserted it in a Volume of the German
History, from Charlemaine to Frederick the Third.

It is to be observed, that the Family of the Palatinate, is the same with
Bavaria, and made War to extirminate Voldemar, as an Impostor: Therefore there
was much Contradiction and Absurdity in these Elector's Proceedings; who writ
to the Pope, in favor of the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria, who had given the
Electorate of Brandenbourg to his Son, as vacant by the Death of Voldemar, in
putting his Name to this Letter, if they believed him Dead; for that was doing
a notable Prejudice to Lewis, Son of this Emperor, who then possessed the
Dignity of Elector, and the Marquisate, to own in his Place the absent
Voldemar, whom they believed was dead. They knew, that Lewis bore a mighty
Hatred to the House of Ascagne, the two Electors of that Family, Rodolph Duke
of Saxony, and Voldemar the First, having opposed his Election, declaring for
Frederick of Austria, his Rival in the Empire, in the year 1313, at the Diet of
Franckfort. Voldemar the First starving Nicholaas Booch, his Envoy, in Prison,
for falsifying his Letters of Procuration, razing out the Name of Frederick, to
insert that of Lewis, contrary to his Master's Intention and Pleasure.

All these Considerations make me reasonably conclude, they either thought him
Living, and had some News of him; or were persuaded, the Emperor Lewis only
gave his Son the Administration of the Marquisate and Electorate of
Brandenbourg, till he returned, or his Death was better confirmed.

It is almost impossible, he should die in a strange Country, and tell no Body
who he was; as likewise, that the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria should send no
Messengers, to be assured. of the Place and Circumstances of his Death, when it
would have saved him so much Trouble, and secured so rich a Prize.

How many Examples are there, of Princes, who have quitted their Country, through
the same Motives that Voldemar did? William Duke of Guienne, and Earl of
Portou, whose eldest Daughter and Heiress, Elenor, was repudiated by Lewis the
Seventh, King of France, called the Young, and Married to Hen y the S cond,
King of England, in the year 1152; also of the Old Blood of the Earls of Anjou:
which Lady became the occasion of most cruel Wars between those Martial
Nations, while her Father went on Pilgrimage to St. James of Galicia, feigning
himself Dead; he, in the mean time, traveling like a miserable, unknown
Wretch, about the World, that he might exercise those rude Pennances for his
Crimes; after his Death being made a Saint, to eternize his Memory.

Fiacre, Son of Eugenius, the Fourth King of Scotland, lived a Hermit, unknown
to all, near Meaux in France; choosing a Spade before a Scepter: Him also they
made a Saint.

Julius Sabinus, an Illustrious Gaul, near Langres; who boasted, that he was
descended from Julius Caesar; and in the time of the Civil War between
Vitellius Otho, and Vespasian, caused himself to be proclaimed Emperor, by
several Legions; but having the worst in Fight, lived Nine Years in a ^ave,
with his dearly beloved Wife Eponina; where, in the greatest Extremity to
Poverty, he had several Children by her; but could not so conceal himself, to
avoid Death by the Cruelty of the Emperor Vespasian, who destroyed him, with
his Wife and Children.

The Proverb says, Ill gotten Goods are soon lost: Which was verisied in the
Posterity of Lewis of Bavaria, Marquis of Brandenbourg; for neither He, nor his
two Brothers, Lewis the Roman, nor Otho, ever possessed it quietly; but were
constrained to abandon it to the Emperor Charles the 4th.

Thus (as Carrion concludes in the Fifth Book of his Chronicle) the Bavarians
were deprived of this Electorate and Marquisate of Brandenbourg, by the same
Deceits which they had used to frustrate the Princes of Anhalt, after the
Absence and Death of Voldemar, who were justly the next Heirs.

CHAP. XI. THE False Mustapha. SON of BAJAZET, (The First of that Name,)
Emperor of the Turks.
There Is none can be so ignorant in History, as not to have heard of
Tamberlain, Emperor of the Tartars, and of the Victory he gained over Bajazet,
the First of that Name, Emperor of the Turks. In the Turkish Annals, these two
Monarchs are called, the one Temir Can; and the other, Gilderum Can. The Title
Can, which signifies King or Lord, being commonly used to any other Tartar
Prince, or Turkish Lord. But the Name of Tamberlain or Tamerland, was given him
because he was Lame; which Land expresses in the Persian Tongue: Some called
him Temir Cuthlus, signifying in the Tartarian Language, a Fortunate Sword. His
Sirnames were, The Terror and Desolation of the East, Terror and Clades
Orientis. He also styled himself the Wrath of God, or the Instrument of his
Indignation. As for Bajazet, he was Named Gilderum, or (as others say) Hildrim;
which, in the Language of the Tartars, signifies the Terror of Thunder and
Lightning. The Greeks called him Lelapa; that is, a Violent Torrent. The
Imposture of this False Mustapha, who called himself the true Son of Bajazet,
(certainly believed to have been killed in this great Battle, where his Father
was defeated, and made a Prisoner) obliges me to look backward, and tell you of
Bajazet, with the Subject and Circumstances of the War.

Bajazet was a most Cruel, and Bloody Parricide; being the First, who taught
the Princes of his Family, to Imbrew their Hands in the Blood of their nearest
Relations; he causing his Brother Jacup or Jacob to be strangled, whom Paulus
Jovius calls, Solomon. His Ambition was so great, that without having any
right, but the sharper Scymitar, he drove many Sovereign Princes out of their
Countries: As Techrin, Prince of Erzingue, or Erzrum, in the Greater Armenia,
whom some call Scander, and make him King also of Armenia; together with the
Prince of Germian, the Duzinon, or Lord of Adem, and others, sadly
experimented. He had also much Afflicted Constantinople, and made great
Devastations, in the Countries of Emanuel, Emperor of the East.

These expelled Princes being thus cruelly used, went in Person to implore the
Protection of Tamberlain, against the Tyranny and Injustice of Bajazet: The
same Greek Emperor groaning under the severe Yoke of this Tyrant, paying him
Three Hundred Thousand Crowns Tribute every Year; ( Tres myriadas Auriorum, as
Carrion has it in his Chronicle) was constrained to surrender up the City of
Philadelphia to him, which the Tyrant had so often Besieged in vain; giving him
also Hostages, and being Obliged to furnish such number of Soldiers for his
Wars; this made him also send Ambassadors, to represent his miserable
condition.

Axalla, the bravest of Tamberlain's Generals, was a Christian of Genoese
Extraction, born at Copha in Taurica Chersonesus, which was then a City, and
Collony, under the Dominion of that State of Genoa. This generous Man
endeavored also by his entreaties, to persuade his Master to re-establish
these Persecuted Princes, and beat down the Pride and Insolenc^ of Bajazet.
Tamberlain was pleased to hear him express what Glory it would be to his
Reputation, if he should deliver the Emperor of Constantinople, and the other
Princes, from so unjust a Tyranny. The Tartar was so sensibly touched with
their Misfortunes, that he dispatched away a Herald, to require Justice on
their behalf from Bajazet; at the same time, sending a very Rich Vest, which is
always by them presented from a Superior to an Inferior.

This so enraged the Turk, that a War was soon declared; Bajazet bringing an
Army of Eight Hundred Thousand Men into the Field, ( Paulus Jovius says a
Million.) where in a bloody Fight, he was absolutely defeated, and taken
Prisoner. The Turkish Annals mention not the numbers of either Army, only that
Bajazet's was as numerous as Tamberlain's. And that the Occasion of Bajazet's
defeat proceeded from the generosity of the Tartars, in freeing of Die, and
other Nations, as Germian, Mentez, etc. which Bajazet had subjugated, whose
Princes were in Tamberlains Army.

There was none but Bulcis or Bulcogli, for so they called George, Son of the
Despot of Servia, who followed not the good Example, endeavoring to
exterminate the Tyrant, by abandoning him as the rest did. His Men behaved
themselves so well (to the Glory of the Christians) that Tamberlain cried to
those about him, See how valiant and resolute those Dervices are! Proh quam
feroces and truculenti; sunt isti Dervisii; till some of his Great Officers
told him, They were Christians, and not that sort of Religious Turks, called
Dervices and Turlacks. The Victory fell on Tamberlain's side, One Hundred and
Fifty Thousand Men being Killed upon the Place. This Battle was Fought in the
Year 1399, and according to the most probable Opinion, in the great Plain
called Cassobe, or Descanards, near Mount Stella; Memorable for the Famous
Defeat, that Pompey the Great gave there to Mithridates King of Pontus.

I find very different Accounts of this Action; but follow the Turkish Annals,
which say, that Zelebis, or the Noble Mustapha, (the Name of Zelebis being
given to all the Children of the Turkish Emperor) was killed in this Fight: And
he being the Subject of this Discourse, who must appear, and pretend to the
Ottoman Empire, and dispute it with his Brothers, and with Amurath the Second,
his Nephew; It seemed necessary to dispose the Reader, for the History and
Adventures of this Impostor, by the recital of what preceded it, to give him a
more full Idea and clear knowledge thereof.

The Disasters of his Father Bajazet, being so annexed to his Death, I will say
something farther concerning them, without resting on what several Authors
report of Tamberlains being the most Inhumane, and Bloody of Mankind; and of
his Extraction from the meanest of the People; having been very well informed
by that Excellent Book of this Conqueror's Life, Written by Monsieur Sainctyon,
which was taken from an Arabian Historian, called Alhacent; who was an Occular
Witness of his Actions, and Military Expeditions, and familiar with him, (which
Life is very different from that Written by one Acamed, Son of Gueraspes, a
Creature of the Ottoman Family, and by consequence an Enemy to Tamberlain.)

He was the Son of the Potent Monarch Og, King of Saketay (or the ancient
P^^shia) nearly related, and Successor to the Great Cham of Tartary: He had two
Sons Cham Sentrokius, (which signifies the Love of Mankind) and Letrokius,
whose Variance occasioned the Desolation of their Country. But he, for the
Goodness of his Life, his Royal Virtues, and above all his Justice and
Victories, might be equaled with Alexander the Great: So far was he from those
Vices of Cruelty, Barbarity, and Rage, which Paulus Jovius accuses him of,
Feritatem, truculentiam, ore truculento recedentibusque Occulis semper minaci.

And the Turkish Annals call him Inhumane, for this reason, that when Gilderum,
or Bajazet was taken, and brought to him, he conducted him to his Tent,
receiving him on foot with great Honor: Gilderum was on Horseback, because of
his Wounds, supported by Tamberlain's People; and being brought in, they both
sat down, and eat together: Tamberlain saying thus to him; Prince, we ought to
give God infinite thanks, and to sing Hymns of Praise to him, that he has given
me, who am a poor Lame Man, so vast an Empire; extending from the furthest
Parts of India, to the Gates of Sivas, which is Sebaste: And to Thee, from the
Walls of this same City, to the Confines of Hungary. God having thus disposed
so great a Part of the World between us, what can such a Cripple as I, desire
of him more? It Is for this his great Goodness, that we ought to make him our
Acknowledgments: It may be, thou have not done this heretofore, as thou
ought; but have been ungrateful to his Bounty: for which Reason, this
misfortune is come upon thee. Philip Camerarius, in the 54th. Chapter of his
Historical Meditations, makes him continue it further, as follows: Can we think
the Sovereign Disposer of the World, thought us the most worthy, to Command so
many Millions, who are wiser and stronger than we? That it should please Him,
that Thou, who art almost blind, should be Emperor of the Turks? And I, who
am a Tartar, and Lame, be the Sovereign of so many People? No certainly, it was
not our Merit, but a pure Effect of his Grace and Bounty.

Tamberlain sent him Dogs and Hawks, either to divert him in his Trouble, or
reproach his extraordinary Delight in those Creatures. The Turkish History
saying, that Gilderum kept Seven Thousand Faulconers, and Six Thousand Dogs. He
talked so insolently to Temir on this Occasion, that he exposed him to the
Contempt of his Army, setting him on a Mule, and commanding him to be led
through it: Thus enduring the Mocks of the Soldiers, and causing his Wife, the
Daughter of Eliazar, the Despot of Servia, whom he passionately Loved, to wait
half naked at his Table.

One Day Temir, or Tamberlain, asked him, and desired him to Answer
ingenuously, If he had fallen into his Power, how he would have used him?
Gilderum, or Bajazet, who was a Man of a terrible and cruel Temper, answered
him in a Rage thus; To say the Truth, if Fortune had given me the Victory, and
made me thy Master, I would have shut thee up in an Iron Cage, and so carried
thee about with me. Tamberlain was not ignorant of the Lex Talionis, nor of
that natural Law, which the Emperor Alex. Severus (as says Lampridius) so
often repeated, Do to another, what you would have done to you: Following the
Law of the Twelve Tables of the Romans, and of that famous Edict mentioned by
Aulus Gellius, in the First Chapt. of his Noctes Atticae; where the Curious
Discourse is between Sextus Cecilius the Lawyer, and Phavorinus the
Philosopher. And therefore accordingly, he shut him up in an Iron Cage: Yet the
Turkish Annals say, He still continued his Humanity; always before he decamped,
going to see, and civilly saluting his Prisoner: He assured him, he would ^ere
long grant what he should desire: But telling him, he would first carry him to
Samarcand, where he kept his Court; and from thence send him to his own Country.

Bajazet was so afflicted with this, that he killed himself in the Fourteenth
Year of His Reign, and the Fourth of his dreadful Imprisonment, in the Year
1403. and of the Hegira, or Flight of Mahomet, 804. Theod Spandugin relates
these Circumstances of it; That having no other way to end his Life, filled
with Rage and Despair, he frequently and with such violence beat his Head
against the Bars of his Cage, that he broke his Skull, and died distracted.

This Emperor left Five Sons, of whom Mustapha Zelebis, the Eldest, was lost at
the Battle; The Annals say, Amissus fuit in Temiriano praelio. The others
escaped, who were Lemir Solomon, Isa Zelebis, Zultan Muchemet, and Casan
Zelebis, who was then very young: I will not meddle with the Accidents, Wars,
and Murders, which happened amongst them; only relate, how after the Death of
Lemir Solomon, in the Year of Christ 1423. which is of the Hegyra 824, Amurath
his Son being newly Placed on his Throne, Twenty Years after Tamberlain's
Famous Victory; a certain Man, called Dusmes Mustapha, pretending to be the Son
of Can Gilderum or Bajazet, appeared in Romania. And although Mahomet the
First, and Amurath the Second, was assured, that he was killed at Mount Stella;
yet the Grecian Emperor Emanuel Paleologus, would never believe it; but always
thought him the true Mustapha; and by giving him his utmost Assistance, pulled
many Unhappinesses on his own Head. Amurath offered him great Advantages, not
to meddle with their Quarrel; but to let them determine it among themselves,
with their own Arms.

Carrion, in his Chronicle, speaks not of Mustapha, as an Impostor; but says,
that the Greeks perceiving Amurath to raise the Ottoman Name and Power, after
that Fatal Overthrow at Mount Stella, where his Grandfather lost both his Glory
and Liberty; and that he attacked all the little Christian Princes, who had
dependence on the Eastern Empire, to extirminate one after another; by their
Spoils, seeking to repair his own Losses; though they most Religiously observed
the Peace with his Father. Wherefore the Greeks then brake it also, taking out
of Lemnos, his Uncle Mustapha, whom they had kept there under a sure Guard, as
a Rival, capable of frustrating his Designs; for which purpose, they gave him
all Imaginable Assistance, that he might disposess Amurath, and obtain the
Empire for himself.

This Prince, whither True or False, is uncertain, lived sometimes at Verdari,
a little City of Thessaly, bearing the Name of a River, which runs by it; where
several Lords of the Family of the Eurenoses, took his Party: Assisted with
whose Forces, he Besieged the City Serra, which, with its Fortress, he forced
to a Surrender. This great Success exalted his Hopes, and gave him Courage to
attempt Adrianople, then Capital of the Ottoman Empire; whose Inhabitants had a
Favorable Opinion, both of his Person and Title; opening their Gates at his
Approach, and swearing Fidelity to him. All Romagna followed their Example, and
submitted to his Government; yet he still continued his Residence at Verdari.

Sultan Amurath thinking on little, but his Pleasures at Bursa, where he then
kept his Court or Port, heard what Progress Mustapha had made, and sent against
him Bassa Bajazet, with a considerable Army; but when he came before
Adrianople, this Traiterous Bassa abandoned his Conscience, and his Honor,
joining with Mustapha's Army; for Recompense of which Treason, he was made
Vizier; which is like Chancellor, or Prime Minister of State.

Zunaites, Prince of Smyrna, who had been Prisoner with the Impostor Mustapha,
in the strong Fortress of Monemuasia, which was the ancient Epidaurus, armed
also for him. The Turks called this Man Chusines. He raised a considerable*
Body of Men, composed for the most part of Azapes, being foot, who fight with
Bows and Arrows: Laonicius supposes these to have been an Auxiliary of
Strangers. He gave great privileges to all those, who took up Arms in his
Favor, and that freely embraced his Party.

Having raised this Army, he left Adrianople, and Marched straight to Bursa;
and on the way, finding his new Vizier, the Bassa Bajazet, was conspiring
against him; he caused him to be Excecuted publicly, as a Traitor, within one
days Journey of Bursa: Thus paying with an Ignominious Death, his double
Treason.

In the mean while, Amurath advised with his Bassa's, how he might best defend
himself from the Storm that threatened him. They counseled him to release out
of Prison, Mechemet Beg, Chief of the Michalogli; of whom Lunclavius, in the
Twenty Seventh Chapter of his Pandects, gives this account.

Osman, one of the Chief Heads of the Ottoman-Family, the better to Establish
his Greatness, made a Friendship and Alliance with Three little Princes; by
whose Assistance, he extraordinarily advanced his own Affairs, and gained many
great Victories over the Christians. One of these Princes was called Michael;
another, Mark; both of the Eastern Imperial Family; and the Third, a Turk,
named Aurami: From which Three, were descended the most Considerable Persons
then in the Ottoman-Empires: Still retaining the Names of the Son of Michel,
Mark, and Aurami; or Michalogli, Marcalogli, and Auramogli; the Turkish
Pronounciation calls the last Eurenosogli, whom Mustapha had on his side: as
Amurath had the Micaloglis, and above all, Beg Mechemet, the Instrument of his
Good Fortune, who extirminated his Rival, in this manner.

Amurath recalled him to the Port from Nisar, the ancient Nicocesaria, often
called also Tocat, the Chief City of Capadocia; where he was under Restraint,
kept like a Prisoner; giving him, with his Liberty, the Command of his Army:
Mechemet, without staying at Bursa, Marched to Lupadi, or Vlabat, a
considerable Town in Natolia; encamping near the Bridge. Dusmes Mustapha
likewise advanced with his Army, on the other side of it, opposite to him.
Mechemet apprehending the Danger of a Battle, saw that Dusmes his Army was no
way to be forced, thought on a Stratagem more for his purpose: He then in
Disguise went to the Enemy's Guards; and being one of the greatest Men among
the Turks, made himself known to them, desiring to speak with the Officers,
that were his Friends; to whom, with Substantial Evidence, he represented, and
proved the Imposture of Dusmes Mustapha, with the Interest the Greeks were able
to make of their Division, by endeavoring to set up a base, unknown Impostor,
and Creature of theirs, on the Ottoman Throne: Telling them also, what
Recompenses Amurath would give them. Mechemet, with the Sentiment of the
Christian Religion, had also renounced and disclaimed the Blood of the Imperial
Family of Greeks, of whom he was descended. By this, and other Arts, he drew to
his Master Amurath's side, the most considerable Lords and Soldiers in Dusmes
Army, (as Laonicius reports at large) which over-threw all his Affairs, without
Hopes of any Re-establishment; reducing him to the utmost Extremities. Dusmes
Mustapha, and Amurath, both sent Ambassadors to the Emperor of Constantinople,
Johannes Paleologus, to obtain his Assistance, making great Offers, and
soliciting his Ministers with mighty Promises.

This Affair was much debated in the Council of State; The Reasons of both
Sides being considered, the Emperor declared for Mustapha, who was his
Creature, whom he had begun to oblige, when he was in Prison: And therefore
promised himself more from his gratitude, than Amurath would ever do. This had
great Reason to fright Amurath's Party; and doubtless, had it been known, the
greater part of his Captains would have declared for his Enemy: But his
Ambassadors, foreseeing the danger of such a Report, returned with speed after
this denial, to give the Army an Account of their Expedition; but Mechemet, the
Michalogli, who was a cunning Soldier, and a Greek, though he had abjured his
Country, with his Faith, caused it to be reported, that the Greeks were for
them, and were sending vast Succors to their Army. This False News soon got
into Mustapha's Camp, where it put them in such a Consternation, and Disorder,
that before their Ambassadors could give them the True Account of their
Alliance with the Empire, and the Assistance he was preparing, most of the
chief Officers, and European Soldiers, deserted him, getting over the River
Lupadi in the Night, into Amurath's Camp; others, by various ways, flying into
their own Countries. Mustapha, seeing himself thus unhappily forsaken, and
incapable to resist his Enemies, (a Memoral (...) Example, showing the Power of
True or False News, spread oppo^^^^^ly through an Army) fled with his Baggage
toward the City Baga or B^^^, bearing the Name of the River, on whose Banks it
stands; whither he was so closely pursued, that he very narrowly escaped the
danger of being taken; but by the Favor and Assistance of the Cady, or Judge
of the Place, to whom he gave a round Sum of Money, he there got shelter.

Zunaites, Prince of Smyrna, who had always followed Mustapha's Fortune, both
before, and since his Captivity, being as much afrighted as the least Soldier
in the Army could be, stole away secretly in the Night, with all his People;
and by his Example, drew those after him, who had any remains of Affection to
the supposed Prince Mustapha. Amurath putting all those Troops that remained,
to the Sword; while Mustapha only thought of saving his Life, flying with very
few followers; and being favored by the Greeks, passed the Channel or
Straights of Gallipoly into Romania, or ancient Thrace; seizing all the Ships,
and Vessels he found in the Ports, or on those Coasts, to hinder Amurath from
pursuing him; but could neither foresee nor help a Genoese-Ship, that cast
anchor on that Shore; having for its Freight of Turks, at two Ducats the Head,
paid to the Master of the Vessel.

Historians differ about this Infamous Avarice of the Genoeses, so prejudicial
to Christendom, by their helping the Turks for Money into Europe; some
mistaking it for the first time, which was long before, when the Turks were
fled over from Asia, at that narrow Neck which is near to the Fortress of Asty
or Maitos, formerly called Cheronesus, at the Mouth of the Hellespont; and took
Zemenicum, at the same time, surnamed Chirocastron, or the Town of Widows;
because according to Nicolaides, they destroyed all the Men, and only kept the
Women for their Use. And others mistake it, for that, in a few Years after,
when Pope Eugenius, having Absolved Vladistaus King of Hungary, and Poland, of
his Oath, given to Amurath, for the Observation of the Truce, made in the Year
1444. obliging him to declare War; which proved Fatal to himself; That deluded
King losing his Life, and a Great Army, at the Memorable Battle of Varna; The
Grecian Emperor John Paleologus, with the Venetians; and other Christian
Princes of Italy, seconding his Intentions, promising to keep the Straights,
and hinder the Turks from coming into Europe, while Ibraltem, Prince of
Caramania, held him employed in a Fierce War in Asia.

This was one of the deepest Wounds, that Christendom er'e received from the
Turks; their Army being Eighty Thousand Men, composed of several Nations, as
Hungarians, Germans, Bohemians, Polanders, Italians, and Walachians: besides a
Train of Four Hundred Pieces of Artillery. The Peace, after a Defeat of the
Turks, had been concluded for Ten Years; and, for the Security of it,
Lunclavius (in his Pandects, (Numb. 116.) affirms upon the Authority of several
Christian Writers, particularly Cuspinian, and many others; That this Young
King Vladislaus, by the Impious Advice of some Counselors, or Ministers of
State, gave into the Hands of Amurath, a Consecrated Host, which he thought his
God, pawned for the inviolable Observation of the Truce, and solemnly sworn
upon the Holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: Amurath swearing also by his
Prophet Mahomet.

But notwithstanding these sacred Conclusions of this Affair, the Pope of Rome,
Eugenius the Fourth, never left off, when Amurath was retired into Asia with
his Army, till he had broke the Peace, sending the Cardinal Juliana Cesarini,
his Legate a latere, to dispense with, and absolve the Christian Princes of
their Faith and Oath, which they had plighted to the Turk, for the Observation
of this Truce: Which Cardinal so acquitted himself of his unjust Message, by
his Prayers and Entreaties, added to the Papal Commission, that he broke the
Peace, notwitstanding the Repugnancy of the most Conscientious Opposers.

Amurath finding himself obliged to return our of Asia, and meet Vladislaus his
Army, came, bringing the greatest Strength he could so suddenly raise: And when
the Fight was begun near the City of Varna, in a Marish Ground, by the Mar
Maggiore, or Pontus Euxinus, he saw the Beglerbeg of Romania killed by the
Hands of the Valiant John Huniades, and the two Wings of his Army put into
great Disorder; he then absolutely despairing of Victory, drew out of his
Bosom the Consecrated Host, with the Articles of the Truce, which the
Christians had made; and lifting up his Hands and Eyes toward Heaven, said
these words, or to this effect: O Jesus Christ! if thou art God, as the
Christians affirm to us, revenge the Perfidiousness of thy Followers, who have
pawned Thee in my Hands; see the Injury they do Thee, after having sworn in Thy
Name, and on Thy Holy Gospel; violating by an execrable Crime, that Peace so
holily and solemnly sworn between us.

After he had made this Prayer, the Success of the Battle soon altered: For
Amurath, rallying his Routed Troops, and with Fury charging this half
Victorious Army, in a short space defeated, and ruined it entirely.

Thus did God show his Judgment on the Christians, for having abused and
violated, contrary to Justice, their Faith given in his Name; as both the
Christian and Turkish Histories agree. Though Callimachus says, This matter was
so secretly done, that the Public could never know certainly, that any such
Gage was put into Amurath's Hands.

The Circumstances of this Great Disaster, makes us observe, That the
Protection, which the Emperor gave to the False Mustapha, and the Avarice of
the Genoese-Merchant, who sold a Passage into Europe, to Amurath's Troops, were
two dreadful blows to Christendom; which has often endured its greatest Losses
by the blameable Conduct of Christians them selves. But to return to our Story.

Amurath having passed the Straight, encamped with his Army upon the Plain
Ezea, which is near to Maitos, on the side of Thessaly. Mustapha finding
himself so pressed, took his March toward Bolairis or Bolerus (This plain of
Azea, is sometime confounded with Bolairis) from thence he sled into
Adrianople; where, being abandoned by his Men, and his Disasters increasing, he
endeavored to save himself in some other Place; but was taken, and brought
back to Adrianople: which Amurath, by this time, had seized. Here the miserable
Impostor was Hanged over the Battlements of the City-Wall.

For certain, Death is always equally the Punishment, or the Misfortune of
those, who of the Ottoman Family aim at, or seem to have any pretense to the
Scepter. It Is neither the Innocence of Age, the Merit, the Proximity of Blood,
the Sincerity, nor Justice of the Cause, can ever preserve them, if they fall
into the Hands of the Conqueror.

I have taken this Lamentable End of Mustapha, word for word, out of the
Turkish Annals, and the Pandects of Lunclavius, with the History of that War,
and its Accidents. Indeed, till Sultan Amurath was delivered from this
considerable Opponent, he could not think himself secure, nor fast settled in
his Throne: Which happened in the Year of Christ, 1425, and of the Hegira, or
Mohammedan Computation, 827. It is true, that one of his Brothers, also named
Mustapha, who was in Natolia, gave him much Trouble, but he overcame it; and
geting him into his Power, caused him to have his Throat Cut: Others say, to be
Strangled at Nizar, or Nicea, where he was delivered into his Hands by his own
Governor. Which seems to have been a mistake, occasioned by the Conformity of
the Names of the two Mustapha's.

Du Verdier writing the Adventures, and Death of our Mustapha, believes him no
Impostor; and tells his last Flight, and miserable Catastrophe in another
manner, as follows: After he found himself (says he) deserted, he cried out,
Oh, how hard it is to preserve a Great Heart against the Power of Fortune!
There were many Proofs of his Courage; His Pretension to the Empire, was no
weak Mark of it. But a Crown was then no longer in Controversy: The Question
was, How to save his Life? For which purpose, when his Troops left him, he no
more thought of Glory, Honor, nor Interest: but only fled, quitting all his
Pretensions, for the Hopes of Life; which, for a little while, he preserved, by
the Assistance of the Greeks, who received him kindly into their Vessels, and
gave him the Opportunity of gaining the Fortress of Gallipoli. But all this,
only served to ruin him more shamefully; for Amurath pursued him so
obstinately, that he besieged him in the Place he chose for his Retreat;
compelling him to get out of it in mean Equipage; and at last, finding him hid
in a Bush on the Mountain Toganum, he caused him to be strangled in his
Presence, that he might be sure he had of him no Competitor left.

Lunclavius, in the 83. Chap. of his Pandects, makes a Parallel between this
Mustapha and Voldemar; saying, That Two Eggs were never more alike, than these
two Men were: Whom he puts in the Rank of Imposters. Both of them had mighty
Allies; Mustapha having for him, John Paleologus, the Grecian Emperor; and
Voldemar had Charles the Fourth, Emperor and King of Germany, whose Empire was
more Flourishing than the Others.

CHAP. XII. IAM. Heraclides. THE FALSE DESPOT OF Moldavia and Wallachia.
LVnclavius, in his Supplements to the Turkish Annals, brings in this Man,
whom, he affirms, he both saw and knew. He says, That he had a Noble Mien, was
of a middle Stature, had a Body strong and nervous; that he was discreet in his
Discourse, and used four Languages very well; to wit, the Latin, Greek, French,
and Italian. He was called James Heraclides and Baziliquez, pretending to be of
the Race of the Ancient Despots, or Waywoods of Wallathia and Moldavia, Lord of
the Isle of Samos, and Marquis of Paros, in the Archipelago. He found some
Lords in Poland credulous enough to believe him no Impostor, who were so much
affected with his Person, that with an Army they Established him Despot of
Moldavia and Wallachia.

The Principal of these Polish Lord, were A^^ere Lasens, Philiponischy, and
Lassotchy. whose Army was much Inferior in Number to that of Alexander the
Despot, whom they endeavored to expel, for the putting this Impostor into his
place. However the Victory fell on their Side; Alexander was driven out, and
James Established Despot; and confirmed in his Principality by the Turkish
Emperor Soliman. This was effected by the influence of his Presents, which he
sent the Bassa's of the Port. The Victory gained by this Impostor, happened the
18th. of November, in the Year 1561. But yet, three Years after, though he
governed his Subjects gently enough they suspected him to be an Impostor, and
the Wallachians Murdered him in cold Blood.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for William Cademan, at the Pope's Head in the Lower-walk of
the New-Exchange, in the Strand.
Folio.
AN Institution of General History; or, the History of the World. By William
Howel, L. L. D. in Two Volumes. Historical Collections; or, an Exact Account of
the Proceedings of the Parliaments in Queen Elizabeth's Reign. A Journey into
Greece, by George Wheeler Esquire; in Compuny of Dr. Spon of Lions. In Six Books
Containing 1. A Voyage from Venice to Constantinople. 2. An Account of
Constantinople, and the Adjacent Places. 3. A Voyage through the Lesser Asia.
4. A Voyage from Zant through several Parts of Greece to Athens. 5. An Account
of Athens. 6. Several Journeys from Athens, into Attica, Corinth, Boeotia, etc.
With variety of Sculptures. Pharamond, Complete in English, an Excellent
Romance. Clelia, a Romance, in English. Parthenissa, Complete in English. An
Historical Heroic Poem on the Life of the Right Honorable Thomas, Earl of
Ossory, ( with his Picture neatly engraven on a Copper-Plate) Written by
Elkanah Settle. A Protestant Plot no Paradox; or, Phanaticks under that Name
Plotting against the King and Government. The English Jeroboam, or, the
Protestant Reforming Magistrate, and what the Church of England may expect from
such a one. Considerations Offered to all the Corporations of England,
containing Seasonable Advice to them in their Future Elections of Burgesses to
serve in Parliament.
Quarto.
An Historical Relation of the First Discovery of the Isle of Madera. The
Protestant Religion is a Sure Foundation, etc. By the Right Honorable Charles
Earl of Derby. The Jesuits Policy to Suppress Monarchy. By a Person of Honor.
A Warning Piece for the Unruly, in Two Visitation Sermons, by Seth Bushel, D.
D. The Great Efficacy and necessity of Good Example, especially in the Clergy,
in a Visitation Sermon at Guilford, by Thomas Duncomb, D. D. A Sermon Preached
before the King, by Miles Barn, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. A Sermon
Preached at the Assizes at Lancaster, by Henry Piggot, B. D. Praise and
Adoration, a Sermon on Trinity Sunday, before the University at Oxford, 1681.
by Thomas Manningham, M. A. late Fellow of New-Colledge in Oxford. A
New-years-gift for the Anti-prerogative Men; or, a Lawyers Opinion, in Defense
of His Majesty's Power-Royal, of Granting Pardons as he pleases; wherein is
more particularly discussed the Validity of the Earl of Danby's Pardon.
Octavo.
The Spanish History; or the Differences that happened in the Court of Spain,
between Don John of Austria, and Cardinal Nitard: with all the Letters, and
Politic Discourses, relating to those Affairs. Rapin's Reflections on Ancient
and Modern Philosophy. The English Princess; or, the Duchess Queen, a pleasant
Novel. Court Songs and Poerns, being an exact Collection. The Temple of Death,
with other Poems. By a Person of Honor. Hogan Moganides; or, the Dutch
Hudibras. Liquor Alchahest; or, the Immortal Dissolvent of Paracelsus and
Helmont, etc. A Philosophical Essay; or, the History of Petrification, by Dr.
Sherly. Gulielmus Ferrarius de bello Batavico. Westminster Quibbles, very
Pleasant. Zaide; or the Spanish History, a Pleasant Romance. Memoirs of the
Duchess of Mazarine. Anima Mundi, an Historical Narration of the Opinion of
the Ancients, concerning Man's Soul after this Life, according to unenlightened
Nature. Clarks Manual; a Book of Presidents. Saunders his Astrological Physic.
A Copy of the Two Journal Books of the House of Commons, in which is the whole
History of the late horrid Popish Plot. The Wits Paraphrais'd; or, Paraphrase
upon Paraphrase. In a Burlesque on the late several Translations of Ovid's
Epistles. Two Discourses; the First showing, how the Chief Criterions of
Philosophical Truth, invented by Speculative Men, more eminently serve Divine
Revelation, than either Philosophy, or Natural Religion. The Second
manifesting, how all the Foundations of the Intellectual World, Viz. Reason,
Morality, Civil Government, and Religion, have been undermined by Popish
Doctrines and Policies. By Thomas Manningham, M. A. Fellow of New-Colledge in
Oxford, and Rector of East Tysted in Hantshire. Machiavel Redivivus; being an
Exact Discovery or Narrative of the Principles and Politics of our Bejesuited
Modern Phanaticks. The Present State of Geneva; with a brief Description of
that City, and the several Changer and Alterations it has been subject to,
from the First Foundation thereof. Amarillis to Tityrus; being the First
Heroic Harangue of the Excellent Pen of Monsieur Scudery; a Witty and pleasant
Novel, Englished by a Person of Honor.
Twelves.
The Amors of the Count Du Noy; a witty Novel. The Penitent Hermit; or, the
Fruits of Jealousy; a Novel. The English Mounsieur, a Comical Novel. History of
the Pollas Royal; or, the Amors of the French King, and Mademoiselle de la
Valiere. The Amors of Madam, and the Count de Guiche. The Novels of Queen
Elizabeth, in Two Parts.

