THE CERTAINTY Of A FUTURE STATE:

THE CERTAINTY Of A FUTURE STATE: OR, AN OCCASIONAL LETTER CONCERNING
APPARITIONS.

By J. Roe, A. M. And Chaplain to the Right Honorable Charles Earl of
Burlington.

If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded if one
rose from the Dead,

Luke 16.31. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Wild, at the Sign of the Elephant, at
Charing Cross, MDCXCVIII.

To the Right Honorable Charles Boil, Baron Clifford of Lansbrow, and Earl of
Burlington, Baron of Youghall, and Bandon, Viscount Kynalmeaky and Dongarvan,
and Earl of Cork, in the Kingdom of Ireland; Chief Governor of the County of
Cork, and of the City and County of the City of Cork, Lord High Treasurer of
Ireland; Lord High Steward of the Royalty of Knaesbrough in the County of York,
and one of the Gentlemen of His Majesty's Bedchamber.
My Lord,
IT is not with any Design to Inform Your Lordships Judgment, by any thing that
can be met with in so mean a Discourse, that I am induced to lay it at Your
Lordships Feet: But being Composed under Your Lordships Roof, it Claims a
Natural kind of Right, of coming under Your Lordships Protection.

Things of little worth receive a Value when they are made the Offerings of
Respect and Gratitude; and this I am ohlig'd to Acknowledge upon the account of
those Remarkable Instances of Generosity which I have received, (not only from
Your Lordship) but from Your truly Honorable and good Lady, both before, and
since I had the Honor of being Entertained as Your Lordships Chaplain; which I
needs must own with all that deference which is justly owing to Your Lordships
Eminent Quality, and Personal Accomplishments.

It is Your Lordships Happiness to receive the Extraordinary Blessings of
Providence, without any Alteration of Temper, which can only be Attributed to a
peculiar Greatness of Spirit, which the World is fully convincd of, and of
which Your Lordships Family in all degrees are particularly sensible.

It will be a difficult thing for Posterity, rightly to distinguish between
those who have deserved Well, or Ill; since some have been so averse to Truth,
that they have supplyd what has been really wanting in due Merit, by their many
Flattering and Excessive Commendations.

But I need not take such Measures with Your Lordship, whose Accomplishments
ate so Signal, that they render Your Lordship, (in the Opinion of all that know
you) one of the greatest Ornaments of the Age we live in.

That Your Lordship may be truly thankful to Almighty God, for so Great
Endowments, that Your Lordshiy may live Many and Many Years to make a Right and
Good Use of them in this World, and be Rewarded for Welldoing in the Next; is
and always shall be the hearty Prayers of,

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Obedient Servant and Chaplain, I. Roe.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe following Letter was not Writ out of a desire to appear in Print, nor from
a Principle of too nicely Enquiring into the Judgments and Opinions of other
Men, but to gratify the Requests of some, whom I could not modestly refuse: If
it may any ways Contribute to Promote the Dignity and Sufficiency of the Holy
Scriptures, or prove the Certainty of a Future State, against the Scepticks of
the Age, without the Testimony of Apparitions, I have my chief Aim.

Farewell.
THE CERTAINTY Of A FUTURE STATE: OR, An Occasional LETTER Concerning
APPARITIONS.
SIR,
I Have often thought (since our last meeting) of the strange account you gave
me of the Apparition of G. S. to W. D. and likewise of the dreadful
Consequences that have attended some Persons, who have entertained too
credulous a Belief of them; insomuch that to this very Day too many are grown
to that height of Impiety, that they will not be persuaded of any Future State,
unless some one rise from the Dead to make proof of it. As you were pleased to
be very free with me, I shall take the same Liberty; and must beg pardon, if I
cannot condescend so far as to be of your Opinion.

In the first place then I shall give you my own Notion of an Apparition.

2dly. The Reasons why I cannot believe any thing of them.

The Word Apparition is usually taken to signify no more then the Species or
Resemblance of a Deceased Person; and that there are no such Apparitions
(whatever some may pretend) I am very apt to believe upon these three accounts.

First, Because it is a Supposition so far from being countenanced, that it
seems directly contrary to the sense of the Scriptures.

2dly. Because it is a Supposition altogether useless and unnecessary.

3dly. Because it seems to be inconsistent with common Reason.

I would not be thought to question, much less to deny that that there are
Spirits, neither will I presume to limit the Wisdom and Power of Almighty God:
But as for the Apparitions of Deceased Persons so frequently Discoursed of in
the World, I believe there is nothing in them. The Holy Scriptures in my
opinion are so far from giving us the least encouragement to expect an
Apparition upon any account whatever; that God himself has strictly forbid us
to apply our selves unto, or have any manner of intercourse with the Dead,
Isaiah 8.19. And altogether as strict is the prohibition given by Moses, Deuteronomy.
18.11. there shall not be found among you any one that is a Charmer, Consulter
with Familiar Spirits, or a Necromancer, for every one that does these things
is an abomination to the Lord.

But besides th^se and such like Prohibitions, the Holy Scriptures plainly do
assure us, that the Body of Man after Death returns to the Dust, and the Spirit
i. e. the Soul unto God that gave it, i. e. to be disposed and determined by
him to a fixed Station, either of Happiness or Misery. This is evident from the
Account we have of Dives and Lazarus; there being so vast a Gulf between them,
i. e. an irreversible Decree (by the wife Order and Appointment of God) passed
upon them; insomuch that as one observes it is impossible for all the Saints in
Heaven to obtain any manner of Release for them, Dr. Hammond; in his
Annotations on Luke 16.
and altogether as impossible for themselves to be one Minute out of that State.

Now since it appears Demonstrable that the Souls of the Righteous are confined
to a State of Happiness after Death (where they are to continue and remain till
the Day of the Resurrection) and this by the special designation and
appointment of God; then it must necessarily be supposed, that the Souls of the
Wicked are closely confined by the same appointment to a State of Misery and
Horror, where they must necessarily and unavoidably continue till they receive
the final Sentence. And if both the Souls of the Righteous and the Souls of the
Wicked are respectively Determined to their several States, and have their
bounds fixed by the positive Order and Appointment of Almighty God; if the Body
turns to Dust (as we daily see it does) and if the Soul is confined to a
certain Station either of Happiness or Misery from whence it cannot make any
escape, (all which is clearly intimated in Scripture) then how is it likely
there should be any such thing as the Apparition or real Representation of a
Deceased Person.

It is Gods Prerogative to be the Creator of Mankind, and it is. God only that
can give him Life and Being, and if so, call we think it to be in the power of
Dust, Corruption, or any other created Being whatever, either to Unite or
Animate that same Body and Soul, which Death has deprived both of Life and
Being upon Earth.

There have been some its true who have maintained the contrary, Dr. Henry
Moor. Mr. Glanvil's Sadducismus Triumphatus.
who positively affirm that departed Souls have a care and regard to their
fellow Souls upon Earth, See Dr. Moor's Letter to Mr. Glanvil.
because a Soul appeared to St. Stephen, when stoned, and to St. Paul before
his Conversion. I shall not trouble you to show what a forced Inference this
is; the Scriptures only mention Angels doing so, which I am far from
questioning; but yet I think there is some difference between an Angel and the
Soul of Man, otherwise the Holy David needed not to have told us that Man was
made lower then the Angels, and Tertullian likewise, de anima, to have defined
the Angels, ( evocatores animarum, i. e. the Messengers of God, which command
the Souls out of their Bodies: And whose business as that Father intimates, it
is to Conduct and show them whereunto they are designed after Death.

If any reply that an Apparition may be, though not of the Body or Soul of any
Deceased Person, I shall Answer this in its proper place, where I am to show
the inconsistency of such a Supposition with common Reason.

At present I must confess, Almighty God can do whatsoever pleases him both in
Heaven and in Earth, in the Sea, and in all Deep Places, insomuch that every
particle of our Bodies, every Dust and Atome that belongs to us is known to
him, for he who numbers the very Sands of the Sea, and the very Hairs of our
Heads, must needs keep an account of all the scattered Bones, see into all the
Graves and Tombs, search all the Repositories of the Earth, and know what Dust
belongs to each Body, what Body to each Soul, and by what ways and means, as at
the first Creation, those scattered Particles should be again united, and the
ruined Fabric of Man's Body once more Composed.

But to Unite a dead Carcass to a living Soul, or to permit and suffer a true
and real Resemblance thereof to be acted by any other, and all this only to
make a slight show and appearance for some little time, either only to be the
Messengers of God's Will, or a Terror to the Living, seems altogether
inconsistent with those Methods of Divine Revelation, which God has been
already pleased to favor us with.

The Question whether the Souls of Men departed do appear to those who remain
alive, is decided by most, both Ancient and Modern Writers negatively; and they
who are for the Affirmitive Part, can resolve it no other way but this, that
when such Apparitions are, it is only by special Dispensation; thus at our
blessed Saviors Transfiguration, there appeared Moses and Elias, and likewise
at his Crucifixtion the Graves were opened, and many Bodies of Saints which
slept arose.

But now the case is otherwise, for since Miracles are ceased, and the
Christian Dispensation is very sufficiently confirmed to us; there is not one
Instance in the whole Bible to encourage us to expect an Apparition in these
times; but on the contrary, there is nothing more usual with God then to
frustrate and disappoint the Expectations all such as will not acquiesce in the
ordinary Dispensation of his Will.

To suppose therefore that this Course of Consulting with the Dead were not
Prohibited (though you have seen it is) and to suppose yet farther that it is a
very likely and probable way of succeeding in what may be designed thereby; yet
this must be granted of necessity, that it is not the ordinary Course which God
has appointed, and therefore cannot be depended on as likely to become
successful unto any.

The Pharisees we know desired a Sign from our Blessed Savior to Confirm his
Mission and Doctrine to them, they were not contented with those wonderful
Miracles that he wrought amongst them; and which were then (as I may say) his
ordinary means to Attest his Divinity, and Convince the World of their
Unbelief; nothing would do with them but a Sign from Heaven; and no other Sign
then such as was given at the first promulgation of the Law: But the vanity of
all this our Savior plainly discovers, and severely rebukes in these words,
there shall no Sign be given.

Thus when Men presume to Capitulate as it were with Almighty God, as to the
enforcing the Duties of Faith and Obedience upon them (as the chief Priests and
Elders did with our Blessed Savior at his Crucifixion, namely that if he would
come down from the Cross then they would believe him.) I say, when Men begin to
question the Power of God, and the Authority of his Word, and resolve neither
to believe in him, nor obey him, unless he will condescend to let them have
such Signs as may answer and gratify their foolish expectations and
unreasonable Curiosities; when they will not believe there is a Future State of
Punishment prepared for the Wicked without an Apparition to confirm the truth
of it; it is not only usual, but just with God to frustrate and baffle them in
such unreasonable Proposals.

2dly, But supposing God should permit and suffer Apparitions to wander up and
down and haunt his Servants upon Earth; yet what end and purpose can we imagine
there should be in it? Can it any ways tend to promote the Honor and Glory of
Almighty God? The Psalmist expressly tells us, that the Dead praise him not,
neither they that go down into silence? Or can it answer any other of the
Designs of his wise Providence in governing the Word? Or in the least
Contribute to the Reformation of Mankind?

Some perhaps may object and say, why may it not consist with Gods Wisdom to
send an Apparition to make a Discovery of some strange Murder which may have
been concealed for some time.

But in this it may be answered, that Almighty God has many extraordinary ways
to make such Discoveries without an Apparition, whereof we have many Instances,
as well from History, as our own Experience; for if the Heavens above, the
Earth beneath, and every thing moving therein are the Work of Gods Hands, and
subservient to his wise Providence in governing the World; what need of an
Apparition to make such Discoveries, Since they may be done well enough without
it, and by such ways and means as very well consist with his other Methods of
Administrations here on Earth.

And if an Apparition cannot answer any of the Designs of Gods wise Providence
in governing the World, it may be very easily proved that they cannot in the
least Contribute to the Reformation of Mankind.

For to suppose that an Apparition or the Ghost of a Deceased Person could have
the liberty of coming into the World, and might be able to give us
Topographical Description of the Future State of Punishment; yet this
Description could not any ways exceed the Discoveries we have already made to
us in the Holy Scriptures. There we are informed of a devouring Fire and
Everlasting Burnings, of a Gnawing Worm that never ceases, and of being
Tormented in a Burning Lake with Fire and Brimstone Day and Night for ever.

Now if this be so, what imaginary necessity can there be for an Apparition, or
any ones rising from the Dead to confirm these things: Certainly nothing does,
or can exaggerate the wooful condition of Damned Creatures with greater
Circumstances of Horror then the Scriptures do; and considering the Authority
they are delivered by, they are sufficient to convince the most confident and
daring Sinner, so as to cast him into Belshaazar's Tremblings and Convulsions;
and if there may be any who can hear these Terrors of the Lord with
Indifference or Unconcernedness, or conceive them worse in their Description,
then they really are; such Persons are Scripture proof, they are above Moses
and the Prophets, our Blessed Savior and his Apostles; neither would they be
persuaded though one rose from the Dead; for I dare be positive in this, that no
Ghost or Apparition will ever have any effect upon that Man, whom the greatest
Promises, the strongest Arguments, the most affectionate Persuasions, and the
most dreadful Threatenings cannot prevail with to Repent; and if I am unwilling
to affirm that it is impossible there should be such a thing as an Apparition,
yet I am sure they are unnessary: And those Persons who are so Credulous as to
believe them, must resolve to Act without a just Warrant from Scripture.

I am not in the least insensible of the frequent Mentions which are to be
found of Apparitions in Holy Scripture: But these were the Miraculous Works of
God, made manifest for the Confirmation of his Will, and the Christian
Dispensation, and since this has been sufficiently Revealed and Confirmed to
Mankind, Miracles are Ceased.

Some its true distinguish between things strange and unaccountable, Glanvil 's
Saducismus, page 124.
and Miracles, and though they allow that Apparitions are strangle and
unaccountable, yet they will not allow them to be Miracles, for a true Miracle
( according to Mr. Glanvil's Notion) must be above the Power of Nature, to Seal
and Confirm some Divine Doctrine in which the good and happiness of Mankind is
contained.

But certainly, if the matter of Fact (related by Mr. Glanvil, as to Major
Sydenham and Captain Dyke) be true, then an Apparition may confirm us in
several Fundamental Doctrines, as the Being of a God, the Certainty of a Future
State, and the Rewards and Punishments of another Life.

And according to the same Notion of a Miracle, to suppose an Apparition to do
thus, is to suppose a Miracle; and if Miracles are Ceased, it consequently
follows that Apparitions must be so too, and then the Inference is plain, there
can be no farther necessity for them, in order to the Reformation of Mankind.

Now the truth of this is Evident from plain Matter of Fact; and they who have
used that piece of Necromancy in Consulting with the Dead, touching Matters of
concernment to themselves or others; have met with this particular Judgment
from God, for their Indirect and Unwarrantable Practices; that they have grown
more Obstinate and Hardened in their Impieties, till at length they have been
drove to the utmost Horror and Despair: There are several Instances in
Scripture to this purpose.

I begin with Saul, who applys himself to the Witch of Endor, and must needs
have Samuel raised from the Dead to Inform him of some things wherein he was
not satisfied; and here I shall not enter into a Dispute, whether the true
Samuel appeared (though I believe it was not, and most Expositors are of the same
Opinion,) it being never known that any of the Prophets were subject to such
Diabolical Conjurations.

However, we find that Saul believes the Spirit appearing in the Form of
Samuel, to be Samuel indeed, and therefore Saul behaves himself with all
possible respectfulness, bows down before him and so propounds his doubts.

But alas! He was so far from being informed of any thing that was material;
so far from being reduced to Obedience by what he either saw or heard from the
Spirit, Ghost, or Apparition; that he became more confirmed in his Obstinacy
and Rebellion against God: Insomuch that some are of opinion, that for this
very Transgression he was at length cut off.

But least Readiness wickedness should be thought to have obstructed the
proceeding; and that some may thereupon be induced to think it may prove
otherwise, where God gives the opportunity of doing it; I say, notwithstanding
such Evasions, common Experience shows the contrary.

And although we read of our Blessed Saviors raising Lazarous, after he had been
dead four Days, yet the Scribes and Pharisees were so for from being affected
with it, so far either from believing in Christ, or obeying his Commands, that
they consulted how to put him to Death.

Thus also when Herod had beheaded St. John the Baptist, and came to hear of
the fame of Jesus, he presently concludes with himself that St. John Baptist
was risen from the Dead; which although it was false, yet Herod believed it was
true; and although he was persuaded that St. John was risen, and that God had
signally attested the Horrid Wickedness of the One, and the Real Innocence of
the Other, yet notwithstanding all this, Herod continued in those very Sins
which St. John the Baptist reproved him for before. Nay, our Blessed Savior
himself dyed and rose again, and yet the Chief Priests and Elders of the Jews
(instead of being wrought upon thereby) endeavored by the most subtle Devices
to abolish the very Memory and Report of his Resurrection.

Thus you see how ineffectual extraordinary Means are, when Men have hardened
themselves against all Impressions from Divine Revelation; and I dare make this
Challenge to any Man, whose Reading or Observation can inform him, of any that
have been made true Converts Apparitions from the Dead.

I know the Popish Legends and other Writings of that kind, mention very
strange Effects produced in the Living by Apparitions from the Dead; but the
Vanity and Imposture of such Reports is so Notorious, that it would give them
some kind of Credit to attempt a set and industrious Refutation of them; and
therefore I shall hasten to the last thing proposed, and that is to show the
inconsistency of the Supposition with Reason.

3dly, To grant there may be such a thing as the Apparition of a Deceased
Person, yet no Man (I presume) will deny but it is God's Prerogative and
peculiar Privilege to Fashion and Compose a Man; and every Man from the first
Creation till the Dissolution of all things, is the undeniable Work of his
Hand: For it is he that has made us and not we our selves, his Eyes beheld our
Substance when imperfect, and in his Book (and his alone) are all our Menbers
written.

Now if to Create, is God's peculiar Privilege? If nothing of an Inferior
Being can pretend to it? If Death makes a real Division and Separation both of
Soul and Body, by the special Appointment and Designation of God himself, and
such a Disolution that the Body returns to Dust, Corruption and Putrefaction,
and the Soul is taken into the safe Custody of Angels, who are to answer for it
and Conduct it to that State, either of Happiness, or Misery, where it is to
remain till the Resurrection; yet there can be no reason to think (supposing
there may be an Apparition) that this Apparition should consist of the same
Body and Soul which did belong to the Deceased Person; because it is Gods
Prerogative only, to Create and Unite the Body and Soul of Man; and the same
Body and Soul being once dissolved and separated by Death, are consined by the
Wise Order and Appointment of God to their respective States until the last
Trumpet sound, and Command them to rise again; and therefore as it cannot be
with the same Body and Soul, it is altogether as unlikely it should be with the
Body or Soul of any other Deceased Person whatever, for the same reason of
Confinement already given.

And therefore to suppose there may be an Apparition, yet of what can we
imagine it should consist? It must either consist of Substance or Matter, or
else it must be Immaterial and without Substance: If it consists of Substance
and Matter, and consequently may be Seen, Felt, and Understood, why may it not
be secured and kept for the Conviction of such as will not believe there are
such Beings; but this was never yet attempted, and therefore I dare conclude,
that either there can be no such thing at all, or if there be, it must be
Incorporeal or Immaterial.

And to suppose this: How is it likely it should perform the same operations
with Matereal and Corporeal Beings (as is frequently pretended either by
discoursing with, discovering things past, or foretelling things that are to
come.)

Or, to suppose a Point further; that it is neither merely Corporeal, nor yet
merely Incorporeal. But (as some Philosophers Imagined) a Being or Existence
between both; yet if so, how is it likely it should so nearly resemble such a
Being, as was both Material and Immaterial, and as such consisted both of Soul
and Body; for if it be Incorporeal, it must necessarily be Immaterial, and if
it is Immaterial, it must as necessarily be Invisible, and if so, the
Controversy is at an end.

But to beg your Patience a while longer; according to the Platonic
Hypothesis, Spirits are Embodied; Mr. Locks Humane Understanding page 162. Book
2d. Chap. 23.
and although a very ingenious Person seems to think that Spirits can assume to
themselves Bodies of different Figure and Conformation of Parts; yet the same
Person as ingeniously confesses, it is but a mere Conjecture, owns that he can
give no manner of Reason for it, but common Report; and is so far from imposing
it upon the World, that he calls it his own extravagant Opinion.

Historians I am sensible make frequent mention of the Miracles of Magicians,
and several other Unaccountable Prodigies by Invisible Powers and wicked
Spirits; thus they tell us, that not only the time, but the place of Cesars
Death was fortold to Pompey and Crassus; but as this happened in a little time
after, so it was as much expected as it was foretold, as Tully witnesses, lib.
2. de Divinatione.

And although some of their Predictions might happen to be true, yet this must be
supposed in Common Reason, to happen but by Chance, because they so often
failed; which can be owing to nothing more then the overruling Power and
Providence of God who brings the Councels of the Heathens to naught, and
makes their Devices to be of none effect. thus Demosthenes confessed that the
Delphian Oracle was determined by Philip of Macedon, and their Corruption is
clearly taken notice of in several other Authors.

Eusebius Prepar. lib. 4. shows that several of the Heathen Priests publicly
confessed the Impostures of their Oracles, and that their Confessions have
been, if they are not still upon Record; and as the World increased in
Knowledge, they were rejected and laid aside: For as soon as Light and
Immortality became discovered by the Power of the Gospel, they were visibly
slighted and disregarded till at length they became despicable every day more
and more.

I make no doubt but there have been Apparitions, as in the several
forementioned Instances from Scripture for Ends and Designs best known to God,
as perhaps for the Manifestation of his Power and Wisdom, of his Love and
Goodness to Mankind; but I cannot see the least reason why or how, there should
or can be any such in these times; Since Miracles are Ceased, Gods ways are
sufficiently known upon the Earth, and his saving Health amongst all Nations.

For as God cannot propose any thing considerable to Mankind, (as to the
Revelation of his Will and Pleasure here, or his Rewards and Punishments in the
other Life) either by raising the Dead, or suffering or permitting an
Apparition, (as has been already shown) so neither can I think, that any other
Being has Power to do it. for although the Devil had a Power once given him to
Metamorphose and take strange shapes upon him, ( as he did to Eve in the shape
of a Serpent) yet it does not follow that he has the same Power to do so still;
and although God might permit and suffer it in those times, and likewise Eve to
be tempted by him, (perhaps to bring about that profound Mystery of his Love,
the Incarnation and Crucifixion of our Blessed Savior,) yet since the Coming
of our Savior into the World, (according to that Prediction of him) the Seed
of the Woman has bruised the Serpents Head, the Power of Satan is destroyed,
and his Kingdom is at an End, and thanks be to God who has given us the Victory
through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

God has eng^ged himself by a solemn Promise to us, in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, chap. 10. that no temptation shall befall us, but such as is
common to Man, and more over that he will not suffer us to be tempted above
that we are able.

Now, if this be so, it cannot be in the Power of Satan or any of his Agents to
make any extraordinary Assaults upon us without our own Concurrence; and although
some Persons do pretend to Praeternatural and Extraordinary Temptations; I dare
be possitive this is more owing to their own Wickedness, and Debaucheries, then
to any thing else besides.

For, when Men have once thrown aside Religion, turned God himself out of their
thoughts, and make no scruple to commit Evil, it is no wonder God should have
done with them, that he should leave them to a Reprobate Mind, till at length
they believe a Lie. But then on the other hand whilst Men are careful to order
their Conversation as becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Devil can have no
Power over them. But if this be the least of all their thoughts, they grow
restless and uneasy, subject to the grosest Superstitions, wild and unsettled
in their Heads, till at length they fall into downright Atheism.

I plainly see two Objections that will be offered against what I have here
said, which I think it needful to Answer, before I conclude.

1st. Some will say it is a piece of very ill breeding to disprove what has been
Asserted and Attested by very many Persons of good Integrity and Sense.

2dly, Others again will say that I have gratified the Devil in one main Point
of his Controversy with us, whose Policy it is to Propagate the Unbelief of
Apparitions, whose Concession Infers his Existence; and if no Apparitions, then
no Devil.

To the First I Answer, that multiplicity of Opinions cannot Defend and Secure
us from being imposed upon. For to suppose any thing true, only because a
Multitude does Attest it, is to suppose Whoring or Defrauding justifiable,
because so many in these times delight in the One, and practice the Other.

As it was in the Days of Old, so many will not be persuaded to believe such
things as may be any ways disagreeable to their first Notions and Apprehensions
of things. But certainly this can be no Argument of Truth, for although many have
hitherto been imposed upon, yet it does not follow but that many more may be so
again.

How many were deluded by the Priests of Baal into the Belief of Southsaying,
and many other superstitious Idolatries? How grossly were the Romans imposed
upon by Junius Proculus one of the Chief of their Nobility? who,
(Notwithstanding Romulus had been torn in pieces in the Senate House,) swore
that he was taken up among the Gods, and that he had appeared particularly to
him, and commanded him to tell the People that it was the pleasure of the
Immortal Gods to have him continue among Mankind, till he had founded a City
whose Empire and Glory should far surpass all others; and that he would always
be a Propitious God to them, under the Name of Quirinus.

And thus likewise in some Christian Churches (if all be true that is reported)
there are very strange deceptions, some whereof are still confessed by the Name
of Pious Fraud.

Theudas an Impostor led away four Thousand Persons in the Wilderness, and the
Delusions of Mahomet almost the fourth part of Mankind; all Heresies how gross
soever, have found a Welcome with the People.

Thus many of the Jews were wrought into a Belief that Herod was the Messiah;
and how many in these times of the more inferior sort of People, are openly and
daily deluded by Fortune Tellers, Juglers, and other incantatory Impostors;
unto whom (which is very deplorable in Christians) too many apply themselves
between Jest and Earnest, till at length they are prevailed with to quit the
Truth, and being once deceived themselves, they must needs be subject to very
great Mistakes and Errors.

But besides all this, there are others who (who out of a supine carelessness
and neglect of Enquiry even of such Matters whereof they doubt themselves) are
yet willing to believe many things rather then be at the trouble and difficulty
of Examining them; and either from an Unactive Temper of Mind to put in
Execution the Dictates and Suggestions of their own Reason, or else by a
strange Kind of contentment and acquiesceny in every Species of Truth, they
readily embrace the least Shadow thereof.

But certainly had our Forefathers sat down and taken up such Resolutions,
the Face of Truth had been abundantly more obscured then now it is.

2dly, To the other Objection it may be Answered that I have not any where
denied the Being of Sprits; and how strange soever it may seem to some, that I
cannot believe there are Apparitions, yet I desire such Persons to consider,
how destructive the Belief of them has been for several Ages to the Christian
Religion.

For upon what else but such pretended Apparitions and Revelations do the
Papists ground their Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead; and very much of the
same strain are those pretended Infusions of New Lights and Enthusiastic
Inspirations from another sort of People.

Now, since Almighty God has been pleased to Reveal every thing needful to be
known by us, in the Holy Scriptures, both as to our chief Interest, and Duty in
this present World; it rather concerns us to show ours^ves truly thankful for,
and humbly to acquiesce in so gracious a Revelation, than to raise any farther
Scruples or Doubts concerning any one thing that is contained in it.

And if Men could but once be prevailed upon for to Act thus, we should be be
abundantly convinced of the Truth and Certainty of a Future State and the
Rewards and Punishments of another Life, without molesting or disturbing the
Dead, to make proof of it.

Has not the Prophet Daniel above two Thousand Years ago? Chap. 7.9. discovered
as much to us by what the Almighty was pleased to show him in a Vision, when
his Throne was like a fiery Flame, when Thousands Thousands ministered unto him,
and ten Thousand times ten Thousand stood before him, when the Judgment was
set, and the Books were opened.

And has not the same Prophet told us farther? Chap. 12.2. that they who sleep
in the Dust of the Earth, shall rise some to everlasting Life, and some to
Everlasting Shame and Contempt.

And how often are we told in the New Testament? That God will render unto
every One according to his Works.

Has not St. Paul descended farther, specified the very time, and given all
Imaginable satisfaction and positive Assurance that the Heart of Man can
reasonably desire, as to the Case before us? When he tells us, God has
appointed a Day in which he will Judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man
whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all Men, in that he
has raised him from the Dead.

I might lay before you, many other places of Scripture to the same purpose,
which I must needs omit, least I should exceed the narrow Proportion of a
Letter; whoever has a mind to see these at large, may have full satisfaction,
from the learned Dr. Scot, in his Christian Life, and Dr. Sherlock in his
Treatise of a Future Judgment.

And although our chief Evidence for Proof of a Future State, does depend on
Scripture, yet those Persons who will question the Scriptures in a point of so
great Moment, will question any thing,

That Almighty God in a thing of so great Importance, has not left himself
without witness to all the World, will appear upon these two accounts.

First, By considering the Nature of God.

Secondly, By considering the Nature of Man.

First, By considering the Nature of God himself, who is an Omnipotent,
Powerful, and Wise Being, which appears by the bare Work of his Creation: He
regards not the Actions of his People ( whom he has made) so as to have only a
Naked speculative Knowledge of them, but with an Eye of Providence and Judgment;
he does not merely gaze upon us, as an indifferent and unconcerned Spectator,
but beholds and views us with the highest concernment; either with Infinite
Complacency, or Detestation.

And what can we imagine all this should be for? But in order to be produced
either for or against us, whenever he shall be pleased to call us to an
Account, that so he may distribute his Rewards or Punishments accordingly; this
Solomon clearly Determines, Eccles. 12.14. he will bring every Work into
Judgment, with every secret thing. And if there are any, who will not be
persuaded as to the truth of this, only because God has spoken it, who is not a
Man, that he should lie, nor the Son of Man, that he should Repent; there will
be a time when with Shame and Confusion of face they shall be forced to
confess, Righteous art thou Oe Lord, and true are all thy Judgments.

Almighty God is not only a Powerful and Omnipotent Being, but Truth and
Justice are Attributes as Essential to him as any other; and if God be Just, he
must needs do Justice to every Person, for shall not the Judge of all the World
do right? And if he does not distribute this Justice for the present, it
unavoidably follows that it must be done hereafter, and that the dispensations
of his Providence, are in many things promiscuous and uncertain now, is an
invincible Argument of the Great Certainty of a Future State.

2dly, This Truth will apear farther, by considering the Nature of Man.

The very Nature and Condition of Man, shows him to be a Creature that must
give an Account of himself hereafter; this the Scriptures are positive in, and
therefore St. Paul tells us, Romans 14.12. Every one must give an Account of
himself to God.

But besides the Scripture, Reason will make out as much, for as Man was
Created in time, his Creation must needs argue some Design in the Creator, and
as Man was endued with Reason; it is but rational to think, that he should be
also Accountable to his Creator, how far he has answered the Design of his
Creation, either here, or hereafter; this has been Universally consented too by
Mankind.

That Almighty God does not permit and suffer his Servants upon their departure
out of this World, either to lie sleeping in the Dust, or to be hovering about
unrewarded to the End of it: But as soon as they have finished their Work upon
Earth; he either admits them to the Joy of their Master, i. e. to all the
Felicities, that their separated Spirits are capable of, in those several
Degrees and Measures of Perfection which they have arrived to: Or else
dismisses them into a State of Misery and Horror, where they are to remain
during their separation from the Body, expecting the farther Completion of
their Happiness or Misery by a General Resurrection; is sufficiently attested
by the Primitive Sages of the Church, as Ireneus, Tertullian, Clemens, St.
Chrysostom, and many others; plainly Intimating that the Souls of the
Righteous after Death, are kept in proper Receptcles, enjoying certain Degrees
either of Happiness, or Misery, till the Day of the Resurrection. This is
called in Scripture sometimes by the Name of Paradise, sometimes by the Name of
Abraham's Bosom.

And the Souls of the Righteous are expressly said to be sustinentes
Resurrectionem, eternitatis candidati, i. e. waiting with a solicitous
expectation for the Resurrection, and to stand Candidates for Immortality.

And that there is nothing in all this, but what is agreeable to Scripture, is
evident from Zachariah, chap. 9.10, 11. where the Souls of the Righteous, are
styled Prisoners of hope, lying in the Lake where there is no Water, i. e. (as
some interpret) no constant Stream of Joy; but yet they are supported with
certain Showers, and farther Illuminations of their Hope.

And that the Souls of the Wicked are confined to a State of Misery* St. Jude
plainly intimates when he tells us, verse 13. that they are reserved unto the
Blackness of Darkness.

When St. Paul reasoned with Felix, of a Judgment to come, it made him tremble;
and that the Common Heathens themselves were convinced of as much, appears from
their Notions (which are still upon Record) of Minos, Eacus, and Rhadamanthus:
And with what Artificial and plausible pretenses soever, Men may seem and
endeavor to Color over their Debaucheries, yet it is not in their Power to
drown or stifle the Clamours of their Consciences, which will suggest what they
must expect hereafter.

Let us then resolve with a Holy Sobriety and Religious Prudence, (instead of
questioning) to confine our hopes and desires only to be directed by the
written Word of God; which is every way fitted and proportioned for the
regulating our Lives, in order to that Great End of making us wise unto
Salvation, and if we have such a certain Rule, proposed to us, will it not
argue the most monstrous Vanity, and unaccountable Perverseness, to depart from
it.

And if Men will not believe that there is a God, and a Future State of Rewards
and Punishments, without an Apparition or some New Revelation, they are never
like to have it.

For God has no where undertaken to gratify the vain desires and peevish
Inclinations of his People; he has sufficiently provided for their Welfare and
Happiness, both by Nature and Revelation; and it is not from any thing but the
want of a modest and humble Submission thereunto, that so many grow wild and
unsettled in their Heads, that they are always gadding after New Discoveries
and Revelations; and for all those that will not be saved, unless it be
according to their own Way and Method of Invention, how Insulting or
Atheistically soever they may carry it for the present, yet there will be a
time when they shall be forced to lie down in their own Shame, and to cover
themselves with their own Confusion.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Bullivant, Who was Barbarously
Murdered by Edmund Eudley. By B. Crook, A. M. Rector of St. Michael Woodstreet.


