THE HAPPINESS OF A Quiet Mind BOTH In Youth and Old Age, With the way to
Attain It.

In a DISCOURSE occasioned by the Death of Mrs. Martha Hasselborn, who died
March 13th, 1695/6. in the 95th year of her Age.

By TIMOTHY ROGERS, M.A.

LONDON: Printed for John Salusbury at the Rising Sun in Cornhill, MDCXCVI.

THE Epistle Dedicatory. TO Mr. Jacob Hasselborn, Merchant.
THere is nothing Men are more apt to value themselves upon, than the being
descended from Great and Honorable Persons; who have either had Noble Blood
running in their Veins, or have signalized themselves by a series of Heroical
Actions for the good of their Country; and by this means have delivered their
names down to Posterity, Crowned with those Garlands, which the thirst of Glory
made them to desire: And yet many thus descended, stain the Memory of their
Predecessors; and as far as in them lies, make all their Laurels wither, by
Lives led according to their own humor and fancy, and the contagious Examples
of a depraved Age.

But you have the Honor to be akin to one who was on earth related to the
family of Heaven. Your Good Mother after having with continued Patience,
sustained the troubles of her weary Pilgrimage calmly at length arrived at her
dearest home, where she longed to be.

The Remembrance of her, I doubt not, is a great help to you in your Christian
Race, such an example of goodness, so unaffected and sincere, whilst it is
always brightly shining before your Eyes, gives you both light and strength to
follow her, in the same happy path wherein she went: The frequent thinking on
the Holiness of her Life, will be a great Motive to quicken you to be like her
in every commendable and praise worthy thing. To think of her Faith, and
Meekness and Patience, will make you flourish in the same Virtues: As young
Painters increase their skill, by frequently Copying old and excellent
Originals. In your pious Mother you have seen living and exemplified Religion,
a quiet Mind, not as represented in the coldness of Precepts, but as warmed and
animated by the blessed Spirit, and Patient holding out to the Conclusion of a
great Age; such a Patience as is to be admired, but not to be described; for no
Colors can be soft enough to draw this Admirable Grace.

St. Paul rejoiced in his beloved Timothy, and expressed a very lively pleasure
upon the thought of one that had very good Parents, and was himself vevery
good: When (says he) I call to remembrance the unfeigned Faith that is in thee,
which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois and thy Mother Eunice; and I am
persuaded in thee also, wherefore I put thee in remembrance, etc. I hope that
the pure and constant Faith that was in your Mother is passed into you; not by
a propagation of Blood, but of Spirit; not of Nature, but of Grace. That you
and your Relations may meet her and all the blessed Saints with comfort at the
Great Day; live together in that place where there will be no Sin nor Pain, nor
Old Age, but an Eternal Holiness, Spring and Youth; and where our present
Weakness shall be swallowed up of Strength, is the hearty Prayer of

Your Real Friend And Servant T. Rogers.

Psalm. XL. Verse 1. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me,
and heard my cry.


AS of all the Ages of the Life of Man, Infancy is the most Innocent, and
Childhood the most Vain, and Youth the most Brisk and Daring; so Old Age is the
most clogged with Pains and Miseries. In other Stages of our Journey we are
annoyed now and then with Trouble and Calamity, with Sickness and decays of
Strength; but this last part of our Pilgrimage, this feeble part of Life, is
its self a Disease. It Is so weak, that generally the Powers of the Soul, as
well as the Members of the Body, have not the Liveliness and Vigor that they
had in their greener Years; the Evening is much more Cloudy and Tempestuous,
more Dark and Frightful then the Morning of their Days. And yet there are found
some Blessed Souls that flourish even in Winter; neither the sharpness of the
Weather, nor the uncomfortableness of the Season hinders their being over
Green. Such an one was David, as he was all his Life Musically given, of an
Harmonious Heavenly Temper: in his pleasant Angelick Airs he had often mounted
up to Heaven; and at last, with praise, he took his Flight thither, to change
his Hymns into sweeter Hallelujahs. 1 Chr. 29.10. He blessed the Lord before
all the Congregation: v. 20. He said to all the Congregation, Now bless the
Lord. V. 28. He dyed in a good old Age, full of Days, Riches and Honor. So old
Jacob, when the decays of Strength, and the weakness of his Age would not allow
him to be long in his Devotions; he improved the more easy Intervals of his
Illness to breath after God. Gen 49.18. I have waited for thy Salvation, O
Lord: His Expression was short, but his Faith and Patience were very great. So
Moses prepared his Soul for the Joys of Heaven, by tuning his Harp below, he
Sung before he dyed. Deuteronomy. 32. And before his death he blessed the Children of
Israel. Chapter 33. And after this he went up to the Mount, and put off his Body to
be Clothed upon with Life and Immortality, Deuteronomy. 34.5. And good old Simeon,
who had a Promise, that he should not depart till he had seen the Lords Christ:
He did not hide himself from the glorious sight, though he knew, that after that
he must quickly dye; but he came by the Spirit into the Temple, and there he
met with the Child Jesus, that for many past years he had longed to see: And
having seen the Blessed Babe, he took him up in his Arms, and was full of
Transports, saying, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for
mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, Luke 2.27, 28. I might allege the Example
of Paul the Aged, who was then in Chains, and near his Execution by the Lion
Nero; and yet after having served several Years under the Banners of Christ,
neither the Cruelties of his Imprisonment, nor the prospect of death, nor all
the weight of Age that laid upon him, did abate his hope in God; nay, his hope
was ripened to assurance, when he says, I have fought the good fight: He spoke
as if he had been in Paradise; as if the Crown of Glory had been already on his
Head; to all these I may join, that daughter of Abraham, for whom I Preach this
Funeral Sermon, who served God with cheerful hope many years, and bore all the
advances of Death, as well as her declining Age, with admirable Calmness and
Resignation, and long continued Faith and Hope, and dyed near an Hundred Years
old; dropping into the Grave like Fruit from the Tree, when it is fully Ripe.
She had no Clouds and Darkness in her Soul; she was all calm and serene; she
lived in Joy, and she dyed in Light; she set in Beams: And that which greatly
contributed to the pleasure of her Life, and the calmness of her death, was the
quietness and stilness of her Soul; using frequently, upon all occasions, this
very passage of the Holy Prophet, I waited patiently for the Lord: From these
words I observe,

First, That is not below the greatest and most honorable Persons to wait on
God. The Grandeur of a King is no bar to his dutiful Attendance on his Maker;
and the Crowns of those Princes shine with the highest Luster, that are laid at
the Feet of God. Those that honor him he will Honor. The Angels that are the
Courtiers and Nobility of Heaven, and in constant waiting know their distance;
and though they are of the highest rank of Creatures, they remember they are
Creatures still; and whilst they wonder at the Glory of the Divine Majesty,
they know they cannot comprehend it! They do not sit upon the Throne, but are
in postures, full of Reverence, employed round about it. They are very humble
even in their highest ecstasies and cover their Faces when they cry to one
another, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his
Glory, Isa. 6.3.

Secondly, When any affliction or trouble is upon us, it is our most becoming
and most Advantageous Duty, to wait upon God with patience, and to pray for his
relief and help.

I. What is implied in this patient waiting? II. What obligations we are under
to it? III. The Application.
First, In this patient waiting there is included a most entire and free
submission to the Will of God, as to the nature and duration of our Trouble.
That it come and tarry just as long as he pleases; a waiting Christian looks
upon his Fathers Hand, and is not with such a view frighted at the most bitter
Cup: He is not hurried away with violent Passions, with murmuring or uneasy
Thoughts. The Divine Wisdom that knows when and how to deliver, produces the
most refreshing acquiescence; he is not surious and precipitant, no fluctuation
of Spirit discovers it self in his Speech or Actions, Isa. 30.18. When the
Storms are high, he is still: In all varieties of Providence, in all the
changes of his Health or Life, he is peaceable within; no Bitterness, no
Thorns, no Canker in his Soul; he leaves the time of his Deliverance to his
all-wise Creator, and waits in quiet till the time come, without complaining or
finding fault with the pressure of the Cross, or the slow advances of his help.
He knows, that uneasiness and displeasure at the Proceedings of the Most High,
is the mark of a fallen Angel, and not the Character of a Saint.

Secondly, This patient waiting upon God, is attended with Faith and Hope. With
Faith concerning the reality of good to come, and with Hope concerning the
seasonable fulfilling of the Promises that he relies upon: What wait I for, my
hope is in thee, Ps. 39. Hope is the lively Spring of Action, infuses Life and
Spirit into the feeble and the most humbled, but despair cramps and freezes,
and enervates all the Powers of the Soul: It reflects upon the Goodness and
Mercy of God, and makes us sink into the lowest depths with its killing weight:
It swells our Sorrows, and turns our Sighs into Roarings, and our Tears into
Seas of Grief. Whereas he that patiently waits, knows that after the blackest
Night and most Tempestuous, the Sun will rise again, and cheer him with his
reviving help; he knows that Celestial Comforts are many times Neighbors to
the most doleful fears; and sometimes the howling Wilderness is the way to
Canaan, and the Waters may be troubled, when the healing moment comes; the face
of the Pooll was not so smooth when the Charitable Angel descended as it was
before, but it was more useful and medicinal. Never was any Season more gloomy,
then when our Savior was upon the Cross; never was any bordered with more
glorious Events. It was a dark Night when he Suffered, but 'twas a glorious day
when he Rose again. He that patiently waits remembers that the Church has been
most dear to God, and most fruitful in good Works, when tossed with Storms; it
has flourished most, when the Devil and his Angels have endeavored to depress
it; he waits for help, as they that watch for the Morning, they look and hope
for the dawning of the Day, watch the first streaks of rising light, and
rejoices to see it, Ps. 130.6.

Thirdly, This patient waiting upon God, is attended with earnest desires and
prayers for his merciful Appearance. I waited and I cried unto the Lord, O for
that sweet and pleasant Hour, when I shall be Saved! that the time to favor
me, even the set time were come! O that I had the Wings of a Dove, that I might
flee away from the windy Storm and Tempest! O Lord behold my distressed Case,
oh send me some help for thy mercies sake; remember my weakness, and thy own
Promise; hear my groans, and perform the word on which thou have caused me to
hope; do not cast out my Prayer, do not suffer me to Perish in my low Estate:
All this earnestness is submissive, full of Resignation and Tranquillity: The
Sick desire many times to dye from weariness and pain; but a good Christian
shows that he is ready to depart, but is willing to stay till God bid him go;
he waits for Christ with a longing craving Eye, as for a dear friend from a far
Country; he bears his absence with Patience, but would be very glad to see him
come: Heaven is welcome to such a panting Soul, as the Port, to one that has
been frighted and endangered by the Storms; such an one when confined by
trouble, longs for a Release, but will not break his Prison; He waits, till the
hand that Bound him shall break his Bands asunder; remembering that God is as
Jealous of his word, when he promises favors to his Children, as when he
threatens punishment to his obstinate and hardened Enemies. The desires of
Persons in distress are most serious and importunate: When Peter was like to
sink, how heartily and with all his force may we imagine that he cried out,
Master save me, Matthew. 14.30. So our Savior, in the days of his Flesh; used
strong Cries; and the Prayers of the Mariners in Jonas were as loud as the
Storms; these were not more blustering then those were affectionate. People
that are just like to be Drowned, have no time to Compliment, their danger
swallows up all other thoughts, but those that relate to their present
Circumstances.

Fourthly, This patient waiting directs the quiet Soul in such a manner to God,
that he uses no undue reflections upon the Instruments, or more immediate
occasions of trouble. When he is sick he does not rail at the Physician,
because he does not give him ease; but considers, that the Wisdom of the most
Wise, and the Skill of the most Skilful will not avail: When he is Plundered,
he does not inveigh against the vile Engines of his Misery, but bewails his Sin
that provokes God to turn the Lions and the Bears loose upon him; when the
Sabeans and Chaldeans had spoiled the Patient Job, he calmly said, The Lord
has given, and the Lord has taken, chapter 1.21. A quiet Christian, when he is
falsely accused of things that his Soul abhors; and sees in such an accusation
the hand of the Devil, using weak and malicious People as his Agents to Coin
and Spread his Lies: He pities their cruel Malice; and in a Contempt of these
mean Arts of Hell, says, The Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: Or
when he hears a Shimei rail, for some take delight in railing, they are a
Generation of Vipers, Poison and Stings are in their Make and Constitution; to
such he only says, It may be the Lord has bid them Curse us, Ps. 37.7. When
others are planting Thorns and Briars to vex him, he will not torture and
distress himself; when they wound him, he will not enrage and multiply the
Wounds; such a Christian in every State is calm and quiet: He knows, that God
is the Author of all Good, and the Ruler of Evil; that all his Diseases have
their Commission from him, as the God of Nature; and all inward Troubles are
under his direction, who is the Father of Spirits, and that in both he will be
gracious and merciful.

Fifthly, Patient waiting upon God implies, that a man do not use any unlawful
methods, to rid himself of trouble. If we use any sinful arts, to escape from
this or that Affliction, it is an argument of exhausted Patience, and that our
strength is gone; It Is heinous unbelief, with reference both to the Power and
Goodness of God, as if he were not able, or not inclined to help us: If we have
not the presence of our Savior, as formerly, we must not with Saul go to the
Witch of Eaden, or imagine that the Devil can help us when God has left us; we
may in all trouble use all the good means for escape that we can; providing
they be such as are not inconsistent with the Wisdom of a Man, or the Innocence
of a Christian, we are to wait on the Lord, and to keep his way. As the Eyes of
an Handmaid are fixed on her Mistress, being ready, with patient attention, to
know and do her pleasure; so must our Eyes with the like dutiful regard be
fixed on Heaven. The Precepts of the Gospel are in all these cases quite
opposite to the Maxims of the Stoical Philosophy, that gave its wise Men leave
to end their own Lives, when they found their Pains and Griefs many and
insupportable; this indeed, as some observe, showed the falseness of their
Patience, and this was opposite to other Opinions of the same; for they said,
there was no Grief, how violent soever, that could overwhelm a wise Man. Zeno
the famous Author of their Sect strangled himself: A patient attender on God,
must not do any thing to shorten or destroy his own Life, by Surfeits,
Drunkenness, Intemperance, or any other wicked Action whatsoever.

Sixthly, This patient waiting on God includes a constant perseverance in all
good Duties, till Relief and Mercy come. We must wait during the sweetness of
the Spring, and the Rigors of the Winter, when we are at ease, and when we are
in pain; when we prosper in our Affairs, and when we meet with unlooked for sad
Events; we must begin to wait in Youth, and not fall till old Age shall Snow
upon us, Job 14.14. as a Sentinel keeps his Post till he be Relieved, if help
come not this hour or moment, it may the next: We shall never be ashamed of our
hope, if afflictions do never so closely Besiege us, our Savior in due time
will march to our assistance, and reward our Courage and Fidelity, Exodus 14.13.
The Husbandman waits for the precious Fruit of the Earth, notwithstanding he
now and then sees unseasonable weather, and very sharp Seasons, yet nothing
does abate his hope of Harvest; he knows the joyful day will surely come; he
does not tarry lazily at home, when the Season does invite him to Sow his Seed;
he rouzes himself, summons his Servants, and all in earnest go to work
together; he is not discouraged with a stormy day, nor folds his Hands because
the Sun does not shine, nor the wind blow as he would have it, Ecces. 11.14.
But alas, how many excuses do we make, to evade our Duty and put it off; it is
too hot or too cold, too soon or too late to begin to work; many will not be
good, because the days are bad, they will not travel, because they are afraid of
Rain; whereas that Rain they fear might lay the dust, that affliction they meet
with in the Road, might deliver them from those hurrying cares that at other
times blind their Eyes, and obsoure their Judgments. Let us take heed least the
Patience of the Husbandman condemn our peevishness, and our fearful haste, who
if we have not help immediately think, we are undone; whereas, that quiet Son
of Adam, having Ploughed his Ground and Sown his Seed, takes no further care
about it, but leaves the rest to the Influence of Heaven, and the God of
Nature: He quietly waits for the Harvest; and for the Rain that plumps the
Corn; he would not cut it down when it first begins to spring above the Ground,
but stays till it is fully ripe. Those Christians that are in darkness should
consider, that Light is sown for the Righteous, Ps. 92.11. Let us not desire to
reap before the time, not with a vain labor strive to hasten the Months of
Harvest, Jer. 5.24. We shall reap in good time, our Salvation is nearer then
when we first believed, and we may with the Husbandman find a deal of work to
do before the Harvest come. So a Christian knows, if no Salvation from trouble
come in this World, yet Death will set him free; and then the tedious hours of
pain, will return no more for ever: It Is very hard indeed long to wait it, very
grievous to Flesh and Blood; but its highly agreeable to the brightness of our
Faith, and the greatness of our Hopes; for what is this poor short Life to a
long Eternity? Simeon and Jacob, and the rest of the waiting Saints, are now at
rest in the full enjoyment of their blessed Hopes: Long Attendance upon God,
shows a firmness of uncommon Courage, and a most profound Humility. Whereas, to
be angry and uneasy, that we are not delivered just when and how we please,
betrays too great an Opinion of our selves; for if we were less proud, we
should be more patient; if we thought of what we deserve, we should not murmr
at the burden that is laid upon us, 1 Samuel 13.11. The hastiness of Saul brought
on his Ruin; he could not wait, and so he Rebelled; he acted as if he had been
bewitched, for the Rebellion of Princes against God, as well as of their
Subjects against them, is as the sin of Witchcraft; but to stay till he that
sends trouble think fit to call it off, shows a temper truly Christian, and is
an evidence of a subdued and a resigned Will.

Secondly, We are to consider the Reasons that should oblige us to this patient
Waiting.

Reas. 1. We should patiently wait on God for our many miseries and sorrows,
call for such a frame of Soul. The Thorns in our flesh, and the troubles of our
minds, our pains and our fears call for it; our Voyage to Heaven may prove very
full of Storms, and by this patience we shall escape Shipwreck, and not be left
to the mercy of the Waves, but have a wise Pilot to steer us, and a sure Anchor
within the veil: God may give the Devil leave to vex us, an Angel of Satan may
buffet us, he may torture and distress us very sore, though he have not leave to
kill us. The roaring of the Lion makes the Beast tremble, though they are not
within his devouring Jaws. The Devil is often instrumental to bring sickness
and pain upon us: The worst of Men serve for common Executioners, and the
basest of Spirits may serve to bring Judgments. And besides, God will have no
Creature useless; even Storms and Vapors, and Lightning and Thunder fulfill his
Will: But now by our patient hope in God, the Malice of the Devil will be
turned to Good; his buffeting will teach us the need we have of Christ, it will
make us watchful, it will make us full of gentleness and pity, to such as he
falls upon, when we are escaped our Bowels will earn over them: This waiting
upon God will reconcile us to the most painful, and the sharpest methods of his
Providence; this disappoints the Devil, who would have us when the hand of God
smites us, to torment our own Souls; he will be disappointed if we are not
fretful though we be diseased; by patient waiting we pull out the sting of
troubles; we Conquer Sin, that would otherwise embitter all our Comforts, and
rob us of our Peace and Hope, and make God to be our Enemy, and every frown of
his is more frightful and astonishing then the united threats of Men: Every
touch of his hand is heavier then their combined strength; one drop of his
Anger will overwhelm us more then the floods of many Waters: Innumerable Evils
in this Life will assault us, both as we are Men and Christians, and therefore
we have need of Patience; Patience to steer a right course to Heaven; for we
shall meet with many rough and contrary Winds, that will blow upon us from
every quarter: Only by this quietness of waiting we shall be happy, as to have
no Tempest within, though there may be Storms abroad. We have need of Patience,
for we may meet with many Tribulations that will shake our confidence, and put
our strongest Faith to a very sharp Trial, and make the bruised Reed bend very
much, though it do not break. If we have never so many years of smiling shining
Light, the days of darkness will at length come, and the shadows of the
Evening be stretched out: Our greener Youth knows but little sorrow, but it
hangs with a mighty weight upon decaying age. A thousand Miseries come crouding
thick upon old folks; and after all these, comes the shady veil and bitter
death. When we stand upon the shore, and view the blustering Winds and the
rough Seas that we are to encounter, surely we need a deal of patience of
waiting, and of prayer; and our great afflictions will not be well born, with a
little Grace: fiery Trials will consume us if we are not fortifyed before we
are thrown into the Furnace. We need a vast Treasore of Grace, when we
consider, what paint we may live to feel, and what stinging troubles and
provocations we may meet withal.

Reas. 2. We should patiently wait upon God, for by our most painful troubles
he designs our Welfare; and if we are not wanting to our selves in a due
improvement of our Crosses, we may reap unspeakable advantages: The ruggedness
of Adversity may be more useful to us, than all the smoothness of our most
unclouded and most easy days, our Souls may thrive with the fairest and most
lasting qualities: When our Bodies languish and decay, as it is commonly
observed, that the People in cold Northern Climates, are more robust and longer
lived, than those that are nearer to the South, who are daily broiled with
excessive heats, which, by quick degrees, melt their Lives away. In our most
overflowing afflictions, we are like those that are at Sea; Ps. 107.24. We see
the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep, a thousand strange things
are discovered to them that are in the midst of the gaping Waves; that are not
seen by those that are upon the Land; they see the wonders of his Power in
their support, the wonders of his Wisdom, in finding out ways to save them in
the midst of danger. We should particularly wait on God in all our sickness,
for he then teaches us to know our selves, our weakness, our ignorance, and the
folly of our careless unthinking health; he teaches us to see, that we and
others in our best estate are altogether Vanity. The smartness of our pains
makes those instructions that are given us by the Rod, to be more remembered and
more abiding, we cannot after bitter experience forget what a terrible thing
Sin is, that makes our Body pine, and our Souls droop. Our troubles that are
deep and lasting, teach us to see, that none of our fellow Creatures in the
very height of their Grandeur and Prosperity are to be the marks of our envy:
for they may in one moment be as low as we. We that have been scorcht with
fiery Trials, must pity those poor Men that have been singed in the Flames: We
should not be uneasy nor grieved at the Cross, for our pain will soon be past,
and our past pain gives a mighty relish to our present ease; and we may hope
that in the midst of those Sorrows that God sends, he will give us the most
refreshing discoveries of his Love, and by the Inconveniences that sieze our
Bodies, remedy and abolish the far greater disorders of our Souls; such as
unbelief and ignorance, and self-conceit, and vain glory, and a too great
admiration of the world. No Books, nor no Preachers can teach us that which our
own painful feeling and sensation does; a few days sickness causes a mighty
alteration in all our thoughts, and apprehensions; by this we judge of all
things, by a different and a truer Light. We look upon this alluring world with
other fort of eyes then we did before; all its paint and varnish does not
change its bewitching quality, nor after having seen it at the borders of the
Grave, can we think it beautiful or dote upon it: And such a discovery we then
make of our selves and our own evil hearts, as we never had before. We could
not have imagined that our Faith had been so weak, till the Storms came and
made us tremble. While we are in a calm, and on the quiet shore, we do not so
well know our weakness; but when we put out to Sea, and have lost the sight of
Land, and the Wind and Waves roar about us, then we are amazed and astonished.
All the Medicinal strokes of God to his Servants, are the product of his Love:
He could take all their Burdens off in one moment, but he sees that their Faith
and Patience in the midst of troubles, is beneficial to themselves and others:
Without some of the calmness that is in their Souls, this World would be an
Hell, a Region of blasphemous discontent in their afflictions; his People have
a dearer love to Christ, and new manifestations of his faithfulness, and of the
wisdom of his Conduct.

Reas. 3. This quiet waiting upon God makes us in all sickness, pain and
trouble, easy to our selves and others. It makes us possess our Souls in
patience; but to be fretful and peevish, and quarrelsome at our burden, makes
it more burdensome, and splits one cross into a thousand; fills our bitter Cup,
and makes that which before was but half full, to run over with Gall and
Wormwood; a fore uneasy temper of mind, makes us that we cannot rest in any
posture, and no Pillar will be soft enough for us, when we Crown our Heads with
Thorns, an uneasy disquietness of Spirit approaches near to the tormenting
fury of the damned. Hell is an abode of horrible rage and discontent; they are
ever angry at God, and at themselves, continually burnt with Flaming thoughts:
But a patient Soul is like the milky way, no Clouds obscure the brightness of
his Grace: He shines with a crowd of graces joined together: His Innocent sense
of grief, and his expressions of his affliction, fall like the drops of dew in
the silent Night; they fall very gently: and wherever they come, they make
all very green and flourishing. The words of the patient edify the by standers,
and show to them the strength and beauty of Religion. What an attractiveness is
there in a composed quiet Soul. How Serene! how Lovely! it is entertained with
Music, lives and dies in Harmony. When Storms are without, all is still
within; but an impatient man vexes himself and others, runs upon the Rocks and
suffers Shipwreck; he is overloaded with anxious cares, and sinks beneath the
bulky weight, and often in his prosperity he is overset with too much sail, his
pride and ambition, with too strong a gale, blow him on the shelves. Let us
therefore strive to keep our Spirits under Government, for the Scorchings of a
Fever, and all the violence with which it preys upon the blood, are not surer
indications of abated Health, then tumultuous fluctuating passions, and
discontented thoughts, and murmuring expressions are of a bad state of Soul.

Reas. 4. Because such evil days may come upon us, wherein we shall by our
decaying age and trouble be unqualified for active service. We need patiently
wait, for it may be long before our Sorrows have a period. Many a weary step
may we have to take, and many a burden to bear, before we come to our Journeys
end. The time may come, when nothing that offers it self to your Eye, your Ear,
or your Taste, will give you pleasure; and you will neither be fit for business
nor recreation; and the motions of your graces will share in the decays of your
age. When you are a burden to your self, you will find no content in other
things. Not all the grandeur of preferment could tempt old Barzillai to a Court
Life; and you will be very little capable of Spiritual Improvements, when your
faculties are weak. When old age with its pale attendants shall sieze upon us,
it will be very well, if in the Winter of our Life there be any vigor in our
hope: All the Oil we have put into our Lamps, will be little enough to serve us
in our passage through the dark and shady veil. We are to take great care,
least when the Night comes, our Stock and Treasure of Grace should be spent;
and we shall find it hard to have inward liveliness and health, when our
outward Man decays. 'Twill be hard to rouse our Courage to new Conflicts, when
we come lagging like weary Soldiers from the field of Battle. We can go but a
very flow pace toward Heaven, when old age has maimed us, and when our Blood
begins to freez and stagnate in our Veins. In this nearness to the Grave,
People are generally so very feeble, that they are fit for nothing. They are
blessed, that in circumstances so afflicted, have learned calmness and
resignation, and can patiently wait. For by this means a pleasant Harvest, and
sweet and easy thoughts will arise in those furrows that are Ploughed with
Age; and while their Foreheads are wrinkled, the face of their Soul will be
very smooth: No thorny cares, no weeds nor thistles will be growing there. In
such a case, if you patiently wait, you will have the root of the matter; and
that Root will be fixed like some stately Cedar, that has taken deep hold and
is not easily torn up; keeps its Station when its leaves are fallen off. In the
withering decays of Age, you cannot indeed run very fast in the ways of God,
but you may travel by soft and easy Journeys to the Grave, and your Souls be
recreated with the bright views of Heaven, whilst your Bodies stoop with the
weight of many years. Though your hearing fail, you will be saluted by good News
from within; Music will be in your own breast, when the Daughters thereof are
brought low. And you will have this happiness in the want of that sense, that
you will hear no slanders nor sad tidings. When your gust and relish of other
things is gone, you will feed upon the Bread of Life: When your Eyes are sunk
your heart will be in Heaven: And when your Memory is failed, God will not
forget you; His word will be the staff that your tottering Age may lean upon.

Reas. 5. By patient waiting upon God we shall have renewed strength, and fresh
Experience of his Love; We shall have help both for our Bodies and our Souls; a
Life of patience tends to its own preservation; keeps the humors from
overflowing their just bounds, and the Spirits from irregular fermentation;
whereas the peevish and impatient chafe themselves into a continued Fever, and
their strength declines and evaporates. It Is said, Deuteronomy. 12.3. That the man
Moses was very meek, above all the men that were upon the face of the earth:
And in Chapter 34.7. He was an hundred and twenty years old; when he dyed his eyes
were not dim, nor his natural force abated. He had as a man may say, a
springing Winter, or a youthful Age, a remaining unperisht vigor in every
part. It Is most certain, that patient waiting upon God, will make him not to
send those Judgments that waste and shorten Life; such as are those raging
Plagues, Famines and Devastations, which send many thousands early to the
Grave: We shall by this means not pass our days in his wrath. An aged Christian
that has been patient for many years, comes at length, like a Vessel richly
laden home, after a tedious and stormy Voyage, full of reviving Experiences of
the Divine Goodness, from the Morning to the Noon, and to the Evening of his
Life. Ps. 71.17, 18. He calls to mind with joy the various and admirable
conduct of his Heavenly Father, and sleeps in quiet on the lap of Providence.
Seeing with what beautiful Wisdom he had laid the soundation of his Happiness,
and carried on the Structure; how he healed his Diseases, and has safely
brought him to the borders of a perfect cure: How they were planted as Trees of
Righteousness, and by various Acts of Love and Power maintained in the
Vineyard; how they were in pain, and how they were eased with his tender hand;
how they wept in agonies, and how he wiped their tears away; new support arises
to the patient holy Soul, Isa. 40.31. It hastens our escape from trouble; as
the stilness and composure of any Person in a Fever, tends to mitigate its
force; but a restless agitation of the Body, does more and more inflame and
fire the Blood. By suffering we learn to suffer, and patience reconciles us to
the Cross, Ps. 27.14. No studied arguments, no fine Sentences do so fortify the
Soul in trouble as its own experience: This is the Lenitive of anxious and
unquiet thoughts; gives a secret refreshing, and a mighty strength; this pours
balm into those Wounds, that otherwise might gangreen and fester; when clogged
with outward infirmities, and when there are the marks and signs of a falling
habitation; there will be the prospect of an house not made with hands; and
when death is in the windows, there will be strength in the heart.

Reas. 6. This patient waiting does most excellently prepare for the mercies
waited for, and gives them when they come the sweetest relish; they are welcome
as rest to weary Travelers, that long to be at home. When God and a waiting
Soul meet together, What transports and joys are there? O he is come, he is
come, that I longed to see! it revives me to hear his chearing Language, to see
his smiling face. In what an ecstasy was Old Simeon, whilst he embraced his
Savior; many a long year had he waited for the blessed sight. O happy eyes
that saw that Sun begin his Race! happy Arms that embraced and hugged so great
a Treasure! Luke 2.36. O what a joy to a Father, to see a Prodigal returning
home, after he had long stayed and waited for his return? With what Music,
with what Joys, with what Feasts does he solemnize such a pleasant day? Thus
it is reported of Augustin's mother, what a concern she had for her Son, he was
the daily Subject of her Prayers and Tears; that St. Ambrose often when she
mourned, sent her away with this Answer, That it was not possible, that a Child
of so many Prayers should perish. No sooner was he Converted, but her Spirit
was at ease, and she now desired no more. He tells us in his Canfessions, that
when the day approacht that his Mother was to pass to a better Life, as they
were talking together of the joys of Heaven; in the Conclusion of this
Conference, which was the most agreeable in all the World; she said to me, My
Son, I avow to you, that as to what relates to my self, that I have now no
further hopes nor pleasure in this world: I know not what I do here, for I have
nothing more to look for. The only thing that made me desirous to live, was to
see thee a good Christian before my death; now my good God has granted me so
great a favor, as to see thee become entirely his Servant, by the contempt
that thou have of all the goods and pleasures of this Life, Why then do I tarry
here any longer.

Reas. 7. It cures the frowardness of our spirits in our last sickness, and
makes death very happy, and Heaven very sweet, not an unbecoming thought nor
word of God. The Conclusion of such a serene Life, is still and fair as the
Evening of a Summers day: Such an one is not pusht or hurryed out of the World;
but walks out as from one Room into another; sleeps in death, with the
composure of an Infant sucking at its Mothers Breast; they go by a smooth
descent to death: some without much pain; though but rarely is that exemption
from the assaults of the last Enemy granted. Some are laid down very gently on
their bed of dust, and others with groans and sighs extinguish the dwindgling
lamp of Life. A patient Soul is ready, and if God give the word, it gladly
flies away; it longs and flutters to be gone; and in the parting moment, such
an one shall not be left: a Convoy of Angels shall wait upon it, to see it safe
through all the Regions of the Air, where the Evil Spirits would dispute its
passage to Glory. Oh how welcome is Heaven to a troubled weary Soul! How
welcome are Hallelujah's to one, that upon Earth heard the slanders and
reproaches of many a bitter Tongue; the Clouds of Life are then scattered, and
there succeeds an eternal day: Then patience has no further work, for there is
no pain; there hope is vanished, for the Good that was once desired is possessed.
The calm of that quiet Region into which we enter after death, will make amends
for all the Storms we met with in the way thither. How many Blessed Souls shall
we meet that were in Storms as well as we? that were sick and tempted, and
scorned and afflicted, that had weak Bodies and fearful Spirits? and to go
thither from such a World as this, from the Subburbs of Hell into the New
Jerusalem. Though we are in Tempests, yet we are not to live upon the Sea. Our
Life may be very calamitous, but it is also very short: Though loaded with bitter
and uneasy griefs, yet in Heaven there is no more sorrow, for there is no sin:
there will be light in our Minds, peace in our Consciences, and comfort in our
Hearts; there will be no more fear in the place of Eternal Love, no trembling
doubting Soul in all the vast Assembly: they cannot question whether they Love
Christ or not, when they are with him. All their former suspicions are turned
into pleasant wonder, Isa. 60.2. Its an Honor to be in Christ betimes, an
Honor to be Christ's Disciple, and much more Honorable to be in his glorious
Temple. Oh Blessed are they that are at their Journeys end, after having waited
long for God; he seeing they could find no durable rest below, put out his
hand, and took them into his Ark above. How can we almost forbear
congratulating those happy Souls, that have fought the good fight of faith, and
have got the Victory. While we sin they are absolutely pure; they Rejoice while
we Mourn: though thanks be to God we mourn in hope; what we pray for, they enjoy.
When we see these calm and patient Christians going to Heaven; we say, O our
fathers, our fathers, the Horsemen of Israel, and the Chariots thereof, ye were
our Defense and our Glory; we can hardly forbear saying, Oh that we were with
you, why have you left us behind? but you were in Christ before us, and are
with him sooner; you entered into the Vineyard sooner, and so before us are
rewarded; we will endeavor to tread in your steps; then you and we, nay Jesus,
our dearest Jesus and we shall meet together! I often think of that place,
Eccl. 4.1, 2. because so many afflictions and miseries, and judgments, are the
portion of the Living. Blessed are they that sleep in the quiet Grave, no more
terrified with Dreams, no more complain of restless Nights, and of Months of
Vanity; no more do they hear the Confusions and Disorders of our World. And to
the quietness of our slumbers there, nothing contributes more than patient
waiting when we are alive. How did Jacob bless his Sons before he dyed? and how
sweetly did he yield his Breath? Genesis 49.3. O happy death to wait for God's
Salvation, and to see the Salvation that he waited for; Salvation carries a
very pleasant sound; but the Salvation of a God is very great and glorious. The
hope of this sweetens the lives of the blessed Heirs of Heaven; it pulls out
the thorns of sickness, and the sting of death; it relieves their age; it makes
the Grave to lose its horror; it makes their Bed of dust very soft; they live
in motion, and they rest in peace: They exhaust their Spirits in the work of
God; but they never come to the dregs of Life, for theirs is clear and pure to
the very bottom.

Exhortations to those that have patiently watied on God even in Old Age.
Reflect. 1. How gracious he has been to you, in giving you many years, wherein
to get Oil, and to trim your Lamps, and to prepare for another World. How many
storms have you outlived that made others sink? Many, many young People are
gone to Judgment a great while ago, while that Hand that crushed them, has been
very gentle and merciful to you. You have survived the dangers, and the sins,
and the giddiness of Youth, and are now almost at our Journeys end.

2. Endeavor to do good to others, that have not had such experience of God as
you. Thus you bring forth fruit in old age, and are fat and flourishing, Ps.
92.14. you do, as it were, grow young again, with a vast accession to your
Spiritual stature. When you are full of patience, and by your Example and your
Words declare to others how faithful and how kind God has been to you: So, by
teaching them knowledge, you will rekindle and inflame your own Light; whilst
others younger then you decay, you shall thrive and prosper. He that planted
you makes the green Tree to wither, and the dry to grow. You Will not only go to
Heaven fully ripe for Glory, like a shock of Corn gathered in due season, but
there will be something for others to glean when you are gone: And in the mean
time Summer and Winter. Youth and Old Age, do as it were meet in you; the
decays of one, and the fruitfulness of the other. In your Evening there is
Light, Zech. 8.4, 5. Fortify your selves with the Experiences of God, goodness
whenever your patience is like to tire, as Polycarp said, when he was urged by
the Proconsul to deny Christ, or to do something like it: These fourscore and
six Tears, have I served Christ, and he never did me any harm; and how can I
then blaspheme my Master and my Savior. Exhort others to fear, and love, and
trust God, as you have done; by your Holy Awe and Reverence, seek upon all
occasions to Correct their Lightness and their Vanity. You have served a good
Master, and you have had the Honor to serve him very long; be not now weary of
his work, be not now for going out of his Vineyard, when he that employed you,
is just coming to reward your diligence. Be of good Courage, The Lord is at
hand; O ye aged People bless the Lord your Preserver, and daily sing his
praise; let your Winter, as well as the Spring of Youth, praise the Lord. How
few have had that time for Heaven, that you have had? Oh the blessed Seasons
and Days of Grace, that you have had! It Is a wonderful Honor to those that are
old, that they have so large a space, wherein to do a World of Good, to enlarge
the Kingdom of Christ, and to make their future Crown more weighty: And none
should grudge to labor for fourscore or an hundred Years, when for so short a
Duration of painful Diligence, he shall have an Everlasting Recompense. By
living to old Age, you have more Wisdom, and Experience, and Skill, than
others; your Graver Years teach you to beware of several Rocks that they split
upon. And all these Mercies are heightened to such as arrive to an Healthful old
Age, not loaded with the usual Pains and Griefs, and Languishing Motions of
decaying Age, for then the longer the Life, the more the Misery, Joshua 14.10,
11. Thus Life does smoothly take its course, without meeting with great
Obstructions in the way, and is not only Long but Happy too. This was the
peculiar Felicity of the Patriarchs before the Flood, their Lives were extended
to almost a thousand Years, and yet we read of none of those Sad Symptoms
attending them, that attend us now at fourscore, Psalm. 90.10. It Is a very
comfortable thing, to have neither a poor nor sickly Age, neither to want
Necessaries, nor to be in Pain: It Is a Blessing to live to see your Posterity,
and a greater Joy to see them walking in the Truth, Psalm. 128.6. but yet none
can expect to be freed from the evil days mentioned Eccles. 12.1. full of
trembling Palsies, grievous Aches, lingering Pains, and innumerable Evils; but
if you patiently wait on God, and improve well your declining Years, you will at
length be satisfied with living as it is said of Job, Chap. 42.17. He died,
being old and full of days. He rose as from a Feast, not Surfeited, but well
pleased with the Joys and Plenty of his latter Days. He was once indeed in
another Frame, when his Spirits were overclouded with Melancholy, and his Soul
was burnt with Anguish, when he had restless Pain by day, and no sweet Sleep at
night, Chap. 7.4. then he wished for any sort of Death, though Shameful and
Untimely, though Violent and Uncommon, Verse 5, 16. But this was more Job's
Disease than his Grace, 'twas a most rash and hasty Wish; to die in Terror and
Anguish, is a forlorn and doleful way of dying: He eagerly thirsted for the
Grave, but at last he looked upon it with another Eye, and went to it as a
weary Traveller goes to Bed: He looked for the finishing of his Course with
submissive regular Desires, and Quiet Hopes: So refreshed and satisfied with
living, are those that are good in Age, but a Sinner an hundred year old is
accursed. Cursed in his neglect of the Business of Life, Cursed as condemned by
a perpetual Desire of Longer and Longer Time, he is pained with Trouble, and
afraid to die. The Sins of his Youth have a Resurrection in his Thoughts, and
scare him with the sight of Death, as knowing they will not only lie down with
him in the Grave, but rise with him thence. And yet amidst such hideous Views
and Apprehensions, he has an unquenchable and painful Thirst after those
Pleasures that are past away: His Lust is fresh and lively when his Head is
gray; every thing about him grows old but his Sin; and a long Life to such an
one, is but a continued Load of Guilt, a daily treasuring up of Wrath against
the Great Day: But nothing is more Decent or more Lovely, than to see a
remaining Green under the Snow of Age: The Beauty of an old Man, is his Grace
as well as his Years: To be full of Days, and to be full of Grace, full of
Faith, and Hope, and Joy in God, is to be as beautiful as ever any was in the
most blooming gayest Youth. Job 5.26. Thou shall come to thy Grave in a full
Age, like as a Shock of Corn comes in his season. It sheds and spoils if it
stay too long, if it be not gathered when it is fully Ripe, and the Season of it
is as well lost, as when it is taken too green. Do you that are Old, take care
of all the Evils proper to your advanced Age, of Peevishness, and Moroseness,
and Sourness, and Covetousness; and let those that are Young, be Temperate and
Sober, and useful to the World, that they may either live to be old, or get to
Heaven betimes. Do you that are Aged improve your leisure Hours to prepare for
your Change; and do you that are Young, listen to the Speeches and Directions
of those that are near their latter end. In your old Age recreate your selves
with looking forward to a better State; and when you do but very faintly draw
your Breath, yet be breathing after Heaven; and your sincere Sighs and Groans
shall be as acceptable as all the Motions of your swifter Youth: And when your
Tongues begin to faulter, let your Actions speak your Patience and Submission
to the Will of God: And when you are even like to sink with Pains and Miseries,
Oh remember you are almost at home; you have but a little while to run, and you
shall obtain; a little while to fight, and you shall be Crowned: Watch a little
longer, the Sun is just setting, and in a few Moments you may be allowed to go
to sleep; there is but a little Sand left in your Glass; your Life is like a
Candle burnt quite to the bottom: And though the Religion of young People is
very pleasant in the Eye of God, their Graces send forth a sweet Perfume; and
when he walks in his Garden, it is agreeable to him to see the moist Flowers
breath out their Morning Incense; yet he loves old Disciples too, and he gives
them his Word and his Promise for their tottering Age to rely upon. Be sure to
improve the leisure of your declining Years to the best Purposes, and be
thankful that you are now retiring from the Noise and Hurry of the disagreeing
busy World. As Sir Henry Wotton said after a kind of tempestuous Life, I have
a great Advantage from my God, that makes the Outgoings of the Morning to
Praise him; I daily magnify him for his particular Mercy, of an Exemption from
Business, a quiet Mind, and a liberal Maintenance, even in this part of my
Life, when my Age and Infirmities seem to sound a Retreat from the Pleasures of
this World, and invite me to Contemplation, in which I have ever taken the
greatest Felicity. You may make use of all the Remembrances of the places where
you have lived, to help you in the best things. As Mr. Walton tells us of the
aforesaid Politician, that he said upon his being in his old Age in Winchester
School, My being in this School, and seeing the very place where I sat when I
was a Boy, occasioned me to remember the Thoughts of my Youth that then
possessed me, Sweet Thoughts indeed, that promised my growing Years numerous
Pleasures, without mixtures of Cares; and those to be enjoyed, when time (which
therefore I thought slow paced) had changed my Youth into Manhood: But Age and
Experience have taught me, those were but empty Hopes; for I have always found
it true, as my Savior did foretell, Sufficient to the day is the Evil thereof.
I have, says he to Mr. Hales then of Eaton, in my passage to my Grave, met with
most of those Joys of which a discursive Soul is capable, and have not wanted
those that were inferior. Nevertheless, I have not in this Voyage always
floated on a Calm Sea, but have often met with cross Winds and Storms, with
many Troubles of Mind, and Temptations to Evil. And yet though I have been and
am a Man compassed about with Humane Frailties, Almighty God has, by his Grace,
kept me from making Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, the thought of
which is now the Joy of my Heart, and I most humbly praise him for it; and I
humbly acknowledge, that it was not my self, but he, that has kept me to this
great Age, and let him take the Glory of his Mercy. And now my dear Friend,
continues he, I now see that I draw near my Harbor of Death; that Harbor that
will secure me from all the future Storms and Waves of this restless World; and
I praise God I am willing to leave it, and expect a better; that World, wherein
dwells Righteousness. And to him I add the Example of Mr. George Herbert,
that blessed Man, that other David, that tuned his Soul with Heavenly Thoughts,
and Musically lived, and Musically died. Mr. Walton in his Life tells us, that
in the time of his last Decays, he did often thus express himself to Mr.
Woodnot and his other Friends, that attended him in his Languishing Condition.

I now look back upon the Pleasures of my Life past, and see the Content I have
taken in Beauty, in Wit, in Music, and pleasant Conversation are now all past
by me, like a Dream, or as a Shadow that returns not, and are all now become
dead to me, or I to them: And I see, that as my Father and Generation has done
before me, so I also shall now suddenly (with Job) make my Bed in the dark and
I praise God I am prepared for it; and I praise him that I am not to learn
Patience, now I stand in such need of it, and that I have practiced
Mortification, and endeavored to die daily, that I might not die Eternally:
And my Hope is, that I shall shortly leave this Valley of Tears, and be free
from all Fevers and Pain: And which will be a more Happy Condition, I shall be
free from Sin, and all the Temptations and Anxieties that attend it; and this
being past, I shall dwell in the New Jerusalem, dwell there with Men made
perfect; dwell where these Eyes shall see my Master and Savior Jesus, and with
him see my Relations and my Friends: But I must die, or not come to that happy
Place; and this is my Content, that I am going daily toward it; and that every
day that I have lived, has taken a part of my appointed time from me: And that
I shall live the less time for having lived thus, and the day past -- And to
another he said, My dear Friend, I am sorry that I have nothing to present to
my merciful God but Sin and Misery; but the first is pardoned, and a few hours
will now put a period to the latter.

Thirdly, Do not murmur, if some that began to wait upon God later than you,
yet have more Joys. He is gracious to you still, and he may do with his own
what he will. Though it is your Privilege to have served him long, yet remember
you are at the best, and when you have done all, but unprofitable Servants;
they that came in later to the Vineyard, may have as much Joy as you, but you
have as much as you deserve: He may give to his Returning Prodigals very noble
Entertainment, but you that are elder are not excluded from the Feast, you may
come and taste of the Fatted Calf, and share in all the Festival Solemnities
and Joys of others. The Surliness of the elder Brother in the Parable,
discovered a great deal of Spiritual Pride; made him undutiful to his Father,
and unkind to his Brother, whom in Union to his Father's Carriage, he should
have welcomed home. There was in all the Behavior toward him, nothing of
Injustice or Partiality, he took nothing from the Elder to give the Younger, he
did not strip him to cloth his Brother. Can you who are Aged murmur who must
have Heaven at last? In the mean time God is yours, all that he has is yours,
his Son, his Word and Promises, and Innumerable Blessings. It should rejoice
you, to think that these younger Servants of your Master may prove eminent
Instruments of his Glory, when you are at rest from your Labors.

Fourthly, With humble reliance on the Grace of God, endeavor to persevere in
his Service to the last moments of your Lives. You have done a great deal for
Christ, which is matter of Joy, but you have done it all with his assistance,
which is matter of Humility, 1 Cor. 15.9, 10. Alas, how little have you done
for God, of what you might have done: It was a great Favor to you, that you
did not grow old among his Enemies; but it is a Favor that obliges you to a
particular Acknowledgment. Oh take heed least having begun in the Spirit, you
end in the Flesh, and degenerate to Formality and Worldliness, and a vain
Religion: Take heed least your latter end be not worse than your beginning;
Paul the Aged, and a Prisoner, was still doing good, Philem. 9. Some will say I
have labored so hard, and done so much, I hope I may now sit still and take
mine ease. You must labor till your last Sand be run; you must labor from
your first Morning to the conclusion of your day, from your Conversion to your
Death; and you must strive that your last days may be your best.

To all such aged Servants of our Lord, so Steady, so Religious, and so
Fruitful, there is a great Reverence due from young People: We must not despise
those that are Old, for if we live we shall be so too, and then others may with
justice treat us as we treated them; a good old Man or Woman are never to be
spoke of, but with terms of Respect, and not with such a slight Air, and
jearing Contemptuous sort of Expression, that is usual with many giddy People;
with all imaginable deference does St. Paul speak of Andronicus and Junia who
were in Christ before him, Romans 16.7. And as Solomon observes, Prove. 16.31. The
heary head is a Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of Righteousness,
that is, Old Age is very honorable, if it do not dishonor it self by a Course
of wicked Actions. The wise King intimates, that a great respect is to be paid
to one who has long traveled in the best way, somewhat resembling that which
is to be given to a Crowned Head. It Is a most comely thing to see Grace
ripening with the Maturity of Age; and the number of Services to God and Men,
bearing proportion with the number of increasing Years: Old Age, though
decrepit, is honorable, like the Ruins of some noble Palace, there remains in
the Fragments of the stately Structure, some Gracefulness and Beauty, something
uncommon and Magnificent. It may be said of Goodness of a long standing, as of
old Gold, old painting, Sculpture, Statuary and Architecture; the Pieces that
have most Antiquity, are generally most valuable, their Duration does not
lessen, but increase their Excellence: Good old Age is, to the true discerners
of things, full of Wonder and Observation, as in a Winter or a Frost Landscape
may be expressed a curious deal of Art, though such as are young Practitioners
in Painting, may perhaps be more affected with those Descriptions that
represent the blooming Spring. It Is certain that Persons advanced in years and
Grace, have a more established Love to God than younger People; and we may, as
to this, prefer their more grounded Knowledge, before that of such as have been
but a while tutored and disciplined in the School of Christ.

The more General Use.
First. IN all your Troubles, to further your patient waiting upon God, be sure
to pray unto him for Support, or for Deliverance. When St. Paul had a Thorn in
the Flesh, a painful Disease, that created as much trouble to him, as a Thorn
usually does in the tender Flesh; He sought the Lord thrice, which denotes his
earnestness and his fervent Desire to have the Cross removed; as to that he was
not heard, but he obtained sufficient Grace, which was infinitely better than
external Ease and Comfort: Say when you are deeply distressed, O Master save me
or else I perish: And when Troubles increase, we must renew our Cries, as the
Mariners double their Cable of the Anchor when the Storm grows more furious;
and it is far from being a Sin, to pray against violent and sharp Afflictions,
because it argues a right Knowledge of our own Weakness, and that we are not
able to bear a Burden that is very heavy? We may lawfully desire to be freed
from tedious, and lingering, and sharp Pain, for the length of it is a very
great Temptation. There are two things which we may pray against, 1. Reproach,
That like some Indian Poisons Murders us by slow degrees, and shoots its
envenomed Arrows in the dark, we are wounded, and we know not who it is that
bends the Bow; the blasting of our good name, is a Persecution of the worst
kind, it is one of the most refined Stratagems of Hell; and such as slander
their Neighbor, either know not what they do, and then they are Fools, or they
do it wilfully, and then they are Devils, they smell rank of Fire and
Brimstone: Some are as forward to put off all the Productions of their
gangreen'd ulcerated Spirits, as if they had got a Patent for Lying, as if they
had engrossed and monopoliz'd this Sin; they think a little Backbiting has no
great harm in it, whereas there may be Death in a Whisper, as well as Murder
in a Wish. We may pray against Anguish and Terror of Soul, which is like a
fiery Furnace and scorches us on every side, and imbitters all that others call
the Pleasures and the Sweets of Life: Especially must we pray, that when
sickness or pain robs us of our Health, sin may not at the same time rob us of
our Faith and Hope in God: as also that it would please him not to allow Satan
to rake in our wounds; and when his Almighty hand has smitten us, that he would
not leave his Enemy and ours to touch us to the Quick as he did Job: and that
at last all his malice may be defeated, and that thirst extinguished whereby he
so eagerly thirsts and longs for our Ruin; and if we patiently wait, we must
in all our Pains maintain a most entire Compliance with the Will of our
Corrector, both as to the continuance and removal of our Sufferings: And while
they last, let us open with all the freedom imaginable our whole Case, and all
its circumstances to the Father of our Spirits; and when we open our Griefs,
his Bowels will earn over us: our very miseries have with him a pleading and a
moving Eloquence. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him. You may cry to
the Lord, which implies a vehement eager motion of the Soul, and an outward
expression of your sense of Grief: The best of men have not been insensible of
pain and trouble; Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob and the other Patriarchs felt
these Inconveniences of Life as well as other men. It Is said of Jacob, Genesis
48.1. that he was sick; and ver. 10. that his eyes were dim for age, so that he
could not see: he was bedrid sometime before his death, and no doubt had his
Groans and his Cries like other Aged men. David with all his Music could not
preserve an undecaying Youth, nor charm away the cold Winter of his Life. When
he was old and stricken in years, they covered him with clothes, but he got no
heat, 1 Kings 1.1. And in other seasons of his Life, he says, the pressure of
his grief was so very weighty, that it made him groan all the night, and he was
weary with his groaning, and his bed swimmed in an inundation of
overflow-Tears, Ps. 6.6. and Ps. 38.8. I am feeble and sore broken: I have
roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart. This Roaring, notes the
Loudness and Vehemence of his Cries. And says the poor desolate Job, when his
melancholy and terrors were upon him, chap. 30.28. I went mourning without the
Sun: I stood to and cried in the Congregation. I had, during my tempestuous
Night, scarce a glimpse or beam of Joy. I was in such flaming Anguish, that
scorcht my Body, and preyed upon my Soul; I was in such dreadful and amazing
fears that I, was not able to keep silence. My inward torment, even when I was
in any public Assembly, made me shriek and cry aloud. And Hezekiah says of his
sick and languishing condition, Isa. 38.14. Like a Crane or a Swallow, so did I
chatter; I did mourn as a Dove. His Cry was quick, and frequent, and loud, and
frightful; with a very sorrowful and doleful Tone: His Eyes failed with
waiting, and his Heart was even like to break. These Examples I allege to show
you that the best of men may be sensible of pain, and yet be submissive to the
Author of it. Loud Groans and Cries are no marks of an inward Impatience and
disorder; for by these troubled Nature gives it self a little vent, and it
gives a little ease, though indeed but very little; because our returning Grief
makes our Groans and Cries return. Though they are innocent and unavoidable
expressions of some weighty sorrow that is like to crush us. Grace does not
overthrow Nature, though it corrects all its excesses and disorders. We know that
the Language of the Sick has not the livelyness the briskness and strength of
those that speak in health: their Countenance, their Looks, their Actions,
their words are all changed. All indeed are not equally sensible, for some
persons have a finer set and contexture of Spirits, and consequently a quicker
sense of Pain than those that are of a heavier and duller Constitution. The
delicate temper of the Body of our Savior, was more susceptible of grief than
the Bodies of the Thieves that were Crucified with him.

2dly. When you pray, do not wonder if you are not immediately answered: do not
murmr at the slow pace of Divine Mercy. You shall have help in the most
beautiful season, when the glory of God and your good may be most promoted. If
he as yet delay to hear your very earnest and importunate Cries, remember that
his Elect cry to him day and night, and he will at length avenge their Cause.
The Souls under the Altar cry; all Nature, Groans and Cries to be eased of the
miseries that our sin has brought upon it. We must pray, but not presame to
tell our Benefactor what, and when he is to give. It Is an excellent posture to
be found waiting on our Knees, though mercy and deliverance come not just when we
would have it.

1. Those things which we many times most earnestly ask might be vastly
prejudicial to us. Many an one says, give me this or that or else I die; and
the very things they prayed for, when obtained, prove a curse; and those in
which they hoped to rejoice many years, send them betimes mourning to the
grave. Rachel said to Jacob, give me Children, or else I die. There was in her
speech a great deal of childish weakness and impatience: She hoped the having a
Child, would prolong her life, and she smarted for her wish, she died in her
Lying In. Many are very importunate with God, and nothing will serve them but
this or that particular Comfort, I must have it, or I am undone; and when they
have the Idolized Vanity that they doted on, they quickly find cause to repent
of their hasty follies. The Israelites were fond of a King, but they had a long
time wherein to repent of that fondness. You may perhaps have what you ask, but
you may have it with a frown, with such displeasure as will change your Wine to
Vinegar; and your smoothest delights into the roughest thorns, Psalm. 78.31. It
is a friendly act of God to refuse us often what we ask, when it is really for
our hurt; and to save us from our misguided wishes is the love and kindness of
a Father. If Paul had had his thorn removed immediately he might too greatly
swell with his Gifts and Revelations, or be like a Saul again.

2dly. Though God do not immediately hear our Cries, yet he may gratify us in
better things. Moses begged to enter into Canaan, but he had no remaining
longing after that happy Land, when he was once in Heaven. The joys of Paradise
had with him a sweeter taste than all the Milk and Honey of that could ever
give. We have no cause to grumble that our Suits too long depend, if in the
delays of desired help, he now and then gives us a sight of his amiable Face:
The Cross will not overwhelm us, when his Arms are underneath: when, though he do
not remove the Cup, yet he sweetens it with his Love: he delays to save us to
try our faith, and to make his Salvation more illustrious. As Jesus, though he
heard that Lazarus was sick, Joh. xi. 6, 7. he did not hasten to his dying
Friend, as knowing he intended to glorify his power in his Resurrection.

3. He delays an immediate Answer to our Cries, to see whether we can patiently
wait, and believe his promise, when we have no sensible proofs of his good
will. Whether with the Woman of Canaan we will continue Suppliants when he
seems to chide us from his presence. This is an evidence of confirmed patience
when we abide waiting at his door, though for several hours or days he seems to
take no notice of our Cries.

4. He suffers us to wait a long time before he hear our Cries, to bring our
sins to remembrance; and to put us in mind how we used him, how long, how many
a tedious hour we made him stay before we bid him welcome to our hearts, a long
time he knocked e're we let him in: It Is no wonder that he uses us as we used
him, it is a most equitable and unblameable retaliation, that we should taste of
the Fruit that we have planted.

5. He loves to see his Servants in a praying posture, for it is an argument of
Love and of Humility; their Tears are botled; he knows that these Sorrows, like
April showers, will make them more fruitful afterward; and that by praying
they learn to pray; and the frequent returns of duty make them to perform it
with greater zeal and skill.

As to your Cries to God for help in trouble, observe these Rules.
1. Be sure to offer up all your Cries in the Name of Christ, and all the while
you pray think of his kind, and compassionate, and prevailing Intercession. Cry
in his Name for you are encouraged so to do, from his Promises, from the virtue
of his Blood and Merits, from his nearness to God, and his Love to you. You
find Mat. 14.23. that he was praying on the Mountain when his Disciples were in
a storm at Sea. As he suffers not in all our Agitations, so he is not unmindful
of our Troubles: when we are tossed hither and thither by the changes of our
Bodies or our Souls; He is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8.
How many Gulphs would swallow us up, and against how many Rocks should we be
dashed if it were not for the powerful and tender remembrance of our Savior.
Let us under every Cross pray to God in his Name; for by his sufferings we are
reconciled, and have access to the Throne of Grace, a Throne sprinkled with
Blood; whereas without him we had trembled at the Bar of strict Justice: And he
prays for us, not only as a Favorite, but as the Surety of the Covenant; not
merely by entreaties, but in the virtue of his Blood. And whenever we make
mention of his blessed Name, it must be with the lowest reverence, with a due
apprehension of our unworthiness, and an high value of the Love and Grace of
Christ; and take care to avoid whatsoever may obstruct the success of your
repeated Cries. For says the Apostle, Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask
amiss, James 4.3.

2. When you have Prayed and Cried, look for an answer of your Prayers. Let not
your Requests be shot at random, propose to your selves some good end, and see
whether you have obtained it. If you have asked peace of Soul, enquire whether
all be still within, and whether his Light has shined upon you with its
chearing Beams. If you have begged Patience, enquire whether you have more
willingness to suffer; and so in all other Cases it argues that we perform our
duties as a Task, and from a slavish temper or a cold indifference, when we
never concern our selves for the success: and it is a withholding of that
Glory that is due to God; for upon every answer of our prayers we should give
him fresh Acts of Praise. If we have a Petition depending in any Court, as we
wait with hope, so we fail not on all occasions to enquire whether it be
remembered and kindly received; and whether we are like to have what we
petitioned for. But if we neglect to review this part of solemn Worship, we
lose that trust and hope that we might have had, and we weaken our own hands.
For to mind our answered prayers would increase our Love, Psalm. 116.1. and our
neighbors fare the worse for this Omission, we do not encourage and invite
them to praise God with us.

3. Wonder greatly that such poor Cries as yours should reach Heaven. It was
matter of great thought to Solomon, when he said, 1 Kings 8.27. Will God indeed
dwell on the Earth? He that has all the spacious Heavens for his Circuit and
Dominion, will he not only visit this Earth, but dwell there? So may you say,
will he whose Court is thronged with Angels and happy Saints, regard such a
poor Wretch as I? Will he that sits upon a Throne regard me a Prisoner on this
Earth? Will he that is surrounded with Hallelujah's, regard my sight, my
groans, my tears? Oh what Grace is this! What adorable condescension! I know he
would not regard me, but for the sake of Christ; Glory be then given to him
that fits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb. I am not worthy to look toward
Heaven, what am I then that my prayers should reach thither, and enter, and be
recorded, and answered there? A poor Beggar is not disdained by the King of
Kings, he does not trample on a worm, Ps. 34.3, 6. O what am I that I should be
admitted into the Presence, and have audience of the King of Heaven; Lord what
is man, or the son of man?

How shall I know that God has heard my Cry, and that my patient waiting has
not been in vain.

1. If he bestow upon you the very thing that you requested: If after your cry
for ease you are eased; if you are recovered after you have prayed to be
brought from the Gates of Death? If after having had many sollicitous thoughts
about your being falsely accused, God is at length pleased to scatter the Cloud,
and make your Innocence appear to the shame of your malicious Enemies? Thus
Jabez prayed in 1 Chro. 4.10. That God would bless him, and enlarge his Coast.
And he granted him that which he requested. It was a superabundant kindness to
one desirous of Grandeur and Dominion, for Jabez might have been a very happy
man, though his Coast had not been enlarged; he might have governed and enjoyed
himself and his Friends in a little room; and he might have gone to Heaven by
the way of grief.

2. Your Cries are heard when God gives you resignation to his Will, even in the
absence of that which you most eagerly desired: if after having poured out your
supplications, you return from his presence cheerful, and easy, and well
pleased, leaving him that is insinitely wise to do with you and your Bodies,
with you and your Friends, what seems best to him: when you find your hearts
unbroken with anxious cares and solicitude whether you are gratified or no:
This secret contentment is a foretast of Heaven, and a pledge and instance of
Divine Love.

3. It Is a most certain sign of your Cry, being heard, when even in the delays,
of the desired Comfort, you love God more than you ever did. When your thoughts
of him are more frequent and delightful: when your love to all his
appointments, and even to paintful Duties is increased, and that you are
thankful for the smallest mercies, for the smallest intervals of pain and
trouble; and when even in the way of his judgments you wait for him; by all
which you may plainly perceive that your prayers may be heard when your
affliction is not removed, and many times the Mercies may be given, and they
are so sudden or surprising, that you scarce can believe your selves delivered,
even when you are delivered, Psalm. 126.1. and Acts 12.14. though they had the
faith to pray for Peter, they had not the faith to believe that he was escaped,
and knocking at the door.

The Second General Head, in order to your patient waiting upon God, you must
endeavor to keep up in your minds good and honorable thoughts of him all the
while you are in trouble. It is with great industry and art that the Devil
takes occasion from our affliction to possess us with unbecoming thoughts of
him that is our best Friend: and to make him, during our dark and gloomy
seasons, to pass for an Enemy; as the Disciples in the storm mistook their
approaching Savior for a Spirit; and in hideous consternation shouted out, as
thinking some Evil Spirit was come to make their Death more terrible, for they
looked upon themselves as just drowning. If we have irregular apprehensions of
God, as rigorous and inexorably severe, as rouzing up the greatness of his
Power to crush and ruin us, such undue thoughts breed black and superstitious
fears, and shrink all the faculties of our minds with despairing unbelief; our
minds are weakened and cramped by the terror of our thoughts; and the consequent
of this will be, that we shall either give him no service, or that which is
very trifling, and full of vain and idle Ceremonies: For to such a sort of
pompous insincere Worship does Superstition lead those poor People, whose Eyes
are hoodwink't and blinded with it. Under our dark mistaken thoughts of God and
his Designs, our Obedience is the Action of a Slave; it is with unwillingness
and constraint that we Obey, retaining at the same time a disposition to throw
off the Yoke. We proceed in our Devotions like those that Row in Galleys; it is
with a backward Heart, and an unwilling Shrug. Whatever we give to our Maker,
is with a convulst and stingy Hand; for we apprehend him as a severe and a
rugged Master, as full of stern and ghastly Majesty. Now to remedy these
uneasy fears, our Savior came into this World, to give us admiring thoughts
of God, to represent him as aimable and worthy to be delighted in; to make him
the object of our Trust and Hope, and not of our Dread: As a Benefactor, or a
most liberal Physician most tender and compassionate, that wounds us in order
to a lasting Cure; and his Spirit is sent to promote our Love to him: and St.
John, whose Soul was most full of Love, was the most beloved. God has in a
great measure left off dealing with Men in visible terrors, as he did
heretofore. Nay, says the Apostle, Though we know the terrors of the Lord, yet 2
Cor. 5.11. we persuade Men, we use toward them the most gentle, and soft, and
easy Methods; we are to say to them, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away
the sins of the world; and there is nothing frightful in him, that has all the
tender Qualities of one of the meekest of all Animals, a Lamb.

Thirdly, If you would patiently wait upon God, beware of having only little
Faith. We are not to lay the blame of our being troubled so much on the
greatness of our danger, as on the weakness of our Faith; when we doubt and
tremble, then, with Peter in the Storm, we begin to sink. That our Faith may
grow, we must use all the good means we can to enlarge our knowledge of God and
Christ; for the dwarfishness of our trust, is owing to the darkness of our
Minds; They that know thy Name will trust in thee. Knowledge of its self does
not produce this admirable reliance of the Soul: The Devils are very Learned
and Knowing Spirits, but their Light does only serve to scortch them; it gives
no comeliness to their horrid shape, nor to their Flaming Torments any
Relaxation: But such a Knowledge as is founded upon Love and Hope, and sweet
Experiences of the Truths and Mercies of God, will convey to us great degrees
of Strength. In order to remove our little Faith, we may make frequent and
delightful use of Christ; we must run to his Arms with all the speed and force
we can; and by being near to him, we shall learn to bear the Crosses of this
Life; and how to long for that which is to come. Such whose Faith is rooted and
spread to a mighty breadth, and of a tall Stature, scruple none of the greatest
Tribulations; and many of them go to Heaven with as much calmness, as if they
were but going into another Room, or changing their Rags for a new Suit of
Clothes. But a little Faith shivers and trembles, and is loath to go hence, as
amazed at the painfulness of the Passage, and the greatness of the Change. In
no case let us blame God for his Rigor, but our selves for our unbelief. In
this Life we are exposed to very great Trials, and these will not be patiently
born with a little Patience. O! What a Contest is there between great Storms
and little Faith? The time will come, when we shall wish to have had more Oil
in our Lamps, and more Grace in store against an evil day; when the Devil and
his Temptations and Diseases, and pale and dreadful Death, with all his
mourning Train of Evils will set upon us; How shall we meet such Enemies,
without well-polisht Armor on? What shall the Sick, and the Lame, and the
Blind, and the Decrip't do, in the day of Battle? Will not our little Faith be
a most unkind and disingenious return to the great Love of Christ? How
unsuitably do these two look, his Love in its strength, and our Faith in its
decay; his Love in its flourishing perfection, and our Faith withered and
liable to be extinguished, almost with every little breath? And our grief will
be increased from the time we had wherein to prepare for all the sorrows that
might come upon us; the leisure and the helps of many Years: But if our Faith
be strong we shall not be discouraged with the delays of God; we shall trust
him though he kill us, and cast our Anchor in the dark; we shall look to, even an
absent Savior; and wait for his Salvation, when there is no deliverance within
the Ken and View of Sense, when all other resuge fails; when all the Greatures
cannot help us, even in the most threatening and the last extremities; when we
see no light, we shall cast our selves at the Power and Love of God.

Fourthly, If you would patiently wait upon God in trouble, you must have
suitable promises to rely upon. You have but small encouragement to wait, if
you have no promise that your waiting shall not be in vain: We are not with
vexatious labor to pain our selves, by stretching our thoughts too much upon
futurity; or to plunge our selves into the unfathomable depths, to know the
secret decrees of God. Our Eyes are too weak to read the Records of Heaven, and
they are far distant from our Sight: But it is more easy and profitable to
look into the Revelation, that is made to conduct our lives, both in Prosperity
and in Trouble; and in this Revelation there are abundance of very reviving
Promises for the most trembling Soul to rely upon. And all those are most
sincerely true, not like those of many Men in high Places, who draw along such
as wait upon them, with large Promises, most kind Looks, and obliging Words,
but never think much of what they Promise; and so make the poor Expector of
Preferment, at length to go away ashamed; after having spent a deal of time,
and perhaps Money too, to no purpose: And so all they gain is a little bought
Wit, which alas they dearly bought, with the Circulation of many torturing and
unquiet Hopes. But it often happens, that they go away both with their Heads
and their Purses empty. But now they that wait upon the Lord, shall not be
ashamed of their hope, Psalm. 34.5. Psalm. 25.3. they shall at length obtain what
God has promised, and what they waited for.

Fifthly, That you may patiently wait upon God, remember how many kind
experiences you have had of his love hitherto, 2 Cor. 1.10. Without this
Reflection, you will be startled at your new Trials: But no Goliath, with all his
stalking Greatness and his big Words, will make you quit the Field; if you
consider how God has often secured you from as near and as bulky dangers; from
the hissing Serpents that were swollen with Venom, and ready to spit it all
upon you; and from the paw of the Lion and the Bear: But unless we call to mind
the years of the right hand of the most High, every present Storm will always
seem the most blustering, and every present pain the most sharp, it will be a
most unreasonable thing for us now to sink, when we have been formerly
delivered from as near and as great Calamities. That arm that saved us once, is
not now shortened that it cannot save: The sweet Experiences we have had of God,
should cause us to be assured, that when we wait on him we do not wait in vain;
and no Evidence can give us so unshaken a certainty, both of his Being and his
Providence, as those inward tastes and relishes of his Love. This inward
Sensation is extremely quieting; it is a beam of Divine Light: Nor can we by any
troubles, how long or how sharp soever, be forced to quit our Religion and our
Faith, when we have once felt the joy and pleasure of them. A good Man has Two
Harvests every Year, one from the Furrows of the Field, and another from his
own Thoughts. Such efficacious Faith, diffuses a vital warmth over every
faculty, and is no more to be separated from a Christian, than he can be
divorced from himself; and keeps the pleased recreated Soul from being listless
and indisposed, from being chilled and frozen with excessive fear and anguish.
To have a Treasury of Experiences whereto to have recourse, is the Privilege
of those that are arrived to a good old Age; every year of their Pilgrimage,
they have had new Experiences of the kindness of their unerring Guide; they can
look back and see wonders of Mercy and Deliverance. O! What a Catalogue of
joyful passages offers its self to their Observation? How often they were
dying, and God made them to recover; how often they were sinking and afraid,
and he bid them be of good Courage. It Is comfortable to old People to have a
great deal of Money by them, which they got in the Spring and Summer of their
Active Life: It supplies their wants, makes their Attendants respectful, and
the decays of weary Age more tolerable, when they cannot work for a livelihood
as they used to do. But O! How much more comfortable is it to be Rich in Faith,
such their good Master looks upon with a pitiful and watchful Eye: He takes
care of their weakness, as all good People have a great kindness for an old
Servant, that has lived many years in their Family. Very Honorable and Blessed
is that Age, that has been long faithful to God. Besides, Such as have been
careful to remember their Experiences of his Mercies, may plead them with hope
in Prayer, Judge. 15.18. Psalm. 77.7. Lord, thou have been my Father hitherto, be
not now my Enemy; thou have heretofore dealt graciously with me, do not now
overwhelm me with the weight of numerous and too great Afflictions: In other
distresses I have had thy Presence, O be not now a stranger to me!

Sixthly, That you may patiently wait on God, maintain in your Spirits a great
indifference to the things of this World; that you may be prepared upon the
first Summons to take your flight from it: Regard without concern or too
passionate Affection all that is dear to you in this Life; and while you are on
Earth, let your Eye be on Heaven. Cease to live to sin, that you may not be
torn from your Enjoyments; but bid them farewell without a sigh: by a continued
progress in Mortification, you will outgrow that anxiety of thought which
others have, as to what shall befall the World or themselves; this Earth by most
of its Inhabitants is over-rated, and so they are loath to quit it.

Seventhly, That you may patiently wait on God, keep your Eye most constantly
and steddily fixed on your blessed Master. When the Storms arise, look on him
whose Power can in a moment make the Sea calm, and the lowering Sky clear
again: In your trouble look to your Helper, as when we ford a deep River, we
look to the further side. Whereas, if we only pore upon our Miseries, we tire
our Spirits, and raise to our selves more hideous prospects of Calamity. You
need not go far to see your Savior, for he is with you in your Assemblies, in
your Closets; he is in the Scriptures, and in all the Promises; no part of the
World is out of his Dominion, and he has all Power in Heaven and Earth. The
Prince of the Air that is limited to his own Principality, and to his
changeable Empire, cannot raise a Storm without his leave; though he is in
himself very powerful, yet he is Subject to a greater Power. The Apostle
directs the Christians of his days to wait for the Lord from Heaven, 2 These.
3.5. To wait for the sight of that glorious Person on whom they have believed,
with whom they hope to live for ever; the sight of him is what they extremely
long for. It will be an Heaven to see him who has done so much for them, and of
whom they have heard so very much: When he comes, he will reward his patient
Servants; he will manifest their Grace, and make the World to wonder at his
Power in their support: Behold the Faith and Patience of the Saints. Thus in
the Text, David says, I have waited for the Lord. I have not waited so much for
mine own Exaltation or the Conquest of mine Enemies, as for the Favor and the
Love of God. I have not longed to see mine House flourish, and my Friends
enriched, or my Name perpetually celebrated on Earth. No, truly Lord, I have
longed for thee, and thee alone. This is all my Satisfaction, this is all my
Desire; though no Deliverance come, yet if thou, O my God, do thy self come, I
shall have enough. Another sort of Spirit have those who are only of this
World, they all would climb, and are uneasy to attain some high or Lofty
things. Oh that I were Honorable says the Rich; and O that I were Rich, says
the Poor Man: Every one that has Money would fain have more, and he that has a
deal of Land, would fain be Master of another Field; he that is obscure would
fain be noted; and he that is publicly talked of, would fain be more popular.
These are the things they long and wait for; not satisfied with what God thinks
fit to give them. Even Princes sometimes think they have not room enough,
unless they invade the Dominions of others, as well as lord it in their own.
And Ahab a wicked King, could find no pleasure in his Crown, unless he had the
Vineyard of honest Nabaoth. But be you satisfied with whatever is allotted you
by Providence; and do not grumble if you meet with Pain, Reproach, Poverty, and
various Crosses: For all the Saints in Heaven, went through great Tribulations
thither; most of the Illessed Saints performed their Voyage to that happy Land.

And now I come to speak of our Departed Friend Mrs. Hasselborn, who dyed this
Month, in the 95th Year of her Age; in a good old Age indeed. Few, very few of
all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, have, in these times of the World so long a
Life: few of those that dye of Age, hold out so long as she. I shall make no
manner of excuses, nor tell you, whilst I am praising her, that I am not for
praising those that are Departed; nor confute my self, as some do, that say
they are against commending the Dead, even when they say of them all that ever
they can. Our Savior said of this or that Person, O Woman, great is thy Faith;
and he that commends his Saints when they live, would not have their Memory
roughly treated when they are Dead. No body will suspect the Humble Jesus as
guilty of Flattery, or of over-admiring any Persons; and yet what a large
Character does he think fit to give of his Predecessor, Matthew. XI. 11. Verily I
say unto you, among them that are born of Women, there has not risen a greater
then John the Baptist. And the plain-hearted free-spoken Paul, that never never
balked the boldest truth, or the most searching reproof; yet he was not so
morose, as to chide the People for commending Dorcas, for her good Work, and
Alms-deed, for the Coats and Garments which she made, Acts 9.36. Nay, so far
was he from so four a temper, that he highly extols Andronicus and Junias who
were in Christ before him, and who were of note among the Apostles. It is a
fault not to commend good People, if it be done with truth and modesty;
especially in an ill-natured Age, where those that God will own as his Jewels,
are trampled on; and those that he will commend and accept are Censured and
Reproacht, though for their hard speeches that Men utter against the Innocent,
they must be rigorously Judged; therefore, for my part, I reckon it my Duty to
contribute what I can to embalm the Memory of such as were dear to Christ on
Earth, and now live with him above. All the Graces of the blessed Spirit, are
too valuable to be neglected or obscured in the dark: We are to invite others
to behold the aimableness and beauty of Religion; behold how it shines and
triumphs, and spreads its healing Beams. Behold, an Israelite indeed, John
1.47. And it is an Encouragement to others to be good, when they find their
works shall praise them in the gates of Zion, it shall be said, this or that
man was born there; we ought with great freeness and candor to acknowledge the
Gifts and Graces that are bestowed on others. Let us not bury the remembrance
of their excellent Actions in the Grave: Thus we may lawfully give them Praise,
while we do not give them Worship. We think the Virgin Mother blessed among
Women, and to all Generations she is blessed: We will honor her Memory, but
never think she is above her Son; nor will we take the Crown from his Head, to
place it upon hers: We will imitate the Examples of the Saints Departed, but
not pray to them; for even Abraham himself is ignorant of us. In preserving the
Memory of good People, we act suitably to the Design of God, who has taken care
to Record several of his Excellent Servants, of whom we otherwise had never
heard: As they were zealous for his Glory whilst they were alive, he will not
let their Names be trampled on with the Feet of Pride, when they are Departed:
Such Persons are like withered Flowers: In their flourishing Condition they
recreated and pleased their Acquaintance with the sweet Odours of their
Charity, their Meekness and their good Works. For when the Flower and the Green
is Blasted by the cold of Death, they are after all, like the tender Plants
Medicinal, even when dried and in their most unbeautiful State, of great use
and service to the World. The Scripture perpetuates the Memory of several good
Women, as well as Men, as Sarah, and Rebeccah, and Rachel, and Miraim, and
Hannah, and Deborah, and the Blessed Virgin; and that affectionate Person, that
scrupled no cost to show her respect to our Savior, Mark 14.9. And Jesus loved
Martha, and her Sister, and Lazarus, John 11.5. He often met with a welcome at
their Hospitable House. And St. Paul greets Priscilla as well as Aquila, and
Mary and Julia, and several others, in Romans 16.

This Old Disciple of Christ, of whom I am now to speak, had spent her years in
the Fear and the Love of God, and full of Days; full of pleasant quietness and
hope she is gone to Rest: She calmly Sleeps till the Morning of the
Resurrection; when she will have a Body without all the marks of withering and
decayed Age; a Body full of Luster, full of Activity; and, Like to the glorious
body of our Lord: Like the Angels that possess an eternal Youth, their Beams
never dimly shine, their Light never weakly burns: After a long Circulation of
Hymns and Joys, their Praises are as cheerful, and their Voices as loud as ever.

This aged Servant of our Lord, had made it her great business to trust in him;
and in the midst of Revolutions, that were attended with threatening Prospects,
she remained unmoved: When others were frighted with Alarums, and the imagined
approaches of Bloody Enemies, she was undisturbed, saying, I have a good God,
and I fear nothing; and often used to say, They are well kept that God keeps,
for she safely dwelt under the shadow of his Wings; and as one that knew, that
the thoughts and discourse of worldly things, were very unseasonable in a dying
Hour, she settled all her affairs before Death gave the last Summons, and so
was prepared to dye.

She possessed to almost an Hundred, a a very good Age, without pineing
weakness, and the sorrows that cloud others, and send them early to the Grave:
She was now and then afflicted, but she was never overwhelmed.

This good Woman spent her time in Prayer, and Reading of the Holy Scripture,
that best of Books, that great Conveyer of all Heavenly Light and Heat; Where
are the gracious Souls, to whom this Revelation was not dear and precious? What
sort of People are those, whose Ignorance and Rudeness forces them to Ridicule,
what others lay their whole stress for another World upon? Dear to her, as well
as to all other Holy Souls, was her Bible: there she placed her trust, thence
she drew her Supports and Consolations. This was her Lanthorn in this World,
during the darkness of her Pilgrimage; she now needs it not, where there is
everlasting Day. Next to the Blessed Scripture, she often read in Dr. Preston,
Dr. Sibbs, and in the Lives of Luther and Calvin, and some of their Works in
English: On Precious and Reviving Names of Men, that were Stars of the first
Magnitude, that shined in the Church! And when they were placed in superior
Orbs, lest their influence and heat behind; they still edify the Church by
their Grave and Learned Writings, in which every thing is manly and
substantial, and nothing slovingly or ridiculous, or trifling and unbecoming
the Majesty of Divinity, and the Character they bore: How much more happy were
those useful Men, in leaving such solid Writings behind them: then are some of
the Poets of our days, who sauce a great part of their Composures with Wit and
Folly; or as I may say, with foolish Wit, whilst they content themselves in
dressing up Vice with soft and easy Names; and accommodate every thing to the
gust and humor of a depraved Age; and do not so much Combat with Sin, as
discover it; study more to please then to profit; their Books are Contagious,
whilst the Authors are alive; and when they dye, they do, like Nero, leave
Poison behind them, and propagate infection for a long time together.

Among all the rest of the Old Divines, she had a particular respect to Dr.
Preston; which showed, that she had both a good Taste and Judgment in Divine
things. His solidity and wise management of truth, gave Light to her
Understanding; and his serious and devout Applications warmed her Heart: And of
all the Works of this Pious Doctor, she was most pleased and edified with his
Discourse about God's All Sufficiency; and so was another Old Disciple, that I
knew of above 90. that found always a peculiar refreshment in that very
Treatise. So wisely did these Aged People, having sorrowfully viewed the
Vanities of Life, and of all Creatures betake themselves to God alone, whose
help they sought, and whose help they found.

As she was careful to prepare her own Soul for another World, she also
thirsted for the welfare and happiness of others; and often passed the moments
that were most free from pain, in pressing them to mind things of the greatest
and most lasting Consequence, desiring them to prepare to dye; and earnestly
moving them, in order to this, to live an Holy Life; fully thinking, with the
great Apostle, that Without holiness none can see the Lord. The sight of the
pure Majesty of Heaven, would be amazing and astonishing to a Soul full of evil
inclinations to objects terrene and sensual: Therefore this excellent Woman,
did often desire her Friends to take care least they were in their way of
living, like persons walking in a Gallery, that went forwards and backwards
without advancing any nearer to their Journeys end; intimating, that she wished
they might every day be nearer Heaven then they were before.

With a mighty pleasure, when I was once with her, she discoursed of the
forementioned famous Divines, and of the advantages she had by the Preaching
and Sermons of many worthy Men, such as Mr. Buroughs, Mr. Lockyer, old Mr.
Calamy, and several others, whom she had long Survived. Her Lot indeed was cast
in happy times; and she had the favor to live in the days of our Forefathers,
when Religion was more practiced and esteemed, then alas now it is. The
Puritans disputed less then we, and lived better: Oh that their Catholic
Charity, their peaceable Spirit, and their innocent simplicity might have a
Resurrection!

She lived to see most of her old Acquaintance removed by Death, and so was,
after having been satisfied with living, very willing to depart, that she and
her Friends might meet again. She trusted God in her Health, and so she died,
when her Pain and Sickness came upon her. She often desired one that attended
her in her near approaches to Eternity, to read the first words of the 40th
Psalm, as extremely suitable to her own Case and Temper. She was very humble
and very patient in her illness; she had no fretful disordered Expressions; she
bore her burden laid upon her by God; though her earnest desire to see him, made
her now and then say, O why does he tarry? On her Sick Bed she kept her Eye
fixed above, and sent before her arrival at Heaven, her longing Prayers
thither; begging that her Iniquity might be blotted out, and wishing to be with
Christ. And when her Daughter attending on her Ministered to her support, with a
language proper for one just in the close of Life; and told her, God would
receive her into the Arms of his Mercy; she with the composure of a Soul
bordering upon Happiness, answered, She had laid her self as the feet of Jesus
Christ, and had submitted to him, who was able to save to the uttermost; which
words she often uttered in her former and latter Years. And a Night or two
before she was called away, she repeated part of 39th Psalm, Verse 8, 9, 10.
and such was her Faith and Hope, that she was able to apply to her self, those
Triumphant words of that patient Job; I know that my Redeemer lives, and that
she should see him for her self, and this Redeemer she is now gone to see: In
his Arms we leave her, till he, and all that sleep in him, shall come together
at the last day.

And now my Friends, from all that I have said concerning this departed Saint,
we may without any difficulty observe, that Meekness and Patience is the ready
way to long Life: I do not believe this good Woman had lived so long, had she
not been of a calm and quiet Spirit. Those that are furious and passionate, and
ill-natured, corrode and vex themselves, and with have snap asunder the Thread
of Life. There are two things to be wondered at with respect to this Person:
First, That she should live so long, as being one of the weaker and feebler
Sex; and Secondly, That her Patience should not be tired during so long an
abode in this World as 95 Years, but be continued to the last moment of her
Life. How illustrious is that Power, that kept so frail a Vessel from being
dash't in pieces? How glorious is that Grace, that enabled her to persevere in
the Love of God?

We may further consider that Death is the Lot of all those that are the most
Aged, are not immortal; they most at length go to their Long Home, though many
Thousands go with quicker and more hasty steps then they. The Oak that is the
oldest Father of the Forest, that has survived many scorching Summers, and many
cold blasts of Winter, must at length feel the decays of Age; and perish as
surely, though not as soon as the little Trees: the longest day will have a
concluding Night. Those that are an hundred years old, and those that are but
Twenty, must both in a while lie down in a Bed of Dust. Methusalem lived many
long Years, but he did not live for ever. O let us, by the thought of this, be
moved to lay hold on a Life that is Eternal; a Life that has no mixture of
Corruption, and has no fears of decay, and such a life the blessed live in
Heaven; there is no death.

Again, Let none here fancy, because they now and then hear of such an one,
that has attained to almost an Hundred, that therefore they shall live as long;
and having such a prospect, may spend their present days in Jollities and
Mirth, as believing they have an huge deal of time lying on their hands: For
what a surprise will it be to stumble into the Grave in Youth, when they
imagined they should not come thither till they were Old. If you Examine the
weekly Bills, you will find few dye of Age comparatively, to what dye of other
Diseases; more dye before thirty, then live to Fourscore. The youngest here
have seen younger then themselves snatched away by Death; and many a Flower is
withered, when it just began to open. The Sun with many goes down at Noon: As
well might every Disciple of Christ expect to live as long as St. John, who was
to tarry longer on Earth than most of the rest, and Died at 93. Simeon the Son
of Cleophas, Brother of our Lord, lived an 120. Length of Life, is not of all
other Blessings the most desirable; and as one observes, it was not peculiar to
Grace, or the Holy Line; for there are reckoned of the Fathers to the Flood
Eleven Generations, but of the sons of Adam by Cain, only Eight Generations so
as the Posterity of Cain may seem the longer lived. The good Men and good Women
too, sometime lived very long; as Abraham to One hundred seventy five, Isaac to
One hundred and Eighty, Jacob to One hundred forty seven: Sarah, whose years
only among Women are Recorded, dyed in the One hundred twenty seventh year of
her Age, an excellent Mother and a good Wife, Luke 2.36, 37. Anna is said to be
of a great Age, a very patient Person: For when she was about Eighty four, she
departed not from the Temple.

As to you that are the Relations of this good old Disciple, do not water the
Grave of your Friend with useless Tears: There is indeed great cause to Lament,
when an useful serviceable Person is taken away by sudden or untimely death;
it is the falling of Fruit before Autumn come. But such as have been a Blessing,
and a long example of Piety, to the very last step of Humane Life, are not so
to be lamented, as having most regularly finished their Course; and were not
cut off in the middle of their Race. And yet, as one says, it is to be
observed, that the Saints of God, though never so Old, and brought never so low
through the Miseries attending them, when they changed this Life for a better,
were still buried with great Lamentation. Abelmizraim, Genesis 5. was a place
never to be forgot, either by the Egyptians or the Canaanites; and not Jacob
only, but Moses and Aaron, and Samuel, were buried by the People of Israel, and
great Public Mournings made made.

It would be very unreasonable for you to Mourn, and needless for me to desire
you not to do it. She prayed and longed to be with Christ, and would you mourn
that God has heard her Prayers, and that she now is where she longed to be. It
would be a most unjust thing to be sorry that a Labourer is gone to rest, or to
bewail the death of one that is Ninety Five; who was not gathered till the
fullest time of Harvest, and when she was duly ripe for Glory. Oh be thankful
that God has at length comforted this Handmaid of his, that waited for his
Consolations. Be thankful that you so long have had the benefit of her good
advice, her shining example, and her holy prayers. Let the remembrance of her
Faith and Patience, and Hope, and her other excellent Qualifications kindle in
you the like Graces. Consider the end of her Conversation, with what peace she
lived, and with what joy she dyed. Do nothing unworthy of the Children of so
good a Mother; tread in her steps, and follow her in the practice of all praise
worthy things, that so she and you may comfortably meet at the last day, and
never never part again. Amen.

The End.
ERRATA's.
Page 5. line 5. after that Read it is. P. 13. l. 16. for Eaden R. Endor. P.
1^. l. 13. after it R. is P. 19. l. 9. R. Beasts. P. 26. l. 11. R. Pillow. P.
36. l. 11. R. dwindling. P. 41. l. 25. R. God's. P. 52. l. 9. for thus R. this.
P. 75. l. 21. R. Amiable. P. 88. l. 15. after Land R. in Storms. P. 90. l. 20.
R. Amiableness.

THE Changeableness of this World, with Respect to Nations, Families, and
particular Persons, with Practical Applications thereof to the various
Conditions of this Mortal Life. By Timothy Rogers, M.A. Price 1 s. Printed for
J. Salusbury at the Rising Sun in Cornhill.


