Fall not out by the Way: OR, A PERSUASION TO A Friendly Correspondence Between
the Conformists and Non-Conformists. IN A Funeral Discourse On Genesis 45.24.

Occasioned by the Desire of Mr. Anthony Dunwell, in his last Will.

By TIMOTHY ROGERS, M. A.

LONDON: Printed, for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultery, 1692.

To the Gentlemen that Contribute to the Encouragement of the Evening Lecture
at Crosby-square.
Gentlemen,
IT is to you that I owe the largest acknowledgment imaginable; for the
kindnesses that you have showed me, have not only been in themselves very
Great, but very Singular. It was a Noble and a Generous Act, so liberally as
you have done, to encourage Mr. Kentish and Me, and it was a Rare and Peculiar
Generosity not to withdraw the Testimonies of your Love and Respect during my
Long and Doleful Sickness, which made me for two Years incapable of being any
way serviceable to you. It is impossible for me to forget so great a Favor, and
equally impossible for me to express the sense I have of it.

At the desire of Mr. Dunwell, one of your number, I Preached on the following
Subject, and now at the request of a great many of the same number, it comes
into the World: And I was the more willing that it should see the Light,
because, as far as in me lies, I would help to Extinguish those Flames, which
being increased by distance and strangeness, have long Troubled and Scorched
us. It is in vain, I well know, to think that all Men will have the same
Thoughts, or the same Expressions about matters of Religion; forasmuch as in
their different Souls there are different degrees of Light; but I would
endeavor however to persuade persons of different apprehensions to be kind and
civil and genteel to one another, and this is easy to be done, and will be
attended with a mighty pleasure.

Our Lecture, as you will bear us Witness, is not a Seminary of Sedition;
nothing, we dare appeal to you and our other Hearers, is Preached there, but
what is Orthodox and Loyal too; nor do we there take an occasion to vent our
own Passions instead of the Truths of God; nor at any time endeavor to make
our Hearers have an ill Opinion of our Brethren the Conformists, for so we love
to call them, and we hope they will not refuse to give to us the same Friendly
Title. We have among us all abundance of common Work to do against Atheism and
Drunkenness, and the other Vices of a Corrupt Age, and against the World, the
Devil and the Flesh: The necessities of the Souls of Men are so many, that our
United Endeavors will be little enough to supply them; and therefore we should
Love and Encourage and bear with one another, and so the Good of all sides, I
verily persuade my self, will resolve to do.

In our Discourses our Auditory do not use to find matter either of just Scorn
or Laughter, nothing, I hope, that is Absurd or Ridiculous. A late Epitomizer
of the Works of the Learned, is so complaisant as to call some Practical
Discourses of mine, formerly Published, Canting Sermons, and thinks those
Gentlemen, who in a late Account of Books, put an Abridgment of those
Discourses after some Sermons of Mr. Norris, Acted, as if by such a method they
designed to expose the Dissenters. I will allow Mr. Norris to be an Ingenious
and neat Writer, his Thoughts is Cleanly, and his Language Fine; but I think it
will be no diskindness either to him, or Mr. De la Crose, to desire them not to
dip their Pens in Gall, and to forbear Satyr when they would spread Truth: A
little more good Nature and Civility would do neither of them any great harm.
To say this or that is Cant is no Proof, it is Reviling without a Reason, and
none of the Learned or Judicious will use so silly and so Trite a Word. I am
afraid this French Writer is of a very little Soul, and thinks no Sense can be
spoken but on his own side: Men of more Understanding than he, will allow that
the Dissenters know a little what belongs to Sense and good Language too. He
Ridicules the Lives of Mr. Hieron and Mr. Eliot of New England, those Blessed
Divines, as he calls them, but I wish he may sit at their Feet in the other
World. I would desire this Abridger of Books not to be so Partial; and if he
would have his Writings to be useful, not to cram them again with such Stuff,
for it is nauseous to all Men of Sense and good Breeding, to see persons of
such a Little Soul talk as if they had Monopolized all the Wit and Sense of the
World in their own Brains. I have longer insisted upon this, because I hope it
may a little Soften some that are of a Morose and Waspish Constitution: I
wonder in what Air they have lived that are continually spitting out Ulcerated
Language: I wish all the Men of Bitterness an Healthful state of Soul, and then
I am sure they will be calm and gentle, they will cease to be Incendiaries and
learn to be Peacemakers, which is a much better Office.

To you, Gentlemen, it is that I do now publicly return my sincere and hearty
Thanks for all your Kindnesses to me both in Health and Sickness: At your
Service I am, and shall upon all occasions be ready to give you the most
cheerful Marks of my Respect; may your Trades and Employments thrive better for
what you give to my Brother Kentish and to me: What good is done to the Souls
of Men by us (as we hope there is some) will turn also to your Account in that
Day: I wish you may continue to be promoters of Peace and Union among all good
Persons of all Persuasions, and that you would labor in your several Stations
to advance a thing so Pleasant and so Profitable: May you have always calm
Spirits, and quiet Families, and loving People to Deal withal: May you have
Comprehensive and large Souls: For many long Years may you Thrive and Prosper,
and be useful in this World, and at last be admitted into the World above,
which is the blessed place, for it is the World of Love.

So Prays, Gentlemen, Your very much Obliged Servant, L. Rogers.
London, December. 12th 1691.
The following Books have been lately Published by the Author of this Discourse.
1. PRactical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery, in several Sermons, as they
were lately Preached in a Congregation in London, after his Recovery from a
Sickness of near two Years continuance.

2. Early Religion: Or, a Discourse of the Duty and Interest of Youth, with
some Advices to Parents and Aged People to Promote it in their several
Capacities.

3. A Discourse concerning Trouble of Mind, and the Disease of Melancholy.

All three to be Sold by John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey.

ERRATA.
PAge 25. line 20. Read Ages posesed, p. 31. l. 21. r. in its self, p. 71. l.
19. for of, r. in.

Two SERMONS Preached upon the DEATH OF Mr. Anthony Dunwell.
GENESIS xlv. 24. See that ye fall not out by the way.


IT is not unknown to several here, That this Evening is solemn to us upon more
Accounts than one; not only as it is the Evening of the Lord's Day, and the
usual Time of our Lecture here, but also as the Providence of God has given us
a peculiar Occasion to remember a Departed Friend, by whose Appointment and
Desire, before he dyed, I am now come to Preach a Funeral Sermon for him. It is
the same Person for whom, when I was last here, we prayed, as being then in the
painful Agonies of Death; and the next Morning God was pleased to let him Dye.
He had for several Months, by a Lingering Wasting Disease, found the Truth of
that in Job. 14.1. That man that is born of a Woman is full of Trouble: and now
his going hence has also given us the Proof of the next Verse, how, he comes
forth like a flower, and is cut down: He flees also as a shadow, and
continues not. This Flower, on which a little while ago we looked with
Delight, is now blasted with the Stroke of Death, and we shall not behold its
Greenness and Freshness in this World any more: Though we hope it is
transplanted to flourish in a better Place.

This Friend, whose Funeral we now celebrate, was a constant Hearer in this
Place, a generous Encourager of this Lecture; to my Brother Kentish and to me
he was a Cordial and sincere Friend; but alas, he is gone: His Death is indeed
our Loss, but we hope it was his Gain. He is gone, whose Friendship was so
pleasant and so necessary to us: He that delighted in the Activity of his
serviceableness to God and us, is now at rest in the silent Grave; there we
hope he sleeps in the Lord; there we must leave his Dust, and thither will his
Works follow him. He used to be a constant Attender on this Lecture, as he was
always more than a Well-wisher to it; and I could heartily desire that those
other Young People, to whom we are beholden for their Kindness, would be
equally Serious, and if it consisted with the Order of their Families, as
diligent Attenders; there are some indeed that are so, and if they were all
such, we hope they would not lose their Time: We would willingly have them to
receive some Benefit by our poor Pains, and to taste of the Fruit of those
Studies which their Liberalities have Promoted and Encouraged. If it had so
pleased God, I had rather have come hither to have preached a Sermon of
Thankfulness, for the Recovery of our Friend, than a Funeral Sermon: I know it
would have been pleasant to us, and to all his Relations, to have joined
together on such a cheerful occasion; and our Praises then would have been as
many as are now our Sighs and Tears: To these Mourners I am sure the Garments
of Praise would have been much more delightful than these of Heaviness: But
what shall we say, the Will of God is Done, and let us humbly and quietly
acquiesce therein, for he alone knows when it is the most proper Season for us
all to dye: Our Acquaintance are going into the next World, one after another,
and in a little while we shall also be gone, and our Places know us no more. To
those that are Departed we must go, they will not return to us; though our Duty
under the Strokes of God, and the Loss of our Friends obliges us to be sensible
of his Warnings, and of our own Frailty; yet it also does engage us not to
Repine or Murmur at his Providence. Our Eyes may justly weep when we see the
Graves of our Holy Friends; but they ought not so to weep, as to hinder our
View of their certain and approaching Resurrection, when their now vile and
consuming Bodies shall be like the glorious Body of our Lord.

I believe you will think this a very strange Place of Scripture, on such a sad
occasion as this; I believe, had I been left to my Liberty, I should not have
chosen it; but it was bequeathed to me in the Last Will and Testament of our
deceased Friend Mr. Anthony Dunwel, and I do now understand, That it was that
which he had fixed upon several Years ago: Men never put any thing in their
Wills of this nature, but what they most firmly desire to have done. It may be
a great Comfort to his Friends and Acquaintance, that he not only retained a
quiet and peaceable Spirit to his Dying Day, but that he was willing to have
Peace and Quietness flourish in the World and in the Church, when he was Dead
and Gone; a Temper not like to those selfish and narrow* Soul People, that so
they may Live and Dye at Ease, care not if all the World be in Flames and Wars,
and Confusions afterward, as he said, Me pereunte ruat Mundus. Our peaceable
Friend was in this Like to our Blessed Savior, who as he chose to be
manifested when the Temple of Janus was shut at Rome, and all the World was in
a profound Peace, and being himself the Prince of Peace; and his Reign full of
Pity, he endeavored to Reconcile God and Man, and the Sons of Men to one
another. So, a little before his Death, discoursing with his Disciples, Peace
was the great Legacy that he bequeathed to them, Joh. xiv. 27. Peace I leave
with you; my Peace I give unto you: And it is like, our Deceased Friend had
this in his Eye when he left this Text; which is indeed a most pleasant Text,
though the Occasion on which I am to insist upon it be sad and mournful, and I
will apply my self to the handling of it, when I have done that Justice to the
Relations and Friends of the Deceased, as to say, That I never heard of any
falling out among them; nor is there, I fully believe, any Disagreement, but a
cordial and sincere Love, as there ought to be: Nor do I believe that he
intended them, when his Thoughts fixed upon this Subject; but only from what I
apprehend, he was greatly desirous that there should be Love, and Friendship,
and Union, and Peace among all Good People, of whatsoever Profession and
Denomination, whether Conformists or Nonconformists; and in this Sense, and
with Relation to this, that I shall now explain this good Advice, See that ye
fall not out by the Way.

This History of Joseph contains a series of admirable Transactions, and is a
great instance of the Mysteriousness and Wisdom of the Divine Providence, that
by Ways, to Appearance very unlikely and undiscerned at first by Mortal Men,
does certainly bring about his own Designs, and that Curious Succession and
Period of Things, which was first laid in his own Decree. The Malice and Envy
of Joseph's Brethen was the Means of his Advancement; their Selling of him
preserved their own Lives: It was a Cruel Lie that they told his Father Jacob,
when they said, Joseph was torn to pieces, and showed the Coat of his Son, his
dearest Son Joseph, all besmeared with Blood; What Hearts had they that could
thus torment a poor Old Man, and their own Father too? and what Sorrow pierced
his Heart, when he thought he had taken of him an everlasting Farewell, and
should see the promising and hopeful Youth no more for ever? See Genesis 37.33,
34. he said, It is my Son's Coat, an evil beast has devoured him; Joseph is
without doubt rent in pieces. And Jacob rent his Clothes, and put Sackcloth on
his loins, and mourned for his son many days. I wonder at Joseph, that he
should never send Word to his Father that he was alive; or that when he had now
so fair an Opportunity he should so long neglect to give him the Tidings of his
Welfare, for he might justly think it would wipe away all the Tears of his
Mourning Father, as it did extremely revive him afterward; when he heard that
Joseph was alive, the good old Patriarch was then content to Dye: Genesis 45.48.
Israel said, it is enough, Joseph my Son is yet alive: I will go and see him
before I dye. I most of all wonder that he should urge his Brethren to bring
from their Father his only remaining Comfort, their younger Brother; the very
Motion of which was so formidable to his Cruel Brothers, and they knew it would
be so sad News at home, that it immediately awakened their Consciences for the
Crime that they had committed against him a great while ago, Genesis 42.21. And
Joseph hearing their Mutual Accusations, was much affected with them, and was
forced to turn about and Weep, ver. 24. They brought the sad News Home, and you
hear the Language of Jacob's Sorrows, ver. 36. he said unto them, Me ye have
bereaved of my Children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take
Benjamin away, all these things are against me. The poor Man thought all this
was to load him with a greater Heap of Miseries, when it was the way to make
him Happy. Good People are apt to think, when many Crosses meet together, that
they are absolutely ruined; but the Potions that are very bitter, promote their
Health; and what they lose in the Creatures, God is pleased to make up with his
own Love, or to restore them Mercies of the same kind with those of which they
are now bereaved. This was a severe Proposal to Jacob, and as one says, (
Cereziers. Joseph. or the Divine Providence, p. 109.) he may be supposed to cry
after this manner; Will you bury me alive? Suffer me to Live, may be you intend
to see me languish the rest of my Days! I have one only Son, that Consolates
the Loss of Joseph, and of his poor Mother, and must I lose him! O my God, how
happy had my Condition been, to have had no Children, or to have had some more
prosperous! I have then had but my Miseries to bewail; whereas now I see my
self obliged to take the best part of those that inflict them: Joseph has
satisfied the Cruel Hunger of a Savage Beast; and his Brother, to appease ours,
must be exposed to the Desire of a Barbarian, who perchance may take Pleasure
to torment me in the Person of Benjamin. What know I if he obliged not all my
Children to present themselves to him, to involve them under one and the same
Ruin, and to blot out the Name of Israel from the Earth? In the 43 Chapter you
behold, That this Joseph, that had carried it so politickly toward them for a
long Time, does at length begin to melt, v. 29. his Pity and his Joy made him
scarce able to refrain before them; and apart, he wept very plentifully. And
after some few strange intervening Passages, in this 45th Chapter, at last
dawned, after all this Night of Mysteries, the bright and pleasant Day; he
could not refrain himself, nay he wept aloud: He said unto them, v. 3. I am
Joseph; does my Father yet live? and his brethren could not answer, for they
were troubled at his presence. And in v. 4. he said again, I am Joseph your
brother whom ye sold into Egypt. Well they might be astonished and afraid, when
they knew it was the very Joseph that they envied, and that they sold: He
comforts them against excessive Grief, telling them, They designed Ill, but God
had a very gracious Design in suffering all this to come to pass, and very
humbly owns, that God sent him into Egypt, v. 8. Then it was he desired them to
acquaint his Father with all his Glory: And because it was a very surprising
thing to them, so great that they could scarcely believe it, he is forced to
say, v. 12. Behold your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it
is my mouth that speaks to you. And v. 14. He fell upon his brother Benjamin
's neck and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his Neck; their very Souls melted over
one another, there were between them the dearest Transports of Love and Joy;
there was an Ecstasy, or a pleasant Contact of two Souls running each into
other: He gives them Wagons to bring down to Egypt the rest of the Family;
assures them they should have the Fat, and the best of the Land; and that they
needed not to regard their Stuff, i. e. to bring their Mean or Ordinary Goods
along with them; for all that was Delicate, and Rich, and Pleasant, was to be
theirs. And v. 24. he sent his Brethren away, and they departed, and he said
unto them, See that ye fall not out by the way.

The Proposition that I intend to insist upon from these Words, suitably to the
Meaning of our Friend, is this,

That all good People, of all Persuasions, ought to agree together. I hope my
Work at this Time will be to be a Peace maker; and such a Subject, as this of
Union, and Love, and Mutual Concord, is of all others most delightful to me,
and I pray God it may be Profitable to us all. I will endeavor to Reconcile
all Christians, but I will Reflect upon none that I judge to be truly so; I
come not to shoot Arrows, but to bring Balsom; not to open Wounds, but, as far
as I can, to close them up; and may that blessed Providence, that has at this
Time called me to so excellent a Task, assist me in it; and if any Persons came
hither Wolves or Tigers, may they go Lambs away; if any came hither with
Revenge and Passion, and Hatred or Prejudices against any good People, may they
never, for the Time to come, entertain such a Savage and Brutal Disposition.

I. Good People should not Fall out by the Way or Disagree, because they have
all the same Father, and he is the God of Peace: It is uncomely for Children,
that have a Father, who sincerely loves them all, to wrangle and contend with
one another: It is unsuitable to their Relation, and reproachful to the Family.
It Is unnatural for Brethren to fight with one another, Genesis 13.8. And Abraham
said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, etc.
for we are Brethren. All Mankind ought to agree together, as having a
Participation of the same Human Nature; they are all Brethren in a larger
Sense, and Sons of the same Father Adam. Much more ought they so to do, who are
descended from above, the Place of Love and Peace; that are not only of the
same Nation, but of the same Church, that is, the Church of Christ; for you
shall find me, through this whole Discourse, not to confine my self to this or
that Party, but to take in all whom I believe to be sincerely good.

II. Good People, of all Denominations, should now agree together, because they
have been in Common Danger. Joseph's Brethren had like to have starved
together, and therefore their Plenty should not make them disagree. We in this
Nation have not felt such a Famine as they did, but we have seen heretofore
Dangers that threatened us with a Worse, even a Famine of Hearing the Words of
the Lord; and if the Papists had prospered in their Plots, Plots that were
levelled both against the Church of England and Dissenters, we had all by this
Time been in Common Darkness, destitute of all Light but that of Fire and
Faggot, and then the good of all sides must have agreed to Burn together,
though they did not live very quietly together; the Stake would have united
those, whom the Pulpit or the Press could not: They would have swallowed us up
all; and shall we not learn so much Wisdom as not to quarrel with one another,
which is Sport to them and a Mischief to us? The World, the Debauched, the
Wicked Part of Men hate all good People on every side, and therefore they
should not Hate nor Fall out with one another, remembering how they had like to
have perished all together, Genesis 13.7.

III. Good People should not quarrel with one another, nor be injurious, when
God has forgiven them all: For Joseph's Brethren to Fall out by the Way, when
they were so lately pardoned after an heinous and aggravated Crime would have
been a very shameful thing, and would have made all their future Sin more
sinful: Have not we provoked God more than any of our Friends or Neighbors can
provoke us? He forgives us all thousands of Sins, and alas we can hardly put up
one Injury. It is unbecoming for us now to quarrel, when God is willing to be
at Peace with us all, after innumerable Transgressions which we have been
guilty of. That Man that is of a Wrangling Contentious Humor, is either yet in
Sin, or has obtained a Pardon for it; if he have his Guilt and Filth upon him,
he has much more necessary Work to do, even to search his Heart and abhor
himself, and to dwell at Home, instead of meddling with other Persons; and if
God has forgiven him, he has very low Thoughts of that Grace, which all the
Saints wonder at, when he cannot easily forgive his Neighbors Wrongs: Take
this for a certain Truth, That the strongest and the best Christians are most
Mild and Gentle; they are weak and Children in Understanding that are
Passionate and Waspish, and Boisterous and Fretful, for so far they are Carnal,
and walk as Men: And it is directly contrary to the Apostle's Exhortation, Ephesians.
4.31, 32. Let all bitterness and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and
Evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all Malice; and be ye kind one to
another, forgiving one another even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

If God were not more tender to us all than we are to one another, alas! who
could then be saved?

IV. No Good People should fall out by the Way, because they are all Traveling
to the same blessed Home; they are Strangers and Pilgrims here on Earth, and
should as Foreigners and Countrymen that meet in some distant Land, embrace and
be glad to see one another. Travelers of several Nations, German, English,
Scotch or French, will agree and be civil to one another upon the Road, how
different soever their Opinions and Constitutions are. We are all traveling to
the Land of Canaan, and hope all to meet in the same Place; and therefore it is
highly unsuitable for us to Fall out by the Way. Nor will our common Father be
pleased with us, when we disagree; we have all the same Rule and the same
Guide, the same Leader and the same Prospect of Reward; and therefore we should
go Hand in Hand, and hearten and quicken, and encourage one another.

V. Our common Enemies agree together; the Devil, the World, and the Flesh,
will oppose to us their united Srength; our Divisions do raise their Courage,
but our hearty Love will defeat all their Stratagems. Our Adversaries sow the
Seeds of Discord, but our Business is to prevent their after-growth, and not to
let the Tares spring up, whilst we are asleep. Quarrelling among Christians is
as foolish as if a Caravan of Merchants, that travel through the Deserts,
should all fall upon one another, and let the Wild Arabians, in the mean while,
make a Prey of their Common Stock. Let not the Israelites sharpen their Swords
against one another, whilst the Philistines design the Ruin of them all.

VI. Not to fall out by the Way, will make the Way less Tedious and more
Pleasant. It Is so troublesome a thing to be always Quarrelling and Contending,
that I wonder Men will not be so wise as to love their own Quiet. They are of a
very hot Constitution whose Element is Fire, and who cannot live but in the
midst of Flames. Persons that are always Fighting, cannot Travel very fast, it
retards their Progress, and makes them advance very slowly to their Home. In
the ordinary Affairs of Life, Wrangling hinders all Dispatch, and no business
is rightly done till Men's Thoughts are cool and Sober. Passionate People
usually make a great Noise and Bustle, but they do but little Work; a Ship does
not sail so directly and quickly to the Port, in the midst of Storms, as she
does in the more quiet and fairer Calm. Solomon very wisely says, Prove. 21.9.
It is better to dwell in the corner of the house top, than with a brawling
woman in a wide house, because the Violence of her Voice will disturb him in
every Place, and effectually with her Clamors hinder all his Business. It Is
much better to live in a smoaky Cottage, with one of a meek and quiet Spirit,
than to live in a Palace with a Scold; the Thunder and the Lightning are not
more disturbing and frightful than such a Woman's Tongue: But now, to live with
Holy, Silent, Agreeing People, makes a Man's House his Delight, and his Hours
with such happy Society slide away with Pleasure. When they all think and speak
the same Things, and when their Designs and Interests, and Hopes are the same.
Love makes every thing sweet and easy; it makes us yielding and compassionate;
it makes us prone to Civilities and Kindnesses, and to all the good Offices we
can for others; it makes us to give them good Advice to raise them up when they
fall, and when they wander to bring them into the right way again. Men that
love Contention are usually scorched and pained with the Fires of their own
kindling; and it is very fit it should be so. It Is a most grievous tiresome
thing to a Man of a Quiet Soul, to see others always in a Ferment and Vexation,
and Wounding themselves, when they have none to Reproach; and Poisoning
themselves with Fury and Passion, when they have not sit Objects whereon to
spend their Venom.

VII. Good People ought not to fall out by the Way, because this will promote
their common Strength and Safety. The Church united is as an Army with Banners;
her joint Prayers and Praises are formidable to her Enemies: But when she is
divided she is liable to be Attacqued and molested on every side. It Is among
Christians, as some observe, it was among the Roman Armies, so long as they
were well united, that their Commanders held a perfect Understanding among
themselves, and their Soldiers were kept in a true Obedience to their Orders,
other Nations endeavored to procure their Friendship with great eagerness;
they esteemed it a Glory to enter into Alliance with this People: But so soon
as they disunited among themselves, other States despised their Alliance, and
took up Arms against them. Whilst Brethren fall not out by the way, they can
assist and help one another in a common Danger; they can advise and warn, and
pray for one another; but when they are divided, that Division, like a
preternatural hectical Heat in the Body, makes the Spirits more feeble, and
causes all its Strength and Beauty to decay. All Societies of Men are both more
Illustrious and Powerful when they are linked together in a common Bond of
Love: But our Savior has told us, Matt. 12.25. Every Kingdom divided against
it self is brought to desolation: And every City or House divided against it
self shall not stand. It is therefore the Policy of the Devil, and of Wicked
Men, to render good Christians odious to one another, and to engage them in
Wranglings and Disputes, and Quarrels that so the Glory of Religion may not be
discerned when it is covered with so black a Veil. The whole Course of Nature
subsists by the common Union of all its Parts. The Heavens above us, as one
observes, Daillee Quinze Sermons, p. 129.
have for many Ages rouled about with an admirable Concord. The Spheres, in the
midst of many Motions, do not disturb nor hinder one another; the Stars, both
the Wandering and Fixed, conspire to promote the Good and Perfection of the
Universe: The Elements sweetly communicate among themselves the Qualities they
receive from Heaven: The Air gives to the Earth of its Light, its Winds and its
Rains: The Sea gives to the Air of its Vapors and Exalations, and both together
give to Plants and Living Creatures what is necessary for their Nourishment and
Refreshment: So the Seasons of the Year give Place to one another, the Winter
to the Spring, and the Spring to the Summer, and the Summer to Autumn, and that
to Winter again; and so there is a perpetual following of Day and Night, of
Light and Darkness, of Calm and Storm, of Hot and Cold, of Rain and Shine: In
this pleasant Commerce of the several Parts of the World does consist its
Strength and Beauty; and if it were Interrupted, there would be nothing but
Confusion and Deformity. Union and Agreement is, as he calls it elsewhere, the
Soul of the Universe, the Ornament of Heaven and Earth, the Life and the Joy of
both Worlds.

VIII. Falling out by the Way, destroys the Power of Religion. It is not much
Talking, but a lively Practice of our known Duties, that is the best Evidence
of our being Christians indeed. If we disputed less and prayed more, if we
could but Love and not Quarrel, we should be far better Men: Wrangling may fill
our Heads with Notions, but never will enrich our Hearts with Grace; it may
enlarge our Knowledge but not promote our Holiness: It takes up that Warmth and
Zeal, and Time and Strength which should be spent about our own Salvation, and
the Good of others; for a Man that is heated with Passion is not fit for Duty;
it is not suitable to one scorched with such a profane Flame, to address
himself to the God of Peace. 1 Pet. 3.7.
This Falling out by the Way breeds Pride and Envy, and Self-conceit, instead
of Self-denial and Humility, and Love, and many other such excellent and
amiable Graces. A Polite Writer has well observed, That, that Pestilential
Spirit of Division, that Heat of Disputation, which has for so many possessed
Ages and wasted the Catholic Church, and by an unhappy kind of Magic
transformed the Zeal of Christian Practice into an Itch of Unchristian Dispute,
made the Questions about our Creed more numerous than the Letters of it, and by
this the Serpent, got into the Paradise of Christ. Causes of the decay of
Christian Piety, p 247.

IX. To live in Union and Concord and Friendship, is the State of Heaven: For
that is a calm and quiet State, as well as Pure and Holy. There is the God of
Peace; there the Angels and blessed Spirits live in perfect Concord with one
another; there is no jarring in their mutual Praises and Hallelujahs; there are
no Axes or Hammers to be heard in that Eternal Temple; that Land is full of the
most cheerful Light and Peace; and we should be ambitious while we are below,
to be like them above; for as one has well expressed it, All we know of what they
do above,
Is that they Praise and that they Love.
Do but suppose a Family, where every part of it is agreed, no bitter Words, no
Strife, but a pleasant sincere good Will to one another, and every thing is
done in Love; and there they live as if they were in Heaven. Suppose the People
of London were all agreed, and had all one common Interest, and all studied and
contrived to lay aside their Quarrels and Contentions, and Names and
Reproaches, and loved as Friends and Neighbors, and Fellow-Citizens; not
injuring, not reviling, not undermineing one another: Oh what a blessed Place
would this be, it would be like the New Jerusalem! If all this Nation were
agreed, if all the Churches and Kingdoms of the World, did but live in Peace
and Friendship with one another, oh what an Heaven on Earth might we then see!
And why should not all endeavor in their several Stations that it may be so?
All good People hope to meet above, and why should they fall out by the Way as
they are going thither? All their Enmities will cease there, and why should
they not now be Friends? Why should they that hope to live in one and the same
Glory, now revile or reflect upon one another? All their differences will be
composed when they arrive there, and why should they now differ? There Luther
and Calvin, and Dr. Owen and Mr. Baxter, will be of all one Mind, there will be
no Misunderstanding of one another there. Now to live in Strife and Bitterness
and Wrath is a sad resemblance of Hell, for that is a place of universal and
perpetual Discontent and Rage; there is no Peace nor Quiet there for ever;
there the guilty condemned Souls, are always accusing and upbraiding and
cursing one another; there they rage against God, against themselves, and
against all the Instruments of their Ruin and Calamity.

Inf. 1. How unsuitable is it for any under the name of Christian to persecute
others, or to force them to be of their Mind! It Is Barbarous and Inhuman and
Antichristian, to use violence in the Matters of Religion, it is not civil nor
like Men so to do: How unreasonable would it appear to be, if you met with such
upon the Road, that are resolved to Beat and Rob and Plunder, all that would
not say as they say, nor travail their Pace? It would also be an unjust Method,
a thing that would carry with it a brand of Eternal Shame, for any Men to
injure their Brethren in their Goods, or Lives, or Estates, merely for matters
of Opinion, which are Innocent and Harmless, and no ways dangerous to the Civil
Government. To persuade gently and with mildness is the way to convince a Man
if he be erroneous, but Fines and Imprisonments, and harsh Usage and bad
Language, will never make any Mortal think that such as use them are in the
right way; it is a poor Cause that is forced to serve it self of such inhuman
and sorry Methods; to force Men to believe, is a French way indeed, but never
was nor never will be Apostolical: It savours of Hell to be violent and cruel,
and our Savior never intended that Men should be Dragooned into Religion, but
by all the mild and gentle ways in the World, be persuaded to receive it. A
Persecuting Spirit wherever it is, is a piece of Popery: It Is the proper
Character of the Romish Church to be fierce and bloody; their Scarlet is dyed
with the Blood of the Saints of God. I have learned (says the famous Mr.
Chillingworth, that great Ornament and Defender of the Protestante) from the
Ancient Fathers, that nothing is more against Religion, than to force Religion:
And of St. Paul, The Weapons of the Christian Warfare are not Carnal. And great
reason, for Human Violence may make Men counterfeit, but cannot make them
believe; and is therefore fit for nothing but to be breed Form without, and
Atheism within: Besides, what will follow from this Method but the preservation
peradventure of Unity, but peradventure only of Uniformity in particular States
and Churches; but the Immortalizing the greater and more lamentable divisions
of Christendom, and the World? And therefore what can follow from it, but
perhaps in the judgment of Carnal Policy, the temporal Benefit and Tranquillity
of temporal States and Kingdoms, but the infinite prejudice, if not the
desolation of the Kingdom of Christ? Chillingworth's Religion of Protestants,
Sect. I. Chapter V. p. 228. Ed. 5.

Inf. 2. How Beautiful are the feet of them that Preach the Gospel of Peace,
Romans 10.15. They deserve a free and cheerful Entertainment that Preach this
Gospel of Peace in a peaceable and quiet manner, when they do not mingle their
own Passions with the Truths of God, and carry that Heat and Bitterness into
the Sanctuary, which would be disallowed about any common things. The Ministers
of Christ are honorable, both with respect to their Character, and the Message
that they are charged withal, that is, to persuade Men to be reconciled to God,
and then to one another; and they have this further advantage too, that they
may as they ought frequently instill into the Minds of their Hearers, the
necessity of Peace and Quietness and Friendship, and how amiable it is self,
and how acceptable to God such a Temper is. It is the work of a Minister to be
an Healer of Breaches, to resolve the Doubtful, and to compose Quarrels as soon
as ever they begin to rise; as well knowing that no Churches ever thrive, where
Love and Brotherly Kindness do not abound. But they are very unhappy Men who
are never pleased but with Invective, who first kindle Fires in their own
Breasts, and chafe their own Spirits with eager and severe Thoughts of those
whom they account their Enemies, and then warm their Sermons with this
Terrestrial culinary Fire; and so I call it, because that Heat and that Light
which comes from Heaven, is pure and peaceable, and soft and gentle; that
Doctrine will certainly produce the best effect which drops as the Due, its mild
Influences will both profit and Delight. A Minister of all Men in the World,
should be Meek and Compassionate and Loving to his People, for he is an
Ambassador from the Prince of Peace: His Sermons, his Visits, his
Instructions, his every Action should tend to promote this; and upon all
occasions to show the evil of Censuring and Reviling and Backbiting, and a
thousand other too common Sins, that have very much of the Image of the Devil
in them, as they are Spiritual Wickednesses, and they are always highly
disgraceful to Religion. Woeful were those times, and unsuitable to their
character were those Men, that would turn their Sermons into so many Satyrs and
Alarms, their Pulpits into Drums, and their Congregations into a Field of
Battle: Unhappy were the times, when the Preacher was most hummed when he was
most full of Railery, and that was thought the best and most witty Sermon that
was the most sharp: Such Persons spoke not as if their Tongues were touched
with a Coal from the Altar, but as if they had been scorched with Fire from
below. God forgive those Men that sought by all manner of Reviling Speeches, to
render their Brethren odious to the Magistrates and the common People, and as
far as they could, to exasperate both against them; and may a peculiar Blessing
be on their Heads, who are now of the highest Rank in the Church, and who were
then, to their Immortal Honor be it spoken, Men of great Calmness, Temper and
Moderation; of such no Church will ever have cause to be ashamed, though she
may blush for those who were then Sons of Coal, and who increased the Flames
they should have quenched. Above all things a Minister must be apt to forgive
private Injuries, and not to quarrel with his Hearers for small matters nor on
every slight occasion; for this will unavoidably prejudice them against his
Doctrine, and render it altogether unsuccessful: And if they be of my mind,
they will not care to hear a passionate and froward Man; for I think, he has
nothing in him attractive, whose greatest Gift lies in railing at others, and
who by that provocation are frequently tempted to rail at him again; and thus
they fall out by the Way, when they might with great ease Travel lovingly
together.

Inf. 3. See hence the woeful Effects of Adam 's Fall: This occasioned all the
Disorders that are both in the great and little World, all the Storms and
Huricans, and Tempests and Inundations, and Miseries that break the Peace of
the Creation, and all those unbecoming violent Passions, that are in the minds
of Men; who are now like the Beasts that perish, and as so many Wolves and
Lions to one another. Surely nothing of this would have ever happened, had not
our first Parents tasted of the forbidden Fruit. By Transgressing the Command
of God, the Harmony of the lower World was greatly spoiled, and Confusion, and
War, and Bloodshed, came instead of Peace and Love, from that time to this;
these two happy Guests have been Strangers to the Sons of Men. To be Passionate
and Revengful and Quarrelsome, is to have the old Man in his Strength; but to
be Meek, and Humble, and Lowly and Forgiving, is to be conformable to the
second Adam, it is to shine with his Image, who came to repair the breaches of
the Fall; therefore, says the Apostle, Col. 3.7, 8. Now you also put off all
these, Anger, Wrath, Malice, etc.

Inf. 4. The great Patience of God that so bears with all his Children, when
they fall out by the way, and cannot bear with one another; it is their
Weakness, their Folly, and their Sin so to do; but for his own sake, though he
is forely displeased at it, yet he lets not all his Anger burst out upon them:
Would it not move even a mild and gentle Father, to see his Children always
quarrelling, when he provides for them all? Their Strife and Bitterness does
vex his Soul, but he remembers they are his Children still; and they are but
Children; and he knows when they have grown to riper and wiser years, even for
their own ease they will be more quiet. Alas! they are Children in
Understanding, that are Peevish and Fretful and soon Angry; and when their
Minds are more Enlightened, they will by degrees be like their Heavenly Father,
who is Merciful and Kind and slow to Wrath, Psalm. 103.8, 9. It should fill us
with wonder to consider how gracious, how compassionate, and how good our God
is to us all, when we are many times full of Bitterness and Venom against one
another.

The next Thing is to enquire whence it is that good People and Brethren are
apt to fall out by the way: The causes of it are such as these,

1. It arises from their Lusts and the remaining Corruption of their Nature,
Jam. 4.9. All the Commotions that disturb the Peace of the World or of the
Church, have their Original from the inward depraved Habits of the Souls of
Men: None are satisfied with their own Stations, some seek to climb higher than
they are, and so justle and quarrel with all that oppose their Ambitious
designs; some have an inward grudging at the Reputation and Greatness and
Serviceableness of others, and their envy kindles a Rage within their Breasts,
which may be stifled by prudent Considerations for a while; but it is so
tormenting, that it vents it self either in Reproaches or Opposition, or
Contempt of others, Gal. 5.26. And Covetousness, and an immoderate Desire of
Wealth, is the occasion of many fold Contentions; and indeed it is for Money or
Dominion, or some such alluring Bait, that the greatest part of the World
quarrel with one another; or some Interest they have, that is the Idol of their
Hearts, which they love, and which they are afraid they must part withal, if
they should agree. Too many Men, in the Matters of Religion consult more their
Temporal Advantage than God's Glory; and it has been often observed by Learned
Men, Bishop Reynold's Works. p. 949.
That Avarice and Ambition, a Spirit of Contention, a corrupt Conscience and
Carnal Ends have usually been the Original of those Heresies which have from
Time to Time annoyed the Church of God; and that Arius, Valentinus, Marcian,
Montanus, Novatus and others, by their Ambition and Impatience of Repulse,
revolted from the Truth. Thus the Disciples strove together on the Way, and it
was who should be greatest: To be Great in the World is that which many Persons
so vehemently desire, that to attain it they scruple not to disturb their own,
their Neighbors, and the common Peace. It is from Guilt, and the too great
Power of Sin in Brethren, that they fall out by the Way. Joseph gave this
Caution to his Brethren, because they had accused themselves, as being verily
guilty of great Barbarousness and Cruelty toward him, and he was afraid that
they might too severely reproach one another upon that account.

2. This falling out often proceeds from a cross-grained Temper: A little good
Nature and Religion would bring the World and the Church to a state of Peace;
but some People are of so sour and morose a Constitution, that nothing that
others do, pleases them, and so they fall out with them: Some are so touchy and
crabbed, that the least thing puts them into a Flame, the least Molestation
gives them an occasion of stinging and troubling them: Some are so Peevish that
the least misunderstood Word or Expression that they do not like, puts them all
into a Heat. I generally observe, That Good-natured People, whether Conformists
or Nonconformists, do most easily and pleasantly agree together: And that those
that are under the Curse of an uneasy rugged Temper, never do, nor will agree.
I am sure there would be a great deal of more Peace in the World, if Men would
but strive to resist the Vices of their own Constitution; I am sure they would
be less Wranglers if they were more Gentlemen; for it is highly disagreeable to
a well-bred Man, to be always contradicting and opposing others; a sweet,
affable, courteous, obliging Carriage and Expression, does insensibly draw one
to a good Opinion of those among whom it is observed; and a stiff inflexible
Temper, is a vast hinderance to the Beauty and the Progress of Religion: There
may be good People that are bad natured; but then, I say, it is their Duty to
strive against, and not to indulge their own Weakness. Some Men are naturally
hot and fiery, and eager, and violent, and it is their Duty to cool this Heat
with very serious and deliberate Consideration, lest it ruin themselves, at
last as it now vexes others. It is a most honorable thing for any Person to be
yielding and full of Condescension toward others in all Lawful and Necessary
Things. I should reckon it a very great Misery as could well befall a Man of
Temper, of Meekness and Wisdom, to be bound always to live with a morose
crabbed Man; it would be a very severe and tormenting Punishment. Some are
naturally boisterous and stormy, and full of that Clamor which the Apostle
reproves, Ephesians. 4.31, 32. and such disturb the World, which if they could learn
Silence, would quickly be at Ease.

3. This falling out by the Way, among good People, proceeds from want of
frequent Conversation and Acquaintance with one another. They whet their
Spirits with abundance of useless and dry Disputes, and when they come affably
and civilly to talk together, they find they are all of one Mind. Strangeness
and Distance, and reservedness and shyness, perpetuate many times the Quarrels
and Contentions which an Hour or two's familiar Discourse would remove.
Acquaintance among. Men of different Persuasions will by degrees cause them to
entertain a better and more favorable Opinion of each other than they had
before; and indeed, as one very well observes, we ought to converse with one
another as Friends, and remember, that the way to Agreement of all Parties is
not to bring Men to be of one Opinion, but to be of one Mind; which we may be,
though of different Opinions: Not by thinking the same things, but by thinking
well one of another; endeavoring to preserve Charity as carefully as to
preserve Truth ( Bishop Patrick's second Part of a Sermon before the then
Prince of Orange, p. 39.) I do not see any Reason why a Conformist should shun
our Society, or we theirs; nor why we should be strange to one another, because
we have not the very same Sentiments in things that are not Essential to
Religion.

4. Listening to Backbiters is another Cause of falling out. Some People have so
little Religion and so little Business, that they can find nothing to do but to
gad about to tell Stories of this or that Person, whom they or their Friend
does not like; And if they be regarded, such Busybodies will occasion
abundance of Strife. It is a wise Man's Part to stiffle all their Revilings, or
not to give any Credit to them, for Tale Bearers are usually the most Credulous
and the most Impertinent, and the most Censorious, and the most Noisy of any
People in the World; they will always commend themselves, and always reflect on
others. And it is a Sign they know not their own Hearts, when they meddle so
much with others; I am afraid they keep not their own Vineyard, nor sweep their
own House, they are so very much abroad; and the hearkening to such silly
People does oftentimes breed a lasting Mischief. It would cause us to have an
ill Opinion of Many that are a great deal better than they are represented, and
to sow Discord among Brethren, is one of the seven things that are an
Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 6.18. Some Men take Delight to set others a
quarrelling together, and it is Music to them to behold the Flames which they
have kindled. Tale-bearers are a sort of Hawkers and Pedlers of groundless
Reports, which they take in the Gross, and afterward Retail out in all
Companies, and it ought to be the Care of every good Man to have them
suppressed, for they greatly hinder the Progress of Love.

5. Another Cause why Men fall out is, because they are very proud of their own
Apprehensions, and cannot bear to be Contradicted. They would be humoured, and
have all People to say just as they say, or to think as they think: Self-will
and Self conceit are the greatest underminers of Peace and Quietness both in
Churches and Families. You meet with abundance of People that cannot bear to
have their Wills crossed in the least, or to have their Opinions examined and
brought to the Test; they carry it so haughtily as if they only were
Infallible, and all others were in the dark; some Undervalue others because
they have not their Parts and Learning, or because they will not blindly submit
to their Dictates, and subscribe every thing which they say is True: And
others, though they want Learning, yet have great Confidence, and will not
suffer any to be in the Right but who use their Terms, and just their way of
Expression: It is better to be charitable than to be only Learned: And it is
better to be humble than to be too well conceited of our own Abilities; a proud
Man is a very bad Neighbor; to dwell with such an one is to dwell with Storms
and Tempests, with Waves and Rocks, for if he be Proud he is hard to please,
and can never be a good Friend. Men are generally fond of the Brats of their
own Brain, and are very angry if others that see no Cause for it, will not dote
as much upon them as they do, Prove. 13.10. the Pride of many is so great, that
they cannot live in any quiet unless they be flattered, and unless others will
acquiesce in all their Actions, and suffer themselves to be trod upon. And Self
conceited Men, Sir William Temple's Obs. on the Netherlands, p. 169.
as one says, talk much of right Reason, and mean always their own; and make
their private Imagination the measure of general Truth; and the Dispute between
them and us, ends at last in three Words, which it might as well have ended in
at first, That they are in the Right, and we are in the Wrong.

6. Another occasion of falling out is from an Ignorance of Human Nature: It is
strange, Men do not consider that as there is a variety of Souls, there always
is and will be some variety of Thoughts; some men have a quicker sight than
others, and penetrate with great ease and pleasure into the deepest recess of
Truth, whither a Man of a duller capacity will never come. It would be a very
senseless thing for one to be angry with another, that he cannot see so well
nor at so great a distance as he can. All Persons will never have the very same
Gifts nor the same Degrees of Grace, and upon this account there will be
different Apprehensions, though they ought for all that to bear with one
another; for whilst they are in this World they will but know in part, and but
little of what is still further to be known. And one great Reason of the
various Sentiments of Persons about one and the same thing, is from the
Contexture of their Spirits; in some they are very pure and lively, in others
they are gross and more terrestrial; and according to these they have either a
finer and more sprightly, or a more dull and less active Soul, which will act
whilst it is in matter, in very many things conformable to the good or ill
Humors of the Body, where it lodges during its Absence from the spiritual and
unseen World. And Men frequently mingle their particular Inclinations (to which
they are led by their Constitution, and which they greatly value) with the
Matters of Religion. Thus take (as one observes) a Man greatly admiring natural
Philosophy, he will be apt to mingle and qualify Religion with Philosophical
Notions. Behmen who was a great Chemist, resolves almost all Religion into
Chemistry, and frames his Conceptions of Religion suitable and conformable to
Chemical Notions. Many great Physicians that have much observed the
Constitution of Man's Body, have figured to themselves Notions of the Soul
conformable to their Observations in the Body: And so again, Men of
Metaphysical and Notional Brains have conformed Religion, and their Notions of
it to Metaphysics, and indeed have made that which is, and ought to be the
common Principle for the actuating of all Men, yea even of the meanest
Capacities, to be a mere Collection of Subtilties far more abstruse than the
most intricate and sublimated Learning whatsoever. See the L. Chapter Just. Hale 's
Disc. of Rel. p. 26. Besides, Parents, and Examples, and Education, and
Company, and Books have their several Influences upon the Thoughts of Men; and
it is unreasonable to expect an entire Union of Thinking among those whose
early Years have been seasoned with Principles and Opinions very different from
one another; and we ought to make great Allowances to one another upon this
Account.

7. Another Cause of Brethen's falling out by thy way, is when they impose
things upon their Brethren, that are but in their own Nature Indifferent, as if
they were absolutely necessary; or will not hold Communion with others, unless
they will agree to all the Terms which they have proposed, as it would be an
unreasonable thing for a Man not to allow me to Travel with him in the same
Road, unless I will wear a Garment of the same Color with his own, and stop or
go on, just as he would have me stay or go; and yet for the sake of Peace, I
may comply with him in several things which I take to be Innocent and Lawful,
though I can by no means praise him for his enjoining them. It is no doubt (as
one says) a very desirable thing to lessen the differences of Christians, Dr.
Wake's Sermons, p. 282.
and enlarge their Communion as far as ever we can; and it has never gone well
with the Church of Christ, since Men have been so narrow spirited, as to mix
the Controversies of Faith with their public Forms of Worship, and have made
their Liturgies, instead of being Offices of Devotion to God, become Tests and
Censures of the Opinions of their Brethren. It is a miserable thing when Men
agree in Fundamentals, and in all those common Truths that are absolutely
necessary to be known in order to Salvation, that they cannot bear with one
another in less considerable things; and without doubt the best things are the
plainest, and the least disputable; and unless we can prove our selves to be
Infallible, we cannot claim of others a total Submission to what we say or
impose upon them; and unless by the Light of Reason and of Scripture, we can
gently convince them that they are in the wrong way, and that we are in the
right. And if we be in the right and have settled things very well, yet if the
peace of the Church be like to be injured by their scrupling of several things
as sinful, in the lawfulness of which we are very well satisfied; yet it will
be no' Reproach to us, to make such alterations and abatements in the
conditions of our Communion, as may show that we most charitably desire to have
them to worship God with us, and in our Assemblies; for nothing Human can be so
complete, as not to need by some unforeseen Circumstances, some Variation. No
harm will ensue, so long as the things most Fundamental are agreed on both
sides; and as one observes, Charity to a weak Brother in things indifferent in
their own nature, is then to be exercised when my Brother is offended
therewith, or never: And if it be said, it is his Duty to submit to the Church,
and not the Church to him, I do think that Answer will not serve in this Case;
for surely though a Child owes a Duty to a Father, yet his neglect thereof,
especially if it be upon a Conscientious Account, will not excuse the neglect
of a Father's duty to his Child: The Apostle professed he would abstain from
things lawful, rather than offend his weak Brother. See the L. Chapter Just. Hale
's Disc. of Relig. p. 32.

8. Another cause of falling out by the way, is from a littleness and
narrowness of Soul; when Persons will have no good opinion of any, but such as
are of their own Way and Party; when they will cry up their own Men with
excessive Praises, and run down all others with the same Breath. Such are like
the Jews of whom we have read, that living in some remote Place surrounded with
Seas, because they have no Correspondence with others, think that they are all
the World, and that the Race of Men is confined to so small a number. It is a
most uncomly thing for any Party of Christians, to say that none can be saved
but in their way; as if they did not know, that several Roads may all lead to
the very same Place; and several Apprehensions about less necessary things, not
hinder their passage to the same Glory. Let us take heed lest we diminish the
Kingdom of our Lord, and make his Empire less extensive than it is. He has his
People scattered up and down the World, and it would be a foolish and
uncharitable thing, to say we alone are the true Church, and there is none so
besides our selves: Let us take heed of such a littleness of Soul, and of such
an ignorance of the State and Progress of Christianity; let us not judge nor
condemn, nor think hardly of another Man, because he is not of our way; but
stop our Censures, till we know the Reasons upon which he differs from us. We
need not Fall out by the Way, because we cannot all think and speak alike; it
would be a rude and uncivil thing for an Englishman, suppose, to fall out with
a Frenchman upon a Journey, because his Air, his Address, his Judgment, his
Prounciation, and the Tone of his Language differs from his own: A Public and
Generous Spirit, will love the Name, the Interest of Christ, and his Glory,
wherever it is advanced, though by Persons of another Persuasion, or in Places
vastly distant from his own Country. Let us carefully distinguish between
things that are really Momentous, and those that are but Trifles: Let us not
lay too great a stress on the little Things that are peculiar to this or that
Party; for a great many are, as one says, like a Company of Boys that blow
Bubbles out of a Walnut-shell; every one runs after his Bubble, and calls it
Religion; and every one measures the Religion or Ireligion of another, by their
agreeing and differing with them in these and the like Matters; and at best
whilst we scramble about the pieces of the Shell, the Kernel is either lost, or
gotten by some that do not prize any of their Contests. And we ought to
consider (as a great Man observes) That Belief is no more in a Man's Power than
his Stature, Sir William Temple's Obs. on the Netherlands, p. 168.
or his Feature; and he that tells me I must change my Opinion for his, because
it is the truer and the better, without other Arguments, that have to me the
force of Conviction, may as well tell me, I must change my gray Eyes, for
others like his, that are black, because these are lovelier or more in esteem.

9. The great Cause why Brethren fall out by the way, is from the Malice and
Policy of the Devil: It is delightful to God, Angels and Saints, to see them
live together in Unity; but to the Devil it is greatly vexatious; for Peace and
Love do oppose his Designs, and render that Religion which he hates, amiable
and venerable in the Eyes of all. The Devil fires furious and angry People with
more Flame and Heat; this Engineer blows the Coals, and increases Strife and
Contention; and he knows that if he can make Persons once very Passionate, he
thereby unfits them for all due performance of Duty, either to God or Man; they
unhinge themselves, and molest others too. There are many People, whom the
Devil finds he cannot ruin by gross carnal Sins, as Theft, and Whoredom, and
Swearing, and Drunkenness, and Sabbath-breaking and the like; whom he
endeavors to destroy by spiritual Sins, such as Envy and Censuring, and
Bitterness, and Wrath, and Malice; for all these are most agreeable to his own
Hellish Nature, Ephesians. 4.26, 27. Be ye angry and Sin not, let not the Sun go down
upon your Wrath; neither give place to the Devil. To be passionate and long
angry, is to let the Devil Triumph over you, it is to bind your selves with
Chains, and let him lead you Captive at his will: He once fell from Heaven like
Lightning, and he has ever since inflamed and disturbed the World, and has a
peculiar Malice against the Gospel; and his great Business is to hinder it from
being a Gospel of Peace and Mercy, and so to render it in a great measure
unsuccessful by the Quarrels of those that pretend to obey its Laws: And it is
observable, That (as one says) no Quarrels were raised among the Heathens about
the several Gods they worshipped; for the Devil, the irreconcilable Enemy to
God's Glory and Man's Happiness, was pleased with their deadly Errors, and let
them adore the Host of Heaven, or of the Earth, it was alike to him, for they
all diverted the Minds of Men from the sole Object of Divine Worship, the True
God. The Devil makes his Slaves to Fire Towns, and Depopulate Countries, and to
Destroy Churches, and Disorder Families: Let us not warm our selves at his
Fire, nor in the least resemble his Cruel Nature. Let us all fight against him
with one accord, remembering we serve the Prince of Peace, and his Banners over
us are Love.

10. An Ignorant and Misguided Zeal: Or as the Apostle calls it, Romans 10.2. A
Zeal of God, but not according to Knowledge; and it is no wonder if Persons
justle against one another when they are Blind or in the Dark: When they call
that Truth which is not so, or when they are as violently concerned for their
own Opinions as if they were plainly revealed; or when they are solicitous to
preserve real Truth, but go about it with too much Warmth and Hear, or make too
great a Noise about it. Zeal must be tempered with a great deal of Prudence, if
it be truly genuine and profitable.

The next thing is to show, what Methods may be taken by Persons of all
Persuasions, That they may not fall out by the Way; and the principal is,

1. To take Care that they believe in Jesus Christ: He is the Prince of Peace,
and all that yield themselves to be his Subjects, he brings by degrees to this
amiable Frame; a Spirit of Gentleness, and Mildness is conveyed to all the
Parts of the Body, from this peaceable and blessed Head. Faith in Christ gives
us Union with him, and conveys a strength to us, whereby we may subdue all our
Sins; among which a proneness to quarrel and fall out with one another is not
the most inconsiderable; whoever has this Faith is immediately thereupon a
Member of the true Church, has a Right to all the Sacraments and Ordinances of
the Gospel; and if any should refuse such a Believer admission into this or
that particular Church, they must do it at their own Peril: if I had so great
an Honor as to have a particular Charge of Souls, all good Christians, under
what Names soever they go, of Conformists, or Presbyterians, or Independents,
or Anabaptists, I would, upon their Desire, their promising to live peaceably,
most cheerfully receive them into my Communion, and though one should be for
Receiving the Lord's Supper Kneeling, another Standing, or another Sitting, I
would not think it in the least contrary to Decency or Order to administer it
to them all in their distinct Postures; for if I thought them true Believers,
how could I dare to refuse them, merely because they were not satisfied in this
or that Gesture, which, it may be, I should think most Proper and Convenient:
All good Christians are of the same Church; and if our Blessed Lord will
receive them all into one Heaven at last, Woe to them that shall refuse to
receive them here; for certainly that which Qualifies a Man for Heaven and
Everlasting Salvation, qualifies him for Communion with any Church on Earth
whatsoever; for the Principal Enquiry of the great Day will not be of what
Party we were, whether Conformists or Nonconformists, but whether we really
believed in Christ, and took him for our Lord and King? whether we were of his
Body, and renewed by his Spirit, and subject to his Laws? The great Rule for
Peaceful Agreement among Christians in their several Societies, is that, Romans
15.5, 6, 7. Receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of
God. And Christ receives us all most kindly when we believe. Our common Faith
in him is our highest Honor, and that well evidenced gives us the truest Right
to all Church Communion. I would earnestly desire People that are censorious
and narrow sold, to read the 14th to the Romans often over, as a most
excellent means to cool their Heats and Animosities.

2. That you may not fall out by the way, you must not give one another bad
Names, nor use Provoking Venomous Expressions to one another. How many lasting
Quarrels and Contentions arise by some awkward and scurvy Titles that Men give
to others, whom by that means they make their Adversaries? All would be calm
and quiet but for such an Evil Tongue as James describes chapter 3.6. The tongue is
a Fire, a world of iniquity, it deflleth the whole body, and sets on fire
the course of nature, and is set on fire of Hell. The Devil and an Evil Tongue
go together. Bitter Speeches exasperate and chase those that otherwise would be
at Ease; and it is a great Weakness when Christians cannot omit Personal
Reflections, but love to Satyrize on one another, as if they were in Jest, when
by their sharpened Animosities the poor injured Church receives many Wounds. O
that all our other Names were laid aside, and only the Name of Christians
retained among us; then we might somewhat resemble the purer Ages of the
Church, when their Business was to live, nor to talk great Matters; and the
Name Christian (as one observes) did so charm them, Dr. Horneck 's Letter to a
Person of Quality, p. 490
that though there were various Degrees of Men among them, Ecclesiastics,
Laymen, Virgins, Widows, Married Persons, Confessors, Martyrs and Friends, yet
the Name Christian swallowed up all; and in this they triumphed beyond all
other Titles in the World: Which, as he says, made Attalus in Eusebius, when
the Governor asked him, What Countryman he was? who his Father and Mother
were? what Trade, Profession and Employment he was of? whether he was Rich or
Poor? give no other Answer but this, That he was a Christian. Give to your
Neighbors, and to those that in some things differ from you, the most kind and
affable Expressions: It is an unseemly thing for Christians to fix ignominious
Names upon one another, when one side will say, That the other are Formalists,
and know little of the Power of Godliness: And when another Party will say,
That all that differ from their Ceremonies do but Cant and Whine, and make a
Show, and that all their Profession is Hypocrisy: These are both to blame. What
Mischief have we seen spread in the Minds of Men, under several new-coyn'd
Names, as of Whig and Tory, and the like? and formerly a great deal of Trouble
was occasioned by the differing Names of Presbyterian and Independent: But now,
Thanks be to God, those Names are buried, and I hope and wish that they may
never have a Resurrection, seeing we have lately given them a very decent
Funeral: The Name of United Ministers and People, is a thousand times more
Honorable: And The Heads of Agreement between these two forementioned
Persuasions, and the most eminent and learned of either side, will, I question
not, for many Ages be a Credit to us; and blessed be that Day of Peace, in
which they were concluded: Blessed be that God of Love that suggested to our
Fathers and our Brethren, such peaceable and uniting Resolutions, which when I
my self saw concluded, I could not but think that Healing Day to be as one of
the Days of Heaven, and as a Resemblance of that Holy Place, wherein all Good
Ministers and People shall agree together; and who could forbear saying with
David, Ps. 133.1. Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity! And especially if you would not fall out, be not always
ripping up Old Sores, nor speaking of things that may kindle Strife, and not
allay it, as they did that in a more unhappy Time used to be always talking of
41. and of that Rebellion; not foreseeing, That many of themselves would upon
some parallel Emergencies use the very same Arguments, and do some of the same
things. Neither ought we to upbraid others always with the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, of which I verily believe the more Ingenuous and Learned part of the
Clergy are now very much ashamed; inasmuch as in the way that it was
frequently, though most unwarily pressed, it was a very slavish Doctrine.

3. That you may not fall out by the Way, put the fairest Construction that you
possibly can upon the Carriage and Actions of those that in some things differ
from you: Take every thing by the best Handle, and do not wrest their Words to
a Purpose which they never intended. Do not load them nor their Doctrins with
Consequences which they neither own nor see; consider they are to stand or fall
to their own Master, and not to be judged at your Bar: Oh! take care that you
condemn none of those in your Censures, whom Christ will own and justify at
the Great Day. What Peace would be in Families and Churches, and larger
Societies, if Men would not stretch Words beyond their Natural Signification;
nor conceive an abiding Disgust from this or that Misunderstood Expression,
with which the Speaker never designed to affront them, or which he never
levelled at them? They entertain many things which were never sent them, and
such touchy People plant Briars in their own Spirits; they never want Vexation,
nor never will. See what the Apostle says of Charity. 1 Cor. 13.4. Charity
suffers long and is kind, charity envieth not, charity vaunteth not it self,
it is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is
not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices
in truth, bears all things, believes all things, enduring all things. There
are many waspish and angry People, that behave themselves as if they had never
heard of such a Chapter, or of such a Grace; I desire them to read this
Description often over, and also the first Epistle of St. John, that Loving
Disciple; as also to meditate on the Life of Christ, with what Meekness, with
what what Lowliness and Affability he carried himself to all, unless that now
and then he was a little sharp toward the Superstitious Scribes and Pharisees.

Fourthly, Resist the beginnings of Strife and Falling out; for how great a
Matter will a little Fire kindle? Jam. 3.5. a few misplaced Words many times
begin a Quarrel, though the Storm ought by Prudence and mutual Forgiveness to
be laid, as soon as it begins to rise. If petty Differences among Men were but
composed with a suitable and an early diligence, how many Lawsuits, which are
both tedious and very costly, might be with ease prevented? For continuance of
Anger makes those People that are hot, to be more hot, it chafes and fires them
more and more: A Disease taken betimes admits of help or some mitigation, which
will not yield to all the most prudent Methods of Physic, that are used after
it is become strong and obstinate: Therefore the Wise Man advises us, To leave
off Contention before it be meddled with. It may seem, (as one says) a
Contradiction to leave it off before it is meddled with; but we are so early to
retire from all Contention, that as soon as it appears, and before we have
engaged in it, we must break it off; for if we are once engaged, Humor,
Honor, and other peevish or designing Men will hold us to it; therefore it is
best to break it off in time.

Fifthly, Carry it always toward those that dissent from you, in a sweet and
obliging manner: Let not their different Opinions make you Morose or Froward;
be very Civil to those whose Persuasion is not the same with yours: A
Conformist ought to do all the good Offices of Kindness that he can, for a
Nonconformist; and the Nonconformist the like again to him: I see no Reason why
we should be shy or unkind to one another, we are both Englishmen, and we are
both of one Religion. Remember that a Meek and Quiet Spirit is of great Price
in the sight of God, 1 Pet. 3.4. and verse. 8. Be ye all of one Mind, having
Compassion one of another: Love as Brethren, be Pitiful, be Courteous, not
rendering Evil for Evil, or Railing for Railing; but contrary-wise Blessing,
knowing that ye are thereunto called, that you should inherit a Blessing. In
the Primitive times they could forbear and forgive their Enemies, much more
their Brethren; and were not like the Waspish Philosophers, who, as one says,
were ready to fall foul upon one another, Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity,
pt. 3. chapter 3. p. 317.
for every petty and inconsiderable Difference that was among them. Christians,
as he says, were careful not to offend either God or Man, but to keep and
maintain Peace with both; thence that excellent saying of Ephraem Syrus, when
he came to die; In my whole Life (said he) I never reproached my Lord and
Master, nor suffered any foolish Talk to come out of my Lips; nor did I ever
Curse or Revile any Man, or maintain the least Difference or Controversy with
any Christian in all my Life. Why may it not be among us, as Sir William Temple
says it is in the Netherlands? where differences in Opinions, make none in
Affections; little in Conversation, where it serves but for Entertainment and
Variety: They argue without Interest or Anger, they differ without Enmity or
Scorn, and they agree without Confederacy. Men live together like Citizens of
the World, associated by the common ties of Humanity, and the Bonds of Peace,
under the Impartial Protection of indifferent Laws, with equal encouragement of
all Arts and Industry, and equal freedom of Speculation and Enquiry. According
to our old saying, Soft Words and hard Arguments are the best; and if I may
judge of others by my self, harsh Expressions and a sour Carriage, will never
make one regard what another says: The Potion has too much Gall in it to be
Medicinal; whereas we cannot refuse to listen to a Man, that comes to us in a
mild and gentle manner. It is the Spirit of Elias and not the Spirit of Jesus,
that is furious and violent. It is an Human thing to be kind to those of the
same nature with our selves; but for one Professing Religion, to be furious and
eager and stormy, is to let the Christian destroy the Man. Mildness is an
Offspring of Heaven, the resemblance of Christ, and has a strange constraining
Power with it: A calm and gentle Soul will govern and allay the disorder of the
Tongue, and keep us all quiet. The very appearances (as one observes) of a calm
Temper have a Charm in them; but the effects of them in concurrence with other
prudent Methods are almost irresistible: And, says he, it is better to be
overrun and ruined in the ways of Meekness, than to conquer all the World by
Cruelty; in the one we bear the Cross, and suffer for Righteousness sake, in
the other we Triumph in the Garments of Antichrist, dyed red with the Blood of
those, who though in Errors, yet may be good Men in the main, for ought we know.

Sixthly, Let us always Love our Brethren, though we cannot he in all things of
their Mind: And this Love will produce all those acts of Kindness and good Will
which I have newly mentioned; in our different places of Worship, and in the
different manner of our Prayers, there may be still an Union in our Hearts. I
can love many a good Man and wish him well with all my Soul, to whose
particular Persuasion I am not satisfied to join my self. Let us love our
Brethren for the Common Truths, in which they and we both agree; we have one
Faith, though we have two Names; then let us commend all that we see in others,
that is truly good and commendable; let us commend their Gifts and Graces,
their Learning and their Holy Lives; let us pity their Faults, and praise them
for their good Deeds; and this is the best way that I know of, to keep us from
falling out: And if we must strive, let us strive who shall be most serviceable
to God, and to one another.

Seventhly, Take heed of loving needless Disputations: Of all things beware of
taking pleasure in them; or of frivolous and curious Questions, which tend to
fill us with Rancour, but promote not Edification. Carnal Zeal (as one says)
may put us on disputing, but true Zeal will put us upon Prayer. Some Men are of
so strange a Palate, that they love Niceties and Quelques chose, rather than
solid and substantial Food; some love to splinter the plain Truths of the
Gospel, and to wrap them up in Clouds, when, if they left them to their native
plainness, they would be as bright as day. For my part, I had rather be a quiet
Ploughman, than a fiery Philosopher; I had rather be a Son of Peace, than the
greatest Disputer in the World: Disputes occasion abundance of ferment in the
Minds of those, who would otherwise be very quiet People; and they also prove a
Generation of Vipers: Such as love them, generally sting one another with many
base and mean Reflections, and which taste more of Billings-gate, than of
Jerusalem. I thank God I have a peculiar Antipathy in my Temper to all hot and
fiery Proceedings, and I had rather Preach one Sermon of Unity among Brethren,
than Write a thousand Follo's of Controversy. We have all Reason to be
thankful that our Age is pretty well delivered from a doting Admiration of the
old Schoolmen, that spun Divinity into Cobwebs, and made Depths and Mysteries
where they found none; it would pity a Man to see such excellent parts as many
of them had, to be so ill employed: But their Notions are now musty and
antiquated and dead, and I will never do any thing to revive or quicken them:
For as one very well observes, our Fathers in the beginning of the Reformation,
were greatly scandalized at that School divinity, which for a long time had
filled the World, not only with Questions vain and frivolous, but pernicious
also, and leading Men to Wickedness. What can any one think of such a manner of
treating the Mysteries of Religion as they used, and by Distinctions crude and
senseless, if it were not that all that was very likely to raise an abundance of
Errors, and excellently contrived for the maintaining of all such, as
Ignorance, Passion, Engagements or Interests would have produced? One of the
Effects of that Disorder of the Schools was the depraving of Christian Morality
by the Introduction of diverse destructive Maxims, which tended only to corrupt
Men's Minds and Hearts; Instances of which see at large in Monsieur Claude 's
Historical Defense of the Reformation, part 1. p. 28. It would be a Comfortable
Sight to see the Funeral of all needless Controversies. We have seen indeed a
Book lately writ by a Learned Man, Mr. Baxter.
of The End of Controversies; and I wish they were really ended, that so we
might Learn though not to Talk so logically, yet to Live better. Some Errors
there are indeed that must be opposed, and God leaves not his Ministers without
Gifts for that very Purpose. The Ministers of the Church of England have done
worthily in their excellent and Learned Writings against Popery; they have
showed their feebler Adversaries the Papists, what Learning and a good Cause
was able to produce, to their solid Resutation. And I may add, The Dissenters
too have done their part against these Philistines, though they have been by
the severity of some later Years very much discouraged, yet none will deny but
such as Dr. Owen, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Clarkson, and many other Divines among us
have done very considerable Service in their Learned Books against the Common
Enemy.

8. Do not attribute the Judgments of God, that may befall us all, to this or
that Party: There is no doubt but we are all guilty of many Provocations in the
Sight of God. Do not say, this or that Evil is long of the Conformists; nor
ought they to say this or that befalls us, because there are so many Dissenters:
This would be in too great Measure to imitate the Heathens, in the Time of the
first Persecutions, who if there were any pinching Famine, or any contagious
Disease, that overran Italy, or if the River Tyber did overflow his Bounds,
and cause abundance of Damage to the Country by that means, it was immediately
the Clamor of the People, That the Christians were the cause of all these
Evils, and that the Gods were angry with them for suffering the Christian
Religion: Thus pretending by an unwarrantable Impudence, to know the certain
Cause of God's Judgments, which are a great deep, and the laying the Blame only
on one side, does necessarily make People quarrel with one another, whereas
upon all such Occasions there ought to be among them a common and sincere
Humiliation.

9. We ought to study our own Hearts more, and what Work we have to do there,
and then we should not so easily fall out with one another. Alas, if we have
enough to do within, with our own Thoughts, with our own Passions, with our own
Sins, what Time shall we have to range abroad, and busily to meddle and
interpose in the Business and Opinions of other People? We shall have no time
to censure when we find that we our selves are bad enough.

In order to accomplish this, let us

Consider I. How many things all good Christians and Protestants are agreed in:
We are all agreed, That God is our only Happiness, and Christ our only Savior,
and the Spirit our only Sanctifier. We are all agreed, That Heaven is our Home,
and Holiness, the way thither. We are all agreed, That the Scripture is the
Rule of our Faith, and that Sin, the World and the Devil are our greatest
Enemies; why should we not bear with one another in things that are of a much
lower nature than these great and weighty Matters of the Law? For (as one of
our Learned Bishops expresses it) The very Basis of the Reformed Religion is
this, Bish. Patrick 's Sermon. before the Queen, on Col. 3.15. p. 36.
That all necessary Truths are not only plainly contained in the Holy
Scriptures, but plainly set down there: Which single Truth being agreed, it is
manifest there must needs be an Union of Opinions among us in all things
necessary: And as for other things which are not evident in Holy Scriptures,
and therefore are not necessary, what should hinder, but that notwithstanding
any different Opinions about them, there be among us a Unity of Affection; unto
which the Holy Scriptures direct and press us, as the greatest Happiness of
which this World is capable? We have all the same Creed, and we all subscribe
to the same Doctrinal Articles, except some small Points relating to the
Ceremonies. Let but the Ministers of all sides strive, as Mr. Dod used to
express it, to preach Christ into the Hearts of their Hearers, and then they
will love as his Subjects, and as Heirs of the same Glory, and bear with one
another. How much common agreed Work have we all to do? How many ignorant
People to instruct? How many Wounded to Heal? How many Troubled in Soul to
resolve and pacify? How many Sleepers to a waken? How many Wanderers to reduce
into the Right Way? And is all this Work upon our Hands, and have we any Time
to lose in Quarrelling and Falling out by the Way?

Consider. 2. Whenever the most pleasant and prosperous Condition of the Church
shall be manifested, it will be introduced by Peace, and Union and Love will
then abound. Is. 11.6. The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the Leopard
shall lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young lion, and the fatling
together, and a little Child shall lead them, etc. v. 9. They shall not hurt
nor destroy in all my holy Mountain; for the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. Ezekiel. 28.24. There shall be
no more a pricking brier unto the house of Israel, nor any grieving thorn of
all that are round about them, that despised them, and they shall know that I
am the Lord God. Zech. 14.9. The Lord shall be King over all the earth, in that
day shall there be one Lord, and his name One. A glorious Light shall shine
from Heaven, and shall show to all good People the Right and the Comely Way of
Peace; the Spirit of the Lord shall reconcile those Brethren that are now
somewhat strange to one another; then the Luster of Christianity, which is now
obscured with our Contentions, shall appear in all its Brightness and all that
look upon the Church then, shall discern it to be full of Glory: It shall no
more appear in Garments died in Blood, mangled and torn by open Enemies and
false Friends, but in Garment of Praise, and then be very Beautiful without, as
well as she is now within. Then Zion shall be a praise throughout the earth.
Then shall the golden Age of Peace return again, then shall the New Jerusalem
descend from Heaven; nay then Heaven it self shall come down to this Earth, and
our now deformed World shall then have an Amiable and comely Face; Then the
Tabernacle of God shall be with men, and he will dwell with them. And my
Friends, do we hear of such pleasant Things, and such glorious Times, and do we
not all wish to see these joyful days begin to dawn? Do we wish, and shall we
not endeavor by our Prayers, and by our Love, to make this blessed and
comfortable Time to hasten on apace? Surely it is Motive enough to say, it will
be then a Time of Love. Come then let us lay aside all Backbiting and
Reproaches, and Heats and Quarrels, with one another; come my Friends, my
Brethren, and my Fellow-Travellers, God is willing to forgive us all our former
Sins and Provocations, let us I beseech you forgive one another: Let there not
be one in this Assembly, that harbors a rancorous revengeful Thought against
any Person whatsoever: Let us not Fall out by the Way, for we hope to dwell in
Peace at our Journeys end, we hope all to come to the same Heaven^ let us
rejoice in each other's Welfare; let us relieve each other's Wants, and in
fine, let us unite our Hearts, our Praises and our Thoughts, to God our Maker,
who is the God of Peace; and as our Apostle says, 2 These. 3.16. The Lord of
Peace himself give you Peace always by all Means.

Consid. 3. Not falling out by the way will increase the number of good People:
Union among Brethren is in Psalm. 133.3. said to be as the Dew of Hermon, and as
the Dew that descended upon the Mountain of Zion, i. e. as one very well
Paraphrases upon it, without Dew neither Hermon nor Zion would be any other
than very barren Places; so without Concord, our Life would be very miserable.
The dew falling from Heaven, covered those places with Herbs and Plants and
Fruits; Brotherly love makes the Church to flourish in Zeal and Patience and
Diligence and Fervor; and it is a very great encouragement to New Converts,
when they can say of the old ones, Behold, How these good People love one
another! There is nothing in all the World has so great a Magnetism and such an
attractive Virtue as Love; it is the most mild and gentle of all the Passions,
and so consequently the most powerful and persuasive: What a Sweetness and a
Pleasure is there in a Family, where the several Members of it treat one
another, with a cordial and sincere Affection? How ambitions is every one to be
acquainted with such a Loving Company? But at what a distance will others keep
from a Society where there is no Agreement, but an everlasting Fighting and
Scolding with one another? To live in Unity and Peace, would bring again that
happy Temper, which was common every where, when Acts 4.32. The Multitude of
them that believed, were of one Heart and one Soul, when they called one
another Brethren and lived as such, and were full of Condecension, and Charity,
and good Works; for then, as some observe, Dr. Horneck's Letter conc. the
Primitive Christ. p. 498
Religion had mortified in the Rich and Noble all Punctilo's of honor and
state, and made them remember that in Christ they were all equal. She in whose
Veins the noblest Blood did run, would say of her poor distressed Neighbor,
she is my Sister, my Fellow-member, one that has part in my dear Redeemer; if
she be Ancient, she is my Mother, said she; if Younger, she is my Daughter: Nor
were these Expressions, Names of course only, but they were Written in their
Hearts, and their Lips spoke what their Minds believed, and these Words were at
once pronounced and thought. If, as he says, one Family had any thing to do
more than ordinary, Id. p. 520.
the Neighboring Family would help them: If one was to Fast, his Neighbor
Fasted with him; if one Wept, his Neighbor did Weep with him; if one Mourned,
his Neighbor Mourned with him, as if both had committed the same Sin; they had
their Joys and Sorrows common, and they might be said to be all in one, and one
in all. In these loving and amiable Times, by these gentle and kind Methods,
many thousands were added to the Church: Whereas, for Brethren to fall out, is
very scandalous and disgraceful; it makes the Religion they profess, look very
meanly in the eyes of Strangers. When they see that it does not reconcile their
Minds to one another, they have not Judgment nor Patience enough to examine its
abstruser Mysteries, but what effects it produces they do most narrowly
observe; and if it avail not so far as to make Men peaceable, they conclude it
does them no good at all. It Is a thing more especially scandalous to the
People, when they see those Ministers disagree, and those Lights dash against
one another, which should yield a pleasant, an united, and a Common Light;
therefore Christ prayed to his Father, Joh. 17.23. Let them be made perfect in
one, that the World may know that thou have sent me.

Consid. 4. Not to falll out by the Way would be a great joy to your Ministers;
they would study their Sermons and Preach them with more Comfort, if they had
always to deal with a Peaceable and a Loving People; nay, they would have more
Time wherein to study; for several Hours unavoidably go away in striving to
Compose Differences, when their Hearers are so foolish as to quarrel with one
another; and then they are a great Interruption and Grief to them in their most
serious Retirement, and many Times their Bitterness and Wrath send them sooner
to the Grave.

Consid. 5. Falling out by the Way, and bitter Contentions amongst those that
should Love as Brethren, may stir up the Wrath of God against them all. It is
no Wonder if a Father, after long Patience, be at last provoked to turn all his
Children out of Doors, when they cannot be quiet, nor agree together: So it was
heretofore, when there was in the Church great Siding one against another,
Pastor against Pastor, and People against People, some engaged in this Faction,
some in that, till, as one observes, the Brethren of the Camp brought in
Dioclesian's Persecution, which devoured them all: And it has often been
observed, by Learned Men, That when God had blessed his Church with Peace and
Protection, and after a long trial, during three Ages and ten Persecutions, a
nursing Father was raised up: Then arose those Contests about several
Speculative and Mystical Points, which made the Churches of Africa very
desolate; and what wonderful Miseries were occasioned by the too warm and eager
Contentions of the Greek and Latin Church? This faling out has turned the most
pleasant and fruitful Countries into a Wilderness, and the most beautiful
Churches into Dust and Ashes.

Consid. 6. It Is one of the Great Designs of the Gospel of our Savior, to
promote Peace among all his Followers. Nothing does he more urge than that they
should Love one another; and as he had loved them with the most constant and
sincere Affection: And for this he prayed, Joh. 17.21. That they all may be
one, as thou Father art in me and I in in thee, that they all so may be one in
us. His first Appearance was wellcom'd by the Heavenly Host with Songs of Love,
saying, Glory to God in the highest, peace upon earth, and good Will to Men.
And to be full of Love is to be Angelical; it is a Resemblance of their kind
and Loving Nature: And which is more honorable, it is the very Image of the
Son of God, who is the express Image of his Father: And God we know is Love.
The Gospel does frequently urge us to live in Peace and Quietness, and conveys
to us that Spirit which is to mortify our bitter and unruly Passions: And the
Jerusalem where our Lord does intend at last to bless all his Servants, is the
City of Peace; and his Sacraments are designed to bind us more to himself, and
to one another in the truest Bonds of Love. We have one Baptism, and are all
nourished with the same Bread from Heaven; he entertains all at the same Table,
that we may lay aside all our little Quarrels, when we see him shedding his
dearest Blood to appease his Father's Wrath, and to testify how he loved us
all.

Consid. 7. You ought not to fall out by the Way, for you will very shortly be
at your Journey's End. This is the Motive of our Apostle, Let your moderation
be known unto all Men, the Lord is at hand, Phil. 4.5. The Lord is at hand, who
is to judge you and them; The Lord is at hand that will bless you for ever, if
you are peaceable, and meek, and lowly; but he will condomn you if he find that
by Wrath, and Strife, and Contention you are altogether disagreeable to his
Holy Example. Oh let not the Great Judge find you quarrelling with one another,
when he comes, but labor to be found of him in Peace. Surely the Brethren of
Joseph might keep from falling out by the Way, when it was but a little
Distance between Egypt and Canaan: It would have been a very unpleasant thing
to their good Father, to have seen them coming Home in so bad a Temper. Oh my
Friends, let us heartily love one another; let us do all we can for one
another: It is but a little Season that we are to be together; a little while
hence, we that are in this Congregation shall be in the Congregation of the
Dead, and our Places, and our Friends know us no more. Oh let us not be
Clamorous now against one another, seeing we shall shortly be in the silent
Grave: Surely we that have so short and so vain a Life, and may so soon be
dead, should spend our Time to better Purpose than to quarrel or fall out;
People that are to die together do usually embrace one another with all the
Marks of a tender Affection, just before they die. Let us labor to die in
Charity with all the World, for Death will come upon us all, and we must rest
together in the Grave; there will be no Warmth, no Fire in our Common Dust,
there will be no Fighting or Scolding in the Grave; there lie the Heads, now
Cool enough, that were once full of Heat, and many a Vexatious and Uneasy
Thought, and who once disturbed both themselves and others with needless
Disputations, and Strife, and Quarrels. Oh let us be as Loving Travelers, that
are all going to the same Blessed Home, and let us help one another in the Way
thither, seeing it is but for a little while, and we know we have but a little
way to go, and when we are at our Journey's End, our Heavenly Father will most
kindly entertain us all.

I shall only say two or three things relating to the particular Occasion, and
so conclude.

First, To the Relations of our Deceased Friend. Secondly, To the Young Men
that were his Acquaintance. And Thirdly, To those who are usually Hearers in
this Place.
First. You that are his Relations have lost a kind Relation and a good Friend;
you that heard him discourse, and saw him with Delight, shall not see him again
till the Heavens be no more. You have laid him in the Grave, and there his poor
Body does now consume away: But let his Death, and the Death of your other
Friends teach you to prepare to Dye; as you now Mourn for him, so will others
Mourn for you, when a few Days and Nights are gone. Oh make you sure of a
better World, for this is altogether Vanity: Breath after Eternal Life, for
this that you now have, does very quickly pass away. And let me beseech you
earnestly to long for that Day, when you and your Holy Friends shall meet in
Health together, and never part again; when you shall see those that you beheld
here pale and wan with Sickness, to shine like the Sun in Glory; when you shall
see those Breasts, from whence there came so many Sighs and Groans in their
painful dying Agonies, to be full of Love and Praise: You shall never hear
their Tongues faulter with a Disease, nor their Breath stop, nor see their
Countenances change, they shall never complain nor die again; they shall be
with you, and you with them, and all of you with the same God and the same
Jesus, and shall never quit or be separated from one another. Oh blessed State!
Oh sweet and comfortable Privilege of all true Believers! What is all that
shines in this World to the least Beam of this Approaching Glory? You have lost
a dear Relation, and one whom, if our Prayers could have prevailed, we would
have kept longer with us. I beseech you, see that you have an Interest in a
God, whom you may never lose. You that attended him and visited him in his
Sickness, have beheld his Patience, and seen his Resignation. In the many Times
that I visited him, I never heard him in the least murmur at the Hand of God,
though it pressed him very sore; he never in the least opened his mouth to
complain that his Disease was so tedious and so very long; imitate you his
Patience when you come to the like Trials, and show your Submission to the Will
of God, who has now taken your Dear Friend away. Some of us that were near him
in his dying Agonies, heard him praying earnestly to God through Jesus Christ,
and expressing his Trust in his Righteousness alone, and hoping only for
Acceptance in and through this Great Mediator; and indeed let Men in Health and
at a great distance as they think from Death, talk what they will of the great
Power of their own Will, or of the exactness and multitude of their own Works,
yet the approach of Judgment will strangely change their Apprehensions, and let
them know, that the Mercy of God in Christ is the best Plea when they are to
die. Some of you were Sick at the same time, and the Physicians had no hope of
your Recovery, but God has been your Healer: God has turned your Glass when his
is run out; and whilst you are in Time, he is in Eternity: God has renewed your
Life, and taken his away; his Lamp is gone out, and yours is recruited with
fresh Oil again. Let the Mercy and Goodness and Deliverance of so kind a
Physician, draw you nearer to himself; and whilst you see our departed Friend
and your Son no more in your Habitation, beg of God to dwell with you there; he
is better than a thousand Sons and Daughters, his Presence and his Favor is a
part of Heaven. God may have spared you with this design, that you may more
glorify him by a patient acquiescence in his Will, and I do not question but
you do. Let me further entreat you his Relations to continue to live in Love,
for your Friend has left you all this Legacy. And if at any time by any
occasion whatsoever you are tempted to Passion, remember your dead Friend as if
you heard him say, Fall not ought by the way: These were the Words left in a
solemn manner by a dying Man, and I hope you and we all shall the more regard
them upon that Account: Excellent Advice he has given us, God give us the Grace
to take it. It is necessary to be considered by many People in the World, That,
to their own Reproach, never Quarrel more than about the Last Will and
Testament of a Departed Friend, and make that an Occasion of long and
troublesome Suits at Law, which was designed to put an End to all Controversies
and Debates: But there is not the least Cause to fear any thing of this from
any of you, you have not so learned Christ: Go on in your peaceable Carriage
and Behavior, and the God of Peace shall be with you, and he himself will
supply this and all your other Wants.

Secondly, To those Young Men that were the Acquaintance of the Deceased Mr.
Dunwell. Oh what Cause have you to admire the Petience and Goodness of God,
that when so many are snatched away, that you have known, he still suffers you
to Live, when many that were both Healthful and Stronger, and Younger than you
but a while ago, are at their Journey's End, and you are still Traveling in
the Way: You have yet Opportunities and days of Grace wherein to work out your
Salvation, and to prepare for another World; and let me desire you that are as
yet in your Flourishing and Greenest Youth not to put afar off the Evil Day; do
not grieve the Spirit of God; do not misimprove your Sabaths, nor lose your
Opportunities, for you may be near, very near to your latter end; in a Week or
a Fortnight, or a Months time, you may be also in your Eternity: It is yet
Morning with you, and as yet it is a clear Day, but Storms will overtake you,
and for ought you know your Sun may go down at Noon: Oh! learn to be Wise in
the Time of Health, for Sickness is not the most proper Season wherein to do
any thing for your Souls; your uneasiness, your disorder and your pains will
then be so great, that you will find your Selves unable to do any thing that
requires much Thought and Care; those of us that have been Sick, can tell you
this by our own said Experience, an those that are now Sick will Confirm to you
the very same thing: Think you hear this your Departed Friend saying to you,
Oh! do not presume upon having a very long Life, for you see God has cut me off
in the midst of my Days: Oh! never think that you can too soon be Religious, or
that you can do too much for God, for he is worthy to be Served: Whilst you
mind the World, Oh! take heed that you do not forget Heaven and Eternal Glory:
Remember that your Time hastens on apace; Oh! Remember that Sickness will come
to you as it came to me; restless Nights and weary Days will be your Lot, as
they were mine a while ago: Death will soon knock at your Door, as he knocked at
mine, and painful Agonies will go before him, and none but those that have felt
them know what are the Pangs of Death. O my Friends! Do you know what it is to
Die? Do ye know what it is to appear before the Tribunal of an Omniscient and
Infinitely Holy God, and will you not make ready for it? Oh! repent of all your
Follies, Pray in Secret, Examine any Try your selves, and put your Souls in
Order that it may be well with you for ever-more. I beg of you that are Young
to consider the Example and the Practice of our Deceased Friend; he was not of
their Temper that spend all their Money on their Clothes, or in Games and
Taverns, and needless and unprofitable Recreations, but gave some part of what
he had to Encourage and Promote the Gospel; he was (which I put upon him as a
peculiar Mark of Honor) a great Friend to young Ministers; he knew, tho many
others never considered it, that the young Men came to appear in the World with
great Discouragements, and after having undergone many great and sharp
Necessities, and he always was ready to assist them what he could, and I
question not but therein he performed an acceptable Service unto God. When we
had a Lecture in Exchange-Ally he was forward to help us all he could there,
and the continuance of many Years and very rugged and severe Times never
changed his Temper, but as he was then, so he continued to be our Friend to his
Dying day. He gave us more than a Cup of cold Water, and I hope he has now a
Prophet's Reward: And are there none of you that might save a great deal of
Money from needless Expenses, from Luxury and Rior and Recreation, to encourage
the Ministers of the Gospel? And I think I might say to those Young Men that
are our constant Hearers, that I hope it would be no dishonor to them
hereafter, to be called Encouragers of the Lecture at Crosby-Square; and I
would not speak only to the Young, but to the Aged and the Rich; it would more
Honor your Memory, and make your Slumbers in the Grave more quiet, if you made
your own Hands Executors, and gave yearly such a part of your Estate to the
Maintenance of poor Young Scholars and Ministers: You do not know but by that
means, you might promote the Conversion of many Souls, which would be your Joy
in the day of the Lord: As for you that are Aged, bless God that you have so
long a Day, and see that your Sins be not more than those of others that have a
shorter date. Here is a Young Man dead in the middle of his Days, and so have
you seen many others die; Oh! take heed that you be not old in Sin, take heed
that all your work be done, for your Clock begins to point to the concluding
Twelve; your Glass has remaining in it but a very little Sand; your Sun is
going down, the Shadows of the Evening are stretched out upon the Mountains,
and in a few Moments it will be Night with you, when you cannot Work: Take heed
that when the Grave opens to receive you, your Sins do not lie down with you in
the Dust. To all of you that are here, let this Warning be of Use: Our Friend a
few Weeks ago, was a constant Attender in this Congregation, and now he is at
his long Home: He used to sit with Reverence and Seriousness in this Place, but
now he will never see us, nor we him, till the great Day. He that silled a Seat
here, does now fill a Grave; a Coffin holds him there, whom nothing could
detain from Religious Assemblies while he was alive: But we hope that he is
gone to a better, a more enlightened, a more loving, and a more pure Assembly,
even the Assembly of the Firstborn, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect.
His Relations have lost a loving Relation, his Friends a kind Acquaintance, his
Servants a good Master, and we a liberal Benefactor; and we may justly cry and
say, O Death thou do indeed make great spoil and havoc in the World; thou
do visit every Family and every Person at one time or other; thou art so
cruel that thou sparest neither Young nor Old, neither the Useless nor the
Serviceable, neither the Profitable nor Unprofitable Servant: Our Sin has
indeed given thee all thy Power, and made thee look with a formidable Aspect to
Flesh and Blood; but because thou art so formidable, we turn our Eyes from
thee, and look with more pleasure upon that Blessed Redeemer, that has disarmed
thee of all thy hurtful Power, and that will give us Life when thou have
exercised all thy Rage, and done the very worst; he dyed that that such as
believe might never die. We cannot but somewhat fear thee, O Death, as thou
do dissolve our present Frame; but we bid thee welcome, as thou art the
Messenger of the Lord of Glory to convey us thither.

To Conclude, It is like that we who are in this Assembly upon this occasion,
shall never meet again; Oh that We and all our Acquaintance might meet in
Heaven above! And let us be sure not to Fall out in our Way thither: Let us
while we live in a changeable and fading World, prepare for one that will never
fade: Let us not be amazed at the Grave, it now swallows us up and our Friends;
but it shall not keep us very long, for our Lord will shortly come and make our
Dust to live again, and make those Bodies that were weakened, by Sickness and
destroyed by Death, to be like his own glorious Body; and what we now believe,
we shall then see and know to be true: In the mean while let us make Conscience
of Meditating at the least once a day, upon that Comfortable and Reviving Place
of our Apostle, 1 These. 4.14. and so to the end, For if we believe that Jesus
died, and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring
with him. For this we say unto you by the Word of the Lord, that we which are
alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are
asleep. For the Lord himself, shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the
Voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall
rise first: Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together
with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air; and so shall we be ever
be with the Lord. Wherefore Comfort one another with these Words. I conclude
this Subject with the Prayer of the same Apostle, 2 These. 3.16. Now the Lord of
Peace himself, give you Peace always by all Means. The Lord be with you all.

THE END.
Books lately Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry, viz.
THE Mourners Companion: Or Funeral Discourses on several Texts, by John
Shower, p. 1 s. 6 d.

The Life and Death of the Renowned John Eliot, the first Preacher of the
Gospel to the Heathens in America. Written by Mr. Cotton Mather.

Mr. Barker's Book, Entitled, Flores Intellectuales, or Select Notions,
Sentences, and Observations: Collected out of several Authors.

Mr. Lees Joy of Faith.

Casuistical Morning-Exercise, the Fourth Volume. By several Ministers in and
about London; preached in October 1689.

Mr. Quick's Young Man's Claim to the Sacrament.

Mr. Crow's Vanity of Judicial Astrology.

A New Martyrology, or the Bloody Assizes, containing the Lives and Sufferings
of those who died in the West. The third Edition.

Early Piety Exemplified, in the Life and Death of Mr. Nathaniel Mather: With a
Prefactory Epistle by Mr. Matthew Mead.

Mr. Baxter's Poetical Fragments.

Mr. Oaks Funeral Sermon.

Mr. Kent's Funeral Sermon.

The Tragedies of Sin, together with the Remarks on the Life of the great
Abraham. By Stephen Jay, Rector of Chimer.

The Heads of Agreement assented to by the United Ministers.

There is now in the Press.
Mr. Brand's Funeral Sermon, Preached by Dr. Annesley, which will speedily be
Published. Printed for John Dunton.


