Londons Resurrection OR THE REBUILDING OF LONDON Encouraged, Directed, and
Improved, In Fifty Discourses.

Together with a Preface, giving some account both of the Author and Work.

By Samuel Rolls, Minister of the Gospel, and sometime Fellow of Trinity
College in Cambridg.

LONDON, Printed, by W. R. for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Sign of the Golden
Bible on London Bridge, under the Gate, 1668.

To the Right Worshipful Sr John Langham, Knight and Baronet, And Sir James
Langham, his Son, KNIGHT.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Player, Chamberlain of the City of LONDON;
And Sir Thomas Player his Son, KNIGHTS.

And to the Right Worshipful. Sir Francis Roll and Sir Stephen White, KNIGHTS.

To the Worshipful Francis Warner, Nathaniel Barnardiston, Thomas Bewly, Henry
Spurstow, Robert Welden, and Henry Ashurst, ESQUIRES.

S. R.

Humbly dedicateth all the ensuing Discourses, in testimony of his unfeigned
respects (as mean and unworthy as they are) wishing to all, and every of you
(his much honored friends) all needful blessings, both for the Life that is,
and that which is to come.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
IF thou have an affection for London, or any particular concern in the
rebuilding of it, (as very many have) the title of this book (and I will assure
thee the drift and purport of it, is such as the Title pretends to) may
invite thee to spend a few hours in the perusal of it, and to cover a multitude
of infirmities in the Author, and this his work, with respect to the goodness,
and usefulness of his design. I know no secular design now on foot, in this
part of the world, that is, or seems to be, of greater importance, and that
to thousands of families, than is the rebuilding of London: and yet no one
English pen (so far as I know) has been employed, in the directing, and
encouraging of it, till the unworthy Author of this poor Treatise, like Elihu
who had waited for the words of others, and did not answer to Job, till his
betters seemed resolved to be silent, made bold to break the Ice, and did
redeem what time he could, from a thousand cares, and perplexities, to signify
his great compassion, and high respects to that once famous, but now ruinous
City, in which he drew his first breath. I dare not to speak in any such
language as Deborah did, Judge. 5.7. They ceased in Israel, till I Deborah
arose, etc. I shall not presume to compare with her, though but a woman, but
rather confess my self to be as a worm and no man.

What the Apostle says of himself, 1 Cor. 2.3. I was with you in weakness, and
in fear, and in much trembling, and the expressions he uses concerning
himself, Acts 20.19. Serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many
tears, and temptations which befell me: I say those expressions have been much
what applicable to my case (as they that have known my circumstances do
understand,) I have been at the most, but a bruised reed, and smoking flax,
(let the world judge of me as it pleases) yet have I broke through all
distractions, and discouragements (which have even laid me level with the City,
or that part of it which lies in ashes) to do what service, I could for the
place of my nativity, to blot out the name of Icabod, and to retrieve, and
recall that glory of England which for the present is departed.

Yet let me not affright my reader, by what I have said, with the expectation
of a melancholy piece, upon so joyful a subject, as is the restoration of
London, for in treating thereof, I have rather comported with the nature, and
quality of the subject, which is pleasant, and chearily, than with the
complexion of my own mind, and those sad, and dolorous resentments of things,
(both my own and others) which I have too much conversed with. One had wont to
say that he did love to drink his wine with his friends, but to eat his vinegar
by himself (meaning to impart his joys, rather than his sorrows) and as to
that I am much of his mind. I will rather hang my harp upon the willowes, than
play those doleful tunes to others, which I do sometimes listen to my self.

What if now and then, I say within my self that the age we live in, is an
unkind and an ill-natured age? that all men now adays do seek their own
things, and not the things of others, that interest carries all before it, and
whatsoever is worthy, and far more worthy than it self, signifies nothing in
comparison of it, so that they who are too honest to comply, with this or that
interest, farther than they understand it to comport with religion, and reason,
shall have leave to starve, whilst they who boggle at nothing, that is in
pursuance of that interest they have fallen in with, but follow it (as if
interest were the lamb spoken of, Rev. 14.4.) whithersoever it goes, though
that their dishonest self-love (for so it is) be all they have to commend them,
shall ride upon the high places of the earth, and have more than heart can wish.

I may sometimes think of it with regret, that persons in no authority at all,
do usually take upon them to prescribe, and give law to others, in those
things, in and as to which they should only be a law to themselves, I mean left
to their own judgments, and consciences: and so it is that they who command the
purse, do seem to think that the consciences of men should be in subjection to
them, themselves assuming, or challenging that power of imposing, and that
dominion over the faith of other men, (though really their equals) which they
condemn in others, who are legally their superiors.

It goes near to me sometimes to think how full of snares, and temptations,
the present time is, both on the right hand, and on the left, as if all the
Devils in Hell were not tempters enough, nor the wiles and methods of Satan
sufficient to try us, or as if to grapple not only with flesh and blood, but
also with principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places,
and with the rulers of the darkness of this world, were not as much as one of
us could well turn our hands to, unless men turned Devils too (tempters I mean)
and went about like roaring Lions seeking whom they could devour. I freely
confess I have had many black and gloomy thoughts upon the consideration of
those things, such as if others had been conscious to, they might have expected
I should have done like the madman spoken of Prove. 26.18. viz. have cast about
firebrands, arrows and death, but instead thereof, I have been pleasant with
my reader, (at several turns,) yea oftener so, than sour and melancholy; though
there be something of both kinds, wherewith to entertain those that are of
different humors. I have frequently piped to those that have a mind to dance
(alluding to Mat. 11.17.) and elsewhere mourned unto them that are more
disposed to lament: as having been under various tempers my self, whilst I was
about this work, and found that saying of a reverend Divine most true, that one
man in a little time is many men.

In some parts and places of this book, thou may lie down (as it were) in
green pastures, and be lead beside the still waters (alluding to Ps. 23.) I
mean tollerably recreate thy self, if thou have a mind so to do: and in others
again, as in dark groves, and obscure grottoes, thou may satiate thy self
with melancholy, if that humor please thee better (as some have seemed to me,
to be in love with it) But I think thou will find the days longer than the
nights, and less of darkness than of light, or lightsomness, throughout this
whole treatise, which I had no mind to make like the Fish called Sepia, or
Cuttle-fish, which casts ink, and blackness, upon all the waters where it swims
(at leastwise so often as it self is in any trouble, or danger of being taken)
but rather more like that more excellent creature, viz. the Sun, which
disperseth clouds and darkness, wheresoever he comes (Sic liceat magnis
componere parva) that is, if it be lawful for us to make so unequal a
comparison.)

There are two things which I should most of all desire to meet with in the
preface to any book, viz. Some account of the Author, either from himself, or
from some other, and some account of the work. I would know whose book I read,
I mean the Genius, and temper of the Author, that I might the better
understand what I read; ex. gr. If I know the Canticles to have been indicted by
the holy Ghost, and penned by Solomon, I am sure no one expression in that
whole book, ought to have any wanton or lascivious construction put upon it:
nor could be so intended (the Author considered) though but for that, there
are several passages in that book, liable enough unto being taken in an amorous
sense. It is an ordinary saying Cum duo faciunt idem non est idem, when two
men, ( viz. of different spirits do one thing, it is not one, and the same
thing which they do. The same may be applied to writing, and speaking. Those
passages may be well taken from persons of known, moderation, which coming from
others, might be liable to a worse construction, and the sayings of moderate
men should always be taken in a modest, and moderate sense, (if the words will
but bear it) and whereas it is said that every thing has two handles, viz. a
better and a worse, what is presented to us by persons universally owned, as
candid, and moderate, should always be taken by the better handle of the two,
for the sayings and writings of men, are generally such as they themselves are.

Now the Author of this Treatise, knowing that a verbal testimony, given by
any man to himself, does signify nothing, as Christ says, If I bear record of
myself, my record is not true) makes his humble appeal to all that know him,
whether the tenor of his conversation, and practice (for professions and
subscriptions amount to little) has not always proclaimed him a moderate man,
of a reconciling spirit, and of a healing temper. Those countries that lie near
the equinoctial line, are continually scorched with heat, (whether the Sun be
moving north or south) whereas those parts which are more remote from the
Ecliptic line, (or path of the Sun) go by the name of temperate zones: So have
I seen sober persons, who by virtue of their moderation, have been nearer to
others (whether they were such as had Northern, or Southern latitude) for
moderation is a kind of (medium participationis) a participation of two
extremes, but of neither of them in extremity (like a composition of elements
which remain in mixtion but refractly) I say I have seen such under greater
sufferings than other men, who have been violent, one way or other, and to fare
like one that goes about to part a couple that are fighting, and by that means
brings them both about his own ears, and whilst he would make them friends with
one another, makes them both enemies to himself. I was about to say, I my self
have been a kind of Martyr in the behalf of Moderation, and am not ashamed to
own it. It is fit that some body should do the world good, even against its
will, and particularly by promoting that which violence would certainly
extinguish, I mean love and reconciliation, without which the world can no more
be happy, than there can be day in the world without a Sun.

If I have any moderation to spare, as some think I have) I wish I could impart
it to them that have little or none. God was not in the wind, which rent the
mountains, nor in the earth quake, nor in the fire, but in the still small
voice, 1 Kings 19.12. All the four Evangelists do record that the holy Ghost
descended like a dove, Mat. 3.16, etc. The wrath of man accomplisheth not the
righteousness of God. I profess my self to be neither for Paul, nor for
Apollos, nor Cephas in opposition to one another, but for Christ in conjunction
with all of them, and to be most for those Disciples whether of Paul, of
Apollos, or of Cephas which I judge to be really best in their practice, though
more remote than others from my particular judgment.

So far as men are of my mind, they bear my image, but so far as they are good
they bear Gods image: now I would love Gods image in men, more than my own. It
may be a man's defect to be like me, but I am sure it is his excellency to be
like God. I cannot bring my self to think that all persons of one, or two
persuasions are only godly, and that all the rest of people who are not of
those persuasions, are carnal, and wicked: I think that some persuasions have
fewer people of good lives, adhering to them, than do adhere to some others,
but yet there are some worse people amongst those that are generally best, and
some better people than many of them, amongst those that are generally worse
than they, and that I ought to love the good people, of a party more generally
bad, better than the bad people of a party that is more generally good. Time
was that Judas might have been seen amongst the disciples of Christ, and Christ
himself amongst the publicans.

Grace and Learning (or solid wisdom) and good nature, all, yea every one of
these, do more attract my heart to him that has them, and is not of my
judgment, than to be of my judgment, does, or can attract it, to him that has
them not. If I were a Presbyterian endowed with power (as some of that name
have sometimes been) I would more love and encourage an Episcopal man, that were
of good life and of good Learning, and of a peaceable spirit than one that
professed himself a zealous Presbyterian, whose life, and learning, and temper,
were not so good, to be sure than one that were of an i^ nature, or an errand
dunce, or which is worst of all a bad liver. Let them that call Malice and
Revenge by the name of zeal, call this that I have described for moderation, by
the name of Lukewarmness, (if they so please) I shall never take it for such,
whilst I remember what is said Gal. 5.22. But the fruit of the Spirit is Love,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, etc. May all that shall
read this Treatise, be in that sense lukewarm; or rather take that advice which
is given Phil. 4.5. Let your moderation be known to all men.

If the Reader would be assured of the Authors Loyalty and good affection, I
could refer him to several Chapters in this Book, which are demonstrations of
it, particularly Chap. 23. Of obliging Magistrates, etc. and to page 219. etc.
where the Authors abhorrence of a popular Reformation, or of the peoples taking
upon them to reform any thing but themselves and their Families, without the
leave and concurrence of Authority, is fully manifested. How much the Author is
a friend to public order, and Ordinances, may be seen most evidently in Chap.
47. where he treats of the Rebuilding of Churches. That the design of the
Author is not to increase the fears and jealousies of people, but to encourage
their hopes, and fill them (what he can) with the expectations of good, may
plainly appear by the two first Chapters, as also by the deep sense which he
has elsewhere expressed, of the great inconveniences of fears and jealousies,
so much abounding as they do, and the many expedients which he has humbly
proposed for the extinguishing of them.

How unwilling the Author was to give offense to one or other (especially to
persons in Authority) may easily be discerned by the soft expressions he has
generally made use of, having seldom spoken sharply, or harshly of any thing,
but of sharpness, and harshness it self (and of other vices as bad as that):
Now Chemists tell us that acid, or sharp things disarm, and infeeble each
other; and Scripture tells us of God himself, that with the froward he will
show himself froward, Psalm. 18.26.

Two other methods have bin used, that no offense might be taken, more than
always will be, if any sin be reproved, which yet must, and ought to be
reproved. One is, the Author has been careful as not to rail (like Rabshakeh)
so not to talk (as he did) in the Jews Language, in the ears of the people that
are on the wall, but to speak to Superiors in the Syrian Language; that is, in
a Language that ordinary people understand not, when, and so often, as any
miscarriage of theirs has been insinuated. Another Compass he has sailed by,
to avoid the Rock of offense, has been the culling and choosing out the safest
and most inoffensive instances he knew, whereby to illustrate the odiousness of
any evil practice. Who is not at liberty without offending any body at this
day, to speak his pleasure, of that little Engine of State, that was sometimes
called the Engagement? by the imposing whereof, several Learned men were cast,
or kept out of preferment. Now where we treat of the undoing of Scholars, we
have particularized no stratagem ever calculated for that purpose, but only
that obsolete Engagement, nor have presumed to speak of any (par ratio) or
equality of reason, that may be against any thing else.

Moreover thou will find, that my manner is rather to show what ought to be
done, than to upbraid men for not doing as they ought (and a milder way than
that cannot be thought of). In showing what ought to be done, some may think me
too positive, and absolute, now and then, but I intend no more by it but this,
viz. to signify how fully persuaded I am of such things in my own breast, how
confident I my self am of the truth and goodness of them; yet not so confident
of any thing (which he that runs may not read in Scripture) as I am confident
of this, that I my self am not infallible, and therefore presume not to impose
upon the belief of others, (and as they call it, to dogmatize) but submit all
that I have written, to the censure and correction of better Judgments.

Yet as unwilling as the Author was to give any body offense (if it could
possibly have been avoided) the Book it self will tell thee that he has dealt
plainly and impartially with all sorts of men, neither sparing the vices of
friends, nor disowning the virtues of enemies, neither flattering the former,
nor slandring the latter; neither extenuating the faults of the one, nor
aggravating the faults of the other, but giving every man his due, both praise
and dispraise. Now some cannot abide to hear of any good that is in their
enemies, nor of any evil that is in themselves and their friends: whereas the
truth is, we have all our faults, and should be told of them in a becoming
way; yea, our selves should say with David, Psalm. 141.5. Let the Righteous
smite me, it shall be a kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall be an
excellent Oil which shall not break my head. That is, (by the plainest Meiosis
that I know in Scripture, for so it is, to say that a precious Oil will not
break our heads) it shall heal my most grievous and dangerous wounds (for such
are wounds in the head). I shall always suspect that book, and that man, that
chideth, or commends but one side, whereas no side is so good as to have
nothing worthy to be condemned; nor any party so bad, as not to have something
worthy to be commended.

(Good Reader) thou will find me to have written (as it were) with a pair of
scales in my hand, weighing out to every one his proper portion. Now he that
uses scales, will scarce weigh eaven, unless he first bring them to play, this
way, and the other way, as they use to do, before they come to an equipoize,
and stand quite still. Of this you have one instance besides all the rest in
page 32. where all sorts of persons who contemn each others different mode in
Religion, whose Religion for substance is the same with their own, are
indifferently and impartially censured for so doing. Besides all that has been
said, thou will find the Author big with design to promote good nature, good
humor, good temper, peace, forgiveness, reconciliation, yea, Christian love,
and brotherly kindness. I say to promote it universally, as knowing that no
Passover can be kept without unleavened bread, and the entertainment of a
Lamb, which is one of the mildest creatures in the World.

Peace on earth, and good will toward men (upon which will follow glory to God
in the highest) is very much of the drift and design of this Book, and in it
the Author goes about, saying in effect, as he thinks he has read St. John had
wont to do, My little children love one another, or as we are sure he says, 1 John 3.18. Let us not love in word nor in tongue, that is, not in word and
tongue only (which yet is more than many do) but in deed and in truth. He often
warns men (and how needful is it he should do so?) of biting and devouring one
another, lest they be consumed one of another, Gal. 5.15. and comes in like
Mercury, with his Caduceus or white wand, with which they say that Heathen God
had wont to lay the strifes of men, and make their contentions fall, whence
they called his wand Caduceus. By this time thou know enough of the Author,
or may know by that time thou have read this book over (if it be such as he
has told thee) and for that matter he appealeth to thy self, and to as many
more as shall vouchsafe to read it: I say to read it carefully, heartily,
thoroughly. For this I presume, that some things in this Book will displease at
the first, that will not displease at the second reading, and part of a Chapter
read singly and by it self, may give offense, when the whole (one thing being
compared with another) will give no offense at all. And here those words of
Solomon would be thought of, Prove. 18.13. He that answers a matter before he
hears it (that is, hears it out) it is folly and shame unto him.

Now a more brief account of the book may serve the turn, because thou have the
book it self before thee, and may soon read it over. The true design of it
is to promote the building and prosperity of London, which cannot be effected,
but by such ways and means as would tend as much to the welfare of all
England, yea of all the three Kingdoms. Physicians say Non curatur pars nisi
curetur totum; meaning if you would cure any unsound part, you must cleanse the
whole body. If any such thing have befallen us in this work, viz. that we have
happened to prescribe what is as good for all England, as for London, and would
cure the whole (if duly applied) as it sometimes falls out that the whole body
is cured, by what is applied but to one part, namely, when all the rest of the
body is ill but only by simpathy and consent) I say if this Book should contain
any such panacea's, or universal remedies, as that it may serve, not only for
the Meridian of London, but of all his Majesty's Dominions (as if calculated
for the whole) I see no reason why any body should be troubled at that.

In order to the rebuilding and reflourishing of London, I have considered
first what are the hindrances both of one, and of the other, viz.
Discouragement of several kinds, Divisions, Discontents about Religion, and
otherwise the Dearness of Commodities, the badness of materials (as ill burnt
Bricks, seared Timber, etc. the dishonesty of Workmen, the poverty of many that
are concerned to build, if they had wherewithal, the ill method that is or has
been used in building, viz. building altogether scatteringly, and not every
where joining the new building to the old, nor finishing any one whole street,
the fears and jealousies of people in reference to the former burning, in
reference to Papists, and their designs, and in reference to the many lesser
burnings which have been since the great Conflagration of London, particularly,
the burning of a stately new house in Mincing Lane: all these, and it may be
some other impediments of Londons rebuilding and reflourishing, I have
considered as well as I could, and prescribed such remedies as I was able for
every one of those grievous maladies, of most of which, not only London, but
all England is sick. I have discoursed of the Builders, and assistants in
building, who they must be, viz. first the great God, who is the maker and
builder of all things; next to him, those that are called Gods, that is,
Magistrates, by affording countenance to the work, and improving their
Authority on the behalf of it: Next to them, good Ministers (for in all great
works Moses and Aaron had need go hand in hand, as that Text says, God led his
people like a Flock by the hand of Moses and of Aaron: and elsewhere its said,
They builded and prospered through the Prophesying of Haggai, etc.): Next to
them, men of able purses, and good estates (though in no public Offices or
Employments, either Sacred or Civil): And lastly, Men of Art and skill as for
matter of building, and whose proper work and occupation is in and about
Architecture etc. Of, or to all of these I have said what I thought fit.

I have in the next place showed how the help and assistance of all the
forementioned may be gained, and procured, as namely, how the great God may be
prevailed with to bless and prosper the Building (in which sense he is said to
be the builder) viz. by our keeping his Sabbaths, relieving his Servants,
reforming our ways and doings that are not good, rebuilding places for his
Worship (out of love to Public Ordinances) seeking of his Kingdom, and the
Righteousness thereof in the first place, propounding good and pious ends to
our selves in that great undertaking, humbling our selves under his mighty
hand, seeking his face and favor by Prayer and Fasting, walking humbly with
God, and by thankfully acknowledging what God has done for the City already.
How we may engage the Gods that are upon earth (Magistrates I mean) to put
their helping hand to this work, I have showed Chap. 23. As for Ministers, if
they be good, they will be forward enough to quicken and encourage such a work
as is the building of the City, and their interest may go very far, and
contribute very much. To rich men I have spoken Chap. 42. where I have pressed
them to the exercise of mercy and Charity toward an undone City (for so it is
at present) and all its undone Citizens: also in the Chapter of Rebuilding
Churches, I have again called upon the bowels and compassions of all rich
people throughout England. As for all Tradesmen and Artificers, whose ware or
work belongs to building, I have adjured them to be honest, and to do their
best for and toward the rebuilding of London, and to use that Mother of theirs
kindly in all respects, and upon all accounts (Chap. 8.). As for the old
Inhabitants, I have wished them to replant themselves within the Walls, that
London may flourish again, Chap. 36.

For and in order to the rebuilding of London, I have further propounded (in
distinct Discourses) that good Magistrates may be chosen into those places of
power which are conveyed by Election, that such Ministers may be encouraged as
can do much by their interest in the esteem and affections of the people, that
trading may be encouraged and advanced, that the burdens of Londoners may be
eased for the present, that a general content and satisfaction may be given,
(so far as is possible) whilst this work is in hand, that they would build the
New City contiguous with the old, and continuous with it self; that is to say,
that they would begin where the Fire made an end, and build some whole streets
together; And lastly, that there may be a contribution of assistance to that
work from all parts of England, (by men, or moneys, or advice, or whatsoever
else may promote and further it) yea from all parts of his Majesty's Dominions.

As motives thereunto I have (in entire chapters) showed the great consequence,
and importance of the rebuilding of London, and that it be done with all
convenient expedition, and how that not only England, but also Scotland and
Ireland, and indeed all Christendom is concerned therein: (at leastwise the
protestant part thereof) I have discoursed how pleasant the work of building is
(Chap. 39.) also how much more profit may probably be made of building in
London, at this juncture of time, than of laying out money most otherways, yea
how much it would be for the honor of those, that have wherewithal, to have a
considerable share, and proportion in the building of London. I have likewise
set before my reader the sad face of London at this day, how pitifully it
looks, and how the mournful visage of it does bespeak relief from all that see,
or hear of it (Chap. 15.) I have also in the same chapter taken notice of the
many houses which are already built, or begun to be built, up and down, here
and there; whereby a great obligation is laid upon Londoners to go forward with
the City, least they incur the name of foolish builders, who begin to build,
and cannot make an end.

Lastly I have showed how the protestant Religion, and the principles thereof,
do as much oblige to works of charity, such as is the building of Churches, and
Schools, and Hospitals, as any principles in the popish religion can do, though
that religion upbraideth ours with a dead faith, which works not by love, and
does arrogate all the charity to it self.

Thus (good Reader) have I given thee an account, first of the Author, and
nextly of his design, or of the book it self? and what thou art to expect in it.

Would I be so foolish as to boast of any thing contained in this work (which
becomes me not to do) it should be of my having written so disinteressedly as
I have done, so like a man addicted to no party, but studious of the good of
the community, or of the whole Church and state, or as one that were unbiassed,
either by fear or favor, as a person of a free and uningaged mind, and that
had never known such a thing as Interest, as it stands in opposition to
religion, reason, equity, conscience, ingenuity, mercy, etc. In which sense we
take the word, when we say of this or that man, that he was acted or led by
Interest, for we commonly add, and not by conscience, or against conscience? It
was Interest made David to murder Uriah, hoping thereby to have concealed his
adultery, and Ahab to take away the life of Naboth that he might get his
vineyard, and the Jews to suborn the misreporting of Jeremiah, Jer. 20.10.
Report say they, and we will report it.

Interest in the sense I here disclaim it, is nothing else but disingenuous
self-love, dishonest self-seeking, an over-weaning, and unjust addictedness to
a man's self, and to the party which he has espoused, a gift that blinds the
eyes of the wise, a love so blind, as that it will not suffer men to see either
the evil that is in themselves, and their friends, nor yet any thing that is
good, and commendable in others, it is that principle which inclines men to
Deifie, or make Gods (or rather Idols) of some men (whose persons they have in
admiration for advantage sake) and Devils (or something almost as bad) of
others (though they be not such.)

He that acts from Interest is one that cares not how much hurt he does to
others in their names, or estates, or other concerns, so he can but do himself
any good (as he counts good) by means thereof, he is one that pursues his
selfish designs, right or wrong, per fas and nefas, and will trample upon every
thing that stands in the way thereof, Jonah was transported by Interest, when
it displeased him exceedingly, and he was very angry because that God had
repented of the evil, that he said he would do unto the Ninivites, and did it
not. Jonah 3.10.4.1. That is, he had rather all Nineveh had been destroyed in
which were sixscore thousand persons that could not discern betwixt their right
hand and their left; than that himself should have been hardly thought of,
through the non-accomplishment of his prophecy: which infamy too, might have
been prevented, by the Ninivites, considering that the threatening was not
without this known reservation, viz. that in case they repented not,
destruction should overtake them.

Interest is a strong bias which suffers no man to go right on, as no bowl can
go straight to the mark, (but must wheel about) if it have a great bias. Now
if I can wash my hands in innocence from any thing, I can do it in respect of
that kind of Interest which I have now described, its mingling it self with
this book. I have not written like a Lawyer that speaks all he can for his
clients, and takes no notice of any thing that makes for the adverse cause, but
rather as a just umpire, or moderator, that hears or alleges, what can be
said on both sides, and having so done, gives to each its due, and brings the
business to a fair compromise, as may (though possibly it does not) give full
content and satisfaction to both parties. Yet when all this is said, and done,
so captious and censorious, is the age we live in, that some will take offense
at what I have written, and possibly they most of all to whom there is least
appearance of any offense given: for some men (such is their peevishness) will
be more angry, if you do but look over their hedge, than others if you had
stolen their horse (as I may allude to our proverb) There are some that cannot
bear any thing of a reproof, though as much too mild for them as was that of
Eli to his wicked sons, though as prudently couched as was Nathans to David in
the parable wherewith he surprised him, yea there are, whose property it is to
take a reproof most hainously from their friends, as if they would have none
but enemies, and those they counted wicked to chide them, whereas David says
let the righteous smite me, or as if it were the part of an enemy, and not of a
friend, to reprove, whereas the scripture says, Thou shall not hate thy
brother, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon
him, Levit. 19.17. A rebuke from an enemy seldom does good, because it is
thought not to spring from love, if then our friends must not reprove us
neither, we have excluded one ordinance of God, which was appointed for good,
viz. Admonition and Reprehension. We cannot endure our sawces should be to
sweet, but if a little tartness, or sharpness, be found in them, they please us
better, why then would we have the writings of men to be luscious? why should a
little sharpness in a book blunt our appetite thereunto instead of whetting it?

If thou have no faults he wrongs thee that reproves thee, but if thou say
thou have none, thy so saying, or thinking, is a fault, (for he that says he
has no sin is a liar) and if thou have faults, he that tells thee of them, in
an humble modest way, does thee a kindness, and if a man do thee a kindness,
why should thou be angry with him for it? Books should be read as well to
inform us in what we are wrong, as to confirm us in what we are right, not so
much to be our interpreters, to speak out that which we thought before, and had
a mind to have said, rather by others than by our selves, but to instruct us
what we ought to think, to rectify our judgments, and practices, wherein
soever they are amiss. If men give us our due (commendation I mean) why would
we have more? it being a fault we mislike in watermen and coachmen, when they
will not be content with their full fare, unless you give them something over
and above. Now he that treates thee as if thou had no faults, g^ves thee more
than thy due, for all have some.

He that would profit by this book must resolve before hand to eat his honey
comb with his honey (Cant. 5.1.) to pare his apple, and pull out the core (if
there seem to be any) and feed upon the rest, he must know how to make a good
meal, at a table where are many dishes, though every dish, or part of a dish,
do not please his palate. If I read a book in which are several passages that I
can make good use of, though in it there be diverse other things, that do not
suit my Genius, I ought not to censure the author, or to repent of my reading
it. Possibly those passages may be of most use to others, which were of none to
me, and those expressions may give others greatest content, which gave me
least. I am beholden to him from whom I receive any good, though not all the
good I could have wished to receive.

Set but candor and charity at work, and thou may find an excuse for all
such passages in this book as may not so well s^it thee. If some expressions
(to thy thinking) do savor of two much melancholy, say it may be the Author
has had a great many things to expose him thereunto, and thou say right: If
thou fancy the color of other passages as much to light and pleasant, as the
former were too sad, bethink thy self that melancholy persons are apt to be in
extremes (and yet mean no hurt) and no wonder neither, since all the mirth of
melancholy persons is triumph, and that triumph because they have obtained
victory over that black enemy (melancholy I mean) out of whose Clutches they
are newly escaped for a time.

What an uncharitable man would call youthful and aerie, be thou pleased to call
the hypocondriaeal wind, and if it seem to lighten in thy face, now and then,
call those flashes the eruptions of a melancholy cloud, torn in sunder; and
rather than be too angry, think the Author to be scarce himself, (the
reputation of being mad is an apron of fig leaves that will cover any
nakedness.)

One thing more I must advertize thee of, viz. that if thou deal fairly with
the Author of this poor treatise, thou must make him a fourfold allowance, one
as a man (for that all men have their weaknesses) another, as a man weaker
every way than many other men, a third as a man weaker at this time than
himself (having had many troubles, and discouragements to make him so;) and
lastly as a man that means well, and had an honest design, in what he has
written (as the serious perusal of the book may assure thee.

I might have told thee that in many passages of this book, I seem to my self
to have followed the motion of the primum mobile (or movens) of the first mover
(as the spheres do) who has openly proclaimed his desire of uniting, etc.

Nay I deceive my self if I have not in this book answered one of the most
difficult, and insuperable questions (or which has gone for such) that is put
at this day, upon the answer whereof very much depends, and that is, what will
give men content? or what is the likeliest way to satisfy all men, or the
major part? I am hugely mistaken if I have not showed how that may be done,
without rasing any one foundation, or fundamental law, and without laying an
axe to the root of any tree, that is appointed to rule over the other trees in
the Forest (alluding to Judge. 9.) I say I have endeavored to build up a
structure of peace, love and unity upon the foundations that are already laid,
without presuming to lay any new ones, or to do any thing more than humbly
propose, and modestly offer at some few preterfundamental condescensions. If
this be as truly performed, as it was intended, the book cannot be useless,
though it did signify nothing else. It was a happy cruse full of Salt,
wherewith Elisha healed the naughty waters, casting it into the spring, 2 Kings
20. if any thing in this book may prove like that Salt, to heal the waters of
Marah, that is, of bitterness, which do even overflow us, and to sweeten the
spirits of men, one toward another (as has been endeavored) I shall much
rejoice in the success. Fain would I contribute toward raising up the
Tabernacle of love and good will, that is fallen, and unto closing up the
breaches thereof, alluding to, Amos 9.11.) If I fall short of what I aimed at,
I have that old, and good excuse to plead, viz. magnis tamen excidit ausis,
that is, that I have fallen from great and good designs, that I shot at an
excellent mark, though it was my unhappiness to miss it.

Here thou will find several sins reproved, and cautioned against, namely,
Pride, Penuriousness, Censoriousness, Unmercifulness, Undutifulness toward
superiors, Sinister ends, seeking other things before, and above the Kingdom of
God, and the righteousness thereof, etc. Thou will also find in this Treatise
several graces commended, as namely Humility, Charity, Heavenly mindedness,
Publickness of spirit, Thankfulness, etc. also several duties exhorted to, viz.
Sanctifying of the Sabbath, humbling our selves under the mighty hand of God in
burning the City, reforming what is manifestly amiss seeking unto God by prayer
and fasting, etc.

Besides the theological discourses I have mentioned, there are several others
that are purely moral, (for so the nature of the subject did require) now
though in those discourses, which are but moral, (as in Chap. 46. and others) I
have given scope to my phantasy, to be a little youthful (or for diversion sake
it has taken leave so to be) yet have I taken no such liberty, when the matter
before me was divine, and spiritual, as being a professed enemy to any thing
like a jest, in any thing like a Sermon, or mingled with any matter, which
otherwise might become a pulpit.

If thou art altogether a stranger to the art of Divine Chimistry, or of
extracting moral and spiritual considerations out of mechanical and ordinary
things (like good Spirits out of lees and dregs) thou thou may learn
something of it here, for though some heads of this book be very unpromising,
and such as some would wonder what good could come out of them (as they said of
old, can any good come out of Nazareth?) yet thou will find the application
somewhat practical, and profitable, which may reconcile thee to it, as a good
Moral might do to a fable, that at the first hearing did seem but slight. There
are instances of this in Discourse 5, 6, 7. the Titles whereof promise little
or nothing.

Would thou have thy mind to be filled with good, and useful thoughts, as
thou passest to and fro the ruins of London (as many do very often) and as thou
take a view of the new buildings, either begun, or finished, this Treatise
may furnish thee with seasonable meditations, with some of which if thy heart
be in too light a frame, thou may make it more serious, and with others, thou
may make it more pleasant, if it be too sad.

These are all the uses, which this Treatise pretends it can serve for, and
these thou will say are enough, if it perform accordingly, now whether it do so
or no, is and must be left to the reader to judge; but if it do not, the Author
has failed of his design, in whole, or in part.

Mispointing and misprinting have disturbed the sense now, and then, and made
it unintelligible, but if thou please to have recourse to the table of
Errata, thou will there see what the Author intended, (the smalness and
swiftness of whose hand has doubtless exposed the Printer to more mistakes,
than otherwise he had been guilty of.) I have closed this book with a Discourse
of the Resurrection of our bodies, (those houses of clay in which we dwell)
(which is that Article of our Creed, which the resurrection of London does most
naturally, and easily put us in mind of, as the destruction of that City, did
most genuinely lead us into the thoughts of our own death, and dissolution:)
And thus thou have an account of the drift, and purport of the whole work.

I am conscious to my self that this Treatise carries with it the stamp, and
impression of many of the Authors weaknesses (though the proverb be The eye
sees not its self) but if no man shall throw a stone at the Author, till one
be found that has no weaknesses of his own (or shall be thought to have none,
when ever he appears in print) though not guilty of, or charged with so many as
he) I say, if the Author escape till then, he is like to sleep in a whole
skin, for good and all.

I verily think that this poor despicable book, will (in the main) approve its
self to every man's conscience, and though not to every man's private humor, and
dishonest interest, yet to the interest of the public, and good of the
community, and that there is not one expression in it, but may be taken in a
sense that shall give no offense, or by which there shall be no scandalum
datum, or offense justly given, whatsoever may be unjustly taken. Let those
that never exposed themselves in print, suspend their censure but till they do;
and let those that are in print already, read these lines but with so much
candor, as they would desire their own should be read (especially if they have
treated of matters hard to be treated of, and sailed, as the Author has done,
from first to last betwixt Scylla and Caribdis, that is amongst rocks on every
side of him) I say let them who would themselves be construed as well as ever
their words will bear, but do as much for me, and it is all the favor in that
kind, I shall entreat.

He that does but glance upon a book, his eye may light unhappily upon some
passage, one, or more which singly, and by its self considered, may prejudice
him against the rest, and make him resolve to read no more, whereas, if the
same person had read the whole book over, he would have liked it well, and been
no more offended at those very passages, than skilful Apothecaries are at the
vipers which are in the receipt of Venice Treacle, which with such and such
corrective ingredients, wherewith it is compounded makes it a more sovereign
antidote than it would otherwise be. (Reader) Thou have my pains, and earnest
endeavors on the behalf of London, that it may rise and flourish again, let me
have thy pardon for whatsoever is, or seems to thee to be amiss, in and
throughout so well intended a work, and (which is more let me have thy prayers)
that God would pardon all the defects and miscarriages of this work, as to
matter or manner, and forgive the Author those ten thousand talents, in which
(upon other accounts) he stands indebted to the great God, (as who can know the
number of his transgressions!) as also that whatsoever in this book, is of real
tendency to personal, or national, civil or spiritual good may be duly
considered, entertained without prejudice and (so far as is possible) brought
into practice.

Now my hearts desire, and prayer to God is, that he would please to say
concerning London, and Londoners, as concerning Israel and Ephraim of old,
Since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my
bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, Jer. 31.20. and
v. 4. I will build thee, and thou shall be built, O virgin of Israel, thou
shall surely be adorned, etc. and v. 10. He that scattered Israel will gather
him, and keep him as a shepherd does his flock, and v. 11. And they shall flow
together to the goodness of the Lord, for wheat and for wine and for oil, and
v. 12. Their soul shall be as a watered garden, and they shall not sorrow any
more at all, and v. 24. Turn again O virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy
Cities, and v. 28. And it shall come to pass that as I have watched over them
to pluck up and to break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and to
afflict, so I will watch over them to build, and to plant; and v. 23. (for I
may not recite all) As yet they shall use this speech in the land of Judah, and
in the Cities thereof, when I shall bring again their captivity, the Lord bless
thee O habitation of Justice, and mountain of Holiness. I say that God would
use the like expressions concerning London, and Londoners, as here concerning
Israel and Ephraim, is the hearty desire, and earnest prayer of the unworthy
Author,

Who desires to approve himself a friend to all men, but especially to them
who are of the household of Faith. S. R.

A Table of all the Chapters or Titles of all the Discourses, contained in this
Book.
Discourse. 1. OF the grounds we have to hope, and expect the complete
rebuilding of the now Ruins of London. page 1. Disc. 2. Of such considerations
as may encourage heartless, and dispirited Citizens, to build again. p. 20.
Dis. 3. Of how great consequence it is that the non wast, and desolate City of
London, should be reedified. p. 38. Dis. 4. That it is convenient that the
reedifying of London should be with all possible speed, and expedition. p. 44.
Dis. 5. Of building upon all the ruins of the City, with brick (as is
enjoined.) p. 48. Dis. 6. Of ill-burnt bricks, and that great care should be
taken to build the new City with good materials. p. 53. Dis. 7. Of its being
intended that the new buildings should be more magnificent than were the old.
p. 56. Dis. 8. That all persons employed, and made use of, in, and in order to
the rebuilding of London, ought therein, (more especially) to use all care and
good conscience. p. 60. Dis. 9. Of such as have made bold, or shall make bold
with other men's materials, or with any part thereof. p. 63. Dis. 10. Of such as
have not wherewithal to build again. p. 65. Dis. 11. That a strict observation
of the Lords day, might greatly promote the rebuilding of the City. p. 67. Dis.
12. Of the help that may, and is meet to be afforded, toward the rebuilding of
London. p. 74. Dis. 13. That not only England, but all great Britain, and
Ireland, and all the protestant parts of the world, is concerned in the
restoration of London. p. 77. Dis. 14. That the Protestant Religion, and the
principles thereof, may contribute as much toward the rebuilding of Churches,
and Hospitals, etc. as ever popery has formerly done. p. 83. Dis. 15. Upon the
looks and prospect of London, whilst but only some few houses are built here,
and there, and others but building, in the midst of many ruinous heaps. p. 91.
Dis. 16. That uniting, or at leastwise quieting the minds of men, as to matter
of Religion (so far as it can be done) would much conduce to the rebuilding of
the City. p. 98. Dis. 17. That a studious advancing and promoting of trade, (by
those that have power to do it) would greatly contribute to the rebuilding of
London. p. 122. Dis. 18. That the best way to dispatch the City, would be to
build some whole Streets together. p. 125. Dis. 19. That our building ought to
begin where the fire ended. p. 128. Dis. 20. That it might much conduce to the
rebuilding of London, to have a through search made, how and by what means it
was burnt. p. 131. Dis. 21. That the countenance of Rulers, expressing much
zeal and earnestness to have the City up again, and a sad sense of its present
ruins, would put much life into the work. p. 137. Dis. 22. That the choice of
worthy men in places of power, both in City and country, would contribute much
to the rebuilding of London. p. 141. Dis. 23. That one good way to promote our
City, would be to oblige our governors (all we can) to put to their helping
hand. p. 146. Dis. 24. That easing the burdens of Londoners (all that may be)
till the City be finished, would encourage the work. p. 158. Dis. 25. That to
give a general content, and satisfaction to men, (or so far as it can be done,
would help forward the City very much. p. 159. Dis. 26. That the continuance of
peace begun with foreign nations, might much promote the rebuilding of the
City. p. 165. Dis. 27. That lessening the price of coals, would encourage
building. p. 166. Dis. 28. That the extirpation of fears, and jealousies (which
do sadly abound) might contribute much to the building of the City. p. 168.
Dis. 29. That if that dread, and terror of the popish party, that is upon the
people, were taken of, the building of the City would thereby be much
encouraged. p. 174. Dis. 30. That to be thankful to God and men for the good
beginnings of a new City, is one way to perfect it. p. 186. Dis. 31. That to
seek much unto God by prayers, and fasting for success, would be one of the
best ways to promote the City p. 190. Dis. 32. On Ezra 6.14. And the Elders of
the Jews builded and they prospered, through the prophesying of Haggai, the
Prophet, and Zechariah. p. 199. Dis. 33. That to be deeply affected with the
hand of God in burning the City, is one good way to have it built again. p.
205. Dis. 34. That greatly to bewail those sins, both of our own, and others,
which helped to burn the old City, would help to build the new one. p. 206. Dis.
35. That to reform throughout England, whatsoever is manifestly amiss, and can
be reformed, would admirably promote the City. p. 211. Dis. 36. That it might
expedite the building of London, if all its former inhabitants, were
considerably encouraged, to replant themselves within the walls. p. 225. Dis.
37. That to propound to our selves the best of ends in building, or attempting
to build the City, may much promote the work. p. 230. Dis. 38. That for all men
to consider how much it will be for their honor, who shall have a great hand
in rebuilding the City, might much promote the work. p. 236. Dis. 39. That if
the pleasure that is in building, were understood by all men, more persons of
estates, would be engaged in the reedifying of London. p. 240. Dis. 40. That
men of estates would be invited to build in London, if the advantage which may
probably (though not certainly) be made thereof, were duly considered. p. 244.
Dis. 41. That the burning of a new and stately house in Mincing-lane, should
not deter Londoners from going on with their building, but admonish them to
build whole Streets together, etc. p. 248. Dis. 42. That the exercise of Mercy
and Charity, would promote the building of the City. p. 256. Dis. 43. That the
promoting of Love and Amity, throughout the whole nation, would much conduce to
the rebuilding of the City. p. 266. Dis. 44. That the grace of humility, and
the exercise thereof, might conduce much to the rebuilding of the City. p. 288.
Dis. 45. That to seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, in the
first place (for Londoners generally so to do) were one of the best ways to
obtain a new City. p. 311. Dis. 46. Upon the observation of that full
employment, which Carpenters Bricklaiers, and all other Artificers, who relate
to building, have at this day, compared with the condition of Scholars, under
various revolutions. p. 319. Dis. 47. Of the rebuilding of Churches. p. 337.
Dis. 48. Of Gods being the maker and builder of all things. p. 355. Dis. 49. Of
our being most unworthy to see another London. p. 360. Dis. 50. Upon the
rebuilding of our houses of Clay, or the Resurrection of our bodies. p. 364.
Reader I entreat thee to correct these and such other faults, as thou may
find, that have escaped the Press.
PAge 39. line 33. read ingens. p. 42. l. 16. put only a Comma at the word
Comet. p. 68. l. 34. blot out That. p. 78. l. 1. r. Empire. p. 87. l. 34. r.
were not true. p. 89. l. 21. r. yea scorn. p. 93. l. 30. r. mourning weeds. p.
97. l. 17. r. when some, etc. and l. 32. r. father. p. 136. l. 22. r. monet ut
facias. p. 145. l. 7. r. three kingdoms. p. 146. l. 5. r. and that. p. 161. l.
30. r. reasonable service. p. 140. l. 10. put only a comma before methinks. p.
184. l. 5. r. lispers out of Popery. and l. 13. r. heterodoxe Sermons. and l.
19. come forth. p. 170. l. 15. r. falsifying his promise. p. 202. l. 19. r.
work. p. 203. l. 4. r. one Aaron. p. 212. l. 19. r. never any of all. p. 228.
l. 8. r. the missing of such a reward. p. 232. l. 21. r. should we. p. 264. 22.
r. your want. p. 280. l. 22. r. pose and puzzle. p. 333. l. 12. blot out the
parenthesis before ponds. p. 328. l. 17. r. hairy skins. p. 347. l. 22. r.
precariously. p. 352. l. 8. r. gourd to wither. p. 340. l. 31. r. Sinagogues of
Satan. p. 352. l. 24. r. them. p. 340. l. 10. r. as to see. p. 359. l. 14. r.
rebuked. p. 84. l. the last add, and do it not, cannot, etc. Sometimes you
will find yet put for yea, and the for that. p. 331. l. 29. r. Nil habet
infaelix paupertas durius in se. p. 330. l. 29. dele si. p. 324. l. 16. blot
out the parenthesis at sense.

DISCOURSE I.
Of the grounds we have to hope and expect the complete rebuilding of the now
Ruins of London.

1. THe day of the Resurrection of London has as yet but dawned, at most, the
Sun thereof is yet but one hour high, or thereabouts; the new City is yet but
in its Infancy (if any thing more then an Embryo) the beginnings of the new are
not yet so great as the small remainders of the old, as therefore it is too
early at this time to congratulate it with acclamations of Grace, Grace
thereunto, as if the top-stone were already laid; so on the other hand, it is
not too late to signify the hopes we have that in Gods good time it will be
brought to a happy period, and that it will shine forth more and more, as the
Sun does till it come to the perfect day. Sure I am, if the grounds of our hope
as to that matter be not vain and frivolous, it cannot be vain and fruitless,
to divulge and publish them, considering how many there are whose hearts would
even fail them, if they should utterly despair of Londons ever being upon its
legs again: As David says of himself, that he had fainted, unless he had
believed to see the goodness of God in the Land of the living, Psa. 27.13. This
hope (if I mistake not) is and must be a causa sine qua non of all attempts for
the rebuilding of the City; that is, such a cause, as without which no man will
undertake to build upon his own account; for as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor.
9.10. That he that ploweth, should plow in hope; (as knowing that otherwise men
would hardly plow at all) so by the same reason, he that sows must sow in
hope too; nor can it be imagined, that any man will throw the seed of his care
and cost into those deep Furrows which the fire has made, unless he be
competently persuaded that he or his shall in due time reap the benefit of it:
I profess my self to be sincerely of that persuasion which I now endeavor to
cherish in others, viz. that the ruinous heap, or that Chaos which we now call
London, will thorough the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush (the burning
Bush) be once again a goodly City. And that no man may think this hope of mine
to be as a Spiders Web, that may soon be swept or blown away. I am ready to
render the reasons of it, which are as follow. First, I think it not
inconsiderable, that there is no Decree of Heaven promulged or made known to
the contrary, which I the rather insist upon, because it has been usual with
God to give notice of his purpose and pleasure, that the places intended by him
for a perpetual desolation should never be raised up again, as if it had been
for that very end (and it is like it was) that men might not labor in vain,
planting that which must immediately be plucked up, and so building up that
which must have been forthwith destroyed. Thus Joshua (doubtless by Divine
Commission) as appears from Joshua 16. did adjure the people concerning
Jericho, saying, Cursed be the man before the Lord that rises up and builds
this City Jericho: he shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in
his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it, Joshua 6.20. which was
fulfilled in Hiel the Bethelite, and his two sons, 1 Kings 16.34. That Curse
made such impression, that for more then five hundred years after, no man
adventured to attempt the rebuilding of that City devoted to destruction, until
Hiel at length took the boldness to do it, and sacrificed his two sons (and as
some think all his children) upon that dangerous service. A like terrible
prophecy of perpetual destruction we find denounced against Mount-Seir, Ezekiel.
36.9. I will make thee perpetual desolations, and thy Cities shall not return.
And the reason given, v. 5. Because thou have had perpetual hatred, and have
shed the blood of the children of Israel. Moreover, against Hazor we find it
thus written, Jer. 49.33. And Hazor shall be a dwelling for Dragons, and a
desolation for ever; there shall no man abide there, nor any son of man dwell
in it. Adding one instance more, we shall have confirmed this truth out of the
mouth of twice two Witnesses, and that Zeph. 2.4. will furnish us with, As I
live, says the Lord, surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon
as Gomorrah, even the breeding of nettles and salt pits, and a perpetual
desolation, etc. v. 10. This shall they have, because they have reproached and
magnified themselves against the people of the Lord. Now if God had spoken
against London, as against Jericho, Hazor, Mount-Seir, Moab, Ammon, there had
been no hope, saving as the threatening might have been interpreted but
conditional, (as when God said Niniveh should be destroyed within forty days)
but no such thing having been denounced against this City, where is the ground
of despair? if there be no Divine Promise of and for the rebuilding of London,
to be sure there is no express, or manifest threatening against it, and so long
there is hope it may take place: When the great God was resolved that Jeremy
should not prevail by his prayer for the Israelites, he bids him spare his
pains, Jer. 11.14. and Jer. 14.11. Jer. 7.16. Pray not thou for this people,
neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee. And at another time
God by his Prophet said, That though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in the Land,
they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, intending
thereby that they should not prevail for others, Ezekiel. 14.14. Might not we in
like manner have expected some intimation of the Divine Pleasure, that the
rebuilding of London should not be so much as enterprized; that if we took any
such work in hand, it should be at our peril, that we should but sow the Wind,
and reap the Whirlwind, in case that were the Will of God indeed? Surely the
Divine Goodness would forewarn us, that we might not undertake so great a work,
and all in vain: But so far has God been hitherto from crying aloud to us, not
to take in hand the rebuilding of the City, that I scarce know any whisperings
to that purpose: Nay, methinks that voice whereby God in these days most of
all speaks to such cases as these (and that is the voice of Providence, and
of the series of Divine Dispensations) I say that voice sounds in my ears, (and
it is like in the ears of many more) as if it were plainly for it, as if it
spoke articulately, Arise and build, up and be doing. For first of all, since
this work was to be done, the great God has encouraged it by an unexpected
measure of health vouchsafed; I say since the City was to be built, God has
taken away the noisome Pestilence, which staying some time after the fire, we
had reason to expect the increase thereof, considering how many Families were
unhealthfully crowded together in a very small compass, and how many green (I
mean lately before infected houses) were forthwith inhabited, which otherwise
had long remained empty. The continuance of that destroying Angel amongst us
had been so great a hindrance to the restoration of the City, as nothing could
have been greater, and the removal thereof is doubtless as great a help,
without which most men would have thought of flying or dying, but none of
building. Surely that gracious hand which so miraculously and seasonably
removed the Plague, was stretched forth in favor of the desolate City, as to
matter of rebuilding.

And does it signify nothing, that God has ordained Peace for us since the
fire, a threefold Peace, viz. with France, Holland, Denmark? and may I not add
a fourth, viz. with Spain also? (of no small import to trade and traffic, as
Merchants tell us) Has that Peace no benign aspect upon the rebuilding of
London? could we have built without it, as well as with it? The great dearth
and dearness of coals that was before the Peace, together with the great plenty
and cheapness of them, which has been, and is like to be after it, assures us
to the contrary, (Coals being as necessary for the making of Brick, of which
our new building must consist, as Straw its self.)

Had the late war continued who would have had any heart to have built? who
knows not how unhappy it is to build with a brick in one hand, and and a
bullet in the other? and would not the expense of War quite destroy the sinews
of building? which are the same with the sinews of War, viz. Money) or had we
money enough, where should we have materials sufficient for so great a work in
a time of War? I doubt our Lebanon would not suffice: we should find the want
of Foreign Timber which now we hope will plentifully come in, and that be
brought in to build our houses, and to repair our City, which would otherwise
have been employed to destroy our Ships, and to oppose our Fleet.

And now I mention Peace, I must not forget the doubling of it (as of Pharaoh's
Dream for more certainty sake) betwixt our selves, and the Netherlands,
(besides those other Nations that may hereafter cast in their lot with us)
neither is it only the same thing ingeminated, or two Peaces, but numerically
distinct; but the latter Peace (if we mis-understand it not) is specifically
different from, and much better then the former; the first having been only an
engagement not to offend one another, but this to defend and protect each
other, as the matter shall require. It is a great while since I remember any
thing so generally well resented, so heartily interpreted, so thankfully
acknowledged, as that League has been, and chiefly for that it was made with a
people of the same Religion with our selves, besides their being most potent at
Sea of all our Neighbors. That Dove Peace, Peace, (for so I may call it) with
two Olive Branches in its mouth, seems to me to bring the best tidings, as
concerning the rebuilding of London, of any Messenger I have heard of; (though
there are several others) and they that think otherwise, are I doubt under the
power of too much melancholy, (not to say prejudice.)

Is there nothing to be gathered from the late Winter season wherewith to
encourage our hope, as touching the rebuilding of London? If builders might
have bespoken a season for their purpose, how could they have had a better? To
be sure the Husbandman did not pray for such a Summer-like mild Winter Frost
and Snow had been more suitable to his desires and occasions: But as if every
thing ought to give place to the restoration of the City, as if plenty and
health its self were not so needful, as that (at leastwise for the present)
behold a Winter (if we may call it Winter) more accommodate to that occasion
and service, then to any other purpose; so warm, as if the Sun had stood still,
(as in the days of Joshua) and would not have stirred further from us till it
had seen the City in some good forwardness. Thus the great God, who sent a
fierce Wind to promote the burning of London, when it was his pleasure, has
sent a mild Winter that has much promoted the building of it, giving us hope
thereby it is his will and pleasure it should be built again.

I observe that God both in the bringing and removing of Judgments, has wont
to make much use of Wind and Weather: So God brought an Eastwind upon the Land
of Egypt, and that East Wind brought the Locusts, Exodus 10.13. And in the ninth
verse we read, That the Lord turned a mighty strong West-wind which took away
the Locusts, and turned them into the Red Sea, there remained not one Locust in
Egypt. So when God had a purpose to dry up the Deluge, it is said, Genesis 8.1.
That God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters assuaged. It is
like one Wind brought the waters in, as another carried them out: So God caused
the Sea to go back by a strong East Wind, and made it dry Land, that the
Israelites might pass over, Exodus 14.21. And probable it is, that the turning
of the Wind brought the Sea back again upon the Egyptians. And I am much
deceived, if the Wind and Weather, which were much against us in the time of
the Fire, have not been as much with us, and for us, since that, I mean in
reference to the warmth and openness of the Weather, which are much what the
effects of Winds suitable thereunto, Job 37.9. Cold comes out of the North:
And v. 17. How thy garments are warm, when he quiateth the earth by the
South Wind. Since then this last Winter God has made the Heavens to hear the
Ruins, and the Ruins to hear the Artificers, and the Artificers to hear the
cries of the poor dejected Citizens, longing to be restored, (you know to what
I allude) why should we despair of another London at Land, more then heretofore
at Sea, where we have known two already?

When I consider how speedily many difficult cases, and perplexed controversies,
relating to Builders and Proprietors, have been brought to an end, either by
the clearness of the Law made for that purpose, or prudence of the Judges, or
extraordinary peaceableness of the parties concerned, or by means of all three
together, I cannot but look upon it as a good presage, that this poor City
shall be built again: For this methinks is a kind of sudden and unexpected
clearing and taking away of that Rubbish which did most of all threaten to
obstruct the buildings; for who that has observed how long some one
controversy about the title of Houses or Lands, being tried after the usual
way, (and not as in the Act for building is provided) does ordinarily depend
(some a longer time then I hope the whole City will take up in rebuilding,)
would not have thought that Lawsuits and Impleadings one of another would have
been so endless, that the City (the building whereof must needs wait upon the
determination of such matters) would never have had a beginning. But blessed be
God, it is evident to us by some hundreds of houses already built, and many
more Foundations laid, that an incredible number of Titles are already
determined, even so many as might have taken up a whole Age in an ordinary
course of Law. And hence also may we feed our selves with hope, that the like
dispatch will be made in and about those Causes which are yet unheard, (or more
if more can be) since by variety of Precedents, and parallel cases, the work of
determination will be easier every day then other. This good harmony gives me
great hope, and may do the like to others, for why may not a City rise up by
Unity and agreement, as well as fall by division? why may not the former be as
powerful to lift up, even from the dust, as the latter is to throw it down? If
God please to grant the people of England as good and easy an accord in all
other matters, I shall yet hope all will be well.

I see a diligent hand at work for and toward the rebuilding of the City, and
that increases my hope, that it will be done. When God forsook London for a
time, and gave it up to the flames, we may remember that men forsook it also, I
mean, a great part of its Inhabitants, made it their only care and business to
secure their goods, but did in effect say, let the City go. But now I find that
Citizens are as active and officious in restoring, as ever any of them (for all
were not so) did seem remiss, and careless in preserving of it; methinks every
body is huge intent upon it, and what his hand finds to do in it, does it
with all his might, and that in despite of all both real and supposed
discouragements. I know not the man whom in this case I can call a Sluggard,
and wish him (without wronging him) to go to the Ant and learn his ways; all
are as busy as so many Ants, hastening to and from their several Mole-hills;
not a few were so intent upon it, that when materials could scarce be had for
love or money, when Coals were three or four pound a Chaldron, when Bricks and
Timber bore an excessive rate, all would not beat them off from building, as if
they had been as fond of houses within the Walls of London, as ever Rachel was
of children, who cried out, Give me children, or I die.

You might see by the respects which Citizens paid, and do yet pay to the dust
and ruins of London, how they hanker after it, not for what it is, but for
what they hope it shall be. Do not as many as had wont to be concerned in those
affairs, visit the Ruins yearly, call every Parish by its former name, observe
its bounds, choose Officers upon the very place, choose Aldermen, and their
Deputies, for every Ward that is unsupplyed, nominate Churchwardens,
Constables, etc. as if it might be said of London as was said of Lazarus, that
he was not dead, but slept; and all thorough the desire they have it might be
raised again, for they do know it is more then asleep, yea, no less then dead
and buried. A careless, unactive, heartless posture was that in which London
was destroyed, and now I see the quite contrary to that, it makes me hope it is
about to be restored; wherewithal did the Psalmist persuade himself, That the
time to favor Sion, yea the set time was come, Psa. 102.13. The reason he
gives us is, For thy people take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust
thereof, v. 14. If that were a good argument, that God would arise and have
mercy upon Sion, (as doubtless it was, else the Psalmist would not have used
it) we have said and evinced the same thing as concerning London, viz. such an
affection toward it, as the people of God in those days had toward their
desolate Jerusalem. Far be it from me to think that so much love, care and
pains, so many heads, and hands, and hearts, as are set at work about our City,
with earnest prayers for the restoration of it, will all produce nothing.

What though God had a sufficient controversy against the old City, as for
which to suffer it to be burnt, may it not be said that possibly he has not
the same against another City, though standing, or intended to stand in the
same place; so that notwithstanding his permitting the former to be burnt, he
may permit another to be built in the room of it? Though such things were done
to the dry Tree, (to which I may compare the old City) must the like, or
something as bad, be done to the green? Christ argues from the green Tree to
the dry, with a quanto magis, What then shall be done to the dry? but not vice
versa. God destroyed the Old World, but did he not nevertheless make a new one,
and that in the same place where the old one stood, and peopled it out of the
loins of those few persons that did remain of the old? Who knows but that God
may have pleaded all that controversy which as yet he means to plead with us
in and by the burning of that one City? The destroying of Cities, (and the not
suffering of them to be restored is no other then continued destruction,) (as
they say of Conservation, that it is continued Creation) is not work that God
does do every day; it is his act indeed, but his strange act, he is usually
long about it, and as it were deliberating with himself, as when he said of
old, How shall I give thee up O Ephraim, etc. True it is, that sin had
overspread the City like a Leprosy, and like that disease gotten into the very
walls of the several houses thereof: but when the walls of the most leprous
house were once pulled down, or the house its self demolished, (as this poor
City has been) there was an end: nor do I any where find that it was forbidden
or spoken of as dangerous to build another house in the same place, or upon the
same ground, Levit. 14.45. Let men charge what they can upon the late City (as
some in spite do charge upon it what it never deserved) what is now in hand is
not that City, nor shall it ever partake of its plagues and punishments, unless
it be afresh polluted with its sins, or some others as great.

That God was pleased to spare a remnant of the City of London, that it might
not be like to Sodom and Gomorrah in point of total destruction, for the
present, is to me a further argument of hope, that it shall not be like those
places in point of perpetual desolation for the future, that it shall not
suffer the vengeance of eternal fire in such sense as that phrase is applied to
the places themselves, meaning they should always lie in ashes. God having
spared eight, and no more of mankind, when he brought the Deluge, and but seven
of any other kind of Creature, reared up a new World out of that small
remainder of the old, which he had reserved as a seed for that purpose, which
it is like to Noah and his Family was also a pledge that God intended so to do.
Methinks London ever since the Fire, has been like a person frighted into a
swoun, whose vital spirits are for the present concentrated and contracted into
a narrower room; (as are the Inhabitants of that Relic of a City at this day)
and if it be but so, why should we despair but it will come to its self again?
or shall I compare it to one that has a dead Palsy, who has sense and motion
in some parts of his body, though he have little or none in the rest. The
remainder of the old City (as small as it is) does not a little facilitate and
encourage the building of that part that must be new, according to the old
saying, Facile est inventis addere, it is easy to add: Give me, said
Archimedes, but where to set my foot in the mean time, and I will turn the
World round. Londoners by virtue of that remainder of a City have where to set
their foot, which is no small advantage: I cannot but reflect upon that
passage, Isa. 65.8. Thus says the Lord, as the new Wine is found in the
Cluster, and one says, destroy it not, for a blessing is in it; so will I do
for my servants sake, that I may not destroy them all. The meaning seems to
be this, as when a Vine is grown so barren, that scarce any good Cluster of
Grapes seems to be discerned on it, whereby it may be deemed to have life in
it, and the Husbandman is above to cut it down, if one chance to espy some one
cluster that has Grapes with liquor in them, whereby it may appear there is
life yet, he may thereby be induced to forbear the utter rooting out, or hewing
down of it, being told there is a blessing in it, that is to say, some life and
sap, giving hope of its recovery, and growing fruitful again. This is the case
of London at this day; though the greatest part of it be withered and burnt up,
yet there is some new Wine found in a Cluster, so that one may say there is a
blessing in it, and may hope from thence, that God will not destroy it, but
will say concerning it as of Jacob, v. 9. I will bring forth a seed out of
Jacob; that is, those who shall be as seed, which though small, is apt to grow
numerous and great: Neither is it less pertinent to this occasion to allude it
to that Prophecy of David, concerning Solomon and his Kingdom, Psa. 72.16.
There shall be a handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the Mountains,
the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon, and they of the City shall flourish
like grass of the earth. Say London be at the present but as a handful of Corn
in the top of a barren Mountain, (whereas it is rather as so much Corn in a
fruitful Valley) yet may it hereafter by the blessing of God come to shake like
Lebanon, and flourish like the grass of the earth.

Is London the first City that ever was burnt and built again? I rather think,
that most of the famous Cities in the world that were of ancient foundation,
have passed thorough the fire first or last, (it may be more then once) and
Phoenix-like have been raised out of their ashes. The Scripture tells us of the
burning of Jerusalem by the King of Babylon, (besides the captivity of the
people) and yet in that self-same place was there so goodly a City and Temple
in our Saviors time, as did move his Disciples to admiration. He that shall
but glance upon History, may furnish himself with instances enough of that
nature: nor will I so far prejudge my Reader as to enumerate them, seeming
thereby to think him ignorant of a thing so obvious. Who knows not that London
its self has been burnt several times formerly, (as in my Treatise of the
burning of London I have showed) and yet how Noble a City was it before it was
burnt the last time, viz. in 1666. One while it lay in ashes above 80 years,
and by that time one would have thought it should have been buried in perpetual
filence and forgetfulness, and some other place have been unalterably possessed
of the pre-eminence; but after that, in all likelihood it was a body not only
dead, but rotten, the very bones and ashes whereof are scare to be found, yet
did it lift up its head again, and became greater then ever, as it lately was.
Now what Maxim in Logic more evident then this, A fuisse ad posse valet
consequentia: What has been may be again. God has raised London out of the
dust several times, he is raising it, and let us trust in him, that he will in
due time completely raise it again.

I have charity and respect enough for Londoners whatever others want) to fetch
an argument of hope even from themselves, the real piety and integrity of many
of them (I say not of all, for where but in heaven are all Saints?) that for
their sakes God will return on high, and say of London, that it shall be built
again. He that would not have destroyed Sodom for the sake of but ten righteous
persons, (if there had been so many there) will (I trust) not give up London to
a perpetual destruction, out of the regard he bears to those many tens, and
hundreds of righteous persons that are found there; if persons that live
righteously, soberly, and godlily, if they that do generally practice only such
things as are honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report, (as it is Phil.
4.8.) if they that seem to be afraid of whatsoever they know to be sin, and to
make conscience of every known duty; I say, if men and women of such a
character may and ought to be taken for persons truly religious, (as our
Savior tells us, that a tree is known by its fruits) if they that bring forth
fruits meet of faith and repentance, ought to be esteemed to have both, and not
censured for hypocrites; then are there I presume, several hundreds in and
belonging to London, whom we are in duty bound (if the exercise of rational
charity be a duty) to own for good Christians; and that they are such, I dare
appeal to the consciences of their greatest enemies, or the most of them, who
when upon a Deathbed, or in great distress, shall desire, and value their
prayers to God for them, much more then the prayers of those that have been
their most intimate associates. I had almost said, if there were less Religion
in London then indeed there is, (though God knows there is not that which ought
to be) some would love it more, and give a better report of it then now they
do; They count it strange that you run not with them into the same excess of
riot, speaking evil of you. Could I speak with their enemies, and themselves
not over-hear me, thereby to be tempted to something of pride, I would say,
that if God have a people in the world that love and fear him, he has some
such in London, yea, I hope he has much people in that place whose habitation
himself is, in the sense intended, Psa. 90.1. and as for other habitations
shall in due time be provided for by him. I will not now determine in what
sense it was spoken, but in Exodus 1.21. it is thus written, It came to pass
because the Midwives feared God, that he made them houses.

For once I Will venture the scoffs and scorns of this the profanest of Ages, by
making bold to say, that the many fervent prayers which have been, daily are,
and will be offered to God on behalf of this desolate City, that it may be
revived once again, is to me a further ground of hope that it shall be so. I
have evinced already, that there are considerable numbers of good and gracious
Christians, in and about the City, to ply the Throne of Grace, for the welfare
of it; and the Scripture tells us, that the fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much. I must first doubt whether there be a God, at leastwise whether
God be a lover of righteousness, and righteous persons, (which the
uncontrollable dictates of my conscience will not suffer me to do) before I can
think that the prayers of good men signify nothing, and are but as water spilt
upon the ground. Prayer has prevailed for greater things then is the building
of a City, in the use of ordinary means: Did it not shut and open heaven in
Elijah's days? though himself, who offered those prayers, were a man of like
passions with our selves. Can it do the greater, and not the lesser? Did I know
the man that would say, let no man trouble himself to pray for the success of
my building, I shall do as well without, as with all the prayers that can be
made on that behalf, I should expect some Eminent Judgment to fall upon that
man, as has done upon some other eminent Builders, that have gone by the name
of Atheists.

Tush, it is in vain to contradict experience, they that have received many
signal answers of prayers, and on the other hand, have met with great rebukes
at such times as they have restrained prayer from the Almighty, or prayed as if
they prayed not, will never believe to the contrary, but that any good
undertaking may, and will be much promoted by the ardent prayers of those that
have interest in God, of which I doubt not but there is a great Stock going for
London at this day; and it shall stand for one of the Pillars of my hope in
this as in other cases, that God has never said to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye
my face in vain.

Next unto the prayers and tears of good men, the triumphs and insultings of
bad over a famous City laid in ashes, gives me some of the greatest hope and
confidence, that it shall not always lie there. Was it not publicly observed,
that Papists up and down the Land were never more jolly and jocund, then they
showed themselves soon after the burning of London? Some hellish Persecutors in
the Marian days did not more rejoice in those flames which burnt the holy
Martyrs, then some of them are said to have done in those which burnt the City.
But will the great God always feed and cherish such mirth as that? Shall not
their laughter be turned to mourning, and their joy to heaviness? Has not the
Lord seen it, and it displeased him? and will it not invite him to turn away
his wrath from the City? Prove. 24.16. God will not always suffer Philistines
to make sport with Sampson, but will cause the house at last to tumble about
their ears and grind them to powder, who made him grind in derision. Another
City (which therefore we now hope for) would spoil the insolent mirth of Popish
enemies above any thing else, and put them quite out of countenance. God
speaking after the manner of men, Deuteronomy. 32.27. speaks as if himself did fear
the insolency of enemies: Were it not that I feared the enemy, would behave him
self haughtily, etc. And if so, doubtless he will take a time to suppress both
it, and them.

And now methinks I my self am almost weary of this so long a Chapter; (though
consisting only of encouragements and grounds of hope) and though I have stayed
and rested my self upon thirteen several Pillars by the way, (and those Pillars
of hope) I shall more easily be pardoned, because the Subject is lightsome; and
we know that the length of days uses not to be complained of, though that of
nights be troublesome; howsoever Sol^mon telling us, that it is not good to eat
too much honey, Prove. 25.27. advertiseth, that shortness may be wanting where
sweetness is not, saving as want of shortness may somewhat imbitter that which
of its self was sweet, even as honey (then which nothing is sweeter.)

Therefore lastly, methinks God has given us earnest, great earnest of another
City in place of that which was burnt; and what should I mean by that, but the
many Foundations that are already laid, yea some hundreds of houses that are
built in so short a time? (though those hundreds as yet be fewer then were the
thousands of what was burnt) But suppose we seven or eight hundred houses
finished already, it being now March 12. 1667. and not much above one year and
half since the Fire, in which time two Winters have passed over our heads, and
but one Summer, War with three several Nations was unconcluded when the
building began, Trading as dead as could be imagined, Citizens generally
impoverished, materials and necessaries, such as Coals, etc. at a stupendous
rate, admit, I say, there be yet but eight hundred houses finished, (though
some think there be more) is it not a good and a great progress, all things
considered? After one of the burnings of London I do not find that in 70 years
(and upward) so much was done toward the restoring of it, as has now been
done in less then two.

Is it not remarkable, that since the rebuilding of London was this last time
taken in hand, no one disaster has befallen it, there has appeared nothing
like an Angel with a Sword in his hand to obstruct those that have attempted to
bless the City, by rebuilding of it, as did to obstruct Balaam when he went
forth to curse Israel. How early did the wrath of God break out against the
builders of Jericho, the very foundation whereof was laid in the death and
blood of Hiel the Founder, his firstborn Son? But all the foundations that
have been laid in London, yea and houses which are finished there, (for ought I
learn) have not cost so dear. As Mannoah's Wife said unto him, Judge. 13.23. If
the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering,
and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have showed us all these
things. So may we probably argue, (if I be not deceived) that if God had
purposed to anticipate the full harvest of Londons restoration, he would
scarce have given us so timely and so ample first fruits as he has vouchsafed
already: Reflecting upon all that I have said, I doubt not to bid defiance to
such as have or shall presume to call London by the odious and misapplied name
of Babylon; for though it may be said of London, It is fallen, it is fallen,
yet not so (as of Babylon) that it shall never rise again.

DISCOURSE II.
Of such considerations as may encourage heartless and disspirited Citizens to
build again.

WHy see I so many people with their hands upon their loins (like a traveling
Woman) and so many faces turned into paleness? (as the Prophet expresses
himself, Jer. 20.6.) Why are the generality of men and women at this day (as is
said of Ephraim, Hos. 7.11. like a silly Dove without heart? Why hear I little
else but the voice of the Turtle, viz. Mourning, and Lamentation; yea, like to
that of Rachel, who refused to be comforted? Would you have us (say they) build
(so methinks I over-hear them speaking) pray what? another Babel? for alas our
Languages are all confounded; England is a Kingdom, and London a City, that
are divided against themselves, and therefore how can they stand? England is a
Land as it were of all Ishmaels, every man's hand is lifted up against his
Brother, and his Brothers against him: How like is England at this day to a
great Army all in mutiny, or to a routed Army, all whose Ranks are broken, and
themselves flying, some one way, some another, every man shifting for himself;
or like a great Fleet riding in a Storm, some of which are driven upon the
Sands, others split upon Rocks, and the major part fall foul one upon another:
Would you have us as secure as the Sodomites were in the days of Lot, who
planted and builded, till such time as fire came down from heaven and destroyed
them all, Luke 17.29. Would you have us build to be burnt again? are we not yet
to expect the fatal influence and effects of a third prodigious Comet, as
Astronomers do tell us? and if the Product or signification of that shall be
such as was of the two former, woe be to us.

Wherewithal shall we build? England is become as poor as Job, a dunghill
served his turn; as those words imply, Job 2.8. He sat down amongst the ashes:
and why may it not serve ours? Those Primitive Christians, of whom the world
was not worthy, wandered in Deserts and Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the
earth, Heb. 11.38. And are we better then they? The fire has made a multitude
of caves, let us go down into them, and dwell there; let us hide our selves in
those clefts of rocks (as it were) till the indignation be overpast? Is it time
for us to dwell in cieled houses, whilst the House of God lies wast? (for so
to our thinking it does at this day) or shall we build houses, and soon after
be made to dwell in prisons, either for debt, or it may be for Conscience sake?
Is it for us to build, when God seems to be pulling down, and plucking up,
and making an utter end? England has not only gray hairs upon it here and
there, but (as some Searchers judge them) Plague tokens, so that there is no
hope (or next to none) of its recovery: And is this a time to build in, when we
neither expect Religion nor Trade to our content, nor any long continuance of
Peace either at home or abroad? Would you have us trim up our Cabins, whilst we
suspect the whole Ship will be lost? who has not heard such language as this
with his own ears?

But will it admit of no reply or confutation? doubtless it may. It was the
dark side of the Pillar that was turned to us, on which side it was a mere
Cloud, but the other side is bright, and as it were a Pillar of Fire. The same
Instrument or Subject otherwise played upon, may afford us as pleasant Music,
as that we heard was doleful.

First, who art thou that limitest the holy One of Israel? Who has known the
mind of the Lord? or who has been his Councellor? Romans 11.34. and Isa. 40.14.
Have you forgotten what God says, Isa. 55.8. My thoughts are not your
thoughts, neither are my ways your ways; for as the heavens are higher then
the earth, so are my ways higher then your ways, and my thoughts then your
thoughts. That saying Jer. 29.11. should be considered, I know the thoughts
that I think toward you, says the Lord, (implying, they did not know the
thoughts of God toward them, till he had thus revealed them) thoughts of peace,
and not of evil. It is incident to us to think of the Mountain of our
adversity, as well as of the other of our prosperity, that it will never be
removed: But we are often mistaken, so was Asaph when he did thus expostulate,
Psa. 77.7. Has the Lord forgotten to be gracious? has be in anger shut up his
tender mercy? will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be favorable no more?
is his mercy clean gone for ever? and adds, v. 10. I said this is my infirmity,
v. 14. Thou art the God that do wonders: And v. 19. Thy way is in the Sea,
and thy footsteps are not known: Hear the moans of Sion, and the answer given
by God thereunto, Isa. 49.14. But Sion, says, the Lord, has forsaken me, my
Lord has forgotten me. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should
not have compassion on the Son of her ^omb? Yea, they may forget, yet will not
I forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls
are continually before me, ver. 15, 16. Little did the Israelites think, when
their task of brick was doubled, that deliverance was at hand (which sense
became a Proverb, Cum duplicantur lateres venit Moses: but so it was: but the
Text says, The children of Israel hearkened not to Moses ( viz. prophesying of
deliverance) for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage, Exodus 6.9. Little
did Abraham think, that Isaac should be spared, though he came so near unto
being sacrificed, as that he was laid upon the Altar, whence sprung that
consolatory saying, Jehovah-jireh, Genesis 22.14. In the Mount of the Lord it
shall be seen.

I shall not extenuate the badness of our present circumstances, it is too too
evident, that we look like a Land meeted out for destruction; the face of
things at this day is as it were facies Hippocratica, (as Physicians call it)
that is, we look like death. Never was poor Nation more convulst, and pulled
this way and that way backwards and forwards, and other while made (or
endeavored to be made) more stiff and inflexible by a painful Tetanus, as they
call that kind of Convulsion that braceth the body so straight, it can stir no
way: It must be confessed, these are ill Symptoms, but no grounds of despair;
possibly it is now a critical time with England, and the Crises of diseases are
often attended with horrid Symptoms, even when Nature gets the upper hand at
last. Are we now in any more danger to be destroyed by our divisions, then we
were in 65. to be devoured by Plague? but thence has God delivered us: He that
has said unto the Sword of War with other Nations, Put up thyself into thy
Scabbard, rest and be still, can say the same to the Sword of home divisions
(which are a kind of intestine war.)

Surely England has been in a worse condition then now it is, and yet saved
from thence.

First, in the Marian days, when the weapons of warfare against the true
Religion were no other then Fire and Faggot, when the Scarlet Whore made her
self drunk with the blood of Saints and Martyrs; were not those days sh^rtned
for the Elects sake, Matthew. 13.20. Afterward in 88. when the Spanish Fleet,
called the Invincible Armado, came against England, in how desperate a case did
it seem to be, but how soon did that black Cloud blow over? Then succeeded the
hellish Powder Plot in the next Kings Reign, which had it taken effect, had
rooted the Protestant Interest out of England, as in the twinkling of an eye,
or whilst a small Paper could be burned, but that also came to nothing, that
snare was broken, and this poor Land delivered. Who doubts whether Popish
Archers have not shot at us many times since then, and yet our Bow abides in
strength thorough the mighty God of Jacob. O England! so often saved by the
Lord, why should thou despair of any more deliverances?

Is it because thy sins are so many and great? call to mind what God says,
Ezekiel. 36.33. In the day that I shall have cleansed you from all your
iniquities, I will cause you to dwell in the Cities, and the wastes shall be
builded; v. 35. And they shall say, This Land that was desolate, is become like
the Garden of Eden, and the desolate and ruined Cities are become fenced and
inhabited. Look back to v. 32. Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord
God, be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel. See also
v. 22, 23, 29, 36, 38. of the same Chapter.

Or is it because the Lord seems for a time to have forsaken thee, having
given thee up to flames, that thou, O London, despairest of ever seeing good
days again? I see not why thou should cast away the Anchor of thy hope for
all that: what if thou should cast it upon that Text, (and others of like
import, Psa. 60.9, 10. Who will bring me into the strong City? wilt not thou O
God which had cast us off? And Lam. 3.31. For the Lord will not cast off for
ever, but though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the
multitude of his mercies. Who sees not the inference plain from such Texts as
those, that God may cast off a people for a time, and yet not cast them off for
ever?

Is it from a fear of being burnt again, that you have no heart to build? that
fear in all likelihood arises from a mistrust you have, that the former
burning came to pass by Treachery: if so, be of good cheer, God will discover
it in due time, it cannot be always hid; and when that secret (if it be yet a
secret) shall be brought to light, when the true Incendiaries shall once be
known, London is like to be more secured from fire then ever it was, and that
fire which consumed the old City, will be as a wall of fire (that is a defense)
about the new.

If the great divisions, discontents, and heart-burnings that are now in
England, be alleged (as they have been) as a main discouragement of the
rebuilding of London, I would take leave to say, I hope one day to see an end
of those things. Surely there will come a time when passion and fury will hold
their peace, and give way to reason and conscience to interpose; and when ever
that time shall come, such Rules and Principles as I would now suggest will be
hearkened to, and cannot but offer themselves (being so obvious as they are,)
and whenever they shall take place, we may expect to see England a quiet
habitation, and all good people therein of one heart, though not of one mind.

The first principle which I would hope will be received in time is this, That
every man pretending conscience constraining him to what he does, or
restraining him from what he refuses to do, if generally trusted and thought
worthy to be believed in other cases, ought to be trusted and believed in that
also, and not to be changed with pride, prejudice, interest, faction, as the
true reasons of those actions for which he pretends conscience, yea it may be
exposes himself to considerable sufferings, as for conscience sake, or under
that notion. To put no trust at all in men of good and commendable lives, were
to decry the validity of all Humane Testimony, and to raze the foundations of
all Humane Society: Now if we cannot trust men in this case, why should we
trust them in other things? and if we can trust them in other things, why not
in this?

Secondly, That all such persons, who in the judgment, and by the principles of
Christian charity, ought to be deemed and taken as acting from conscience, and
from a fear of offending God in doing otherwise, should at no hand be treated
with such severity and rigor, as they justly might, if we could be certain, or
rationally presume, that what they did were from such base principles, or
sinister ends, as pride, contumacy, interest, or the like: Who ever had the
heart or the face to deal rigorously with any man pretending conscience for
what he did, or refused to do, especially about indifferent things, unless he
did think (or at leastwise make as if he thought) that conscience was but
merely pretended in the case? But if conscience be really interessed and
engaged, (as in the circumstances before put we should take it to be) the
Apostles tenderness toward those that had a zeal for God, though not according
to knowledge, will tell us how we ought to carry toward them, viz. not only
with calmness, but kindness, Romans 10.1.

Thirdly, That persons agreeing, and consenting with us in the main points of
Religion, in the sum and substance of Christianity, ought not to be punished
for their unavoidable dissent from us in lesser matters at so great a rate,
much less at a greater, then those that vary from us in Fundamentals, and go
about to subvert the faith; if such be not temporally undone, and deprived of
all ways of subsisting for their persuasion, much less ought these so to be.

Fourthly, That they who believe, or profess to believe so much truth as to
Salvation is necessary to be believed, and who in their general course practice
accordingly, who are also peaceably disposed, and will give (or have given) the
highest assurances that men can give, that so far as in them lies, they will
preserve the peace of Church and State; I say, that such men should be
accounted worthy to live, and have wherewithal so to do, (they and their
families) and if able for public employment, should be entrusted therewithal,
specially at such a time as the Church, or State, or both, have apparent need
of their service, and for want thereof are forced to employ many worse, and
less useful in their room.

Fifthly, That men should make no more divisions in Church or State then are of
absolute necessity, and cannot be avoided, (and least of all, such as tend to
the ruin of others, though to the raising of themselves) considering what the
Apostle says, Romans 16.17, 18. Mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
for they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly.
Doubtless the way to the Church, and to the Communion thereof, should be made
plain and accessible, as God appointed of old those ways should be which led
to the several Sanctuaries, or Cities of refuge; to be sure no needless
stumbling blocks, or unnecessary hindrances, should be laid in that way;
neither ought any member (principal member especially) to be cut off from the
Church without urgent, and enforcing cause, any more then an arm, or leg, or
eye, to be severed from a natural body, if it and the body can possibly be
preserved together.

Sixthly, that no man should be tempted to separation, or division, by
suffering such things as may seem (if not more then seem) to plead for such a
practice, as namely, by allowing and intrusting ignorant, insufficient, and
scandalous Ministers: Divisions, or rather Dividors, will be quite out of
countenance when they have no plausible thing to plead for themselves, but if
they can say the Blind are set to guide them, and they to feed them who for
bread gave them a stone, and for fish a Scorpion: who have neither the Urim in
their doctrine, nor Thummim in their lives, so long will they divorce
themselves and rest persuaded, that in so doing they do God and their own Souls
good service. This notion is so obvious, as may make us hope it will not
always be overlookt, if not speedily taken into serious consideration.

Seventhly, That the paying tithe of Mint, Anniss and Cummin, and mean time
omitting the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith, (for
which Christ denounces a woe to the Pharisees, Mat. 23.23. that is) a rigorous
insisting upon lesser things whilst those of higher importance are slightly
past over which is no other then a straining at Gnats and swallowing of Camels;
is a practice that will make any Church obnoxious, not only to the all
discovering eye of God, but to the observing eye of men, such especially as
have little affection for them. If they can say we do place the kingdom of God
in meats and drink (in which it consists not) rather then in righteousness
(wherein it does consist) they think they have enough against us to justify
their separation, that we make nothing of their Souls, feed them with mere
husks, and chafe and have zeal for nothing, but unscriptural rites and
traditions.

Eighthly, A little time time cannot but discover that to prefer men according
to the largness, and hardiness of their consciences, rather then the tenderness
thereof; is no good rule to proceed upon. It was the commendation of Josiah
that his heart was tender, and of Nehemiah that he did not do as others because
of the fear of the Lord. The worst of men have the widest consciences, and such
a faculty at swallowing that nothing can choke them: like some bewitched
persons I have read of, they can swallow needles, and bodkins and knives, and
when they see their time cast them up again in the faces of their owners.

Ninthly, It cannot be long hid from the eyes of men, who now do least see it,
that to lay more load upon the consciences of men (even such as are thought
best able, to bear it) then they needs must, to cause them Issachar like to
couch down betwixt several burdens, to scrue up the strings of men's
consciences till they are ready to crack again, to increase their task (as
Pharaoh did by the Israelites as if they feared conscience would otherwise be
idle) in a word to gorge the consciences of men till they are ready to spue up
all again is no good policy. Consciences that are overstretched (like cloth
that is so) will be apt to shrink again, and Ostriches (which they say can
digest Iron) have anill report as creatures more then brutish both for folly
and unnaturalness, Job. 39.14, 18. I say it cannot long be hid, that that is no
good policy; and therefore if any such thing has been a cause of division,
when a few succeeding days have been by those that preceded them, made wiser
then their predecessors (as they say, Dies diem docet) it is like that occasion
of strife and debate will be out of doors.

Tenthly, It is like the world, ere it be much elder, will be sufficiently
instructed that it is no point of prudence to tempt men (even under hatches I
mean) to immoderation and fiercness, by making it their true and only interest,
under their present circumstances, to be fire, and tow, not to yield a hairs
breadth. They that will have all, or nothing, all that ever they did require,
or nothing that ever they will accept from those that are invincibly witheld by
their consciences from doing all that is required, must exspect just nothing at
all. For what will men say, if we cannot do all that is imposed upon us, we had
as good do just nothing. They on whom our dependence is under God (as too many
there are that cannot be without dependances noun adjectives like) if we
concede any thing, will say we are lukewarm, and spue us out of their mouths:
and as for those that are in power for the execution of those laws, they will
not abate us an ace of what they demand had we a hundred fold so much of gifts
and graces, as either we or they or any man alive has. What if the law has
left it in their breasts to dispense with the rigor of it as they see cause (as
by suspending their certificats, etc.) if it be their pleasure generally not to
do it? thence indigent men (and alas how many good men are such) will be apt
to infer since no greater earnings can be made of moderation, than of eagerness
on one hand, and much greater of eagerness, and inflexibleness, then of
moderation on the other hand, since they cannot yield to every thing, they will
yield to nothing, and make an interest (for some interest they must make for
themselves and theirs, or starve) I say make an interest where they can. Thus
men become jealous that they must either ruin, or be ruined, and those wounds
which by mutual condescension might have been healed, by utmost opposition on
both sides do as it were fester, and become incurable. Thus the rough answer of
Rehoboam harkening to his young Counselors set the people all into a flame,
who had he taken the advice of his grave Senators, would have found their words
true who said 1 King. 12.7. If thou will be a servant to this people this day
and will speak good words to them then they will be thy servants for ever. As
this most certain principle that lenity, and condescension will do more good
then fierceness, and exasperation shall by experience be made more evident. I
doubt not but our divisions and discontents will heal up by degrees, and the
warm sun will make us throw off that particollored coat, which the boistrous
wind made us to gird more close about us.

Eleventhly, Another principle tending to allay our discontents is as obvious
as any of the rest (and therefore it is like will be taken notice of ere it be
long) viz. That something in point of prudence, must and ought to be indulged,
to the temper, and complexion of a nation, and to those opinions and sentiments
which people have long been possessed with, so that they are become as it were
a second nature to them: Principles long riveted in the minds of men, cannot
easily be extirpated. These arbitrary rites and usages, which amongst some
sorts of people might make Religion more venerable, with others again that have
sucked in an invincible dislike of them, might make it very vile and
contemptible.

Twelfthly, To secure a Nation all that may be against fears and jealousies,
and to beget in them all possible confidence, that nothing is intended, but
what is and shall be for their good; that I say will lay an Axe to the root of
discontent, as much as any thing that can be done; and that it will do so, is
so well known, that it is scarce to be imagined, that the wisdom of Governors
will not prompt to it first or last.

Lastly, That they who are of one and the same Religion for substance, holding
the same Foundation of Doctrinals, both as to Faith and manners, should not be
suffered to vilify and reproach each others different Mode and Dress in
Religion, and to render one another ridiculous and contemptible, or to
represent one another, as if the Religion of each were vain, a mere mocking of
God, Hab. 3. As the cutting off a dogs neck, offering of Swines blood, or
blessing of an Idol. I say, men and women who hold the same Fundamentals in
Religion, should not be suffered to scoff and deride one another, as Elijah did
the Priests of Baal, (they being Idolaters, but he a Worshipper of the true
God) for hine illae lachrymae. This is one as great cause of our
heart-divisions, and heart-burnings, as any I know, that we pour out contempt
and scorn upon the Religion of each other; (though in the main it be the same
with our own) and that I must tell you is a most provoking thing, for he that
touches a man's Religion, touches the apple of his eye, and causes him to cry
out as Micah did, Judge. 18.24. Ye have taken away my Gods, and what have I
more? and what is this that ye say to me, what aileth thee? Religion is the
great Bond of Love, and men are apt to think they are not bound to love one
another, when they have learnt to deny and nullify one another Religion.
Religion is also the Bond of Charity, in point of judging; now when that Bond
is once to appearance dissolved, by a conceit entertained, as if each others
Religion were vain, then will there be no end of censuring and of exasperating
one another thereby. How ordinary is it for men to say of a foot, because it is
not the hand, or of an ear, because it is not the eye, that therefore it is not
of the body; but is it therefore not of the body? as the Apostle speaks, 1
Cor. 12.15. To deny an Episcopal man to be a Member of Christ his Mystical
Body, because he is not a Presbyterian, and a Presbyterian to be such, because
he is not an Independent, and an Independent to have any truth of Religion,
because he is neither of the two former; when every one of the three is of a
good and holy life, and sound in the main, is a point of high injustice and
uncharitableness. He whom thou censurest, though his different mode and way in
Religion may not be so good as thine, may have more acceptance with God then
thy self, if more sincere and zealous, and true to those main principles in
which you both agree, then thou thy self art: Romans 2.27. Shall not
uncircumcision by nature if it fulfill the Law, judge thee, who by the Letter
and Circumcision do transgress the Law? But nothing more ordinary in this
Age, then for men to vilify others, who are much their betters, both as to
gifts and graces, which is so irrational a thing, that one would think it
should easily be apprehended and avoided.

We bring Religion its self (even that which is truly so called) into great
dis-esteem, whilst we refuse to own it in any dress but one; for if all should
do so, Religion (so and so modified) would no where have the applause and
suffrage of any more then one party of men, (if there be twenty) and fall under
the censure and condemnation of all the rest. By that means the faith of such
as are weak would be staggered, and they would be tempted to question the truth
of that Religion which is represented to them as peculiar to themselves, though
it be indeed common to all sound Christians, and sober Protestants, (that is)
so much of it as the Church of God determines to be de fide, that is, of
absolute certainty, and necessary to salvation.

That men of another Opinion then our selves are of in matters controverted,
are therefore of another Religion, and that utterly vain, is a principle that
has bred a great deal of strife and debate; but a principle so fond and
senseless, so ignorant and arrogant, that one would think it should easily be
parted with, and when ever men shall let it go, the fire of our dissentions
would slake presently, and that if love to one another begin to kindle; why
should men say in opposition to one another, Lot here is Christ viz. in the
Desert, or there viz. in the secret Chambers: (as it is Mat. 24.26.) whereas
Christ may be here and there too, and has said, that wheresoever he records
his name, thither he will come. Surely there are not fewer different Opinions
as to Religion openly professed in the Low Countries, then are in England;
neither are there fewer different modes and ways in, and of the exercise of
Religion there, then here, yet there they are quiet, and here we are all in an
uproar: And what is the reason, but because here we are always biting and
devouring one another, as if it were a part of our Religion, to oppose and
vilify the Religion of others, though but circumstantially differing from our
own; whereas we ought to have charity, and Veneration for it, as agreeing with
our own in the most material things; and as the Apostles rule is, Phil. 3.16.
Whereto we have attained already, walk by the same rule, and mind the same
things.

Now the causes of our divisions being so manifest as they are, and the cure so
easy (as appears by the obviousness and easy practicableness of those
thirteen healing Principles which I have laid down) why should we despair that
those causes will ever be removed, and our divisions and discontents at length
healed? Surely there is Balm in our Gilead, Jer. 8.22. there is some Physician
there; though the health of the Daughter of our people be not recovered, nay
give me leave to say, that I think our wounds are not so great (as great as
they are) but that they might be cured with Vnguentum Apostolorum (if I may so
call it) I mean such as is prescribed Romans 14. almost throughout that Chapter,
especially if for better digestion sake, a little Basilicon were added
thereunto.

All the Objections I have now left to answer against the building of London,
are those which were taken from the present poverty of the Nation, and the fear
of future troubles, both from abroad, and at home. I much fear what was said of
Cinna is true of London, Cinna videtur esse pauper and est pauper, London does
not only seem to be much impoverished, but is really so: And how can it
otherwise be, all things considered? But must Citizens therefore quit their
trades? How shall they ever be rich again but by means of trading? yea how can
many of them so much as subsist without it? And if trade they must, where
should they trade but in the City? and how should they trade there unless they
build again?

Whereas the fear of future troubles has been insinuated, as an argument
against building, it cannot be denied but that our manifold sins, and present
distractions, may cause us to exspect them.

But first of all may not the infinite mercies of God, possibly prevent the
confusions which we exspect, and not suffer the things we fear to come upon us:
or may not the Divine patience reprieve the Nation for some considerable time?
(as the old world was reprieved after sentence denounced) and if so, will it
not be every man's wisdom to make the best provision he can for him and his in
the mean time? shall men certainly and forthwith undo themselves for fear of
being hereafter undone? Shall not men seek to live whilst they may, for fear
they may not afterward be able to live, if they would ever so fain? Solomon
says He that observes the wind shall not sow; that is, He shall never
atchieve any thing, who will adventure nothing: (like one that would not sow,
till he were sure of the wind and weather, to continue such as he would have
them, and that he can never be.) Go which way you will to work, to improve your
estates you shall run an adventure. He that lays out his money upon lands
shall have little profit, great taxes, and it may be bad title: he that will
turn Merchant must run the hazard of winds, and seas, and shelves, and sands,
and Pirates, unfaithful servants at home, unconscionable and uncontrollable
Factors abroad. He that shall put his money to interest (besides that some
scruple the lawfulness of so doing) shall (if he fare no better then other men)
be in danger of loosing both it and his principal: if he happen to loose
neither, six per cent. is all the increase he can exspect, whereas in the way
of building upon the wast of London there are that hope to make almost double
that improvement.

To them that shall say they are under hatches, and therefore they have no
heart to build I would propose what is written Jer. 29.4, 5. Thus says the
Lord to all that are carried away captives, etc. Build ye houses and dwell in
them, and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them. Who can say it is worse
with them now then it was with the Jews when this advice was given them? more I
could say to encourage heartless builders but that these two first Chapters
have swelled too much already, for which I can make no Apology but this, that
these were strings most of all to be harped upon, and that the rest of my
discourses, are like to prove like those that sprang up after the flood, viz.
much shorter lived then those that went before them: upon the whole matter I
shall take leave to apply to desponding Londoners those words of the Prophet,
Jer. 26.19. Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust for thy dew is as the dew
of herbs, etc. As also what was said of the dry bones mentioned Ezekiel. 37.5.
Thus says the Lord God unto those bones behold I will cause breath to enter
into you, and ye shall live. And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up
flesh upon you and cover you with skin, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

DISCOURSE. III.
Of how great Consequence it is that the now wast and desolate City of London
should be re-edified.

SUrely it was not without cause that London (whilst standing) has always
continued the Metropolis of England, though no such promise were ever made to
it, as unto Judah of old, that the scepter, or principality, should never
depart from it, and though an old prophecy has been, that London was and York
should be, Yea though London has several times ceased to be its self, for a
while, lying in ashes, as now it does (once fourscore years together) and other
places have succeeded in the Metropolitanship for that time, yet no sooner was
it raised again, but other places (as if but its Deputies, and Viceroies) did
presently resign the pre-eminence to it, and like to Nebuchadnezzar come from
grass, and turned man again, it was presently reinthroned, and restored to its
former dignity and Primacy. This I say was not for nothing, but did certainly
imply there was something in the place, the situation I mean (for sometimes
little else has been left) that did render it much more fit, then any other to
be the Metropolis or head City of England so that as often as London was in
being, no other town or City would offer to come in competition with it. It was
the river Nilus made Egypt rich, and fruitful, and has it not been the River
of Thames has always (under God) made London what it was. They that would
utterly destroy London must dry up that River (as the river Euphrates for the
destroying of Babylon) or set it at some greater distance from that City. For
whilst they two stand so near together, London is like to be rich, and
fruitful, like trees that are planted by the rivers of water or like meadow
ground that is overflown. What is said of Joseph is like to be verified of
London, Genesis 49.22. Joseph is a fruitful bough by a wall whose branches run
over the wall. By the side of London is planted that great trunk of the vena
porta of the Nation, I mean, the great mouth, and inlet of trade (the river of
Thames I mean) which makes it so necessary for England, that England cannot
much better subsist without it, (that is to say in wealth and prosperity) then
a man can live whose mouth is sowed up, and who can take no nourishment but as
a glyster, no breath but at his nostrils. They are deceived that think England
may be destroyed merely and only by destroying London for a time, for if
England its self be not first destroyed, it must and will (God permitting)
always have another London let the former be burnt, or demolished ever so
often: London is the heart of England, and if it were not primum vivens it will
be ultimum moriens at leastwise. England if it do not die first must die not
long after it, for without a heart it cannot long live. If London fall it must
rise again, or all England must fall too, at leastwise into great misery,
disgrace, and poverty. London is the place to which those passages of the
Prophet concerning Tire are most applicable of any place I know, Isa. 23.4.
Thou whom the Merchants that pass over sea, have replenished; the harvest of
the river is her revenue, and she is a mart of Nations, etc. v. 8. The crowning
City, whose merchants are Princes, and whose tr^ffiquers are the honorable of
the earth. At leastwise this she was fuimus troes and nigens gloria) and this
with the blessing of God she is most capable to be again. And is it not of
great consequence that a City of so vast a concernment to the whole nation
should be rebuilt.

Which of all our famous Cities is fit to make a Head for so vast and Noble a
Body as England is, London excepted? There is much deformity and inconvenience
in a Head that is much too little for the body, as in one that is too big:
Besides, if a head be not well situated; as suppose a man's head were placed
upon his arm, or back, and not upon his shoulders, such a posture would be not
only inconvenient, but monstrous. And verily any other Metropolis for England,
besides London, would be of like inconvenient positure and situation; the head
would not stand in the right place, either for commodiousness, or decency.

I would know what great Kingdom there is in the world, that has not a
Metropolis or Head City answerable to its self? And why should England differ
from all the rest? should we be unlike all other Nations, and become their
scorn?

Is not some one City magnificent and splendid above all the rest (like the Sun
that out-shineth all the other stars) greatly for the honor both of a King and
Kingdom? I had almost said England looks sneakingly whilst it is without a
London, it does as it were hide its head in the dust, and seems to be ashamed
of its self, if it have any head to hide.

Tell us not of the Suburbs, Citizens know how inconvenient they are for their
business, over what the City is; and besides, both together are little enough
for traders, and other inhabitants, else it might have saved them charge and
trouble to have dwelt in houses built to their hands, and well seasoned; they
durst not go after the declining Sun, lest they themselves should decline also
in their trade and business. They found more warmth in the heart of London,
then ever they expect in the extreme parts, as they say of arterial blood that
is warmest, for that it comes immediately from the heart. Cottages within the
walls seem to please and accommodate them better then stately houses without.

He that thinks the rebuilding of London might well be spared (if any man or
woman can so think) let him or her, consider how many houses upon survey are
said to have been consumed by the late fire, viz. no less then thirteen
thousand, or thereabouts: now many of those houses did contain two, some three
families apiece, so that we may well suppose twenty thousand families, most of
them traders, to have been by that fire dispossessed, now where shall so many
thousand families of trading people be disposed of if London be not built
again? shall they go into the country and trade there? how inconvenient and
insignificant would that be, besides that so to do were to eat the bread out of
the mouths of country shopkeepers. Whilst they live at a distance from them
Citizens are helpful to tradesmen in the country, as the sun when it is
farthest removed from the moon, shines full upon it, and exhibits that which is
called the full moon, but when they two are in conjunction, then does the Moon
disappear, being swallowed up by the greater light, and brightness of the Sun.

Say not that Citizens are already disposed of and settled well enough; for are
not diverse of them forced to live in the country to this day and to leave off
their trades ever since the fire as not knowing where to accommodate themselves
in or about the City. And as for others, who since that time have planted
themselves either in the City or suburbs? how incommodiously are many, if not
the most of them situated both as to their trades and families? how do they
complain, of being pent up and straightened for want of room, how unsweet and
unpleasant are many of their dwellings, how private and obscure? do not some of
them seem to dwell more like Diogenes, then like themselves? at leastwise
rather in tents, and booths, then in houses? who knows these things to be so,
and yet has the heart to say that Citizens are well enough as they are and
that it is no matter if London never be rebuilt. If God had not more love and
pity for them then they have that say such things, I know what they must trust
to, but to the shame and confusion of their faces, who care not what becomes of
London and Londoners and in despite of all the terrible predictions of
Astrologers threatening us with I know not what sad effects of a third Comet. I
doubt not but through the goodness of God London (as sinful a place as it is)
will be built again.

And now a word to the Astrologers their predictions: because I hinted that
objection in the second Chapter, and then forgot to answer it, what Astrologer
in the world can assure us that when three Comets appear together, or within a
little time one of another, each of them does portend a several judgment,
hanging over the head of that nation, or people which those Comets seem to
point at. As Joseph told Pharaoh, That the seven good kine are seven years, and
the seven good ears, are seven years: and the dream is one, Genesis 41.26. That
is, the two things he dreamt of, did point out but one and the same event: and
as Joseph had two several dreams, Genesis 37.5, 9. one about the Sheaves, and the
other about the Sun, Moon and Stars, which were but one, and the same in
signification so it may very well be that two or three Comets may point out but
one and the same judgment.

But admit that each of those Blazing Sars were intended to foretell a several
Judgment, it does not follow that one of the Judgments thereby portended must
needs be yet to come: for if I mistake not we have had three sore Judgments
since those Comets, viz. Plague, Sword and Fire. But what I have here said to
Astrologers I confess to be a digression in this place, and only the supply of
an omission in the foregoing chapter; therefore I will not much insist upon it,
but yet must needs put them in mind of that pat and pertinent place, Isa.
44.25. Thus says the Lord that frustrateth the takens of the liers, and makes
diviners mad, etc. v. 26. That says unto Jerusalem, thou shall be inhabited,
and to the Cities of Judah ye shall be built, and I will raise up the decayed
places thereof: v. 28. That says unto Cyrus, he is my shepherd, and shall
perform all my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built; and to
the temple thy foundation shall be laid. The Diviners seem in this place to be
called liars for that very reason, because they did prophecy Jerusalem should
not be rebuilt (flattering the Babylonish monarchy, as if that should always
last) whereas God had purposed to raise it up again. I would wish those great
deciers (viz. of future contingencies) for so the name given to Astrologers
Isa. 47.13. does signify) to read that chapter also, and their doom in it:
methinks ever since black Monday (as they called it) only black to the
Astrologers themselves as I remember, by frustrating their predictions) that
sort of men should learn to be more modest and not bear the world in hand, as
if they were Secretaries of Heaven, or of the Almighty his privy counsel, which
I no more believe then I do the vaporing of some of their brethren who pretend
to certain rules of their art (as Tully reports) of forty thousand, yet some
of seventy thousand years standing, whereas for many thousand years since that
(the world being not yet six thousand years old (there were neither stars to
observe, nor men to observe them.

But to return to the business in hand, I wish it were put to the vote of all
the people in England, whether it be, or be not of great importance that London
should be rebuilded. Here and there we might light upon a person that had an
^aking tooth against that City, and would vote for continuing it in its ashes,
but I am well assured that five to one would be of another mind, and say we
were undone if London were not restored I am bold to affirm (and therewith I
shall conclude this Chapter) that he is a man that does not understand
consequences (which is the character of a person void both of Logic, and
Reason) who thinks it a matter of no consequence and importance that London
should be rebuilded.

DISCOURSE IV.
That it is convenient the re-edifying of London should be with all possible
speed and expedition.

I Shall not compare the kindnesses we have received from our Superiors, one
with another (since comparisons as they say, are odious) but sure I am, they
have not been more acknowledged, and thanked for any thing they have done, than
for their prudent Act for, and concerning the rebuilding of London: nor do I
think there is any thing in that Act more thank-worthy, than the zeal they have
expressed for the dispatch of that work, by injoyning under a great penalty,
that every house should be rebuilt within the space of three years after the
date thereof, ( page 94.) though I doubt not but if that shall prove morally
impossible to some, though not to all; they in their wisdom, and clememcy will
hereafter allow as much more time, as shall be thought absolutely necessary.

Now if any man shall think it was more than needed, to quicken men to a work,
to which their own interest, and inclination, might so much prompt them; I must
crave leave to dissent, and to tell them that the dull minds of men had need to
be stirred up by more than Ceremonies, to those things in which they are
greatly concerned, witness Lot himself, of whom it is said, that whilst he
lingered (which was whilst the Flames of Sodom were pursuing him) the men laid
hold upon his hand (the Lord being merciful to him) and they brought him forth
and set him without the City, Genesis 19.16.

I cannot but judge that the rebuilding of London calls for expedition, when I
consider, how the burning Fever which befell London in the year 66. was not the
first fit of sickness it had lately been visited with, but a sore relapse,
after it was newly (and but scarce) recovered out of other great, and dangerous
maladies; not only accute, but chronical: who knows not that London had for
many months together been brought even to deaths door with the Plague, and that
it had lost abundance of blood, both red, white, and yellow, with a wasting
War; insomuch that its great Physicians, have said long since, that both it,
and the whole Kingdom, were in a deep Consumption. Not to recite all its
Diseases, though I might name the Scurvey, Hypocondriacal Melancholy, and
several others, which it is full of. Now this Calenture, (the Fire I mean)
coming after all the rest, has brought it so very low, (together with the
whole Nation) that without some strong Cordials, and powerful Restauratives,
speedily administered, it cannot long subsist.

It cannot be forgotten, that London was but three or four days a burning, and
why should that which was destroyed in three or four days, be longer in
building and restoring than three, or four years, (provided it can be done in
that time.) If I mistake not, I have heard of a Wall of great length, and
circumference, which is about the great House in Osterley Park, that it was
built in one nights time, by the help of an incredible number of Workmen, that
were summoned in for that purpose, to entertain and amuse Queen Elizabeth who
was there at that time, and knew not of the beginning of it, till she saw it
finished; I am not certain of the story, but am sure our Proverb is true, viz.
that many hands make light work, and though Rome were not built in one day,
neither can London be; yet if Workmen from all parts, were commanded to give
their attendance upon that business, and upon nothing else, but what were of
absolute necessity, till that were finished, London would go up amain, and
appear something like a City in a little time. Alas! Poor Citizens long to be
settled once again, and to fall to their respective Trades, as formerly, making
a hard shift mean time; and pity it is, that whilst the grass is growing the
Steeds should starve; that whilst the City is raising, the Citizens in the
interim should be ruined. Therefore it is I so much press for expedition.

If our Governors would encourage the importing of all necessary materials,
from foreign parts, (as I hear they intend) it would be a good, and acceptable
work, and nothing could carry a greater show of love and good will to that poor
City, than that will do (which will never think it self beloved, unless its
restoration be promoted, by them that have power to do it.)

And since the great want of money is (as I am told) like to be the main
hindrance of the rebuilding of London, how do I wish that Usurers, and all
other great moneyed men, would bring forth their bags, and cheerfully lend to
Citizens for the purposes of building, securing themselves by the premises, and
taking no other advantage when that is done.

Did all men long, as I think I long, to see another London (though I have
little interest in it to what it has in me) (and I think all English men
should long for it as much as I do) I persuade my self, such treasure, and such
assistance in every kind, would be brought in toward it, as would make a very
quick dispatch even of so great a work.

But lest I my self be tedious, whilst I plead for others to use expedition, I
shall conclude this Chapter, with what a Heathenish King gave in charge about
the Temple of God at Jerusalem, (and their good Example will most of all
condemn us Christians if we fall short of it) And I Artaxerxes do make a Decree
to all the Treasurers beyond the River, that whatsoever Ezra shall require of
you, it be done speedily, Ezra 7.21.

DISCOURSE V.
Of Building upon all the Ruins of the City with Brick (as is enjoined.)

I Hope it was not for state, but for security; not out of pride, but prudence;
not for pomp, but for preservation; that it was enjoined, that so much of
London as was burnt, should be built again all with Brick: For was not God very
angry with those that said in the stoutness of their hearts; The Bricks are
fallen down, but we well build with hewn stones; the Sycamores are cut down,
but we will change them into Cedars; Isa. 9. v. 10, Therefore the Lord shall
set up the Adversaries of Rezin against him, and join his enemies together,
verse. 11. And were it not as great a crime to say, in a way of stoutness, the
Rafters are fallen down, but we will build with Bricks, etc.

But as I said before, so I am in the same mind, that this was appointed in
order to safety, rather than to state, and magnificence: And verily experience
has told us that Brick-buildings are in an ordinary way much more secure from
the danger of Fire, than such as consist of much Wood and Timber: Witness those
Skeletons of Brick-Houses, which we see standing since our dreadful Fire, which
though it picked out the Marrow (as I may call their insides, yet could not
digest the bones, though it devoured the kernel of such Houses, could not quite
destroy their shells: whereas it made no bones (as we speak Proverbially) of
timber Houses, but consumed them entirely, and have left us nothing of them,
but the excrements of Fire (so fed) I mean, dust and and ashes.

Now all such beauty and decency; as is the mere result and product of what is
otherwise good, and necessary (like shadows that follow substances, or honor
consequent upon virtue) is no offense to God, and should be none to men.
Whatsoever is in all respects as is naturally behoofeful and necessary, for it
to be, cannot likely want some degree of handsomeness. Thus the body of a man
(or other creature) all the parts of which are so formed, figured, and put
together, as is most conducing to health, strength, and usefulness, cannot
probably be otherwise than comely.

And so it fares with the Exercises and Institutions of Religion, where all
the substantials thereof meet together; as namely, when the Word of God is read
to the people, gravely, distinctly, and devoutly; when the Minister preaches
soundly, and savourily, in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit; when
he prays solidly, methodically, spiritually, and affectionately; when the
people do hear, and join reverently, and attentively; I say, where these things
meet, there does unavoidably result abundance of decency, and solemnity, and
such, as if one that believes not, or is unlearned, shall come in, may cause
him to be convinced of all, and judged of all, and to fall down and worship
God, reporting that God is in them of a truth, as it is in 1 Cor. 14.23. where
all the Order the Apostle prescribes is, that all things be done to edifying,
verse 26. that Women keep silence in the Church, verse 34. that such as are fit
to Prophecy should Prophecy but one, by one, and the rest hold their peace,
verse 31. and that the spirits of the Prophets should be subject to the
Prophets, ver. 32. and such like things which are not arbitrary, but in their
own nature necessary, and without which, in the judgment of all men, there
would be mere confusion.

Now as in Religion, from such things, and such alone, as are absolutely
necessary, there ariseth^ beautiful Order, which is of great advantage, an^
applauded by the very light of Nature; So I say (...) this inferior affair of
Architecture, though beaut^ and ornament, as such, were not at all looked
after, yet if other things which are indispensably needful, (as safety and
security is) be provided for, something of beauty, and handsomeness will follow
o^ course, and when it flows from thence, ought in no case to be found fault
with, but to be well accepted and commended. And this I take to be a just
Apology, for building London with Brick, (though that kind of building be more
stately tha^ the former was) even after so sad a calamity.

Brick buildings, as they are not the meanest, and cheapest, so neither are
they the most curious and chargeable, but of a middle sort: And verily, (...)
medio consistit virtus, It is good to shun both extremes, even in Religion it
self; in which as me^ ought not on the one hand to be pompous, and
superstitious (putting it as it were, into the dress o^ a Harlot, or making as
if it came to court our se^ses, and fancies) so neither on the other hand,
(...) be rude, and slovenly, as if the outside of a cup, (...) platter might
well be nasty, if the inside were b^ clean.

When we see a City built with Brick, how man it serve to put us in mind of our
beginning, an^ first extraction, of our end, and dissolution, and especially of
the manner of every true Believers resurrection from the dead.

What is Brick but Clay, or red Earth burn^ and whence had Adam his name, but
from Adam which signifies red Earth? Genesis 3.19. till thou return unto the
ground, for out of it wast thou taken. N^ only our bodies, but our souls, do
yet dwell in houses of Clay, whose foundations is in the dust, for what else
are our bodies? Job 4.19. Dust thou art, Genesis 3.19. And God formed man of the
dust of the ground, Genesis 2.7.

And may not the houses of Clay, Dust, or Brick, we dwell in, mind us, as
whence we came, so likewise, whither we are going, viz. to the ground whence we
came; Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. Now we bring the earth up
to us, and place it about us, and over our heads, but the time hastneth, in
which we must go down to it, and make our beds in the bosom of it; Into this
Mothers womb every of us must enter the second time, and be born again at the
Resurrection of the dead.

And of that Resurrection also, may our City when it shall be all of Brick put
us in mind, for then, after so great a death, as it had by the Fire, will it
rise again, much more handsome, and beautiful, than it was before; So shall the
bodies of Believers, which having been sown in corruption shall be raised in
incorruption, and having been sown in weakness shall rise in power, 1 Cor. 15.
and shall be made like to the glorious body of Christ. though before they were
vile bodies, etc.

Yet further, How much we are beholden to that mean creature which we tread
upon every day (the Earth I mean) may be brought to our remembrance, when we
view our houses of Brick, and what is Brick but Earth? From the dirty, dungy,
despised Earth, have we meat, drink, sauce, corn, wine, oil, linen (which we
must cloth our selves with whilst we live) and amongst other things the very
houses we do, and must dwell in, as well living as dead. I write not this to
make my self and others more in love with this Earth (which we are apt to be
too much) but to the end our great dependence (under God) upon so despicable a
creature, may make us yet more vile in our own eyes, and our trampling upon
that which we are so much beholden to, (though that we may do) may mind us of
our trampling where we may not, viz. upon the Name, and Honor of God who
gives us all things richly to enjoy.

Can we behold those Bricks which our houses are, and must be made of, and not
look back upon that sad trade which the poor Israelites were made to follow in
Egypt, viz. of making Bricks, a double tale of Brick, yea without straw too
(save what was of their own gathering) and can we choose but think of the
parallel case of all such poor Citizens, as have houses to build at almost a
double charge, but not wherewithal to do it? Neither may we forget how
seasonably the children of Israel were delivered when their task of Brick was
doubled; for then came Moses (cum duplicabantur lateres.)

But it is high time to put a period to this Chapter, and wherewith can I do it
better, than by some such solemn wish as this, that if the Lord please, the new
City which we expect, may endure as much longer than the old did, as Bricks in
themselves are more durable than Rafters; and that the prosperity of Londoners
may be so great whilst it stands, that whenever their Bricks shall fall,
they may be able to rebuild with hewn stones, and when their Elms and Oaks
shall be worn out, they may be able to change them for Cedars.

DISCOURSE. VI.
Of ill burnt Bricks, and that great care should be taken to build the New City
with good Materials.

WIll any trash serve for the building of our new City? was London so lately
destroyed by the burning of its materials, and shall it quickly be destroyed
again for want of materials (that is Bricks) duly burnt? Do we look for another
Fire to burn our Bricks over again? It is said of Ephraim, Hos. 7.8. Ephraim is
a Cake not turned, meaning not thoroughly baked; that was spoken in a
mysterious, and shall the same be true of London in a mechanical sense? Why do
men make more have than good speed? either build as may last, or not at all. If
they that have Bricks to sell have no more Conscience than to offer such as are
stark naught, you that are to buy should have more care and discretion than to
accept of them.

Is it for cheapness sake that you make use of such unfit Commodities? then are
you penny-wise and pound-foolish. I see no men are such losers as they that are
over-saving, none so prodigal (though sore against their wills) as are the
greatest misers. So some men sue at the Law for great things, which they justly
claim, and lose their cause by starving it; and others, when sick, neglect
advice, and dye as it were to save charges. To such our homely Proverb is but
too applicable, They will lose a sheep to save a half-peny-worth of Tar; but
that of Solomon is much better. There is that withholds what is meet, and it
turns to poverty.

They say that Bricks were never worse than they have bin of late, and yet
never dearer. And it is an ordinary case, for things when they are of least
worth and value, to be of greatest price. Thus some people who pay the most
Tithes have the worst Preaching, and some of the richest Benefices are worst
supplied; Yea, thus some give themselves more cost and pains to ruin souls,
and consequently their own, (Compassing Sea and Land to make men more the
children of the Devil) than others do to save the Souls of themselves and
others. Alas that the worst things should cost most, or that men should give
any thing for that which is stark naught (like unsavory Salt fit for nothing
but the dunghill) and that men should not rather say as one did in another case
non emam tanti poenitere, They will not give so dear for what they shall
afterward repent of.

They that take bad Bricks, do in effect make them (or are as bad as them that
do, as we say The receiver is as bad as the Thief) for if none would buy those
Bricks that were such, no such would be made for sale. This were the way to
make all traders honest, viz. to take nothing off their hands but what were
good, and to that end to advise with those that have judgment in such things in
case we have none our selves. Some things we say are good of the price, but
other things are good at no price, because good for nothing, and so are bad
Bricks as for the purposes of Building.

Have Magistrates taken care to stop one leak by ordering we should build with
brick, and will we spring another? have they appointed us a good kind of
Materials, and will we not take that which is good in its kind? Surely good
timber is better to build with than bad brick (as Solomon says, A living d^g
is better than a dead Li^n), for the first will not presently decay, without
Fire befall it, but the other will of its own accord, and suffer as much injury
from successive Frosts, and thaws (which come of course) as the latter shall by
fire it self, which may not happen in an age.

I foresee the fate of those unhappy houses that have been built with ill burnt
bricks, that shortly they will molder away to dust, (and so I hear that some of
them have begun to do already.) The like (if my Prognostics fail me not) will
likewise befall those Societies both Ecclesiastical and Civil, which are
constituted of ill members, (Principal ones especially) which are as so many
bad and unserviceable bricks in houses. Such Societies, like such houses,
probably cannot stand long.

I much suspect the same fate will befall a great part of the young Generation
that is now springing up, viz. that in a few years they will crumble away like
houses built with ill burnt bricks, (considering how vicious the present age
is). For who can bring a sound thing out of that which is unsound, any more
than a clean thing out of that which is unclean? where the bones are rotten the
Marrow will be filthy, and the product of it will be more of that which is
rotten: which notion is more proper to be here inserted, because that
Generation in Scripture, is called the building up of a house, and children are
called Banim from an Hebrew root which signifies to build.

Our ill burnt Bricks are methinks the sad emblem of one thing more, and that
is of all such Professors who have been merely singed and scorched with the
slender heat of some overly convictions, but were never brought to a due
firmness or consistence, by lying long enough in and under that Furnace which
the Scripture calls a Spirit of bondage. Such may be laid into the building
of the Church, but will scarcely hold out.

But whilst I caution against bad bricks, I would caution as much against bad
timber, as namely such as has been seared and overdried by the fire; and no
less against bad mortar. For to dawbe with untempered mortar, cannot be safe;
mortar being that to a house, which love is to a society, viz. That which
binds, and cements all together.

Surely England does not want for good materials within it self, but if the
daughters will not be kind to their mother (that is if other parts of England,
will not be kind to London, their mother City) we being now at peace with many
nations that can furnish us for building purposes, and having store of nimble
messengers, that can fly about the world, upon the wings of the wind, and fetch
home great burdens (as our ships are) should for Londons use, have enough of
brick, timber, and every thing else, and that good and cheap enough; if it be
to be had in Christendom.

DISCOURSE VII.
Of its being intended that the new Buildings should be more magnificent then
were the old.

Wherewithal shall I excuse what I know be designed, viz. That the City now to
be built should be more stately, and sumptuous, then that which was lately
burnt? The second Temple, for matter of outward splendour, was not comparable to
the first, which made the old men weep that had seen them both. Is this to
humble our selves under the mighty hand of God? is this to accept the
punishment of our iniquity? is this to lay our mouths in the dust, if there may
be hope? or is not this to say we will have beauty for ashes, we will build our
nests on high; though God has laid us lower then ever, or is not this to do
like the Jews of old, who when called of God to weeping, mourning, baldness,
and To girding with sackcloath, fell to shaying of Oxen, killing of Sheep,
drinking wine, etc. Isa. 22.12, 13. Which iniquity God said should not be
purged from them till they died: that is, were destroyed, v. 14.

Were this said in the pride, and stoutness of our hearts, that we would have
another City more beautiful then the former (as they of Samaria are challenged
by God to have said in the pride of their hearts) The bricks are fallen down,
but we will build with stone, Isa. 9.10. There were no excusing it, yea some
great Judgment might be exspected to ensue it, but the greater stateliness of
the new City then of the old, I take to be rather finis operis then finis
operantis, that is to say, the effect of some other, and more necessary thing,
which was primarily, if not only designed, then any thing contrived, by and for
its self.

I have said already, that the law for building only with brick, was in order
to greater security, and indemnity from fire. Then, as for making several
streets broader then they were before, that the great, and many inconveniences,
which were formerly found in and by the narrowness of Thames Street, and some
others, may satisfy any man, was but expedient, and necessary. And whereas
some may think the new houses carry, and are appointed to carry, their heads
too high, and rise up to a greater altitude, then does become them, after so
humbling a judgment, good reason may be assigned for that, viz. That it was
enacted they should do so in order to the gaining of more room, and that so
much the rather, because a great deal of room has, and will be lost otherwise,
by the new model of the City, and particularly, by widening of the streets,
those Latitudinarian streets (if I may so call them) enforcing as it were
altitudinarian houses.

Now from the three forementioned causes, viz. The buildings being of brick,
the breadth of the Streets, and the height of the houses greater then formerly:
thence I say principally, if not only, will spring that beauty and luster,
which the new City, or the major part of it, is like to have above the old, all
which things being necessary for other reasons, and having been done upon their
account, ought at no hand to be found fault with.

As men may fast and mourn and yet not disfigure their countenances whereby to
appear to men to fast, but may anoint their heads (that day) and wash their
faces: and Christ commends so doing, as best, Mat. 5.16. So may the outward
visage of our City be handsome, and beautiful, and yet we our selves
nevertheless truly sensible both of our sins and miseries.

I Should think a City of London, outwardly more splendid then ever, might in
some respects increase our humiliation, rather then inflame our pride, even as
a poor man, clad in a rich habit, might from thence have more sad, and frequent
reflections upon his poverty, as thinking with himself how unsuitable the
fineness of his outward garb, is to the meanness of his condition, and how much
otherwise it is really with him, then by his habit strangers would take it to
be.

But that a stately City, raised in a short time out of a ruinous heap, might
conduce to stir up in us more of thankfulness, and admiration of Gods
goodness, I see not who can deny: with this staff (said Jacob) passed I over
Jordan, and now the Lord has made me two bands, Genesis 32.10. Which surely he
acknowledged, with more thankfulness, and wonder, then he would have done; if
God had made him but one band, no bigger then either of his two

Moreover another London more magnificent then the former, how great an eye
sore would it be to the enemies of that City; who most barbarously rejoiced at
its flames, and triumphed at its funeral, and would (if they knew how) have
rolled so great a stone over its grave, that it should never have been capable
of rising again? I say when those envious persons, shall come to see two
staffes in the hand of London, viz. Beauty and Bands (that is State, and
Strength) alluding to Zech. 11.) neither of which they exspected: how will that
sight abate their pride, confront their malice, and confound their devices.

Lastly a stately City should methinks provoke the inhabitants to a generous
emulation, of being so wealthy, and substantial, as by it they seem or make
show to be. If so goodly a City be to Londoners, at the first erecting of it,
like a garment that is much to big for him that wears it, yet may it put them
upon endeavoring to grow so fast, that it may be fit for them, if it be to
them, as raiment of needle work, or of wrought gold; such as the Kings Daughter
is said to be, Ps. 45.13. may it not stir them up to be like her all glorious
within: that their inside and outside may well agree together?

Now, Lord, though it may be it was not out of pride, or affectation of pomp,
that we have designed to build so fine a City; yet possibly we may be proud of
so fine a City when it is once built, and if so Lord humble us for that our
pride, but destroy us not again, and if like those times of which it was said
they had golden challices but wooden Priests, it may be said of us we have a
rich City but poor inhabitants, we shall in that respect have great cause to be
humble, and Lord do thou make us as humble, and lowly as we have cause to be.

DISCOURSE VIII.
That all persons employed and made use of in, and in order to the rebuilding
of London, ought therein more especially to use all care and good conscience.

WOrkmen do your office, and do it like workmen that need not to be ashamed,
and like honest men. If you take building by the great, make no more have with
it then good speed; but if you take it by the day, make as much have as will
consist with good speed. Do by Londoners as you would be done by, build for
them as you would build for your selves: we may have a noble City (God
permitting) if you will but play your parts.

Make no more faults then you needs must, that you may make work for your
selves to mend those faults which you have wilfully made, and put those you
build for, to a greater charge and trouble. The foolish builder is a name of
infamy in the scripture, and the knavish one is worse: Be not you like smoke to
the eyes of those you build for, as Solomon speaks of a sloathful messenger,
that he is so to him that sends him. Build with such acurateness, as Apelles
is said to have painted, for which he gave this reason Pingo aeternitati, so do
you build as it were once for all. Let London by the universal care, and
honesty of its builders, one and all; be made so excellent a structure, that it
may both now and hereafter be a praise, and a renown to any of you, to have had
a hand in the raising of that Fabric, or to have been any ways related to
that work, as it is said in reference to the Temple of Jerusalem, Psalm. 74.5. A
man was famous according as he had lifted Axes upon the thick Trees: viz. in
order to the building of that Temple. Express your kindness to London to like
effect with what is written, in Cant. 8.9. If she be a Wall we will build upon
her a Palace of Silver, and if she be a Door, we will enclose her with Boards
of Cedar; which are the Words of Christ, and of his Church, contriving some
good for the uncalled Gentiles, set forth under Metaphors taken from such
improvements of small and rude beginnings, as Builders are able to make. In
this building aim not only at private gain, but at public good; at the honor
and welfare of the Nation, in which your selves will have a share; get as
little as may be either for work or stuff, of them that have lost so much: take
the oversight thereof not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre,
but of a ready mind, which is the advice given to spiritual Builders in a
higher case, but not unapplicable to this purpose.

As for those, who shall have the custom of Londoners for Bricks, Tiles,
Timber, Glass, Lead, Iron, and other materials which concern building, I
conjure them by all that is worthy, as they pretend to any thing of
Christiantity, or of humanity, to use them kindly after so great a calamity as
has befallen them: Give them their full quantity of every thing they bargain
for, and let them have that which is truly good, and at as low a price as you
can afford: Rather wrong your selves, than wrong them who have suffered so many
things already, rather lose, than gain too much by them; and yet I would wish
you not to do that neither; Let it never be said that you were raised by the
Ruins of London, or that the impoverishing of that City, was that which made
you rich, unless you can become rich, by a very small, and slender profit out
of each commodity.

If you be Englishmen London is your Mother, (as Jerusalem was the Mother of
the Jews, which are called the Daughters of Jerusalem Cant. 1.5.) and
consequently Londoners are your Brethren, and will you not use them as such.

Alas! many poor Citizens are laying out all they have in the world (yea
possibly more than all they have of their own) upon that one house which they
are building for their pure necessity, and will you diminish those two mites,
which are all the treasure they have to lay out? We read in Nathan's Parable,
of a poor man who had nothing save one little Ewe Lamb, 2 Samuel 12.3. which lay
in his bosom, etc. Surely the house which some indigent Citizens are building,
is to them, as that Ewe-lamb was to the poor man, and will you injure him in
that one Lamb? Will you make him pay so much for his materials that he shall
never be able to pay for his house: Did I know that man that had abused, or
would abuse a burnt-out Citizen, in relation to his house (whether as to
materials or workmanship) I say to abuse him (or such a one) of all men else, I
would discharge that Apostolical Canon in his face, and hereby I do discharge
it, viz. That no man go beyond, or defraud his Brother in any matter, because
that the Lord is the avenger of all such; as we have forewarned you and
testified, 1 These. 4.6.

DISCOURSE IX.
Of such as have made bold, or shall make hold with other men their materials,
or with any part thereof.

I Hear that some have borrowed without leave, (if that may be called
borrowing) that is of some who have taken their neighbors Bricks, and other
materials, which lay near to their own Ruins, and have built their houses with
them, as confidently as if they had been their own. Do such men think that the
Fire has made all things common; that it did or could (Leveller-like) destroy
all propriety (and that not only de facto, but de jure;) Is now all your own
you can lay hands upon? and does every thing of right belong primum occupanti,
to him that can first get it into his possession? Nay surely, it is rather a
kind of sacrilege to take from men what the Fire had left them, forasmuch as
the relics of the Fire, may in some sense be accounted Sacred, and a kind of
Deodates, or things vouchsafed us, or reserved for us by God immediately. He
has a hard heart who grudgeth any man that small Legacy, or Remainder of any
thing which that most cruel Fire left him, when it dyed, or went out; That took
away your neighbor's Vintage, and will you grudge them the Gleanings of their
own ground? Behold! Theft upon Theft, and that is the falsest Heraldry that can
be. Citizens were Robbed when their houses were burning, and now that they
would build their houses, they are robbed again.

You cannot think that your Neighbors Bricks and other materials have so far
trespassed by lying near to yours, that you may lawfully pound them, in your
own houses from whence they are never like to be released? if he had took your
materials as you did his, how would you have taken it at his hands? would you
have put it up quietly?

In Jer. 23.30. it is written, Behold I am against the Prophets says the Lord
that steal my Word every one from his Neighbor. Was God against those Spiritual
builders (for so are Prophets) which stole his Word from one another as
Hananiah did from Jeremiah, using the same words, though to other purposes,
Thus says the Lord, etc. (Jer. 28.2. compared with Jer. 49.1. and 37.) taking
the very words out of Jeremiahs mouth, etc. How much more will he be against
those temporal builders, which steal away each others Materials, because these
latter cannot both make use of the same Materials at the same time, but that
the former ( viz. the Prophets) might have done, two of them might have spoken
the same thing at the same time, but two houses cannot be built with the same
numerical Bricks, etc.

Think of a few passages in Habbakkuk 2. v. 6. We to him that increases that
which is not his. How long? and that ladeth himself with thick Clay, which
words are literally applicable to those that build with bricks which are not
their own, ver. 9. Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house,
that he may set his nest on high, v. 10. Thou have consulted shame to thy
house, v. 11. For the stones shall cry out of the Wall, and the beam out of the
Timber shall answer it, ver. 12. Woe to him that establishes a City by iniquity.

Suppose the greater part of your materials were honestly come by, even
nineteen parts in twenty, but a twentieth part, or some much less proportion,
were got by stealth, it is greatly to be feared and verily to be expected, that
even so small a pittance of that which was stolen, will go nigh to ruin all
the rest, if satisfaction be not timely made for the injury done, and the sin
repented of, (as Gideon his one only bastard destroyed his 70 sons that were
lawfully begotten, Judge 9.5.

Therefore my advice in short is this, If thou have made use of any part of thy
Neighbors Materials unwittingly, and afterward do come to know it, satisfy
him for the principal, and tender him a fifth part over, and above (if he
please to accept it) for so was the Law of Restitution in case of unwilful
injury, Numb. 5.7. but if thou have taken any thing from him knowingly, offer
him five for one (if thou art able so to do) for so was provided under the Law,
if any man did injure another wilfully, Exodus 22.1. When thou art in thy
Belcony, or at the top of thy high house think of Zachaeus in the
Sycamore-Tree, and of what he said, (though not there) If I have taken any
thing from any man falsely, I will restore him fourfold, Luke 14.8.

DISCOURSE X.
Of such as have not wherewithal to build again.

ALas for those poor Londoners that would build their houses again, and cannot.
If men cannot rise without money in the case (as is generally too evident) how
should houses? Haud facile emergunt quarum virtutibus obstat Res angusta domus,
is as true as if it had been domi; that is, it holds as certain in houses as in
men: It is money must raise them. But what shall they do that have it not, nor
can by any means procure it? I know no way but one, viz. they must fell their
ground; but there is the misery, who will give them to the worth of it? They
that know they must, or are forced to sell, think to buy it as they list, or at
some such rates as too many have bought Debenters, it may be at a Noble, for
the worth and value of each pound. Thus poor men are bought and sold, as the
Prophet expresses it, for a pair of shoes, Amos 2.6. A rich commodity in a
poor man's hand, is nothing worth; so barbarously are men upon the catch, taking
their utmost advantages one against another, which is to make a vice (instead
of a virtue) of necessity, I mean a vice to themselves, out of the necessity of
others: For doubtless he that buyeth out poor men so cheaply, sells himself
to work wickedness. Well, what said Ahab to Naboth, 1 Kin. 21.2. Give me thy
Vineyard, and I will give thee for it a better Vineyard than that; or if it
seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money. He offered a
valuable consideration for Naboths ground; will you be worse than that Ahab? If
your Brethren be hungry, will you take occasion thereby to purchase their
Birthright for a mess of pottage (as Jacob did) who was many ways crossed
afterward in one kind, and in another? What blessing can be expected, or
rather what curse may not be looked for upon those houses, the foundations of
which are laid in oppression, and grinding the faces of the poor; who in order
to bread, are forced to suffer their own faces to be ground? Are no merciful
men to be found, who in consideration of the necessity of poor men, will give
them for their ground rather more than it is worth, at leastwise full as much?
yea, why should not every man be so far forth merciful, since the latter of the
two is but to be just? Art thou in a purchasing case, buy poor men's ground at a
full rate, build upon it, and when that is done, if they be able to pay a
moderate Rent, and it may be a courtesy to them, become their Landlord? He may
prove a sufficient Tenant, who is not able to build his own house, and his
Landlord may have a blessing for his sake; for blessed is he that considers
the poor, Psa. 40.1.

Be not you discouraged, if you cannot build your selves, another man's house
may be as commodious for you, as one of your own erecting; and if there happen
to be inconveniences in it, they will not so much upbraid and vex you, as if
they had been contracted by your own misbuilding (as they might have been) Nam
quae non fecimus ipsi, haud ea nostra voco; you are not chargeable with the
faults of those houses which you did not make, or build your selves.

I have one thing more to say to such as must sell their ground, and are
dejected at the thoughts of so doing: Were you not so far undone, that you
could not attempt to build, who knows whither you (as many others have been,
and it is supposed will be) might not be undone by building?

DISCOURSE XI.
That a strict observation of the Lords day might greatly promote the
rebuilding of the City.

THe Lords Day is not that Sabbath which was first so called, for that was the
last day of the week, whereas it is the first; yet a Sabbath it is, and
doubtless enjoined, in, and by the same Commandment that the Jewish Sabbath
was, viz. the fourth; for whosoever does not acknowledge it so to be, must
either say that there is no Sabbath at all, or day of holy rest to be kept
under the New Testament, and consequently, that there are now but nine
Commandments in the Moral Law, the fourth being abrogated and expired; whereas
Christ has told us, That till heaven and earth pass, one jot shall in no wise
pass from that Law, Mat. 5.18. or else they must say, that the last day of the
week is that which ought always to be observed by Christians (as it is by
Jews) for the only Sabbath, and weekly holy day, that is for ever to be
celebrated in obedience to that Command. Most Christians are averse from
Judaizing, in taking Saturday for their Sabbath, choosing rather to imitate the
practice of the Apostles, whose manner it was to observe not the last, but
first day of the week, which we conclude they would not have done, but by
Warrantie and Commission from Christ (who alone was Lord of the Sabbath) so to
do.

Yet some few Christians there are, who symbolize with the Jews in their
Saturday-Sabbath, and keep the same day as holy as they can: And verily (if in
this case I may speak my mind freely) they are much less too blame who keep a
Saturday Sabbath, than they who keep none at all; who understand that
Commandment as the Jews do, than they who make as if it were abrogated and
disannulled.

But he that shall fall into neither of the extremes aforesaid, but shall
confess that the first day of the week is that which was instituted for
Christians by the fourth Commandment, must needs own it to be a Sabbath,
because instituted and appointed by and under that name, Exodus 20.8. Remember
the Sabbath day to keep it holy: and v. 11. The Lord blessed the Sabbath day,
and hallowed it.

That it was necessary I should prove there is a Sabbath yet in being, and that
the day which men ought weekly to observe as holy to the Lord, thoroughout all
Ages, is called the Sabbath, to the end I might show that the Promises made,
and encouragements given to such as have kept, or shall keep holy the Sabbath
day, are not insignificant, and out of date, as to us, who live under the New
Testament.

Having done that, it will be easy to prove what I have affirmed in the Title
of this Chapter, viz. that a strict observation of the Sabbath (for so is the
Lords day to Christians) would greatly promote the building of the City;
witness that pregnant promise, which of its self were a sufficient testimony,
Isa. 58.12, 13. And they that shall be of thee, shall build the wast places,
thou shall raise up the foundations of many generations, and thou shall be
called the repairer of the breach, and restorer of paths to dwell in: If thou
turn away thy foot from my Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and
call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor
him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking
thine own words, v. 14. I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the
earth; (that is, to dwell aloft in places of security and safety) or the words
may glance at the Land of Judea, being much of it Mountainous, and feed thee
with the Heritage of Jacob thy Father; that is, with the good things of the
Land of Canaan, g^ven for an inheritance to him for his posterity. See Isa.
56.6, 7. Every one that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, even them will I
bring to my holy Mountain, that is, to Mount Sion, on which the Temple was
situate. See also Jer. 17.24. If ye hallow the Sabbath to do no work thereon,
then the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and this City, shall remain for ever: v. 28.
But if you will not hallow the Sabbath day, I will kindle a fire which shall
devour the Palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched.

From those Texts I infer, that unto keeping the Sabbath, several promises of
God, building and blessing of Cities, and furnishing men with desirable
habitations are made; as on the other hand, the profaning and polluting of the
Sabbath is threatened, with the destruction of Cities, and of their Inhabitants;
which being true in the general, or in thesi, it must needs be in hypothesi, or
in particular, that a Religious observation of the Sabbath day would help to
build our City.

Who knows not that Nehemiah was a great and principal Agent in the building of
Jerusalem after it was burnt, Nehem. 2.5. and what Magistrate was ever more
zealous than he (if so zealous) to have the Sabbath day kept holy? witness his
contending with Merchants, and Tradesmen of all sorts; yea, with the very
Nobles of Judah, for profaning the Sabbath, Nehemiah 13. from 15. to v. 22. Did
not your Fathers thus (said he) to the Nobles? and did not our God bring all
this evil upon us, and upon our City, viz. destruction by fire, yet ye bring
more wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath. If profanation of Sabbaths
procure the burning of Cities, the sanctification of that day will promote the
building thereof.

It is said, Eadem est ratio loci and temporis; time and place are much akin;
if we would have regard to Gods time, he would have respect to our place, or
places; if we would mind his day, would he not mind our dwellings? the
sanctifying of Sabbaths, is the intrusting of God with the seventh part of our
time (even then when time is most precious with us) Now God is always
bountiful to them that do greatly trust him, Mal. 3.10. Bring all the tithes
into the Storehouse, and prove me therewith, says the Lord, if I will not
pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it; as
if God had said, Do but trust me with the tenth part of the increase, and you
shall see what the other nine shall amount to. If we in like manner would trust
God with the seventh part of our time (for so our Sabbaths are) doubtless the
other six would through the blessing of God, turn to a much better account.

I doubt not to say that one day in seven (that is, every Lords day) we might
promote the building of London, much more in Churches and Closets, than we
could do in working upon the respective foundations, for that indeed would set
it back, and might provoke God to swear in his Wrath, it should never be
brought to perfection.

I observe what is said of Manna, Exodus 16.29. The Lord has given you the
Sabbath, therefore he gives you on the sixth day, the bread of two days, let
no man go out of his place on the seventh day, viz. to gather Manna. God made
them amends for forbearing to progue on the Sabbath Day.

They that did as God had appointed them on the Sabbattical year, viz. Neither
sow their Fields, nor prune their Vineyards, Levit. 25.4. nor reap what grew of
its own accord, entirely for themselves, but let it lie in common to others,
lost no more by so doing, than a Husbandman does by letting his ground lie
fallow when it is out of heart, that it may yield a greater increase hereafter;
see Levit. 25.20. If ye shall say, what shall we eat the seventh year, behold
we shall not sow nor gather in our increase, not for two years together, when a
Sabbattical year, and a Jubilee came together) verse 21. Then will I command my
blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three
years. He knew not what he said, who derided Christians as men that lost the
seventh part of their time because of the Sabbaths they kept, whereas Sabbaths
kept as they ought to be, are no loss, but the most profitable part of time.

But alas, we so carry the matter as to lose a great part of that hallowed
time, which is of all our time most precious, making holyday of a great part
thereof, in such sense, as Children do understand holy days; viz. as mere
pastimes and play-daies; I fear we begin our Sabbaths too late, and end them
too early; we do not remember the Sabbath soon enough to keep it holy as we
should, and we forget it too soon, we are not intent enough, either upon
preparation before, or prosecution afterward. The Sabbaths which men generally
keep now a days, are not only unlike to those of glorious Saints and Angels in
Heaven, but to such as were kept by those good Christians, whom some intended
to reproach by fixing upon them the honorable name of Puritans, which sort of
men, I remember one that was none of them himself, had wont to divide into two
ranks, saying, there was the Knave Puritan (that is one, that was so but in
pretense, and for a color) and there was the Knave's Puritan, whom he
confessed to be a very honest man, and of an excellent sort) but out of malice
called a Puritan by such as were Knaves themselves; because that to such as
themselves, the Name was odious; though both Name, and Person were so only for
their goodness. Now having heard a distinction to that effect, I must explain
my self, and tell you that it was the Knave's Puritan (that is, he, and such as
he, whom Knaves had wont to call so) of whom I affirm, that he had wont to keep
Sabbaths at anotherguise rate, than we observe them kept now a days, (such as
Reverend Dod, Hildersham, etc.) and yet they were not upon their good behavior
(as we are) for the building a poor City lying in ashes. They would have blushed
to have seen our Sabbaths; Oh that we could blush to think of them: they would
scarce have been able to think us sincere Christians, observing us to have so
small a regard to the fourth Commandment; They would have often rebuked us
sharply, for our Sabbath-daies discourse, and minded us of the Text that says,
we should not speak our own words on the Lords day, Isa. 58. when in this
respect shall we be followers of those worthies aforesaid, who now inherit the
Promises? A City, the greater part of whose former Inhabitants were such
Sanctifiers of Gods Sabbaths as they were, would certainly not long lie in
Ashes, but God would cause the wast places thereof to be built. Alas that now
our City is down in the dust, such Master Builders as they (in the sense I have
spoken to) are dead, and gone.

I wonder not that such as are enemies to Religion, have a particular grudge
against the Sanctifying of the Sabbath, or appointing it to be sanctified, since
the preservation of all practical godliness (so far as is in men to preserve
it) does so much depend thereupon. For alas what time have men and women, who
lie down late, and rise up early, all the week long, to get their livings (as
the greater part of people do) I say, what time could, or would they generally
reserve to look after God, and their souls, if it were not for the Lords Day,
preserved by the sanction of the Magistrate from violation, by men's open
following of their Trades, and designed for religious uses.

But it is not the commonplace of the Sabbath that I undertook to handle in
this Chapter, but what, and how great a tendency, a due care taken both by
Magistrates, and people, for the Sanctification of that day, would have to
promote the building of our City, and that I hope I have demonstrated.

DISCOURSE XII.
Of the help that may, and is meet to be afforded toward the rebuilding of
London.

SHall the ashes of London upbraid rich men both in City, and country, with
their unkindness toward it: (those I mean that have no immediate concernment
of their own) shall they cry with a loud voice; how long shall London lie in
the dust, for want of men or moneys, so long as all England can afford them? Or
is England so drained, and exhausted of either of these (even of money it self)
that there is not enough to spare for the reedifying of London. Though a great
part of the Nation be impoverished at this day, doubtless many have wealth
enough, and to spare. Some have great Estates and no Children, others have
great Estates and Children; but not worthy to be entrusted with such Estates;
some have been great gainers by the late revolutions, yea some by those very
judgments which have of late befallen us, even by the fire it is self (which did
not only spare their houses, but much advance their rents) though thousands may
have need to sell what they are possessed of, yet some hundreds (I believe) are
ready for considerable purchases, and have such persons as I have named,
nothing to spare, for, and toward, the rebuilding of such a City? are they
like to give any thing to any good uses (living, or dying) who will give
nothing to this. If men's gold and silver lie cankered by them: whilst there is
such an occasion to lay it out, shall not the rust thereof be a witness against
them, and eat their flesh as it were fire, James. 5.33. Who wonders not (as the
case now-stands) to see any rich man dye, and leave nothing to London in his
will? many places that are burnt down, were built by charity at the first, and
must be so again if ever they be restored; and many persons are by the fire
become the objects of charity, who were not so before, but rather the subjects,
and dispensers of it: many that had wont to give, are now forced to receive:
many that kept good houses, have now no houses to keep; nor wherewith to build
them any. To build for their sakes were most charity; but if you, will not do
so, build for your selves (I mean for your own profit, in conjunction with a
public good) and let them to whom you please. Build with regard to a noble
City (now desolate) if you will not do with respect to indigent, and
impoverished Citizens.

Had London been the tail of all the Cities of England, it had been pity to
have always lost it; but much more pity it would be in regard it was the head
We read how the people lift up their voices and wept, that there should be one
tribe lacking in Israel; and yet that tribe was but little Benjamin, Judge.
21.3. Had it been Judah (and was not London as it were our Judah) would not
their lamentation have been yet greater? As they studied to repair that lost
tribe, so should all Englishmen endeavor to repair this: It will chiefly
concern rich men to do it, but surely the poor are not quite exempted. As in
repairing the high ways, our laws have provided, that they who do not or
cannot hire others, should work at it themselves, so many days: So methinks it
should be in repairing of this great breach. It is a common good, and therefore
should be done at a common charge, though mostly at theirs who have most
interest in and benefit by it. They that had not gold, and silver to bring for
the building of the Tabernacle, were to bring Goats hair, or Badgers skins, or
the like, Exodus 25.5. And would it not in like manner become every body, to
offer something toward this work, even poor widows to cast in their mites?
All rivers as well small as great, pay tribute to the Sea, to the Sea whence
they came, thither they return again, says Solomon, Eccles. 1. and are not
other parts of England to London as rivers to the main Ocean? If the light of
the Sun were extinguished, all the stars were they intelligent, would help to
reinkindle it; for though the Sun does obscure them, yet it brighteneth the
firmament, and there can be no day without it; so all places and parts of
England should contribute to restore London, though obscured by it: because
without it England its self would be obscure, and as it were benighted.

I am deceived, if most families in England, have not some relation to London,
either by descent or alliance, more immediate, or more remote, and shall they
see this worthy relation of theirs lie in the dust, and not do what they can to
help it out.

When we have forts to build, is not the country round about commanded in, to
assist in that work? what is London but the great fort, and bulwark of England
(in more senses than one) and being so, every man's assistance, and contribution
thereunto, may well be expected. They that have noble woods should rather cut
down every Tree, than let London want Timber; they that have Iron, should
rather empty all their mines, than let the City lie wast for want of that
commodity: if you be English men London is yours, that is, you have great
interest in it, though you be no Londoners.

How naturally does a man's hand lift up its self when his head is struck at,
and offer to take the blow? how naturally do blood, and spirits come from where
they were, and resort to that part which is wounded, though inferior to those
parts whence they came? Does not even nature it self teach us, by such things
as those, what should be done in the case of London? London is the head, and
therefore should be relieved with both hands (that is with as many as England
has, though it were with danger to themselves.

All England is but one political body, whereof London is (as I said before)
the head. Now all members of the same body, should not only sympathise with,
but succor one another in a time of distress; but the principal members,
especially ought to be succored by the rest: when, and as need requires.
London then should be helped by all Englishmen, either their persons, pains,
parts, purses, prayers, some or all of them, and whatsoever else they have to
be helpful with.

It will pass for a demonstration amongst our foreign neighbors, that England
is ruined, and not able to help its self, if London be not rebuilt.

DISCOURSE XIII.
That not only England, but all great Britain, and Ireland, and all the
Protestant part of the World, is concerned in the restoration of London.

HE that is a friend to London, is (as such) a friend not only to one City, or
to one Kingdom, but to three united under one and the same Sovereign, viz. to
England, Scotland, and Ireland: These three like the several Kingdoms and
Principalities in Germany constitute but one Emperor: They are but three great
Arms of one and the same Sea or Ocean, the great Port or Haven whereof is
London: They are but three great branches of that mighty Tree, whereof London
is the root. So Moralists divide the Soul into several faculties, as the
Understanding, Will and Affections, whereas the Soul is indeed but one, all is
but one Soul notionally so diversified, and distinguished. So some Divines tell
us, that whereas we speak of several Graces, calling one Faith, another Love, a
third Repentance, etc. it is no otherwise to be understood, than when we speak
of the British, the Irish, the German Ocean, and several others; all which
indeed are but one and the same, assuming different names and appellations,
from the different shores which they wash upon: It is not distance of place,
nor yet interposition of Seas, (one or more) that can make those places
unconcerned one in another, which do all belong to one and the same Prince and
Governor, any more than our feet are, or can be unconcerned in our heads,
because they stand at as great a distance therefrom, as can be in one and the
same body.

Doubtless London is the glory, the strength and stability, the Magazine and
Storehouse, of all the three Nations, at leastwise so it has been, and so it
is necessary it should always be, and so I hope it will.

First, I say it is and has been the beauty and glory of these three
Kingdoms: These three Regions are but one Firmament, and the Sun of that
Firmament has still been London; all three have shoan with the beams of
London; as they say in Law a Wife does (radiis mariti) with the beams of her
Husband. Doubtless Scotland and Ireland were proud of a London they had
interest in; (and which in a sense was theirs as well as Englands, though not
so much) if London were our Mother, it was their Grandmother, and that was an
honor to them.

I have further said, that London was the strength and stability of the three
Kingdoms, and so it was; as when there are three great Families allied to one
another, (suppose as Brethren or Sisters) they are a mutual strength and
establishment one to another; but the Head, or Chieftain of the greatest
Family, is a greater ornament and support to all the three, than any one of the
rest, is or can be. So in this case; for London was (as I may call it) the Head
of these three great Families, (Kingdoms I mean.) As the strength of Sampson
lay in his hair, and when that was cut, he became weak as another man, so did
the strength and puissance of these three Nations lie in London; there the
force of England was most united; there, as in a center, all the lines of
strength did meet, and a sure rule it is, that vis unita fortior, the more
united any force is, the stronger it is. London was as the Sea, the tide
whereof runs much more strongly than that of particular rivers, because all
rivers run into the Sea, and from thence has its name, Genesis 1.10. The
gathering together of the waters he called Seas. The beams of strength were
concentred in London, the great populousness and plenty, its great fullness both
of people, wealth and wisdom considered, as the beams of the Sun might be in a
burning-glass.

It will need little proof, that London is also the great Magazine, and
storehouse of the three United (if now I may call them united) Kingdoms,
London as Tire may be called a Mart of Nations, it being the great Emporium or
Mart-Town, to which, not England only, but also Scotland and Ireland are
beholden for multitudes of commodities: Not only Country Towns, and inferior
Cities in England, do replenish themselves with many or most things, which they
need from the City of London, but also Edinburgh and Dublin, the two
Metropoles, one of Scotland, the other of Ireland, (if I may call them any more
than London's Deputies, or vice Metropolitans) are glad to do the same. Thus we
see these three Nations are in point of honor, strength and Supplies, united
under one great City, viz. London, as well as under one and the same King (the
genius of our Government affecting a kind of Monarchy as well in and amongst
Cities, as in other things.) And thus what was said of Jerusalem, holds true of
London, she was great amongst the Nations, and Princess amongst the Provinces,
Lam. 11.11.

Now if I can prove but one thing more, viz. that no City within the compass
of these three Kingdoms, is fit to succeed London in its primacy, or able to
head three Nations so honorably and profitably, as it has done, I shall then
have demonstrated that England, Scotland and Ireland, are all three highly
concerned in the Restoration of London.

That three such Nations (the form of whose Government is Monarchical) have
some one head (head City I mean) over and above all the rest, is but suitable
and necessary, neither can it be less evident, that it is of great importance,
that whatsoever place or City be their Head, should be the best and fittest of
all others for that purpose. Now that London is so, I appeal to the
incomparable commodiousness of its situation, (well known to all men) and the
advantage which in that respect it has above any other place in the three
Nations. By this was it so manifestly designed (as it were from heaven) for
Primacy and Metropolitanship, that I know no Town or City that was ever
Competitor with it in that behalf, or did ever pretend to be what it is, viz.
chief, whilst London its self was in being: Now what but the indisputably
supereminent fitness of London to be the Metropolis of England (and the United
Kingdoms) could have prevented all Usurpations, Pretensions, and Competitions,
even from those places, which had themselves worn the Crown of Dignity whilst,
and so long as London was (as several times it has been, and now partly is) in
the dust.

And now have I undeniably proved (if I mistake not) that these three Nations
are highly concerned in the Restoration of London.

But now the question will be, whether all the Protestant part of the world be
so likewise (as has been affirmed) tell me then whether England (when it is
its self) be not able to yield a countenance and protection to Protestants all
the world over, to be a kind of covering upon all their glory? If I am not
deceived it has done so, (particularly in the days of Queen Elizabeth) and
may do so again. As is the House of Austria to the Papists, viz. their great
prop and pillar, so England has been, is, or may be, to the Protestants.

If then the strength and bulwark of Protestants be England, and that the
strength of England (as has been proved) be London, we may easily conclude by
that sure Maxim, Causa causae est causa causati; that London is (or may be) the
great bulwark and fortress of the Protestant Interest; and consequently, that
the whole Protestant World is concerned in the being and well-being of London.
This the great Zealots for Popery have known, and do know too well, who in
order to the Propagation of that Religion, have thought, and do think nothing
more requisite, than that the City of London should be laid in ashes, and
continued there. England being so mighty in shipping as it is (at leastwise
has been, or may be) may be serviceable to them that profess the same
Religion with its self, not only near at hand, but at the greatest distance;
and will be so, if ever God shall cause the zeal, and the prosperity of it,
both to revive together. Let me add, that if London flourish, England cannot
likely do much amiss, and the most zealous part of the world (as for the
Protestant Religion) will then prosper, to the advantage of all others who make
the same profession.

What is it then, that not only England, but Scotland and Ireland, and not
those Kingdoms only, but any part of Christendom (called Protestant) can do,
or contribute toward the rebuilding of London? whatsoever it be, their own
interest does call upon them to do it with all their might: If London rise not,
they are like to fall after it. Shall we not hear of the kindnesses of Holland,
Sweden, Denmark, much more of all England, and of Scotland and Ireland (if they
be able to do any thing) toward poor desolate London? let them be good to
themselves in being good to it, its interest is their own: Help London now, you
know not how soon you may need its help, and find it both a cheerful and
considerable helper, in a time of need.

DISCOURSE XIV.
That the Protestant Religion, and the principles thereof, may contribute as
much toward the building of Churches and Hospitals, etc. as ever Popery has
formerly done.

HOw many places are demolished by the Fire, such (as Churches and Hospitals)
which must be rebuilt (if ever) upon the account of Piety, and Charity? But
where is that Piety and Charity to be found? Methinks I hear the Papists
vaunting themselves against Protestants, extolling their Superstition above our
true Religion, and their Doctrine of Lies above the truth of ours, telling us,
that they built most of those Churches and Hospitals which are now burnt down,
and must do it again, if ever it be done; as Peninnah (when time was) did
upbraid Hannah, Sam. 1.1. with her barrenness, so do they the principles of
the Protestant Religion, as if they could bring forth no good works.

As for their building those houses again, there may be more reason for that
than I shall presume to give, but that (if it must be our work) our Religion
will not as strongly invite us to do it as theirs would, (if they might build
them for themselves) that I utterly deny.

True it is, if God stood in need that men should lie for him, none were fitter
to do him service than they, whose Religion is full of lies and Legends, but
that he does not; but of such as say (or report the Apostles of Christ to say)
Let us do evil that good may come of it, the Scripture says, their damnation
is just, Romans 3.8.

We know full well their great Incentives to Charity, and what falsehoods they
are telling the people, that they must be saved by their good works, (that is)
by the merit of them; that Christ has merited to make their works meritorious,
talking much of opera tincta, works died in the blood of Christ, how
meritorious they are: (whereas theirs are rather died in the blood of
Christians, and of holy Martyrs) how men by their good deeds may satisfy the
Justice of God for their evil ones, and expiate their sins; how by eminent acts
of Charity they may hereafter deliver themselves and others out of Purgatory,
with many more such cunningly devised fables, wherewith they pick men's pockets.

We know there is truth enough in the world, or rather in the Word of God, to
make men as charitable and free (in that sense) as it is fit they should be. We
distrust not the efficacy of Divine Truths, as they do, nor think them Nouns
Adjective that cannot stand without our lies, as if they were so many
Substantives added to them: We therefore tell men (as the truth is) that by the
works of the Law no flesh shall be justified, Gal. 2.16. but withal we tell
them, that good works (are causa sine qua non) or things without which there is
no salvation, for faith without works is dead, as a body without a soul, and
that there can be no love to God, where there is no charity toward men, 1 John
3.17. Who so has this worlds good, and sees his Brother have need, and
shuts up his bowels from him, how dwells the love of God in him? He that
loves not his brother whom he has seen, how should he love God whom he has
not seen? 1 John 4.20. Therefore such as have wherewithal to show mercy, and
to do good, cannot be saved, say we; and this principle well considered, were
enough to make men charitable if we could add no more.

But then we say further, that no one good work or deed of charity (that is
truly such) shall go without a reward, quoting and urging Mat. 10.42. (with
other Texts of like import) Whosoever shall give a cup of cold water only to
one in the name of a Disciple, verily he shall not loose his reward.

Nay more than so, we tell men that the reward of charity, and of good works,
(truly so called) is no less than Eternal Life, (though not of merit, but of
grace.) We charge them that are rich in this world, (as Paul bid Timothy to do)
that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.18,
19. We mind men of our Saviors words, Luke 12.33. Give alms, provide your
selves bags that wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that fails not, where
no thief approaches, nor moth corrupts. We say unto men as Christ said, Luke
16.9. Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when
ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations. We promise Heaven
(in Gods Name) to those that are truly charitable, and is it not worth
accepting, unless God will own it, or we our selves can think it, to be of
debt, and not of grace?

We deny that the infinite Justice of God, will or can receive satisfaction, or
reparation, for the evil deeds which men have done, by the good deeds they may
or shall do afterward, (as by their works of charity, for former acts of
injustice) for that satisfaction can be made only by the undertaking of our
Savior, who bore our sins in his body upon the Cross, and who is held forth
to be a propitiation for us through faith in his blood, Romans 3. But withal we
say, that Zacheus having been an oppressing Publican, did well (and set others
a good example) when he gave half his goods to the poor, Luke 19. (which furely
he did upon that consideration) and that it was good counsel which Daniel gave
to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.27. Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; the meaning whereof may be, that he
should cease from unrighteousness and cruelty, for time to come, and practice
the contrary with all his might, viz. Justice and Mercy; yea, we stick not to
quote that passage of Solomon, Prove. 16.6. By mercy and truth iniquity is
purged; which may be construed thus, where mercy is, iniquity is purged, that
is, it is a sign of the remission of sins (as was Mary's love to Christ) or
that God of his free mercy (not of their merit) pardons those who abound with
mercy; as he has said, that with the merciful he will show himself merciful;
and with the garment of his undeserved grace, God covers a multitude of their
infirmities who are such, 1 Pet. 4.8. We say, that more of bounty and charity
toward men, than would otherwise have been required of us, is necessary, and a
duty, in case we have been injurious or uncharitable to others formerly; for if
so, we are in arrears both of Justice and Mercy, which, as to men, (if we be
able to pay) can no otherwise be satisfied, nor can remission be obtained
without such a restitution.

As for the fire of Purgatory, wherewith Popish Priests do melt down the gold
and silver of ignorant people into their own Coffers, we know it is but a
device to keep their own Kitchins warm; nor can any man give a reason why the
charity of men should be less inflamed by this real fire of Hell, made to flash
in the faces of all that do, and shall remain unmerciful and uncharitable, than
by the feigned fire of Purgatory: Why should not, yea, will not men part with
as much to keep themselves out of Hell (when made sensible how damning a sin
covetousness is) as to get themselves out of Purgatory, sooner than otherwise
they would expect?

To him that considers these things, it will be plain and evident, that those
Principles which all good Protestants do own, and insist upon, have as great an
aptness and powerfulness in their own nature to awaken and excite man to works
of charity, as any that Papists do, or can insist upon: Neither ought it to be
forgotten, that all the forementioned Principles of Protestants are real and
Scriptural, and being such, must needs be of greater force, and authority, than
those gross Falsehoods, vain Dreams, and Bugbears, wherewith Popish Impostors
delude their people.

But here it may be a Papist would reply to us: How comes it to pass if the
Principles wherewith you Protestants endeavor to excite men to works of
Charity, be in themselves as forcible as those we go upon, that we, in that
case do prevail more than you? That by our instigations people are ready to
give all their goods to the poor, and to say to their very Parents, It is
Corban, or a Gift (to the Church) by whatsoever thou may be profited,
whereas you Protestants have much ado many times to extort even from dying
people (though rich) some few pounds or shillings to any good uses?

I wish I could say that the matter of fact herein objected were true pudet
haec, etc. but too true it is, and the reasons of it (or some-of them) are as
follow:

First, Some Protestant Ministers whilst they are zealous in Preaching the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith (so much opposed by Papists) are, and have
been too remiss in pressing good works, according to the tenor of their own
Principles: And thus whilst the Papists bend themselves against our Faith, they
make us neglect good works: Such Ministers should be put in mind of what St.
Paul writes to Titus, chap. 3.8. These things I will that you affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain
good works: these things are good and profitable to men.

Secondly, Protestant Preachers (if I mistake not) do generally harp less upon
the duty of bounty and charity, in particular (toward the Church especially)
than Popish Priests do, who do some of them it may be, preach little else, at
leastwise, that is the most they press, because the most profitable of all
subjects (though not to their hearers) (upon whom other duties are sometimes as
necessary to be pressed) yet to themselves. Now Protestant Ministers being too
much afraid of being so much as suspected of seeking themselves, do, I fear,
under-do, as to pressing works of charity, whilst Popish Priests are guilty of
over-doing, being like the Horseleech or Grave, which are never satisfied, but
still do cry, Give, give.

Again, Papists will venture to Promise more upon the bare opus operatum or
mere act of giving, to such and such good uses (to be bound as it were body,
for body, and soul, for soul, that they that give so much to good uses shall be
saved) I mean (to warrant and ensure their Salvation) than Protestant Ministers
dare to do, who knew that the end of the Commandment (the fulfilling of which
end is required in a saving charity) is charity out of a pure heart, and a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned; and that a man may give all his goods to the
poor, and yet want that true charity without which (the Apostle says) be is
but as sounding Brass, or tinkling Cymball.

Moreover the Popes of Rome, successively, use to dispense pardons for the
greatest sins, and such as were never repented of, for so much money, as a late
Book called the Protestant Almanac (one that will never be out of date) makes
out by multitudes of Instances. This practice of theirs is one of the names of
Blasphemy written in their foreheads, and by such means as these they go beyond
us.

But the money which is given upon the two last accounts, is certainly the
result and product not of real bounty, but of woeful blindness and ignorance.
That which is such a kind of cheat in the receivers, can hardly be called
charity in the givers.

Then may we draw to this conclusion, Papists have ways to cheat men of their
money which Protestants have not (yet scorn to use) but Papists have no
Arguments, truly deduced, either from Scripture, or sound reason, wherewith to
invite men to works of charity, that Protestants have not, and they alone well
used and managed are and will be sufficient.

If Papists will take upon them to be wiser than God, and to teach him (who is
only wise) how to furnish the World with better motives to charity, and good
works, than ever yet he has done, so will not Protestants: It were better
London should continue in ashes, than have its foundation laid in such
Blasphemous Impostures: but that it need not do neither, for want of Scriptural
Arguments, mighty (through God) to pull down the strong holds of men's
unmercifulness, and to bring into captivity every thought which exalts it
self against obedience thereunto.

We that are Protestants can tell men, according to our Principles, that the
least work of true charity shall have a great reward, that the reward of
persons truly charitable, shall be no less than eternal life, that every such
work shall follow good men when they dye, and add to the weight of their Crown
of Glory: We can tell rich men, that if they will not make to themselves
friends of the unrighteous Mammon, they shall not be received into everlasting
habitations (of glory) that if they shut up their bowels against poor
Lazaruses, they shall fare no better than Dives did, who denied his crumbs of
bread, and was himself denied a drop of water: We can freely tell every man
that it is as possible for him to get to Heaven without faith, as without
charity; and as impossible for him to be saved without charity, as without
faith. Then I appeal to every man's reason, whether it be not an act of charity,
and piety, to help up with this poor City, and particularly with the Hospitals
and Churches thereto belonging. Though our Religion be by Papists reproached,
as Hannah was by Peninnah with barrenness, namely in reference to good works,
it may hereafter come (and I hope it will) to sing as Hannah did, in 1 Samuel
2.5. The barren has born seven, and she that has many Children is waxed
feeble.

DISCOURSE XV.
Upon the looks, and prospect of London, whilst but some few houses are built,
here and there, and others but building in the midst of many ruinous heaps.

O London what is thy present hue? how many other things art thou like unto at
this day? but how unlike thy self? unlike what thou were, yea unlike what thou
art, if we compare one part with another Mulier formosa superne desinit in
piscem what a motley, linsey, woolsey, exchequered thing art thou at this day?

One while methinks thou look like a forest in which are some tall trees,
some shrubs; some mere stumps otherwhere, all plucked up by the roots: or may I
not liken thee to an old orchard, in which are some trees that have ripe fruit
upon them, other have but buds, others but mere blossoms, but the greater part
are dead, and withered? nor do thou less resemble a great common field in
which some early corn, is at full growth, elsewhere that which was latter sown,
has yet but peept out of the ground, and very many acres up and down lie quite
fallow. We read of the waters of the sanctuary, how that some of them were but
to the ancles, others to the knees, others up to the loins, Ezekiel. 47.4. That it
may be was successively, but this all at once. Thus in a family where are many
children, ordinarily, there are some at the estate of men and women, some boys
and girls, some infants, and some (one or more) that are yet but in the
mothers womb.

Is London a village that I see the houses in it stand so scatteringly, and at
so great a distance one from another? scarce enough together to make that
number which is said to make a conventicle. 1. Having been degraded for a
while, must it commence a village before it commence a City? As in a
throughfare village, standing upon a great road, most houses are Inns, or
Alehouses to entertain strangers, so may we observe that the major part of
houses built upon the ruins; are let out to Alehouse-keepers and Victuallers
to entertain workmen employed about the City.

How easily does the present condition of London bring France to mind, where a
middle sort of people are scarce to be found, but all are said to be either
Princes, (as it were) or Peasants, Gentlemen, or slaves. Our stately-houses may
serve for an emblem of the former, our ruinous heaps of the latter; or one may
represent the flourishing papists in that Country, and the other the oppressed
Hugonites, they and their Churches, lying together in ashes.

Would I give scope to phantasy I could add that London now looks like Euclids
Elements, or some such books, in which are all sorts of schemes and figures, as
straight lines, crooked lines, triangles, quadrangles, hexangles, and what not?
or like a book of Anatomy, full of cuts representing in one page the shape of a
head, in another of an arm, in a third of a leg, etc. So in one place there is
as it were the head, or beginning of a street, in another place the feet (or
end thereof) by its self, elsewhere the arm, or breast, or belly of a street,
(the middle I mean) standing all alone.

A goodly uniformity there is in so much of it as is built together, but ruins
and confusion round about it, which represents it like a beautiful face stuck
with black patches, which is very lovely, so far as it is seen, but all the
rest is ugliness, and deformity, manifest pride, and concealed beauty.

Neither is London at this day unlike the month of April (in which I am writing
this) consisting of quick vicissitudes of rain, and sunshine, one part of the
Heavens smiling, another frowning and lowering. So one part of the street smiles
upon us (almost throughout the ruins) but the rest of it frowneth, and looks
ghastly. If we compare it to one that is rising out of his sepulcher; it must
be to one that has his grave clothes about him, for so has London.)

But when all is said London at this day represents nothing more then our own
divisions, together with the ill effects and consequences thereof.

For first of all, is it not unquoth, and dolesome, to live in houses that
stand at such a distance one fom another? (Some of them like a cottage in a
garden of cucumbers) How much more pleasant was it, and would it be again, to
be surrounded with neighbors on every side: To such an unquoth, solitary and
unpleasant condition have our divisions brought us. Methinks the depth and dead
of winter, when the nights are tediously long, the weather raw and cold, the
ways wet and dirty; and almost impassable, when the trees are bald and bare,
both of fruit and leaves, and when the earth has put off all its ornaments,
and is as it were in its night dress, or morning weeds, does not more fall
short of that pleasurableness and delightfulness that is in a delicate spring,
or gallant summer, when the earth is full of all that may gratify both our
sight, sent and palate: when decked like a bride, when crowned with the goodness
of God, than a time of divisions, and dissentions, does in point of
comfortableness, fall short of these times in which Christians and fellow
Citizens have been all (or generally) of one heart, if not of our mind, Ps.
133.1. Behold how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity? The
divisions of England now (as they of Reuben in former time) do they not cause
sad thoughts of heart?

That houses in London stand so scatteringly, as now they do, is (if I be not
mistaken) not more unpleasant, than unsafe. By this their single station they
are more obnoxious to the impressions of wind and weather, which now have
opportunity to play on every side of them, which when guarded (as formerly) by
houses, on one, or both sides, and possibly behind also, could not be done: not
to conceal the other part of their danger: many of those lone houses seem to
lie at the mercy of thieves, and robbers, whose mercies are known to be
cruelties) and I doubt not but many in that regard are afraid to dwell in the
houses, which themselves have built, till others shall come to dwell by them.

So insecure do our divisions render us, and the distance at which we keep, one
from another, whilst it is so with us, we may much more easily be carried about
with every mind of doctrine, and by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness,
whereby they lie in walt to deceive. Scattered ships are much more easily taken
by Pirates, or enemies, than is a whole fleet that rides together; and a small
family (or a piece of one) is sooner robbed, than a family that is entire, great
and numerous; Divide and impera, divide them and rule them, was an old maxim,
divided we are, and now our enemies hope to rule over us. Our religion is our
great treasure, and doubtless there are thieves that hope to break in, and
steal it from us, now they see us dwell alone (as it were) I mean in reference
to our dissentions.

Neither is it more unquoth and unsafe, than it is unprofitable, for Citizens
to dwell by themselves, or only two or three, or some few more families, in one
and the same street: Few expect to have any considerable Trade within the Walls
(so far as the Ruins did extend) till the City be built again, either all, or
most of it; and therefore though they have built houses for themselves, in
those parts of London which were, and will be most considerable, as Cheapside,
etc. yet do they refrain to go to them, till their Neighborhood be increased,
and others, to a considerable number, have built near them, as expecting but
few Customers, and small dealings, till that be done.

So fatal have our divisions, and the distance at which we have stood one from
another, I say so fatal have they been to us in point of Trade and profit, as
the remoteness and scattering of houses, one from another, would probably be
to those that should attempt a Trade in houses so remore and scattered.
Divisions, and decay of Trade began together, and have proceeded together; as
divisions grew greater, trading has grown less; as more backwardness has
appeared, as unto uniting Protestants one with another, they say a sensible
damp has come upon Trade, not unlike those damps which arise in Cole-pits,
which put out their lights, and sometimes stifle the workmen. And on the other
hand, any hope given us, as if our breaches should be healed, and our
differences com-primised, has been to Trade as a sudden resurrection from the
dead, as if peace and union, concord and quietness, one with another, were the
Sun, Trade, and Traffic, the Heliotrope, or Mary-gold, which did open and
shut, according as that Sun did either rise or set, shine or forbear to shine
upon it: That saying of Solomon is but too applicable to trade and commerce, as
well as in other cases: How can two walk together unless they be agreed? at
leastwise so far agreed they must be, as not to molest, and disturb, each other.

It is methinks an ill prospect, and a ghastly sight, for those that look from
the Belconies, or tops of their stately new houses, to see ashes, and ruinous
heaps on every side of them, to see ten private houses (besides Churches and
public Halls) in the dust, for one that is raised again. This might be a
pleasing spectacle to a person of an evil eye, that is, to one that were full
of envy (for such people will be miserable if others be happy) and count it a
happiness to themselves to see others miserable:) But he that has put on
Bowels as the elect of God, and knows how to mourn with them that mourn, will
but half enjoy his own house (how goodly soever) whilst so many of his
neighbors lie waste about it.

Have not our Divisions brought England into the same case with London, and
made us like-City, like-Nation? Though here, and there, a Family has wealth
enough and to spare (whom I may compare to the fine houses which are built
here, and there one, upon the ruins of London) yea though some have fished
notably in troubled waters, and made all the rivers which ran in several
channels to pay tribute to their Sea, I mean enriched themselves by the help
and advantage of other men's divisions, and dissatisfactions, yet it is far
otherwise with the greater part of the Nation, the generallity of which are
brought to a morsel of bread (I mean to great and deplorable poverty) Landlords
not able to live without their rents, tenants not able to pay them, tradesmen
not able to subsist by their callings, many left without callings to subsist
by, and all these latter sorts of men are pourtrayed to the life in and by
those houses, (and those the major part) which do yet lie in dust and ashes;
they by reason of the late material fire, but the former by reason of a more
immaterial fire, viz. of Strife and Contention not extinguished to this day.

We have not yet done with comparing the present case of London for want of
more things to compare it to: We might farther liken it to the first World,
when but a day or two, of Creation-work had passed upon it. It was then no
perfect Chaos, neither was it a perfect World. Or I might liken it to the first
appearance of a second World, after the first was drowned. Is not London such a
thing as that was, where some high trees, and high mountains began to show
themselves, here and there; but all the rest continued under water? So
gradually and leisurely, does our City rise.

But such shall not be the resurrection of the Just, for they shall not rise
one by one but (semel and simul) all together, 1 Cor. 15.52. In a moment, in
the twinkling of an eye at the last trump, the dead shall be raised, and we
shall be changed. We which are alive and remain to the coming of the Lord shall
not prevent them which are asleep, we which are alive shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds. 1 These. 4.15, 17.

And now methinks I have done by London, as people use to do by young children,
whose looks are yet come to no setledness, or consistence. Some cry they are
like the Fathers; others, that they are like the Mother; others again that they
are like this or that kinsman, or kinswoman. I have likened it to very many
things, and surely it has some resemblance of every of them. But when shall we
see it like its self again? or every where, like what it now is, so far as it
is now its self? Here, and there, something is hatched: but for the most part,
London is but as an Egg, that we hope may be hatched in time. It looks much
worse than it did before the fire, but yet much better than it did presently
after the fire: so that it gives us occasion to sing both of Judgment and mercy.

Seeing so mixed a face of London, as now I do, some little part thereof so
lovely as it is; the rest so lamentable; I can do no less than pursue it with
my most earnest prayers, that as the corrupted bodies of believers, shall one
day be conformed to their incorruptible Souls, and not their immortal Souls
ever made like to their mortal bodies, and as the Church militant shall
hereafter be made glorious, as that which is now Triumphant, but the Triumphant
Church never conformed in sufferings to that which is militant; so the ruinous
part of London, may in Gods good time, become such as that which is now most
beautiful; but the beautiful beginnings thereof (in spite of all that wish it)
may never become ruinous.

DISCOURSE XVI.
That uniting, or at least wise quieting the minds of men, as to matter of
Religion (so far as it can be done) would much conduce to the rebuilding of the
City.

I Am not of their mind, that think it an impossible thing, to give the
generality of men (that are any ways considerable) some reasonable
satisfaction, and contentment in point of Religion. It may be difficult, but
surely it is feasible. If it has been, and is done elsewhere, why not amongst
us?

That the World may see I do not drive at Anarchy in Religion, the first
principle I would here suggest, is, That it cannot reasonably be expected from
Rulers and Governors, to give equal countenance and encouragement to all sorts
of Religion within their respective Dominions, viz. to the Christian, Jewish,
and Mahumetan Religion. We would not that the Supreme Magistrate should appear
like a Sceptick, as if he were inclined to all Religions, but engaged in none:
Much less would we, that the Laws of a Nation should have a Religion to choose,
and should respect all alike, that is, either afford no countenance, and
maintenance, (or more than connivance) to any, or the same to all.

If the Christian Magistrate do think some Religions damnable, as the Jewish,
Mahumetan, and the like, no reason he should provide a maintenance for them, or
for the Teachers of them, as of that Religion, in, and by which he believes
men may be saved.

Private men are not willing, to communicate their substance to the Teachers
and leaders of a Religion Fundamentally different from their own. What
Protestant would voluntarily contribute to the maintenance of Popish Priests,
as such? any more than to the making of a golden Calf? why then should any such
thing be expected from Protestant Magistrates?

It is more it may be than Rulers can do, without impoverishing a Nation, to
provide a sufficient maintenance for the Ringleaders of all parties and
persuasions, and therefore upon that account (though upon many others also)
must let fundamental diffenters shift for themselves. Howsoever, to give the
same encouragement to good and evil, truth and falsehood, (I mean to what is
fundamentally such, in the account of those by whom Laws are made, and public
affairs administered) is, or seems to be as irrational a thing, as for a
Father to entrust a Prodigal child with as great an estate as the rest of his
children that are good husbands; or one that is a fool, or mad man, as those
that have wit to manage it, or as it is to reward vice at the rate of virtue.

The Principle I have laid down bespeaketh no Anarchy or confusion in Religion,
because it aims at some one Religion to be preferred above all the rest, viz.
that which the Legislators of a Nation shall think fit to establish, own, and
countenance, as the public, authorized Profession of this or that Nation,
which being so established, is not alterable at the sole and single will and
pleasure of the Prince, (to be sure in England) as having not power in, and of
himself to repeal such Laws as are made (whatsoever Religion or persuasion
himself be of;) which objections being removed out of the way, I see no reason
why any body should be offended (and I think upon the reasons aforesaid, very
few will) if the Law of a Nation, and Magistrates, whose work it is to put
those Laws in execution, do afford that countenance and maintenance to one sort
of Religion, and to the leaders thereof, which they afford not to any other
that is fundamentally opposite thereunto; as is the Jewish or Mahumetan to the
Christian; and the Popish, in some things, to the Protestant.

One or two objections more, which are all I can imagine, may be raised against
this first principle, will be answered by and by; And therefore I proceed to a
second, viz. That the Religion of a Nation need not, ought not, yea indeed
cannot, consistere in puncto, but intra aliquam latitudinem. It must needs be
like a circle with several lines drawn within, all which, though they meet and
touch in one and the same center, yet are somewhat distant each from other, in
the circumference: What I affirmed last, I shall prove first, Viz. That
Religion cannot be made to consist in a point, that is, that all persons who
are truly of one, and the same Religion, can never come to agree in every
punctilio: For as the Apostle says, Romans 14.2. One believes that he may eat
all things, another who is weak, eats Herbs, and verse 5. one man esteems
one day above another, another man esteems every day alike; let every man be
fully persuaded in his own mind. He that converseth with men, about such
matters as can admit of any dispute, will find it daily, and hourly verified,
that all men cannot idem sentire, that is, have the same sentiments, and
apprehensions, as to such things, but so many men, so many minds, proves too
true a Proverb.

Thence I infer in the next place, that Religion ought not consistere in
puncto, that is, men ought not to make, or pretend as if it did, or to insist
upon it that it should do so, or to use force and violence to bring it to that
pass, it being a fruitless attempt so to do: Peradventure men may idem mentiri
that is, counterfeit, and make show as if they were all of a mind, when it is
their worldly interest so to do, but then must they use many distinctions,
reservations, equivocations, etc. wherewith to salve themselves and their
pretended unanimity: for idem sentire in matters doubtful, all men never can,
no more than every man's Palate can be pleased a like with all sorts of Meat and
Sauces. Now that which puts men upon shifts, evasions, illusions,
equivocations, and such Ananiah and Saphirah-like tricks, which rewards men
for the same, and punishes others that cannot do the like, that I say ought
not to be, and therefore Religion should not be handled as if it did consist in
an indivisible point, as if every thing were fundamental, that is but
circumstantial; or certain, that is but probable; or fit to be imposed, or
enforced, which is but fit to be recommended.

When I plead for some latitude to be allowed in matter of Religion, I go upon
this supposition, that it is not amiss for a Christian Church to declare its
opinion in some points of Religion, that are not absolutely certain, and to
give its advice in some matters of practice that are not absolutely necessary
(at leastwise to salvation) and that all Churches use to do so, and such
advice of a Church, and declaration of its opinion, is commonly reckoned as
part of the Religion which it professes. Now taking the Religion of a Church,
in that large and vulgar sense, as well for what it opineth, or does but give
its opinion, and advice in, as for what it determines, and is peremptory in; I
say, in reference to the former of these (though not to the latter) some
latitude ought to be given, to modest dissenters, either in Opinion or
Practice: and that for the reasons aforesaid; St. Paul having received no
Commandment from the Lord concerning Virgins, their marrying, or not marrying,
only gave his judgment, that it was better at that time, not to marry, 1 Cor.
7.25. and then left them to their liberty, verse 28. But if a Virgin marry, she
has not sinned; From which example of his, may be inferred, that where the
mind of God is not clearly revealed, or there is no manifest Command, or
Prohibition in the case, it is good to advise men the best we can, and then
leave them to their Liberty.

By what I have said already may be understood, what I mean by the encouraging,
and countenancing of but one Religion in a Nation, so as by public owning and
professing of it, and by the Magistrates providing a maintenance for the
Professors and Teachers of it, viz. that no more Religions should expect to be
maintained, and upheld by the Laws of one and the same Nation, at a public
charge, than those which are radically and fundamentally, one, and the same;
but it is far from me to assert or think, that only one branch, of that
Religion which has the same root, should be watered by the kindness, and
bounty of the Magistrate, whereas, surely every branch of the same tree, that
bears any fruit, ought to be so; as a Father ought to provide for all the
Children that spring from his own loins, and do behave themselves any thing
towardly, and not only for so many of them as are of such a complexion, and of
such a stature. What are persons whose Religion agrees in Fundamentals of
Doctrine, and Practice, but Children of the same Father, and of the same
Mother? and such as ought not to be excluded by some few, that appropriate the
Name of Sons to themselves, as if they only were such.

I make account the true Protestant Religion is but one, in, and amongst all
the Professors of it, though they that are such, be some of them Calvinists,
others Lutherans, etc. (as the Children of one and the same Father, have
several Names) or as the several arms of the Sea though diversely called, (are
but one and the same Ocean.) That one Religion for the substance of it is
common to all the true Professors of it, as one and the same soul is common to
all the parts of that body, which it belongs to, though of different shapes and
figures, or as the Apostle says, There are diversities of gifts, but one and
the same Spirit, who works all and in all. When then I plead the
reasonableness of one Religion, and but one to have more than the connivance of
Authority ( viz. public countenance and maintenance) I mean the whole body of
that Religion (or rather of the Professors and Teachers of it) if by dishonest,
unsober, and unpeaceable carriage (not by some variety in opinion, and modest
practice) they do not cut themselves off. All this does well suit with the
notion which I have contended for, viz. of a latitude within one and the same
Religion, which I have proved cannot but be taken, and moreover that it ought
to be given.

And now I have one thing more to say, concerning such a latitude as I have
pleaded for, in order to contenting the minds of men in point of Religion
(which is the design of this chapter) I say, I have this to prove, that the
vouchsafement of some latitude in Religion, both as to Opinion and Practice,
needs not to be feared. They that dread it, are worse scared than hurt: If some
latitude indulged would destroy a Church, or Kingdom, few of either had been
left in the World; for some such thing is almost every where admitted, and
allowed of, at leastwise connived at, and tolerated, even in the Romish
Church, which does of all others most glory in its being at unity with it self:
Witness the Names of Distinction, and Opposition, which are found in that
Church; Witness their writing, disputing, and practicing, one contrary to
another, the two former of which are more than I plead for.

The danger lies not in Dissents, but in Dissentions, now the former may be
without the latter: They that are of two minds may love one another far better
(and often times do) than they that are of one. Two humble, and well tempered
men, of different Judgments, shall be dearer to one another, and have lesser
strife than two proud men that are of the same. It does not follow, that
because men are not of the same opinion they must wrangle, nor yet because they
are, that they will otherwise agree.

Some that cannot comply with all and every the opinions, and practices of a
Church in matters preter fundamental, may yet be better sons to that Church in
point of duty, honor and service, than hundreds are, who either do, or seem,
in all things to believe as the Church believes. Mr. Chillingworth (if I
mistake not) was a Son that the Church of England seems to be as proud of, as
of most that ever she bore, and yet we know he was no echo to the Church, that
could say all its words after it, he could subscribe the Articles of the Church
in no other sense, than that they did contain in them what was sufficient for
the salvation of them that did believe and practice accordingly (which might
consist with their being interwoven with several mistakes and errors, as a man's
eating a hearty meal, though it presuppose there is enough at the table, of
that which he well likes, may consist with many other dishes being there, that
he does not care for.) How many that could universally assent to the Church;
have been a heaviness to that their mother, and a shame to her, whilst he that
could go no farther than I have said, who could not say credo ecclesiae, but in
ecclesia was and is, a praise and a renown.

We can have but men's words for it, that they are of our mind, or of the same
opinion with the Church, and some men's words are but wind, and give us no
assurance that what they say is true, or admit it be, how great a change in the
minds of weak and unstable men, may a day or two produce, some of which are
generally of that man's mind, whom they last discoursed with, and carried about
with every wind.

As for some latitude, and variety in practice, it was a thing the Apostle Paul
seems not to have been troubled at, nor willing that others should be much
concerned about it. One esteems one day above another; another esteems all
days alike; one believes that he may eat all things; another being weak
eats herbs. The thing that perplexed him, was not that they did not do all
alike, but that they did desspise, and judge one another for not doing the same
thing. Different practice, in circumstantial matters, cannot make so great a
discrepancy betwixt one Church and another, and the ordinances therein
administered, as variety, and diversity of gifts does: and needs must make,
whilst the gift of one Minister lies in explication, of another in
application: one is a Boanerges, the other a Barnabas, one has a lofty style
like Isaiah, the other as plain as Amos, in one man's preaching an Elephant may
swim, but in another man's a Lamb may wade. Is the use of gifts given by God for
the edification of the Church to be suppressed, because gifts are so various
and unlike one another? Is there not harmony even in that discord? what great
deformity, or disorder can there then be, in that smaller discrepancy, which
arises from the mere varying of circumstances, such as habits, postures,
gestures, in which yet I would have no man to affect singularity, and to differ
from others, no more than to suffer for that dissonancy to others, which he
cannot help, his conscience being such as it is. Did ever man complain that the
motion of the Sun was irregular, and ill-favored, because a certain latitude
is allowed him within his ecliptic line? which he makes use of, one while
Northward, another while toward the South: nay is it not for the good of the
world it should be so?

To return once more to a latitude as to opinions, about such points of
Religion as are not fundamental, I could plead for the allowance, or permission
of it by saying. First, That much of that which is called controversy is mere
(...), or strife about words, we thinking others, and they us again, to be far
more dissonant than indeed we are, our meanings being like the tops of some
mountains in Wales, which do or seem even to touch one another, but our words
like the bottomes of those mountains, which are many miles asunder. Men
oft-times do neither contradict us, nor prejudice themselves, so much by their
different opinions, as we take them to do, because they seem to differ from us,
and from the truth more than they do.

Secondly, By some liberty of disputing, as by knocking of two flints together,
some sparks of light are brought out, and men are more confirmed in the truth,
nihil est tam certum quam quod ex dubio certum. Thus trees by being shaken may
take deeper root.

Thirdly, to be in heart a dissenter from a Church in some less certain
Opinions, if men be such only in heart, can no ways redound to the prejudice of
Church or State, nor be so much as a grief to either, if they please not to
enquire into it; for as our Proverb says, What the eye sees not, the heart
rues not.

Fourthly, dissenters as to preterfundamental Opinions, whilst they speak not
Polemical, but practical language, (which is easy for them to do) can scarce
be known to dissent, but when men express controverted matters in School
terms, (known terms of war and defiance) they do as it were beat up an alarm to
those of the contrary persuasion, and send them a challenge, and bring the
enemy about their ears: Prudent men by observing that rule, though they
dissent, yet can forbear to offend, and consequently need not to be rejected
for their inoffensive dissents.

Fifthly, Those that differ as to certain axioms and principles, may draw the
same conclusions from both, at leastwise aim at the same mark, yea, and hit it:
They that disagree in their speculative part, may yet agree in the practick. So
it is observed, that Calvinists and Arminians differ but little in the
applicative part of their Sermons: so have we seen Bowlers, some play their
byasses up, others down, at the same Mistress, and both it may be have come
near it. The notional part of Physic is much altered from what it was, yet men
cure diseases as they had wont to do; and that change which is made in the
Theory of Physic, makes little in the practice.

Lastly, God would that there should be some latitude allowed, both as to
opinion and practice, within the Verge and compass of the true Religion (which
is every where radically and fundamentally the same) as we may easily gather;
first from hence, that God has left many smaller things in Religion
adiaphorous, that is indifferent, and undetermined, as if intended on purpose
for to be the Sphere of Christian Liberty, within the compass of which men
might act, or not act, do the same things, or differ one from another, and both
without sin. Of this there are many instances in Scripture, as Romans 14. 1 Cor.
7. etc.

Again, God has left several other things in the Scripture dark and doubtful,
admitting of doubtful disputations, as the phrase is, Romans 14. as to which the
Church it self can give no other satisfaction than its probable conjectures
will afford, to which a reverence is due, yet not so great, as to receive those
probable and conjectural interpretations of the Church (which may possibly be
weakened by probabilities on the other hand) as if they were matters of Faith,
or as evident as are the Articles of our Creed, all but that one so ambiguously
worded, viz. about Christ his descent into hell; not that the thing intended by
that Article, as Doctor Pierson and others expound it, is doubtful, but the
manner of expressing it, putting the word Hell for (...), and Sheol, which may
signify the grave, and the estate of death. But that by the way.

If the God of Truth and Unity could have brooked no latitude in the Opinions
and practices of those men that hold the same foundation of Christian Religion,
surely he would have left nothing indifferent, but have given order concerning
every pin belonging to his Church under the New Testament, as well as to his
Tabernacle under the Old, neither would he have left so many things doubtful
and disputable, as are manifestly left in that condition.

This seems to have been done as in order to giving men something of liberty,
(a thing so sweet and pleasant) as is a fine Garden behind a closs house; so
likewise (and that principally) to exercise the charity and humility of men,
that the weak should learn not to judge the strong, and the strong not to
despise the weak, and both of them to love the Image of God in one another,
whilst they see in each but little of their own, that is of the image of some
of their own persuasions and practices.

And now I have spoken so much for latitude, that some it may be will think I
am a Latitudinarian in the vulgar sense of the word, but I think they are
mistaken.

Alas that I am got over but two Principles, relating to the composure of the
minds of men about Religion, I say but two principles all this while, viz.
first, that it is unreasonable for the Professors of two, or more Religions,
fundamentally opposite each to other; to expect equal countenance and
encouragement from the Laws of one and the same Nation, Ex. gr. for Papists to
expect that where the Laws of the Land are in favor of the Protestant
Religion, they should be as much in favor of the Roman Catholic (as they
non-sensically call it) and therefore that Religion which is fundamentally
opposite to what the Law of a Nation has established, ought not (at least by
violence) to struggle for pre-eminence, nor yet for parity; as we see the
Protestants in France do neither expect, nor attempt any such thing, as to
equalize, much less to overtop the Papists, who there have the Law on their
sides: And why should Papists attempt any such thing here against those
Protestants, who in England have the Law on their side every whit as much? this
principle received, would lay one great struggling about matter of Religion; the
other, and only principle we have finished besides this, is, that within the
compass of the owned and avowed Religion, some certain latitude ought to be
admitted, that all the sober and peaceable Professors and Teachers thereof
might be included, and not a piece of a Religion accepted and protected,
instead of the whole, and the rest (to the great dissatisfaction both of God
and men) unwarrantably excluded. I doubt I must ride Post through the other
principles and maxims, (unless I ought rather to call them proposals) which I
would lay down, because I have stayed so long upon the two first.

Thirdly, whereas every Religion must and ought to be built upon some
foundation, which no man within the power and Jurisdiction of the Nation
professing it, should be suffered to raze, or to undermine, by preaching,
public disputing, or writing against the same, I lay it down as a farther
principle, to quiet men in point of Religion, viz. That fundamentals in
Religion, or whatsoever things are so called, ought to be so plain in
Scripture, that he who runs may read them, and should themselves be all
manifestly built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, viz, of
their Doctrine. In this case we must to the Law and to the Testimony, or else
there will be no light in us. The Analogy or Rule of Faith (and what are true
fundamentals of Religion but such?) is, or ought to be taken out of the
plainest Texts of Scripture, such as give light to the simple; for such only
can be index sui and obscuri, that is, shine in their own light, and give light
to others.

Two things (if I mistake not) go to the constituting of a fundamental truth,
viz. that it be clear (as I have said already) that is, de facto, though it may
not be so de modo (as the doctrine of the Trinity) moreover, that it be of
great consequence, and importance, if not of absolute necessity to salvation,
to be known and believed. If either of these qualifications be wanting, it is
no fundamental truth, nor fit to be received as such, if both be present, they
will prevent a great deal of strife, and debate, which the putting of small and
doubtful things upon the Church for fundamentals, (like the fallacy of non
causa pro causa) would produce.

Now whereas there are some points of Religion which for the great consequence
of them, as also for their clearness, de facto, are, and have been adjudged
fundamental, particularly, the doctrine of the Trinity in Unity, which de modo
is very obscure, the meaning and manner of which is very hard to explain; I
would humbly propose, that the best way to avoid contention about such obscure
Articles of our Faith, were to state them wholly, and only in the very words of
Scripture, and to leave them to the Faith of men, just as there we find them,
ex. gr. as the Apostle expresses it, 1 John 5.7. There are three that bear
Record in Heaven, viz. the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these
three are one: Why should they not be judged to consent with us in the Doctrine
of the Trinity, who subscribe to that Text, and to all others of like import,
without any explication given either on their side, or on ours? For why should
we require from others a punctual assent to our explication of those things,
the manner of which we our selves do profess very little, if at all, to
understand?

Too peremptorily to explain things that are almost, if not altogether
inexplicable, and to endeavor thereby to conclude the Judgments of others,
what is it, but to conjure up enemies, and to bring quarrelsom wits about our
ears?

Least of all, may private or particular men take upon them positively to
explain those great mysteries, contrary to that sense which the Church for
several ages has given of them, and that (it may be) not without fear and
trembling, least it should miscarry in the exposition of so mysterious
Articles. They that differ from the known sense of the Church, as to such
Articles, when ever they treat thereof, let them keep entirely to the letter of
the Scripture, as to their Trench and Fort, and not come over the Brook Kidron
(as I may call it, alluding to Shimei) and so long they will be safe, and the
Church of God will be quiet: There are things enough of greater concernment to
practice, upon which no doubt or controversy does depend, expatiate upon them
and spare not.

If the Church be apt to take offense, that private persons should diffent from
her public sense, as to matter of opinion, or practice, though modestly
delivered by her, but as probably true, or good, shall I make so bold in that
case, as to offer for peace sake, that the Church would not be too inquisitive
into such matters, but leave it to God to be (as by prerogative he is) the only
searcher of hearts, that is, let the Church not labor to scrue men's judgments
out of them, who desire to keep their judgments to themselves; and mean time
do live honestly, and peaceably. For by so increasing knowledge, and setting it
self as it were to shrive, and confess men, she will but increase sorrow; as
Solomon advertiseth Eavesdroppers, Eccles. 7.21. Take no heed to all words that
are spoken least thou hear thy Servant curse thee: Listen not too much, wink at
small faults, pry not into the hearts of men, which are the Ark of God. Some
have said that Spain has dispeopled, and undone it self, by its Inquisition:
What needed the Papists in Queen Mary's days, to have put that insnaring
question to peaceable Protestants? viz. what understand you by Hoc est corpus
meum? This is my Body; was it not to seek an occasion against them, that they
might burn them? they that shall first examine and then punish the secrets of
men's hearts, will but make work for themselves, and put the Church into a
flame. They that peaceably follow a Religion, that we our selves do think, may
and will bring them to Heaven at the last, ought not frivolously, or easily, to
be disturbed by us, since the end of Religion is to save the souls of men, and
that which will do so should be encouraged, and not infested.

Another rule laid down by the Apostle for the peace of the Church, and of the
estate of Religion, is that in Romans 15.1. We then that are strong ought to bear
the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves. They that know the
things which are indifferent, and lawful to be done or let alone, to be so
indeed, can dispense with them in themselves and others, without sin: but they
that think them to be really unlawful, (and they are the weak men in the sense
of this Text, as the former are the strong) cannot do them without sin: Let
then our Christian charity take the chair, and let it own them for weak
Brethren, who to its self shall appear to be such, and when that is done, you
that are strong consider, though it might best please your selves to make weak
ones stoop to your burdens, it will be only pleasing to God, that you stoop to
their infirmities, and bear them viz. by forbearing those that cannot help them.

What of this chapter is yet behind will prove (if I mistake not) like the
Galaxia or milkie way in the Heavens, which is a circle made up of many stars,
but very small ones: or rather like the sparks that fall from a steel, or flint
struck together, which are very little things, and soon over, though there be
many of them. To save the pains of numbering particulars, make account that
every distinct paragraph is a distinct head, and it is sufficient. I had almost
called the following paragraphs, by the name of Via lactea ad pacem Ecclesiae
and Regni, but that to baptize, or name a child before it be born is not so
usual.

Contend not for those things that are not worth contending for, and of that
kind are all they; our contending for which would prevent a greater good.

There are certain truths of smaller concernment, which though evident enough,
are yet less valuable than peace, not that we may deny, or renounce any known
truth (though the least of all) to accommodate the peace of Church, or state
(for that were to lie, which is in no case allowable) but we may forbear to
urge and insist upon them. It was as really true, as any thing else can be,
that no sort of meat was common, or unclean in it self, Romans 14.14. and that
circumcision was not necessary, nor yet the observation of such days as under
Moses his Law were appointed, but yet the Apostle would not break the peace of
the Church about such small matters, but suffer every man to abound in his own
fense, and bids them follow after the things which make for peace, and
wherewith one may edify another, Romans 14.19.

Offend not the consciences of other men, but when if you did it not you must
offend your own. Paul even before his conversion, did not persecute men for
their consciences, but out of zeal, concerning zeal (says he) persecuting the
Churches: and in Acts 26.9. he says, I verily thought with my self that I
ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth, nay in
saying that, he obtained mercy because he did it ignorantly in unbelief: he
intimates, that if he had not done it out of a misguided conscience, he had
sinned unpardonably. Woe be to them (if there be any such) that burden their
own consciences, that they may burden other men's, whereas no man ought to
burden the conscience of another man, but when thereby he may lighten his own,
viz. By doing that, which he thinks to be his indispensable duty. If I baptize
my children, as being persuaded that God requires me so to do, and those that
are against Infant Baptism are offended at it; that is scandal taken, not
given. For in matter of conscience, charity must begin at home, I must take
more care to gratify my own conscience, than any other man's. But to vex the
consciences of other men, in such cases as our own do not command us so to do,
but rather countermand us, not command but rather check, and control for so
doing, is to make a great approach toward that great transgression, viz. the
sin against the Holy Ghost, as some do understand it. I foresee the Church will
enjoy a great deal of rest, and peace, when no more shall be done to the
consciences of men, then what shall be imposed upon them that do it, not by
their lusts and interests; but by their very consciences.

Religion should be made use of for the edification of all, for the destruction
of none. Then is Religion (or what is so called) made a stalking horse, in the
worst sense that can be, when it is designed as a snare upon mizpeh, or as an
instrument of men's ruin (though but temporal) how abominable was the saying of
those Persian Princes, Dan. 6.5. We shall not find any occasion against this
Daniel except we find it against him, concerning the Law of his God. Their own
consciences would have been better satisfied, if they could have found occasion
against him concerning the kingdom, (for that they first sought for) but they
could find none, forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was there any error or
fault found in him. How devilish was that policy that aimed at throwing such a
man as he into the Lions den, by commanding him to restrain prayer from the
Almighty for so many days together? which kind of policy strikes with a two
edged sword, for if men yield against conscience, they are in danger of
Hellfire, if they yield not, they are almost sure of being temporally undone.
They that shall make a net of Religion, in any other sense, than to catch Souls
for Heaven, will make the Church a mountain of prey, and the waters of the
Sanctuary to be styled meribah or waters of strife. Dan. 6.24. and may
themselves in time be cast into a Den; as they have cast others: and those
Lions have mastery over them, and break all their bones, which before were
Lambs till they made Lions of them.

Make the yoke of Religion as light; and as easy, as you can, and let it not be
only tolerable, or not more than men can make a shift to bear: for when the
ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, then assuredly will her paths be
peace. He whose master puts him to as much work as ever he can do, and what is
next to that would exceed his strength, will never have his ears bored in the
service of such a master, thereby resigning himself to be his servant for ever.
A man had better accept of less work, with more good will, and cheerfulness. I
pity that old man that said he did so, and so, but with a trembling hand, and
an aching heart; and that he thought every conscientious man did the same thing
in the same manner.

To them that desire the uniting of all worthy and sober men, give me leave to
say, that such would swallow gnats, if they might be exempted from Camels; I
say for the sake of public work, and public peace, they would swallow such
things as to them seem inexpedient (which I mean by Gnats) though they cannot
but strain at Camels, that is such things, as to them seem unlawful. Public
countenance and maintenance, would outweigh matters of indifferency with many
men, to whom such things are more than indifferent, even very necessary.

One good way to make the yoke of Religion easy, is to make use of as few
spiritual cords, as may be, to tie men with, but rather of such as are of a
civil nature; for thereby the Church and State are more secured, and the minds
of men less exasperated. It is well known what Churchwardens have sworn to do,
by the oaths which they took at their entrance into that office; but whether it
be that they fear to perform what they did fear not to promise, (or whatever
the reason is) we find the intended obligation has little influence upon them,
and they are generally the same, as if they had taken no such oaths, which
confirms what I was saying, viz. that Religious obligations, as from some men,
give the Church and State but little security, yet do they vex and disquiet the
minds of men, more than those of another nature would do, and greatly imbitter
them against those by whom they are imposed upon them against their wills.

It would yet further conduce to the Church its peace, (which is the thing I am
earnestly in pursuit of throughout this Chapter, though in order to the
restoration of the City) if it might be taken for a sufficient proof of men's
obedience to the Church and the Officers of it, when men observe all the
Commands of God, seconded by their Authority: whosoever does what is manifestly
his duty, having the Authority both of God and man to induce him thereunto,
should be presumed to have respect unto both in the doing it.

Lastly, Superiors should study all they can to give satisfaction in matters
of Religion, and Inferiors what in them is to receive it: So Paul became all
things to all men, that he might win some: He says, he studied to please all
men for their good to edification. Superiors should impose nothing but what
upon a true account is necessary, Act. 15.28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost,
and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things, etc.
and inferiors should oppose nothing, but what they judge unlawful. That which
I aim to prove in all that I have herein said is, that such principles and
practices as I have here recommended (as modestly as I could, and with humble
submission to better judgments) would much encourage and further the building
of the City; which conclusion I draw from these two premises, viz. what would
pacify and satisfy men as to matter of Religion, would much promote the
restoring of the City: But the things suggested would much pacify and satisfy
men, as to matter of Religion. The minor I have proved at large; the major, or
first Proposition, I shall briefly speak to, and so put a period to this
Chapter, which for the length of it beyond any other, formerly compared to the
Antediluvian Patriarchs, we may call Methuselah.

That quieting the minds of men, as to matters of Religion, would promote the
building of the City, I shall briefly prove, as follows. Joy is the strength
of men, as one Text says, The joy of the Lord shall be your strength: Joy
makes men like Giants refreshed with Wine, mighty to run their race. Now
certain it is, that to give men content in point of Religion, would fill them
with joy, and make the greatest Jubilee that has yet been kept.

If it be said, that some will never be pleased with liberty granted to
themselves, unless the same be denied to all others not of the same opinion in
all things, though of the same Religion in the main, Charity would, that I
should think there are but a few such ill natured people, and they, of all
others, have, and do forfe it their own liberty.

I have heard of a Senator much condemned for putting a bird to death, at a
time when it was accounted a Piaculum to destroy the life of any creature; but
he alleging, (if my ill memory do not misrepresent the story) that the bird he
killed, was one that would not suffer other birds to live by him, was thereupon
acquitted, (and well he might.) I hope there are but few birds of that feather,
at this day, since men have seen what pecking at, and preying one upon another,
has brought us to; let him be as the speckled bird, ( Jer. 12.9.) who would
have all others made to fly the light, and the Sun to shine upon none but
himself, and those that flock together with him.

But for the generality of men I dare to undertake, that a liberty in common
with others (birds of the same kind, though not of the same feather) that is,
persons of the same Religion for substance, though of different opinion,) would
make their hearts more glad, than theirs whose corn and wine increase: Then
would our City go merrily on, and men would build with a courage, whereas on
the other hand, dissatisfactions as to Religion, disspirit men for all good
purposes, and make them cold and careless; whilst men dream of transplanting,
they will have little heart to building: That which makes men listless to
Trade, will make them so to build; and that which qui-ckneth the one, (as to
deal tenderly with their Religion, certainly does) will also quicken the other.
Whilst some upbraid others with their dissonant Opinions, they will upbraid
them again with their dissolute lives: and thus whilst we pry into one another
weaknesses, and pelt each other with dirt, the City is like to go but slowly
on, to what it might do, if we had that mutual charity which is said to cover a
multitude of infirmities. A vexed conscience, like the passion of jealousy, is
the rage of a man, and will hardly spare in the day of its wrath. A vexed
conscience will go nigh to discover it self one time or other, as they say,
vexata natura prodit seipsam. And are men fit to build in a rage? A serene mind
is fit for any thing, but a mind that is like the raging Sea, will do nothing
but cast up dirt and mire. We read in Isa. 11.13. how that Ephraim shall not
envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. When God shall make and perform
some such promise to England, then certainly will our City go up amain.

DISCOURSE XVII.
That a studious advancing and promoting of Trade by those that have power to
do it, would greatly contribute to the Re-building of London.

WHat should we do with a City without a Trade? Can men pay great rents, and
fines, keep servants, etc. with little or no trade? Citizens (as is said of the
Fowls of the Air) can neither sow nor reap illis nec seritur nec metitur in a
literal sense. London streets are neither arable nor Pasture. Take away their
Trade, and you take their Millstone to pledge, which is their very life, for so a
man's livelihood is said to be. London is a Lamp, Trade the Oil that feeds it.
What is a Lamp without Oil? Give them but Oil enough, and if others have made
them burn, you will make them shine again.

If Trade be destroyed, Citizens will be starved, and that will make them
desperate: for Hunger (as they say) will break through stone walls. Those Bees
will care for no hive, if they can suck no honey. If Trades be not the making
of men, usually they are their undoing. If Trading take wings and fly away,
they will be gone too. Could Londoners foresee there would be no Trade, they
would presently cease from building, and betake themselves to the Country,
where they could profit more both by the earth and by the air, and could live
for less. No Trade, no City; no City, no Kingdom. Impoverish London, and you
impoverish the Country (for the City doubtless was, and is the best door of
utterance for the Country man's best Commodities) impoverish the Farmer, and
you undo both Gentry and Nobility, for what shall Landlords live upon, when
Tenants cannot pay their rents?

Who knows not that Trade is that to the Politic Body, that the Circulation of
the Blood (whereby proper nourishment is conveyed to every part) is to the Body
natural? When the Blood stagnates, or does not circulate freely, the Body
languisheth. Trade is a Mystery of gaining by those that do gain by us, and in
the same Commodity. The Merchant gains by the Drugster, the Drugster by the
Apothecary, the Apothecary by the Patient, and the Patient by the Apothecary
(with the blessing of God) though not wealth, yet health, which is better. As
friendship is upheld in the World by an intercourse of kindnesses, and doing of
courtesies one for another, so the greatest part of humane society, is upheld
by Commerce and Traffic, one man needing another Commodities, and he his
again.

Trade is as I may call it a grave Tennis-play, whereby the Ball of profit is
banded from one man to another, an exercise which most men are so well pleased
with, that should they be deprived of it, many men would not much care to be in
the World, much less in the City. In a word, Trade is the very radical moisture
of London, and of other Cities, when that is almost dried up, Citizens, like
those that are fallen into a Consumption, or hectic Fever, will change the
Air, and choose to be in the Country, and to build there, if they build any
where. Give Citizens what you will besides, they will never be content without
a Trade, and the reason is, because they cannot be content to starve: as we see
the Inhabitants of those Towns are ready to do, where the ancient Trade (were
it of Clothing or whatsoever else) is almost quite lost. Though Trade would
not content them without any thing else, yet I am sure nothing else would
without the accession of a Trade. Men will never believe they have any love for
them, who have none for their Trading, and do naturally hate those whom they do
but suspect to be enemies thereunto.

Enemies to Trade (if there be any such Monsters) can be no friends to the
honor of the King, for to be a King of Beggars must needs be a disgrace, since
God counts it his honor to be a King of Kings.

I think the honor, as of a King, so of a Parliament, is not a little
concerned in the welfare of Trade. For a Parliament is a College of State
Physicians, and Trade has been their Patient all along (a cachectick,
obstructed Patient) could they cure it at last, they would be famous. London,
in the Act for the rebuilding of it, is spoken of by the Honorable Title of a
place renowned for Traffic and Commerce all the World over: So will the
contrivers of that Act be, for their Wisdom and prudence, when they shall bring
it to that pass again.

Could Londoners regain such a Trade as formerly they have had, they would not
grudg to build such a City as might even dazzle the eyes of its beholders; but
as Trade goes now, they think it is fine enough as it is, and is intended to
be, if not too fine.

DISCOURSE XVIII.
That the best way to dispatch the City, would be to build some whole Streets
together.

WE have yet but a scattering Village (as it were) of the new part of London,
whereas if we had been wise, we might have had by this time (almost as easily)
a kind of New City. My meaning is this, If the Owners of ground belonging to
some of the highest and noblest Streets, had all agreed together to begin, and
carry on their buildings all at once, or to part with their ground to others,
so many of them as were not in a capacity so to do) others being as willing to
give them a valuable consideration for it (as having a regard on both sides to
the public good) then might we have seen ere now, a New Cornhill, a New
Cheapside complete, and entire, and possibly some other streets of greatest
note and eminency. These would have looked and signified like a new City, or
some good part of such a thing.

It is good to make an end of one thing first. Husbandmen do not use to Plow
and Sow a part of one Furrow, and a part of another, and so of fifty or a
hundred before they have finished any one, but count it the best Husbandry to
Plow and Sow a whole Furrow at a time. We say, he that is aliquis in omn bus,
is nullus in singulis, he that is some body in every thing, is good at nothing.
He is more a Scholar that is thoroughly versed in one Art or Science, than he
that has but sipt of every one. In like manner, two goodly new Streets would
look more like a new London, than all that is built as yet. I doubt not but
they who made the Act for Building did foresee this, but fearing to be
injurious to particular persons, by making some more forward than they could
afford to be, and others more backward than they needed, or were willing to
have bin, (who would have thought it unreasonable to have stayed for others,
till their houses had bin first built (though situate in more eminent places
than were their own) thought fit to leave it to the Liberty and Prudence of men
to agree amongst themselves what might in that particular be most for the
general good.

If Workmen and Materials enough could have been procured, or yet may, (which I
doubt not) to carry on all, and every house at one and the same time, in one or
two noble streets, and nevertheless to supply the occasions of scattered
buildings, and builders, in other more obscure places (where a liberty of
Building dividedly, and successively, were allowed) then would the public
convenience no ways interfere with any man's private interest.

Suppose then it were proclaimed, that all and every house, in two or three
eminent streets should be built at one and the same time, and at such a time
they would begin, do you think that workmen would not come from all parts of
his Majesty's Dominions (if not also from Protestant Countries beyond the Seas)
as not doubting to meet with good and full employment? Now in case they should
do so, there would not want hands to do every man's work, as well in private
streets, as in those of greater eminency. Bells that ring for Weddings, and
other joyful solemnities, are rung all together, and then we know they make the
best music, whereas one, and but one Bell at a time, gives the doleful notice
of Deaths and Funerals. In the case I am speaking of, it is not only the more
the merrier, but the fewer the worse cheer, contrary to the latter part of our
Proverb. It has been complained of, that houses which have been built at some
distance of time from one another, have been apt to sever and part one from
another, and one to sink before the other were finished, which should make men
ambitious to build houses in the same street at the same time, which use to
agree best, as twins are wont to do, who were bred and born, at or near the
same time. It is best that houses which must be contiguous, should be
contemporary, and they that must stand together, should rise together, and be a
collateral security (if I may so call it) each to other.

Divided houses (some one or some few in one street and some in another) do or
may sadly remember us of divided interests, every man shifting for himself, and
setting up for himself, or some few together, like those St. Paul speaks of
Acts 27.44. who in the time of Shipwreck, Some cast themselves into the Sea,
being able to swim, and the rest, some on boards, and some on the broken pieces
of the Ship, made toward the Land.

Methinks men should strain hard (their credit and purses, I mean not their
consciences) to comply with a common and public good, and particularly, with
building some whole streets together, or giving way to others, if that be such.
Nature has taught the lifeless elements to quit their proper center when it
may be for the good of the universe. So Water which naturally inclines to
ascend, will descend to prevent an abhorred vacuum: So the Heavenly Spheres
though they have a slow motion of their own, from West to East, yet do more
swiftly accompany the primum mobile, or first mover from East to West, as if it
were to show us we should be more swift in adhering to, and attending upon a
public good, than our own private.

Let it never be said that men will not agree to do what is best for
themselves, unless they be forced to it, for that is just like Children: If
then it appear to be for a public and common good to build some whole streets
together, let no man oppose it with respect to his private interest,
especially, if there be those that would compensate him for it, for so to do,
were (according to our Proverb) To burn other men's Houses, that we might roast
our own Eggs.

DISCOURSE XIX.
That our building ought to begin where the fire ended.

THe Fire made more ends than one, for that it burned both East and West: but
wheresoever it ended, there should we begin to build. The method of fire, and
of building, are quite opposite, the first is Analytical, the latter
Synthetical, which method begins with the end of things: So one of the first
questions in Theology is, what is the chief end of man? The fire went from the
middle, (as it were) to the extremes, from Them street toward Tower-street on
one, and toward the Temple on the other hand; but every body knows, that it is
better to proceed from extremes to the middle, for (in medio virtus) (and that
is the method which I commend to be used in our building) viz. to build first
at both ends, or extremes of the City, where the fire gave over destroying, and
so to proceed to the middle, from the two poles (as it were) to the center; as
they say, where the natural Philosopher ends, there the Physician begins: ubi
desinit Physicus, etc. So where the fire ended, ought the builders to begin.

Now the reason of that advice is, because when there are but few houses in the
new City, if they stand by themselves, they will be unsafe, but if they be
joined to the old buildings, (and do stand cheek by joul with it) they will be
as safe and secure as it self.

Again, houses so built, (I mean contiguous with the old City) will be more
commodious for Trade, and that with respect both to buyers and sellers: Buyers
will not have far to go for their commodities, and sellers (by that means) will
have the more customers, more Chapmen.

Moreover, to join the new part of the City to the old, at both ends, and on
both sides of the way, would make it more speedily to look like a City, even as
a quarter of an hours discourse upon new matter, joined to half an hours
repetition of that which is good, and old, passes for a Sermon; whereas a
quarter of an hours discourse by it self, would puzzle men what to call it, and
be laughed at for a short come off. A new City joined to the old, would be the
Emblem of a sober comprehension, managed to the best advantage of Church and
State, and of all good men; whereas the scattering of houses some here, some
there, at some distance one from another, and all at a distance from the old
building, would be more the Emblem of an universal tolleration taking in
Papists, Quakers, and every body else, and which is best of the two, I leave to
other men to judge; not to join the new and old together, were to make as if
they were two distinct Cities, whereas indeed they are but two distinct parts
of one and the same City, united under the same Governors and Government, and
comprised within the same wall: Drunken men use to see things double, which are
but single, and it is an ill design to make things seem to be more than they
are. I love unity, and that it should be owned to be where it is, though I
shall not curse the number two (as one of the Ancients did) for first wording
from it.

I have given my reasons why what was last in the execution of the fire
(burning both ways) should be first in the intention and prosecution of the
builder: I will but moralize this head, and dismiss it. Sin, like the fire,
has made the greatest havoc in the midst of us, I mean upon the middle part
of our lives, not guarded by a harmless ignorance, as was our youth, nor yet by
a preventing impotency, (as old age is.) Now the main work of a Christian
should begin at the two ends of his life, (for so the two extremes may be
called, and the phrase of our latter end seems to imply a former end.) In
matter of examination, confession, etc. a Christian should begin at the
beginning, or hither end of his life: In sin was I born, Psa. 51. but in point
of meditation, it is good to begin at the further or latter end of our lives,
(proceeding from thence to serious reflections upon the midst, and worst of
them) as God spoke by Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their latter end.

DISCOURSE XX.
That it would much conduce to the rebuilding of London, to have a through
search made how and by what means it was burnt.

I Charge no body with the burning of London, but him that charged it upon
himself, that confessed, and died for it. But let others produce what they have
to say: if men will confidently affirm that London was destroyed, by the
treachery, and cruelty of more persons than that one forementioned miscreant,
it is pity but they were punished, if they can produce no probable grounds and
reasons, for what they say: But if they have things to allege in the case,
which do amount at least to a strong presumption, and just ground of great
suspicion, that so it was, it is great pity but that sent should be followed,
those footsteps traced, and the utmost sagacity of wise, and impartial men,
(Magistrates and others) employed to fathom and discover what is at the bottom.
As Samuel said to Saul, what means then this bleating of the sheep in mine
ears, and the lowing of the Oxen which I bear? So say I, what means that
doleful cry, which is daily in our ears, such and such have burnt our City?
That is soon said, and may be as soon denied, but proof is all in all. Some
tell us There is a great cry but no wool, a great smoke of accusation, but no
fire (or so much as a spark) of guilt. Still I say, sub judice lis est: When
the law has given a perfect lot in the case, then, and not till then, shall we
certainly know who is in the right. That old dilemma will never be answered: if
it be enough to accuse who can be innocent, if it be sufficient to excuse who
will ever seem guilty? Therefore there is a third thing that must of necessity
be done and that is trial to be made, by sufficient Juries, and the worthy
Judges, what validity there is in all, and every the Allegations pro, and con,
given in upon Oath, what all the Plaintiffs can say against; and all the
Defendants can say for themselves, do signify and amount to. What moment, all
the circumstances produced and proved, have, and are of in the balance of
reason. When that is done, there is reason for every man to be satisfied, and I
hope it will be so. Have our Laws provided, that if the despicablest person
that can be, lie dead in the streets, unknown to any body there present, how he
or she came by their death, a jury shall be impanel'd, and the Coroner shall
sit upon it, to give sentence what the cause, of his or her death was? And did
not God himself by his servant Moses will, and command the Isralites, that if
one were found flain in their land, and it were not known who had flain him,
Deuteronomy. 21.1. All the elders of that City which was next unto the slain man
should wash their hands over a Heifer that was beheaded and say, our hands have
not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it, v. 6, 7. And the Priests
the sons of Levi shall come near, and by their word shall every controversy and
every stroke be tried, v. 5. which last words seem to imply, that the persons
who came to the place where the dead body lay (or the heifer instead of the
dead body) were not acquitted by their mere washing their hands, in token of
innocence (as Pilate did) nor yet by professing themselves not to have shed
that blood, or to have known who did, but that the sons of Levi in those days,
had a spirit of discerning given them, whereby they were able upon seeing, and
hearing such passages, to judge whether the persons, who appeared to purge
themselves, were guilty, or not guilty. For the text says, By their word shall
every stroke be tried. Did the Law of God inquire so strictly after the death
of every man (the time and manner of whose death was unknown) and do the laws
of our land do the like at this day? and is it not highly reasonable that the
death and destruction of a famous City, the greater part of which lies slain in
the streets to this day, and buried in its own ruins, and ashes, I say that
the means and causes thereof should be inquired into?

Nay how great a care did the Law of God take to satisfy those husbands (one
way or other) upon whom the spirit of jealousy came, though there were no
witness to prove that against their wives, which they were jealous of: Yea if
the husband were jealous of his wife and she were not defiled, Numb. 5.13, and
14. Though the thing he was jealous of could not be proved, yea though the
woman was not guilty, nevertheless she was to offer the jealousy offering, v.
18. to purg her self by an Oath, v. 19. and to drink of the bitter water, v.
18. and all this was no prejudice to the wife in case she were innocent, nay it
was an advantage to her, for v. 28. it is said, If the woman be not defiled but
be clean then she shall be free, viz. First from the curse, or mischief which
the bitter water would otherwise have brought upon her, v. 19. If thou have not
gone aside to uncleanness be thou free from this bitter water which causes the
curse, v. 19 Secondly from the jealousy, and suspicion of her husband, which
would not otherwise have been taken off. And one benefit more she was to have
by it, expressed, v. 28. And shall conceive seed, that is, if she were barren
before; she should after that have a Child, and if she had any formerly she
should have more. If so much were done to satisfy the jealousy of one private
man, may nothing reasonably be expected to satisfy and take off the jealousies
of thousands, if not millions of men and women, in City and country, in a
matter of higher consequence, than is that injury which a husband receives by
the unchastness of his wife? (though that injury be very great, yet this I say
was greater:) For this was a fault not to be pardoned if proved, whereas Joseph
though a just man when he suspected his espoused wife, to have been unlawfully
with Child, thought to have past it by, and not to have made her an example,
Mat. 1.

How desirous were the Philistines that were smote with Emrods to know, whither
God had done them that great evil, or whether it were not some chance that had
happened to them, 1 Samuel 6.9. Was their Plague of Emrods greater than our plague
of Fire? If not, why should we less inqure after this how it came than they
after that?

To inform our selves how the Fire came to pass, is not a point of curiosity,
but of great use. For could it be made out (at leastwise with great
probability) that it was the immediate hand of God, and as it were Fire from
Heaven, that did consume our City, that circumstance would so much promote our
humiliation, to think that (rather than suffer us to go unpunished,) God should
work a miracle to destroy us.

And then again upon other accounts, it might make much for our comfort, to
know that men had no hand in the doing of it. For if God himself did do it
immediately, we may hope the like will not be done again, in many ages to come.
For as God, after he had once drowned the world, did presently promise he would
do so no more: so it is scarcely to be paraleld amongst the providence of God,
that he should burn the same City twice in a short time. He uses to pause, and
as it were to deliberate long, upon such strange acts of Judgment, as those
are, expostulating with himself, and with them as of old: How shall I give thee
up O Ephraim? how shall I make thee like Admah, and like Zeboim, my bowels are
turned within me, etc.

But they that suspect it was burnt by men, till that jealousy be removed,
will always be in fear, that they whom they mistrust to have destroyed it once,
if undiscovered, will attempt to destroy it again, as soon and as often as they
can. Now in case the bitter water of a through examination shall confirm the
thing they were jealous of, viz. that London was fired by Instruments, and it
shall come to light who those Instruments were, it is all the reason in the
world they should be made examples, that others may hear, and fear, and do no
more so wickedly. I reckon the danger would be over (for one Age at least) as
to that sort of men that should once be proved and owned to have burnt the
City, so firmly as they would be bound to their good behavior, and so watchful
an eye as would be held over them from that time forward.

All opposition made to the sifting out that business, does vehemently increase
the jealousies of men; for he that does well comes to the light, that his
deeds may be made manifest; but they that have done evil hate the light, lest
their deeds of darkness should be reproved. One would think that whotsoever is
suspected (being indeed innocent) should be more earnest than any other persons
to come to a strict scrutiny, that themselves might be vindicated. Methinks the
chaste Wife that had a jealous Husband, should and could not but long for the
bitter water, as knowing it would be so far from causing her belly to swell,
and her thigh to rot, that it would keep her name from rotting, and make her of
a sorrowful suspected Wife, to become a joyful Mother. If all men can wash
their hands in innocence, as from the burning of London, I heartily wish that
God would bring forth their righteousness as the light, and their judgment as
the noon day. It is pity they should suffer so much as in their names, who had
no hand in it, and if any had, besides that poor Hubart, who was executed upon
that account (the strangest instance that ever was if he burnt such a City
alone) to suffer in their names only is not sufficient.

But now I think of it, there lately came down a Command, or Commission to the
City, to take examinations upon oath of all matters relating to the fire, which
was done accordingly, and the injunction to do it was I know accepted with all
humble thankfulness, and as well resented by many, as ever any thing was. That
considered, I must excuse what I have said with that of the Poet, He that
recommends what is done already, thereby commends him that did it. Qui monet
facias quod jam facis ille monendo laudat. What Solomon says in another case,
I shall allude to in this: After so much enquiry as has been made already,
upon the oaths of sufficient persons, (many of whose depositions are now
extant,) and after all that are like to be hereafter made, by virtue of the
Authority then granted, if there be any guilt at the bottom, Whosoever hides
it hides the wind, and the ointment of his right hand which bewrays it self,
Prove. 27.16.

DISCOURSE XXI.
That the countenance of Rulers, expressing much zeal and earnestness to have
the City up again, and a sad sense of its present ruins, would put much life
into the work.

BLessed be God, and blessed of the Lord be they, for all that countenance,
which by those that are in Authority, has been given to the rebuilding of
London, and particularly by that most prudent Act of theirs, which was made for
that end and purpose: That by that Act Londoners were allowed but a Copyhold
Lease of time, viz. the term of three years, for rebuilding of the City, was
enacted upon no evil design, such as to surprise and take advantage against
them, for not being able to finish the work in so short a time; but with a full
intent to renew their Lease, at or before the expiration of it, (if need should
be) and that upon better conditions than the former, as experience should
inform them of any thing that might be better. Sure I am, London had hitherto
been like a Tree that stands in the shade, if the beams of Authority had not
shone upon it so as they have done, it had not been in that good forwardness
that it is at this day.

What if it be the true interest of our Rulers and Governors, (as doubtless it
is) that London should be rebuilt with all convenient speed? are they therefore
neither praise nor thank worthy for contributing their assistance? If
Magistrates espouse the interest of Religion, and cherish it both in themselves
and others, in so doing they shall pursue their own interest upon the best
terms, (for God will honor those that honor him) yet for so doing, all good men
will acknowledge, we ought to praise and thank them more than for any thing
else.

I need not tell our Rulers (whose interest I have elsewhere proved it is, that
London should be rebuilt) that great works go on but slowly without countenance
from Magistrates, and ordinarily as swiftly with it, when they afford not only
permission and connivance, but Commission and countenance. Our Proverb says,
The Masters eye makes the horse fat. Of the Temple it is said, Ezra 6.14. They
builded and finished it according to the Commandment of Cyrus and Darius, and
Artaxerxes, King of Persia.

How vigorously Cyrus, though a Heathen Prince, did bestir himself for and
toward the rebuilding of the Temple of Jerusalem: We are told almost
throughout the sixth Chapter of the Book of Ezra. and as if Artaxerxes had vyed
with Cyrus for zeal in that matter, or labored to out strip him: We read as
much of him in the seventh Chapter, from the 11th verse, till toward the end.
If either of them had had a Palace of his own to build, which his heart had
been greatly set upon, I see not how he could have promoted it more than both
of them did the Temple. Ezra. 7.23. Whatsoever is commanded by the God of
Heaven, let it be diligently done, ( said Artaxerxes in his Decree) for the
House of the God of Heaven; for why should there be wrath against the Realm of
the King? Under those benign aspects and influences of great ones, the Temple
went up amain; and so doubtless (with the blessing of God) may our City, if the
like countenance and encouragement from such as are in chief Authority shall
always be afforded to it.

And what should make us doubt but so it will be? For first, our Rulers know
full well, that nothing will be rescented as a greater demonstration of their
love and care, than an earnest forwardness expressed to see London up again,
(or of the contrary, man a want of that) nothing will beget a greater
confidence of the people in them, and affection toward them, than that would
do.

Besides that, it is more their own concern, in point of Honor and profit, that
London should be built again, than it is the concern of any ten men whatsoever,
as his Majesty was pleased to say in print, That his loss, by the burning of
London, was greater than any man's else; and certainly it was. Was not his
Majesty the great Landlord, to whom all the houses in London had wont to pay a
kind of Quit-Rent, (othergise than a Pepper-Corn) viz. so much yearly for every
Chimney? Private men may call this, or that, or some few houses in London
theirs, but only the Kings of England can call London their City. (as they use
to do) (though not in such a sense as to destroy the propriety of particular
owners) But though owners have more interest in some houses, Kings have some in
all, which cannot be said of any Subject: Neither is that of profit which Kings
have had by the City of London so great, but the interest of honor and
reputation, which has accrued to them by their dominion over so famous a City
(the very quintessence of their Kingdoms) has been as great, or greater: All
which things considered, it were not unreasonable, or effeminate, if a King
should openly lament the loss of such a City, in some such language, as David
did the loss of Absalom, when he cried out, O Absalom, Absalom, my Son Absalom,
O Absalom, my Son, my Son. O London, London, my City, my City, etc. I should
think the loss of London to be as great as was that of Callice, which one Queen
of England laid so much to heart.

Should then our Rulers express such a passion for London, as David did for
Absalom, or as Rachel is said to have done for the loss of her children (as
hardly any case would better bear it) or should they say concerning London, as
Rachel concerning children before she had any, Give me children, or I die.
Methinks I easily foresee, how the generality of the people would do as David's
valiant men did, who brake through an Host of Philistims, and drow water out of
the Well of Bethlehem, and brought it to David, because he longed for it, 2 Samuel 23.15. My meaning is, if Rulers shall express such an earnest longing
after another London, as David did after the waters of Bethlehem, people would
adventure life, and all, but they should soon have it; and the reason is,
because Rulers in so passionately wishing for another City, would express
kindness to the people, as well as to themselves; and people in pursuing so
good a work, would show kindness to themselves, as well as to their Rulers, the
grateful sense of whose love they are ambitious to express; and when all those
things should meet together, it would be as when stream, and wind, and tide,
(and that a Springtide too) do all concur to promote a Vessel that is sailing,
or Galley that goes with Oars.

When the encouragement of Magistrates, together with the interest and
inclinations of a people, do all run one way, then are people like Giants
refreshed with wine, who though mighty of themselves, are made thereby more
mighty to run their Race. Had David been to build such a City as London, I know
what Abs^lom would have said, (and many people would have believed him) by what
I read of him, 2 Samuel 15.4. viz. that if it were as much in his, as in the
power of some other, they should not stay long for another City: It is not fit
for any man to boast as he boasted; Go too, says S. James, ye that say we will
go to such a City, and continue there a year, and get gain, James 4.13. Much
more might he have checked those that should say by such a time, they would
build such a great City: but most certain it is, that such a work might be
greatly expedited, and will be so, when Rulers shall please to act in it (as
natural Agents always do) ad extremum vitium, to the utmost of their power, and
to be intent upon it, as if amongst their earthly concerns, it were for the
present, the one thing necessary. Their real so expressed, would doubtless
provoke many, and encourage all.

DISCOURSE XXII.
That the choice of worthy men into places of Power, both in City and Country,
would contribute much to the rebuilding of London.

ALl Power in England is not conveyed by Election, and choice of the people,
neither is it sit it should. The Supreme Power, viz. that of the King, as also
the power of the Nobility in Parliament, is not Elective, but (as I may call
it) Native, that which they are not chosen, but born to (that I may avoid his
expression (as fearing he showed his wit more than his grace) who said, that
the Nobles in Parliament were called, but not chosen.) Surely the
hereditariness of the Crown in England (and some other places) is an end of
much strife, which would result from popular elections, upon every vacancy, or
decease of the supreme magistrate. Witness the many late confusions in the
Kingdom of Poland, which is conferred by election.

But setting aside those two orders, or estates (as some call them) viz. King,
and Nobles, which according to the constitution of England, have a birthright
in power) all others derive their offices, and power from the choice, and
appointment, either of the King, or people; as Judges, Parliament men, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Barliffs, etc. Most of these and of the rest that are invested with
power, are made by the choice of the people, and much the lesser part come by
their authority, any other way.

Now for that there is great reason, viz. that they who choose for the people,
should be chosen by them. So Orphans have leave to choose their own gardians,
and malefactors themselves have a power of refusing such Jurymen as they do
not like, because when accepted of they must stand to their verdict:

As for those who are born to rule (according to the laws of England) it is not
in the people to prevent their power, they can only pray that God would make
them, just, ruling in the fear of God, as it is said they that rule over men
ought to be.

But as for others (and they are the greater part) who cannot get into the
saddle of power unless the people hold the styrop for them, or who are made, or
to be made, by the election of the people, if they be not such as they ought to
be, the people may thank themselves. If having two sorts of men set before
them, one very good, the other very bad, (as were Jeremy's figs, Jer. 24.2.)
they will choose the bad, and refuse the good, it is their own fault: and they
are like to pay dearly for it, as those women use to do who withstand good
motions, one after another; and at length cast away themselves upon some vain
Prodigal, who will imbezzle their estates, and undo both them and theirs.
Methinks the Psalmists language is not too sharp; to be used in this case, Ps.
94.8. Understand ye brutish amongst the people, and ye fools when will ye be
wise?

Do you think that bad Magistrates, if you shall choose such, will cordially
help to build a good City? Solomon tells us, that Every wise woman builds
her house, but the foolish plucketh it down with her hands, Prove. 14.11. Unwise
rulers may be good at pulling down, but not at building up. The choice of ill
magistrates is like a fault made in the first concoction, which can never be
repaired in either of the two later. It is an error in the foundation which
can never be mended in the superstructure.

I am not of their mind who say Dominium temporale fundatur in gratia, that
none ought to be entrusted with power but those that appear to have saving
grace. Grace is indeed excellent in a magistrate, but morallity only is
essential unto being good in an office, and that to be sure is. He that shall
use but the office of a Deacon (this mean office in the Church) it is said of
him, that he must be grave, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre,
that he must be proved and found blameless, 1 Timothy 3.8. Now what magistrate
(properly so called) is not entrusted with more power than he that is a Deacon
in the Church? and therefore ought not to be defective in the mean
qualifications of one that is but a Deacon. Some have seemed to think that any
thing is good enough to make a Magistrate, contrary to that old proverb, E
quovis ligno non fit Mercurius. Who can make Gods of Devils: now Magistrates in
the Scripture are called Gods, but dissolute men are little better than Devils,
and may be called Satan, a thousand times, upon as great, or greater reasons,
as Peter was once so called by our Savior, saying to him, get thee behind me
Satan.

It is more than Egyptian idolatry (in some sense) to deify what is worse than
leeks and onions. The people that make such Gods are like unto them. Admit the
Gods you make be of gold, and silver (whereas some it may be are of no better
stuff, then was the lower part of Nebuchadnezars Image) will the richness of
the metal be a sufficient excuse, why then were the Israelites punished for
worshipping a golden Calf? Think not if a man have wealth enough, he is
presenly fit to make a Magistrate: you would be loath to choose him for a pilot
(especially in a storm) that has no skill in seafaring affairs, because he
has more goods in the ship than most other men, or to take him for the
Physician in a dangerous distemper, who understands not the cure of any one
disease, because a man of great estate, or your good Landlord. A Magistrate may
better want an inheritance, than want wisdom, though both together would best
accomplish him. We read of a poor wise man that saved a City, but never of a
rich fool that did any such thing. All will confess that Magistrates should be
sober men, and that they may be such, all men should be sober when they choose
them, else their choice may be such that their best excuse may be that they
were drunk when they made it. That corporation is like to reel, and stagger,
whose officers are chosen by drunken men, or by many that are such, at the
making of their choice. Defeat not the ends which are, that Magistrates should
be a terror to evil doers; but an encouragement to them that do well. Put not a
sword into the hands of madmen, least they sheath it in your own bowels: know
that Moses, as well as Aaron, should have a kind of Urim and Thummim, or what
those words signify, viz. light of knowledge, and integrity of life.

They that have both of them, will doubtless contribute their utmost help to
the rebuilding of our City. For they that are such, will concern themselves for
the good of their Kingdoms; yea of the whole protestant World, which I have
proved does much depend upon the being, and well being of London.

And verily it is much that Magistrates (with the blessing of God) may do
toward the welfare of a nation (much more of one City) when they are generally
set upon it, they having the power of a nation in their hands, as High Sheriffs
are said to have the posse comitatus or power of a county. As the other spheres
are carried about with the primum mobile, so are the people by the Magistrates.
They are as it were the muscles of a nation, which move the body politic, how
and which way they please. Rulers in Scripture are called shepherds, and good
shepherds will no doubt provide a fold for their flock. They are also called
builders (as where we read of the stone which the builders refused) and
questionless, they will be found to be master builders of our ruinous London,
who are indeed good Magistrates. You may elect such men into places of power
and authority, as would more rejoice to see London burned than built again, for
such spirits there are abroad (witness the triumphs of some after the last
fire) You may again elect others (as places shall be vacated by death or
otherwise) who will be as intent upon the building of the City, as the Jews
were of old upon the building of Jerusalem: and the Temple of God therein. I
have presented you with both choose you whither.

DISCOURSE XXIII.
That one good way to promote our City, would be to oblige our Governors (all
we can) to put to their helping hand.

I Would not have Rulers be sinfully disobliged upon any terms. We ought not to
provoke them that are in authority over us (unless conscience provoke us to do,
what will accidentally, but not intentionally provoke them) that not only for
wrath but for conscience sake. Rulers are parents (patres patriae) and if
children must not be provoked to wrath by their parents, much less ought
parents to be so served by their children.

Away with those Chams, who are all for uncovering their fathers nakedness, and
those scurrilous Pamphlets which design nothing else; tell not those things in
Gath, publish them not in the streets of Ashkelon, though (with Cham) you had
seen them, which you never did: Take the garment of love and dutifulness, lay
it upon your shoulders, and though you go backward, and the face of your
practice cannot be toward them, (or answer to theirs, as does face to face in
a glass) yet cover their nakedness, in a sense alluding to what you read of
Shem and Japhet, Genesis 9.23. To restore those that are overtaken in a fault (one
or more) with a spirit of meekness, is a very obliging thing, especially when
Inferiors shall do this to Superiors, for this is for children to have the
heart of a Father, which is more than for Parents to have a heart like
themselves; for it is harder for love to ascend, than to descend. Mourn for
their sins in secret, but proclaim them not, much less aggravate them: It may
be they will cover your offenses more easily, (which are such to them) if you
will cover theirs; and will do more for you, if you will speak less against
them; that good rule, speak evil of no man, will justify your silence, as to
such matters.

There are greater obligations that may and ought to be laid upon those that
govern us, than is our forbearance to speak evil of them, or to upbraid them
with whatsoever men think they are upbraidable: for over and above that, it
behooves us in the first place to take thankful notice, and make an open
acknowledgment of all the good that either we see in them, or receive from
them. God who is infinitely our Superior, does so by us; for speaking of
Abijah, he says, That in him only there was found some good thing toward the
Lord in the house of Jeroboam. If God do this to his inferiors, ought not we
to do the like to our Superiors? this being a point of honor, and of respect,
which to superiors from inferiors is much more due, than to inseriours from
superiors: Many would do more good than they do, if the good they have done
were more generally owned and encouraged.

Admit we should put the best construction the nature of the thing could bear,
upon those actions of Rulers which seem liable to more constructions than one,
would not that our candor oblige them? We hold our selves engaged to those,
that will make the best that can be made of what we say and do: Charity be
lieveth all things, hops all things, (which there is any color of reason to
believe and hope) and charity questionless is due to superiors, as well as
from them to inferiors. It was unkindly said by Eliab to his Brother David, I
know thy pride, and the haughtiness of thy heart, for thou art come down to see
the battle, 1 Samuel 17.28. when indeed he came upon no worse a design, than to
bring provision to his Brethren from Jesse their Father, and by his Command.
Overmuch jealousy expressed, does but prompt and provoke men to those evil
things which they did never before intend, and deter them from doing that good
which they might, and would have done, if it had been manifestly expected from
them. When Paul would invite Agrippa to the Faith, see how he insinuates, Act.
26.27. King Agrippa believe thou the Prophets, I know that thou believe.
Then Agrippa said to Paul, almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian.

Ingenious persons are loath to frustrate that expectation of good which others
have from them, and count it a point of gratitude, for the good opinion they
have conceived of them, to fulfill what they expect. The smallness of our
expectance from God is one reason why we receive no more good from his hand,
(for says God open thy mouth wide and I will fill it) and it may be a cause
sometimes why men do no more for us. I am sure, mistrust sometimes brings that
evil, which else had never come. So the Israelites mistrusting they should
never get through the wilderness, was that which provoked God to let their
carcasses fall there. They could not enter into the good land, and why? but
because of their unbelief: There is doubtless a good medium betwixt being too
suspicious, and too secure; and the less needlessly suspicious of them that
govern us, and the more candid we are in construing their actions and
intentions, the more we do, and shall oblige them. As the Apostle says, have
thou faith? have it to thy self, so would I say to them that cannot quit their
minds of disobliging fears, built upon but slender grounds, have thou fear (of
that kind) have it to thy self, that is keep it to thy self and do not provoke
or disturb others with it.

Spare not to divulg, and manifest all the hopes that are, or can be in you,
that persons in authority will not be wanting to the rebuilding of the City:
cherish not the least suspicion to the contrary, so shall they be obliged to be
as well by your expectation, implying a dependence upon their clemency, and
goodness, as by the great importance of that design.

Show a readiness to obey Rulers, and Governors in whatsoever you think you
shall not disobey God. Children obey your parents in all things, Col. 3.20.
that is in all lawful things, for in Ephesians. 6.1. there is added in the Lord.
Magistrates are civil parents, and how can they choose (if Christians) but love
those people who never refuse, or boggle at any of their commands, but such as
are really countermanded by their consciences? which to go against, were sin in
them, though they were erroneous and misinformed. I wonder what Father having
Sons and Daughters that would never displease him, but for fear of displeasing
God, would not hold himself bound to do all he could for so obedient children.

Patience under those sufferings which men are not conscious to themselves they
have deserved (as if it happen that men suffer for doing what conscience, their
own I mean, bids them do) is another excellent way to win, and gain upon the
hearts of Rulers, and to oblige them to do their utmost for those that are
under their authority. This is a hard lesson, but the Holy Ghost teaches it, 1
Pet. 2.19, 20. For this is thank worthy, if a man for conscience toward God
endure grief, suffering wrongfully. But if when ye do well, and suffer for it
ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For this the example of
Christ is proposed to us, who when he was reviled (causelesty,) reviled not
again, when he suffered, threatened not; but committed himself to him that
judges righteously, v. 23.

I would not that men should expose themselves to those sufferings which may
without sin be avoided, for so to do is not patience but phrensy, not meekness
but madness. Christ gave leave and order to his disciples, if they were
persecuted in one City to fly to another. If men be injured against Law, they
may fly to the Laws of their land to right them; but if the Law it self be
against men, and seem to be injurious to them, there is no sin in flying from
it, nor no lawful avoiding of it, ordinarily, but by flight, as there is no
armor that can defend a Cannon bullet, or way to be out of the danger of it,
but by keeping out of its way. But when the case is so that men cannot fly
either to the Law (because against them) or from the Law, because their
circumstances will not permit them so to do, (their wings are clipped) so that
they are under a necessity of suffering to avoid sinning (at leastwise against
their own consciences) I say when it is so with men (as the case is very
ordinary) that the providence of God has brought them under a necessity of
suffering (as they think for righteousness sake) would they then imitate Christ
who was as a sheep dumb before the shearers, he opened not his mouth, his voice
was not heard in the streets, etc. Would they instead of rendering evil for
evil, love their enemies, bless them that curse them, pray for them that use
them despightfully (as they interpret it) that were the likeliest way to make
friends of them, whom they take for their foes, and to engage them for, who
have been engaged against them. Who does not remember Saul's words to David,
Thou art more righteous than I, extorted by the clemency of David toward him,
who might have avenged himself upon him and would not, who might have taken his
life, and took but the lap of his garment. If sufferings fall short of undoing
persons, and families, I may hope that patience I have pleaded for may be
exercised, but if it come to that, I may rather wish than hope, that what I
have said might take place. But let us rather think, that Christian patience
exercised under lesser punishments, will so mollify those by whom they are
inflicted (for causes not altogether indisputable) that it will never come to
that, yea that the enemies of such meek, and quiet sufferers, touched with the
hardness of their case and softness of their Spirits, and especially by the
hand of him who turns the hearts of men, as the rivers of water which way he
pleases, may become their friends, and do more for, than ever they have done
against them. For patience under sufferings, the desert whereof is not so
manifest, is (as I said at first) a most obliging thing, and apt to overcome
the hearts of those by whom punishments are inflicted, and to provoke them to
double kindness as it were by way of compensation.

That way of obliging Governors which comes next to hand is by rendering
honor to all, and every of them, proportionable to the dignity of their
respective places, and consequently a superlative honor to them that are
supreme in power. To do otherwise is a most provoking thing, as for instance it
would be to give more respect to a private Colonel, and to ascribe greater
things to him, than to him that were his General, and commander of the whole
Army. Saul could never forget but did always stomach it, that they had sung in
their dances that Saul had slain his thousands, but David his ten thousands:
Whereas Saul was a King, and David then but a subject. He that would oblige his
King must honor him, as such, and what is that but to honor him more than any
other man, and no other man so much as him: and that as he is his King; loyal
honor, being like conjugal love, which then only is sincere, when it is
superlative.

Contrary to that honor we owe to governors, not only as supreme, but as such,
viz. as Governors though in a lower orb, is our doing any thing in such a way,
and manner, as may imply a contempt of them, which to make show of, is a most
disobliging thing. Contempt ordinarily is not so much expressed in the matter
of an action, as in the manner of doing, one man may steal in the most private
way he can, merely to satisfy his hunger, and in that theft of his, though
the sin be great, no contempt of the Law, or Magistrate, is either expressed,
or intended, but he that having money enough, shall rob a judge, at noon day,
knowing who he is, aggravates his offense by a manifest contempt of Law, and
Justice. And here that rule holds true, cum duo faciunt idem non est idem.

Conscience may prompt men to some things, which for the matter of them, are a
breach of humane laws, and yet not to the doing of them in any such manner, as
may be construed a contempt. Those that are led by their judgments to baptize
none but those that are at years of discretion, and to do it by burying their
whole body for a time under water, may choose such private times, and places for
it, that though it be not altogether unknown they do such things, yet none can
think themselves affronted, or intended to be affronted, and offended by what
they do.

Magistrates cannot but take it kindly when those that do not keep some of
their Laws, for fear of offending God, yet will not so break them neither, as
may needlessly offend them; so manifesting at once a reverent fear both of God
and of the Magistrate, and that if it were possible they would please both.
This way of obliging Rulers I commend to all dissenters, and to imitate that
good woman who fearing to displease Christ, with touching the hem of his
garment (though she meant well in the doing of it) came behind him, and would
not have been known of it, if any thing could have been concealed from him to
whom she did it.

What if men should turn a deaf ear to those flying rumors which tend to the
disgrace of persons that are in Authority? would not that be one way to oblige
them? Surely it is but our duty so to do: for when the question is put, who
shall abide in Gods tabernacle? Ps. 15.1. one answer is, He that takes not up
a reproach against his neighbor, v. 3. Moreover it is written, 1 Timothy 5.19.
Against an Elder receive not an accusation but before, (or under, as it is in
the margent) two or three witnesses. Witnesses upon Oath we may presume them to
be which are there intended, and if under two, or three such, an accusation
should not be received against an Elder, why should not as much respect be
shown to a Magistrate? We should not be swift to hear matters of that nature,
but yet more slow to speak, deaf we should be in those cases, but yet more
dumb. In stead of encouraging such stories as those, the Prophet brings in Jer.
20.10. Report say they and we will report: we should put men in mind of the
fifth Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother (intended of political
parents as well as natural) Now what Son that honors his Father, would take
up a slight report against him, and report it again? nay, would not labor to
silence and suppress all disgraceful rumors, of and concerning him, though he
knew them to be true? I dare say that Magistrates shall take them for their
friends, and count themselves beholden to them, who shall do as much for them,
though it be but their duty as I said before.

If those who in public congregations are the mouths of the people to God,
would pray frequently, and fervently, and with all demonstration of reverence,
and affection, for all that are in authority: and if the people (whose mouths
they are) shall seem to be greatly affected with such petitions as are offered
to God on the behalf of Magistrates, and to have an earnest passion for the
accomplishment thereof, thereby they would greatly oblige their governors, and
they also would resent it, as a great obligation, as in it self it is. This is
but what by the command of God we are obliged to do, witness that text, I
exhort that prayer^ and supplications and intercessions be made for all men,
for Kings and for all that are in authority, 1 Timothy 2.1. It is happy for us
that we may oblige our Rulers and satisfy our own obligation both under one.
When Jesus wept for Lazarus, then said the Jews behold how he loved him, John
11. Will not Rulers infer we love them, if as Christ, in the days of his
flesh, did ^ffer up prayers with strong crying and tears: so we shall offer up
such supplications as those on their behalf? but especially if with our
petitions we shall commixe thanksgivings (namely for any mercy we enjoy under
them) for so the Apostle exhorts, 1 Timothy 2.1.

A studiousness to please without flattery (as was the Apostles practice, 1
Cor. 10.33.) and a seeking out things that may be acceptable to Governors (as
we read that the preacher sought out acceptable words) and yet without sin, is
another excellent way to oblige those that are in authority, to do all they can
for us. He that shall watch an opportunity to do what may be pleasing to
Rulers, and not displeasing to God, will find it one time or other. Joseph and
David gave great content to those Princes whom they served, and yet maintained
a good conscience, as being careful to do both. David sometimes could please
Saul, so as no man better, viz. by playing upon his Harp in his presence,
whereby it is said that Saul was refreshed, and the evil spirit departed from
him, 1 Samuel 16.23. and Saul says of him, v. 22. He has found favor in my
sight. Honestly to please is the way to obtain favor, both with God and men,
and that may be done, if not at one time, yet at another. Rebekah having
observed her husbands diet, knew how to please his palate; and to provide him
savory meat, such as his Soul loved, and such as passed with him for the
Venison he longed for, though it was no Venison: and so she got the blessing
for her beloved Jacob. Doubtless David was glad of all opportunities to
gratify Saul, by playing on his Harp before him (so that Saul could not be
more glad to hear his music) let us in like manner rejoice when we can make
melody in the ears, and hearts of our Governors, by any thing that we can
lawfully do. He is a wise son that makes a glad Father, and what will not a
powerful Father do for that Son that makes him glad?

Let Rulers have all possible assurance given them, that the rebuilding of
London shall not tend to their prejudice (as some have maliciously, and weakly
objected) but to their great benefit, and advantage, that London if rebuilt
will certainly be theirs, as submisse, and loyal, and ready to serve them as
their hearts can wish. Were they not so before the Fire? and why should we not
think they will be so again? What mutiny and insurrection against the
Government has there been, ever since the return of his Majesty (that of
Venner, and his accomplices excepted, whose number was exceeding small, and
despicable) from one end of that City to the other?

Neither has London contented it self with being only peaceable, and free from
tumults since the Kings restoration, but upon all occasions approved it self a
loyal, and loving City, particularly by their great loans of money, in
reference to which, that expression in 2 Cor. 8.2. may be reverently alluded
to, viz. that their deep poverty has abounded to the riches of their
liberality.

But when all this is said, if Londoners know any other thing, or things,
whereby they may render those that rule over them, yet more confident and more
highly assured of their love, and loyalty, than by what they have done already,
they are, or might be, let them have the security, besides the former; that
they may be fully satisfied that in building a City for Londoners they build a
London for themselves.

It is my humble, and earnest motion, that all that is lawful and possible to
be done, to secure and fortify the minds of our Rulers, against all suspicion,
and jealousy of any the least disaffection in the people toward them, I say
that all such things might be done; that they may as willingly entrust them
with a new and famous City (carried on by their utmost countenance and
assistance) as they themselves are willing to be so entrusted.

How do I long to see the day, in which Magistrates and People shall love one
another, no less than indulgent parents, and good children use to do; that
Court and City, shall set themselves to promote the happiness each of other,
should owe one another nothing but love, should always be paying that debt,
and yet confessing themselves to be still in debted as to that.

Concerning that mutual obligingness which was betwixt Solomon (the wisest of
Kings, yea of men) and his people, we read in Ps. 72. v. 12. He shall deliver
the needy when he cries, the poor also and him that has no helper. This was
spoken of Solomon in type, but of Christ as the antitype, that he should do
thus for his people, but then in the 15. verse, it is said, To him shall be
given of the gold of Shebah; prayer also shall be made for him continually and
daily shall he be praised: which words express what the people should do for
Solomon, how they should oblige him, who would be so obliging to them. Now what
is prophesied as the result of Solomon and his people, thus vying which should
oblige each other most; I doubt not to apply to our City of London, in
reference to its great increase from its present small beginnings, under the
encouragements of an obliged magistracy: There shall be a handful of corn in
the earth upon the top of the mountains ( London is now as that handful of
corn) the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon, and they of the City shall
flourish like grass of the earth. v. 16.

DISCOURSE XXIV.
That easing the burdens of Londoners (all that may be) till the City be
finished would encourage the work.

CItizens may be pincht, and yet not think fit to cry out. They will bear more
than they are well able, rather than seem unable to bear. Their credit is their
livelihood; and that is their life. Some of them by making but a show for the
present, hope in time to get substance. Many are thought, since the Fire, to
have made but few complaints, not out of plenty but policy; because it is their
real interest to put the best side outermost. Many of their hearts are sad (as
is believed) in the midst of laughter. It is our eye must affect our hearts
with their condition, rather than our ears. They say little of it, but we may
see much.

Can an Old man to whom the very grashoper is a burden, carry as great a
weight as can a young porter? Could Sampson after his locks were cut, in which
his strength lay, do as he had wont before? no more can Londoners who have lost
their metropolis, their head City, do as they were able before one hair of that
head was singed. May we not then hope and expect, that they who are called
Gods, will in this case imitate him who is the true God, of whom it is said,
Ps. 13.14. That he knows our frame and remembers that we are dust? Londoners
at this day are not only dust, but dust in dust.

Here we must thankfully acknowledge the kindness of our Rulers in dispensing
with Chimney-money, as to the City for so many years to come, which favor of
theirs if duly resented, may possibly usher in more. When the Temple at
Jerusalem was to be built. Artaxerxes made a gracious decree touching the
Priests, Levites, Singers, Porters, Nethinims or Ministers of the house of God,
it should not be lawful to impose toll, tribute or custom upon them, Ezra.
7.14. It must be left to the wisdom, and clemency of our Rulers to determine,
how far forth the same kindness, or any other equivalent to it, shall be
extended to those who have sustained the damage of burning, and must now be at
the charge of building.

DISCOURSE XXV.
That to give a general content and satisfaction to men, or so far as it can be
done, would help forward the City very much.

A General contentment would cause Religion to reflourish, and consequently the
City. For what says Solomon, Prove. 14.34. Righteousness exalts a nation, and
if a whole nation, a City much more, and in Ps. 72.3. It is said, The mountains
shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills by righteousness. Now it
being ordinary with scripture, by righteousness to express that which we call
Religion, and by peace all manner of prosperity, and rational in this place to
understand it so, I have by the mouth of two witnesses proved (and easy it were
to do it by many more) that if a general satisfaction would promote Religion,
it would also promote the City,

And now my business is to prove, that an universal contentment would be much
to the furtherance and advancement of Religion; and the want thereof would
hinder the growth and increase of Religion, as much as any one thing, and
consequently impede the building and exalting of the City. For Contrariorum
contraria est ratio, contrary causes have contrary effects, etc.

The Apostle speaks of godliness with contentment as great gain, and usually
they go together, and so ordinarily do ungodliness, and discontent. What but
discontent made Jobs Wife most blasphemously counsel him to curse God and die?
The same made Jonas so irreligious for the time, as to say unto God I do well
to be angry even to the death. David himself (as the text tells us) was
displeased because the Lord had made a breach upon Uzza, 2 Samuel 6.8. And
against whom was that his displeasure, but against him that made the breach
which was God himself? yet more strange are those expressions, Isa. 8.21. It
shall come to pass that when they shall be hungry they shall fret themselves,
and curse their King and their God and look up. Treason and blasphemy both in
a breath, and all from discontent, like to that we meet with, Rev. 16.21. And
men blasphemed God because of the Plague of the Hail, for the Plague of the
hail was exceeding great.

A troubled sea will cast up little elfe but dirt and mire. Sick bodies are not
so fit for the service of God as those that are in health, so neither are sick
minds; and such are all discontented ones. Divines observe, that men of
melancholy complexions are most tempted to Atheism, and Blasphemy, and
experience tells us, that in times of most discontent, those sins do most
abound, for discontent and melancholy go together.

In discontented breasts there is envying and strife, and where envying and
strife is, there is confusion and every evil work, James 3.16. Elisha having
been disturbed at the sight of Jehoram could not prophesy till he had called
for a minstrel to help to compose his Spirit, 2 Kings 3.16. Religion as well as
prophesying, calls for a composed and a sedate mind. God was not in the
whirlwind, nor in the earthquake, but in the still voice. It is a proverb, that
Inter arma silent leges, humane laws are but little observed in a time of war,
and it is as true of the laws of God, as of men. The noise of drums, and
trumpets uses to drown the still voice of Religion. In times of discontent,
Atheism is wont to swarm like flies in summer; and those that were never
tainted with it before, are subject then to be fly-blown more or less. Vexation
drew forth those daring words from him that said, This evil is of the Lord,
what should I wait for the Lord any longer? 2 Kings 6.33.

Discontent is rats-bane to Religion, I mean rank poison. A little of it will
destroy a particular duty, and a great deal will shake the very foundations of
that grace that is in any of us. Moses when vexed brake both the tables of the
law, though made of stone. Discontents are some of those thorns which endanger
the choking of all good seed. Religion is a service reasonable, but discontent
and oppression, do make men mad. Many Suns are wont to go down upon the wrath
of discontented persons, and therefore they must needs give place to the Devil,
Ephesians. 4.26. and what, mean time, becomes of their Religion.

Methinks I cannot say enough, to make the world sensible of that vast
prejudice which redounds to Religion by the generality of men being
discontented, and out of humor, to the end men may labor to prevent, or cure
it, both in themselves and others. The Psalmist says why do the heathen rage?
and from sad experience it may be said, that to make men rage, or outrageous,
is one of the readiest ways to make them heathens. Such as are desperately
discontented, use not to care either what they say, or what they do; no not
against themselves, witness Achitophel, no not against God, Isa. 8.21.
Therefore it was that Satan desired of God, to touch all that Job had, and
(said he) he will curse thee to thy face, Job. 1.11. If he curse thee not to
thy face, it is in the margent, q. d. if he do not I am deceived, and so he
was: but knowing the manner of other men, he thought he could not forbear to
curse God, when his affliction was so very great. Though one sort of poor are
said to receive the Gospel (that is more generally than others;) yet those that
are poor unto beggary, pincht with cold, and hunger, are too well known to be
generally as vile as any sort of men, and as void of the least appearance of
Religion (which made Agar to deprecate poverty) and probable it is, that their
being greatly male content may be the principal reason.

It cannot be denied but that we ought to be bettered by miseries, as well as
by mercies, and to learn obedience by the things which we suffer and it is
often so that when the troubles of men are but moderate they do them good, and
not hurt; but when men are whipped with Scorpions, when their punishments are
greater than they can bear, then corrupt nature discovers its self, as
naturalists say in another sense, Vexata natura prodit seipsam.

I could never yet see that deep melancholy, and high discontent was a proper
soil for Religion to thrive in, but rather the quite contrary. Saul when at his
wits ends, betook himself to the witch of Endor, and too many are of his mind
that said, Flectere si nequeo superos Acheronta movebo. They will address to
Hell, if they cannot prevail with Heaven. They that look upon their condition
to be a kind of Hell upon Earth, will scarce refrain blaspheming, as they do
that are in Hell. A general discontent is an axe la^d to the root of Religion.
What Religion can there be, where there is no love? what love can there be to
God, or men, when there is no contentment with the providence of the one, or
practices of the other? Gods dispensations, and men's dealings, are so
interwoven, that men are seldom angry with the latter, but they are so with the
former, because the hand of divine providence is in all the dealings of men
(though in such a manner as to be no whit accessory to the unrighteousness of
any of them.) How often is God less loved than otherwise he would be for men's
sake, and for the sake of those misactings, whereby they become hated? and all
because his providence is known to concur (but in a most justifiable way) with
all the proceedings of men.

Wizards, Witches, and Devils, shall be the last instances, I will now produce
of the sad fruits of prevailing discontent, as to the extirpating of all
Religion. Devils we justly account the worst of all creatures, Wizards and
Witches the worst, and farthest from Religion of any sort of men and women; now
Wizards and Witches are commonly deemed the most discontented parcel of
mankind, as well as the worst; and Devils which are something worse than
Witches themselves, yet more discontented than they.

How do I therefore long for Religion sake to see an end of Discontents, that
some men would take care to give less offense, and others would take no more
than becomes them. Methinks that same is ^o ill proverb, Any thing for a quiet
life. If any reason will satisfy men, for Gods sake, for religions ^ake, let
satisfaction be given them, either in whole, or in part, lest the worm of
discontent, perfectly wither the goard of our Religion, and for want of that
blessed shade, expose us to the scorching heat of the wrath of God.

England is in a high fever, (that fever is discontent) how rough and how
black are the tongues of men? how restless are they day and night? how do they
fling and throw and start, and sigh and groan, and talk many times as they that
know not what they say? how many seem near unto a phrensy, if they be not in
one already? All this while it must be ill with the heart of England (and what
is the heart and Soul of a Nation, but the Religion thereof?) was ever man in a
fever and his heart unconcerned, or not disordered thereby, as much or more
than any other part?

Now for a David with his Harp, to lay the evil spirit of discontent, now for
some musical harmony (though made up of discords, to cure the venomous bitings
of that strange Tarantula (discontent I mean) which makes men moan, and wail,
and cry out, of which disease nothing will cure men, but that which will make
them leap and dance, (rejoice I mean) as it is in the cure of those that are
bitten by a true Tarantula. When that cure shall be wrought, then may we hope
Religion will flourish as the Palm Tree, and grow as the Cedars in Lebanon, and
London together with it.

How conducing contentment is to the practice of godliness David seems to
intimate, when he says, Deliver me from the oppression of men, so will I keep
thy precepts. Ps. 119. v. 134. When the primitive Christians did eat their meat
with gladness, and had favor with all the people, then were there added to the
Church daily such as should be saved, Acts 2.46, 47. and in Act. 9.31. it is
thus written. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and
Samaria, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy
Ghost were multiplied. When the Church had content from within, and from
without (and there is the same reason for other societies) then it grew and
multiplied. The same thing without a spirit of prophesy more than ordinary, may
be foretold of London.

DISCOURSE XXVI.
That the continuance of peace, begun with foreign Nations, might much promote
the rebuilding of the City.

IF God continue peace, we may have more Palaces within our walls, and
prosperity within our Palaces. But if peace discontinue so is our City like to
do: never had we more need of peace both at home and abroad, then now; that we
have a City to build. It is as much as we can do to build with peace, and how
should we build without it? Farewell peace, farewell building.

A relapse into war (which would be worse then the first disease) would put us
upon making bullets instead of bricks, tents instead of houses, and instead of
hiring artificers, to press Soldiers.

Methinks I hear the enemies of our City saying, now for a war to crush it in
its infancy. Herod-like who destroyed all the children that were under two
years old. Would but the French King be reconciled to the King of Spain, how
bravely might his Army, (or some good part of it,) help to destroy this
Cokatrice egg? Thus men of an evil eye toward the City of London, do say in
their hearts: but they that wish it well, do now pray for peace more earnestly
than ever, are much more thankful for the peace begun, than otherwise they
would have been with respect to London now rising out of its ashes, do dread
the thoughts of that flame of War breaking out again (at leastwise till London
be up again) which is for the present smothered, and we hope extinguished. How
inconsistent fighting and building are one with the other, may be gathered from
1 Kings 5.3. David could not build a house to the name of the Lord his God, for
the wars that were about him on every side, till the Lord put them under the
soles of his feet. But now the Lord has given me rest on every side ( says
Solomon) I purpose to build a house to the name of the Lord my God, v. 4. and 5.

DISCOURSE XXVII.
That lessening the price of Coals would encourage building.

I Cannot charge them that trade in Coals with holding up the price, higher
than they needs must, and contriving ways and methods to make them dear, but
they cannot be ignorant that some do so charge them, and if it be so, indeed
they are much to blame, at such a time as this especially; and as the latin
proverb is nigro carbone digni. To deny us coals at this juncture, (and to make
them over-dear is half a denial of them) is in effect to withold straw from
them that should make brick.

It is fit that when war cease, we should taste the fruits of peace, (as
particularly in the cheapness of so necessary a commodity, as Coals are) else
how should we be thankful for it? the community ought not to be impoverished,
that a few men may be enriched.

If care be taken (as I hope there will) that the quantities of Coals imported,
should be as much greater now than formerly, as is the occasion we have for
them, more than it had wont to be, that our store may rather exceed than fall
short, plenty will bring down the price; and yet I wish it not so low neither,
but that they who deal in the commodity may live by it. Give me leave to say,
that men in subordinate authority, have been more severely reflected upon than
I shall venture to tell, as void of care and prudence, or both, in not
preventing that dearth of coals, which befell us the last year, it being then
the common cry, that the nation could almost as well subsist without corn, as
without coals. God forbid we should ever commit such another oversight.

If Coals be dear, bricks cannot be cheap, neither will they be good (that is
well-burnt) but if coals be cheap, bricks will not be dear; neither are they
like to be bad. Were coals a foreign commodity, yea were they no where to be
had but from an enemies country, it is thought some people are so wise, that if
their circumstances were like ours, they would be sure to have them.

God having planted coals within our own bowels (territories I mean) and made
the womb of our soil so far from barren that some part thereof is even loaded
with them, should London be retarded through the scarcity thereof, England
would seem hardened, and to have shut up its bowels against it self, considering
that England does not want for swift and able messengers to send upon that
errand. May coals in our time, and City, be but so plentiful, and so common, as
silver was in Jerusalem in the days of Solomon, 1 Kings 10.21. Silver was
nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon. and v. 27 And the King made
silver to be in Jerusalem as the stones.

DISCOURSE XXVIII.
That the extirpation of fears and jealousies (which sadly abound) might
contribute much to the building of the City.

IT goes to my heart to think, how people are tormented, (or torment
themselves) with endless fears, and jealousies. They are ever and anon in such
frights, as if Hanibal were at the gates. How do they start like melancoly
people out of their sleeps, scared with sad dreams? Damps arise upon men (as
they are said to do upon those that work in coalmines.

I would be no fomenter of such fears, but am thought rather too sanguine, too
credulous of good news, and scarce in the number of those wise men, of whom
Solomon says, that they foresee the evil and hide themselves. I had rather (as
is said of Abraham) in hope believe against hope, than be to suspicious, at
leastwise than to make others so.

It may be some envious men have sowed these tares, I mean some that envy, and
malign the building of the City, and do desire to obstruct it by making people
afraid. For men are so possessed (I know not by whom) (my Soul enter not thou
into their secrets) that they cry out: we shall ere long be invaded by the
French, and other while we shall be massacred by the help of those disaffected
foreigners which (say they) do swarm amongst us, another while they cry we
shall be burnt again: what pannick fears are these?

I wish we could out the head of this Nilus, those fears I mean which like
another Nilus overflow the land, but whence they spring I know not: whether the
cause be that people are hardly come to themselves, since the great and
dreadful fire, or that our great surprise at Chattam, has brought these fears
upon men; or that those many lesser fires, which have happened since the great
one, have produced a habit of fear, or all of these together, or whither (as I
said at first) some do make it their business to terrify Londoners, that they
may have no heart to build. It is hard to say which of these are the true
cause. But that which I mentioned last was the course which the enemies of
Jerusalem took to hinder the building thereof, Neh. 6.9. They all made us
afraid saying, their hand shall be weakened from the work that it be not done,
and v. 29. Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear.

But let the cause be what it will, it is fit the cure should be thought of:
For fears and jealousies have been of pernicious consequence, and may be so
again. Parents cannot endure to have their children frighted, lest it bring
them to convulsions, or make sots of them. None so cruel as cowards, or
frighted persons, because they are most impatient till they have made sure of
their enemies, Desperation turns to valor.

It has always been held good policy to secure a people against fears and
jealousies, though they were such as did arise from their own mistakes, and
weakness. Achitophel taught Absalom to make the people sure of him, that he
never would or could be reconciled to his Father David, and so leave them in
the lurch, by counselling him to lie with his Fathers Concubines, in the sight
of the people, 2 Samuel 16.20.

Was it not a mere jealousy and misapprehension which the Jews had entertained
concerning Paul? viz. As if he taught the Jews which were amongst the Gentiles
to forsake Moses, saying that they ought not to circumcise their children,
neither to walk after the customs, Acts. 21.21. yet Paul was advised to take
it off (and did v. 26) We have four men which have a vow on them. Them take and
purify thy self with them, and all may know that those things whereof they
were informed concerning thee are nothing, but that thou thy self also walk
orderly, and keep the law, v. 23, 24. God himself (such is his condescension
to this kind of weakness in men) has provided all that may he against those
groundless fears, and jealousies, as touching himself, and the satisfying of
his promise (which is impossible for him to do) which our misgiving hearts
might expose us to. And therefore it is that he has confirmed his promise with
an oath, Heb. 6.18. God willing more abundantly (it was indeed ex abundanti for
him so to do) to show the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath,
v. 19. That by two immutable things we might have strong consolation.

But the great difficulty will be, to show how and by what means the fears, and
Jealousies of men (those terrible names sounding like Gog and Magog) may be
prevented or extirpated.

To endeavor to tie the tongues of men, that whatsoever they think, they
should say nothing, would be a fruitless attempt, for out of the abundance of
men's hearts their mouths will speak. That were at most but like the mowing of
weeds, without plucking them up by the roots, which weeds would certainly
spring again, faster than ever they did before.

To tell men they have had many false alarms will not satisfy them neither,
for so soldiers use to serve their enemies before they fall upon them in good
earnest; and so the sheep in the fable heard it often said that the Wolf was
coming, when he was not: but yet he came at last when he was not looked for.
Some more effectual remedy must therefore be thought of, against the dangerous,
and contagious disease of fears, and Jealousies, than were either of the two
former.

Were I worthy to cast in a mite of advice in so arduous a case (which had more
need of a Priest to stand up with Urim and Thummim to direct in it) I would say
as follows.

One way to take of fears and jealousies, would be by manifesting an universal,
and impartial love to all sober, peaceable and deserving persons, even from Dan
to Beersheba without respect of persons, or parties, upon any other
considerations. It is as natural for men to fear those that they think do hate
them, as it is to hate those they are afraid of. If one part of a nation be
Archers armed with bows and arrows, and another look upon it self as not
beloved, and therefore aimed at, so long fears and jealousies will continue;
whereas on the other hand we use to say, we could put our lives into their
hands of whom we are confident that they do truly love us.

If persons who are both in, and under authority, (as was the Centurion we read
of) (who are indeed the eyes and hands of Princes) would please to manifest a
constant care, and zeal for the public good, suffering nothing to be wanting
on their part, that might conduce to public safety, giving no advantage to
foreign or intestine enemies, by their cowardice, covetousness or carelessness,
committing no gross miscarriages and oversights, (like careless servants that
leave their masters doors wide open in the night time, that who will may come
in and steal, if they will see that all be safely bolted and barred from time
to time) I say if they please to do so, by that means for one; they may
disperse fears and jealousies, as the Sun does scatter mists. Timothy is much
commended Phil. 2.20. For that he did naturally care for the state of others,
and they that shall do so, and be known so to do, will never be suspected, they
will add to the hope and confidence of a nation, but never to their fears and
jealousies.

There is no better prevention, or cure of fears, and Jealousies, than to win
the hearts love, and affections of a people, otherwise subject thereunto: men
are as unapt to fear those whom they greatly love, as they are to love those
whom they are greatly afraid of: love is fearful of nothing but to offend,
Perfect love casts out fear, viz. All that fear which has torment
accompanying it; and needs it must do so, because it is founded in and upon the
assurance of their love, whom we so love. The Apostle says of charity, or
love, that it is not easily provoked, that it thinks no evil, rejoices not
in iniquity but in the truth, believes all things, hops all things, 1 Cor.
13. Those very things that bring, or shall bring on love, will carry off fears,
and jealousies.

One good way to be trusted by others, is to trust others, so far as in reason
we may, Jealousies beget Jealousies, and some men will not, or cannot trust,
because they are not trusted, as far as they think they might or deserve to be.
It is commonly found, that men are jealous of those that are jealous of them,
for men are jealous of those that they believe do not love them, and they do
not believe they can love them, who are much jealous of them. For perfect fear
will cast out love, as perfect love does fear. On the other hand confidence
begets confidence: it is an usual argumentation amongst men, why should not we
put confidence in such and such, as well as they put confidence in us? as if it
were a piece of gratitude, and but justice to trust those that trust us.
Whereas on the other hand, men that will take no assurance from others, but
what is more than enough, or than they can give; will be able to give no
assurance to others that will be taken, and so jealousies will be endlesly
propagated by way of retaliation.

As good a receipt as any of the former for the cure of fears and jealousies is
this, viz. that persons who have the unhappiness to be generally suspected, and
ill beloved, (though possibly they may not deserve it) should have as little of
the safety, and welfare of a nation committed to them as can well be, forasmuch
as the spirit of jealousy, presently comes upon people, when those whom they
are greatly prejudiced against (as being of a contrary religion, or otherwise)
are chosen to places of eminency, either military or civil. An eye should be
had to those who keep others in fear, as they that give out threatening words,
causing the persons threatened to go in fear of their lives, are or may be,
bound to their good behavior.

Lastly, If the heats and indiscretions of some men were looked after, who
sometimes seem to symbolize with Papists in their peculiar doctrines, and then
the people by such preaching alarmed, cry out with a loud voice Venient Romani,
and who other whiles exasperate their hearers with bitter invectives, putting
them thereby into an expectation of nothing but trouble, and persecution to
^nsue after so threatening expressions, I say if men might not be suffered to
harp upon those strings whereby an evil spirit is not laid but raised, or were
narrowly watched, that they should no where turn pulpits into cock-pits, and
come directly, and intentionally not to bring peace, but a sword, a drawn
sword, instead of an Olive branch, but more especially if Ministers would every
where come as persons sent of God to bring good tidings to the meek, to bind up
the broken hearted, to comfort all that mourn, etc. By that means would the
exasperations of men's minds be gradually taken off, and their fears and
jealousies begin to go off, like the morning Cloud, and as the early dew.

Woe unto us that at this day we are all afraid one of another, and woe unto
them that study to increase our fears. When shall such a promise be made good
to us, as that in Micah. 4.4. But they shall sit every man under his Vine, and
under his Figtree, and none shall make them afraid.

DISCOURSE XXIX.
That if the dread and terror of the Popish party, which is upon the people
were taken off, the building of the City would thereby be much encouraged.

PApists must not be knocked on the head because the people are afraid of them,
neither ought their estates therefore to be confiscated, or themselves
generally confined, much less for that only reason, should they all be exiled
from their Native Country. Some of them I believe would do others no hurt if
they could; all should, and may be disabled from any such thing if they would:
This may be done, and yet they not be undone.

Certain it is, that Papists at this day are a very center of jealousy, in and
upon whom the fears of all English Protestants, of what persuasion soever, do
meet: Is it because the blood that was shed in the Marian days does still cry
aloud in the ears of men as well as of Heaven? or is it because the Invasion
attempted upon England in Eighty Eight is not yet forgotten? or is it because
the Parisian Massacre will not out of men's minds? or is it because the most
hellish Powder Plot (upon the account of which we celebrate each fifth of
November) does still stick in men's stomachs? or is it long of that most
devilish Tragedy which was acted by the Papists in Ireland upon the Innocent
Protestants, within less than thirty years past, causing the streets to swim
with their blood? or is it because London was lately so suddenly and strangely
burnt, and Papists known to insult and triumph when it was done, besides other
suspicious passages of theirs relating thereunto, as namely their predictions
concerning it, etc. or is it all of these put together that do make Papists so
formidable to Protestants in England?

Some rather than be thought to fear where no fear is, would be ready to give
many more reasons of the fear that is in them, to every one that should ask
them why they are so much afraid of Papists. First, their hatred to Protestants
by the forementioned instances appears to be great, and implacable; then they
would tell you, that many Families of that Religion in England are very
considerable for their estates, parts, and otherwise. Nextly, that they are
great pretenders unto having highly merited (as from God, so from men) above
others, if not to works of Supererrogation, which is as if they challenged it
as their due to be uppermost. How politic, how vigilant, and how restless a
people they are, all men know, how they compass Sea and Land to carry on their
designs! The men of their Religion seem to have a particular spite at England,
and an ambition to subdue it to themselves, rather than any other Nation; as he
said, Fight neither against great nor small, but, etc. so they seem to say, but
against England.

We should not fear them (say they) but that we know what Religion France and
Spain are of, and can have no assurance that they will not, one time or other,
crave aid (at leastwise of so near a Neighbor as one of them is) rather than
fail of their designs: What should hinder them from so doing, who profess to
the world that they do owe more homage to a foreign Prince ( viz. the Pope)
than to their own, and that the Pope is Supreme Head over all temporal Princes,
and consequently can supersede the Laws of any other Prince, and give away
their Crowns and Scepters when and to whom he pleases? If then the Pope shall
command them to join with, or invite in a Foreign Prince against their own
Sovereign, according to that principle, it is but their duty to do it. Now who
can but fear a people of so desperate, subverting principles?

Be secure of Papists (say some) we never can, for no cords can be thought of
wherewith to bind them fast: Their oaths are not to be regarded, seeing it is
their principle, that no faith is to be kept with Heretics, and such they
count Protestants. They are so great assertors of the doctrine of Equivocation,
and so great Masters in the practice thereof, that give them what oath you
will, they make what they please of it in their mental reservations, they put
in and put out what they list, and interpret every thing to their own sense,
and having so done, what is any body the nearer ( viz. to safety and security)
for any oath they take? Come the worst to the worst they hold, that the Pope
has a power of dispensing with oaths, either that men may take those oaths
which beforehand they resolve not to keep, at leastwise that he can pardon
them (and will do it) if they break the oaths that they have taken.

It were endless to rehearse all the reasons men give why they are afraid of
the Popish party: who knows not (say they) that all things are lawful in their
account, which make for the interest and promotion of holy Church (as they call
it?) the stamp of so good an intention put upon the worst of actions, be it
lying, perjury, murder, rebellion, devastation of whole Countries, is
(according to them) able to make what had otherwise been damnable, to become
meritorious: He that shall assassinate a King in zeal for their Religion, may
be canonized for a Saint. O Religion, ever to be dreaded by those that are not
of it, as being resolved to propagate it self every where, both by secret
plots, and open violence, by fire and sword, by fraud and force, per fas and
nefas: By hook and by crook (as they say) as if none were worthy to live but
they that would embrace a Religion so false and ridiculous (so far as it is it
self) as nothing can be more.

Methinks I am tired with hearing so many reasons alleged for one and the same
thing, a thing so generally believed, viz. that there is just ground to be
afraid of Papists, and of their designs, but would I listen to more, some would
further tell me, that the great Agitators for Popery, Jesuits, and such like,
do insinuate themselves into all parts of Christendom; first trouble the
waters of every State, and then fish in them, make Proselites up and down,
undermine the Councels of Protestant Princes, that those Pioneers are always
working under ground, and endanger all Kingdoms where they come: Also, that
there are multitudes of them here, and there, in several disguizes, the effects
of whose pernicious attempts we may yearly, if not daily expect.

That Papists are still too hard for those severe Laws that are in being
against them, so that they (or most of them) come not under the lash thereof,
from month to month, and year to year, whilst the Laws made against others do
find them out continually, and punish their smaller transgressions; I say, that
they escape the Ordeal of Laws, whilst others ever and anon do burn their feet
upon the hot plow-shares which are laid for them, does much increase the fears
of men concerning them.

Now they that have a fear and dread of Papists upon them, having all this to
say, (and yet having not said all) do think it hard measure to be taxed with
childishness, cowardice, and effeminacy, for entertaining a jealousy of Popish
designs, and cannot be otherwise persuaded by any verbal arguments.

Nevertheless, I am deceived if there be not a way to relieve Protestants
against all their fears of Papists, and yet not to deprive Papists either of
their lives, or estates, or liberties, or Native Soil, or any thing else which
by Law or birth they have a right to, nor yet always, and in all cases, to
execute upon all, and every of them, the full rigor of those Laws which are at
this day in force against them.

Who but themselves will be offended, if it be in the first place propounded,
that the Popish party throughout England should be generally disarmed? that is,
deprived of all weapons, horses, arms, ammunition, etc. which they have, or may
have by them, more than is just sufficient for the defense of their respective
families, against the breaking in of Thieves and Robbers. A Massacre committed
by Protestants upon Papists was never heard of, and therefore they need not
fear it, nor can reasonably desire to abound with arms, in order to the
prevention of it: If men have arms enough for their own security, what should
they do with more to scare, if not endanger others? How greatly would the fears
of men be allayed, if but that one thing were done? Ireland that Aceldama, that
field of blood, can tell us how unfit Papists are to be entrusted with arms.

I wish if those rumors be false, that great and unusual numbers of foreign
Papists have lately come for England, I say if they be false, that the people
might be generally assured and convinced they are so; but if they be true,
(which is more than I can say they are) that some due bounds may be set to so
raging a Sea, least a deluge of fears and susp^tions, if not of misery and
destruction also, should from thence overwhelm us.

It has been complained of in and to the Parliament, since London was in the
dust, that many Papists in several parts of England have behaved themselves
very insolently (as one of their eloquent mouths has told us in a Speech of
his extant in print) that certainly would and did strike terror into the
people; nor can those terrors be taken off, unless that insolency of theirs be
corrected, for which there need no better curb and cure, than the strict
execution of the severest Laws that are in being against men of that Religion,
I do not mean, or wish upon all of them (for I understand not the justice of
punishing all that are of such a way for the faults that are committed but by
some of them) but upon as many as have, or shall be found guilty of such
amusing insolency, either in words or deeds: It is fit some Corrosive should be
applied to such proud flesh, but not laid upon that flesh which is not proud,
though of the same body: The summum jus, or utmost rigor of the Laws made
against Papists, would be no injury to them that terrify others by their
insolency, what ever it might be to the rest, as in some cases it would not be
harsh to take the full forfeiture of a Bond, though it would be so in some
others. If the Hugonites in France should behave themselves insolently (which
they never dare to do, being not of the Religion of the Country) we know what
would follow. A restraint upon the insolences of Papists, would be no small
restraint upon the fears of Protestants.

I wish as little power as may be in the hands of Papists, for that experience
tells us, if persons so accounted (though not certainly known to be such) be
chosen to any place or places of considerable trust, it presently opens the
peoples mouths, and fills them as full of fears as they can hold. Power is a
kind of armor, and men may be armed with power as formidably, as with iron
weapons. We read of certain beasts, Dan. 7.12. They had their dominion taken
away, yet their lives were prolonged. There is not a quiet Papist in England,
but I wish his life might be spared, yea, and his lawful way of livelihood;
that if a man of an estate, he might enjoy it, his Religion notwithstanding, if
a Tradesman, he might be free to buy, and sell, and merchandise, as well as
other men; and if he may do so, to be deprived or debarred of power and arms,
will be but an easy suffering (if it be any at all) and I am sure much more
for a public good, men to their private damage: no reason they should be
elected to power, who would be an encouragement to evil doers, and a terror to
them that do ^ell: one way for people to have dominion over their fears, is for
Papists in a Kingdom, whose King, and Laws are protestant, to have no dominion
over the people.

Yet I am really for it, that setting aside power, and Arms, they should enjoy
every thing else so ^ong as they are peaceable, for to strip them of their
^states and livelihoods, or lawful ways of sub^ting, merely for their
religion sake, were unjust, ^^umane, and the way to make them desperate.
Starving, or almost starving of persons and fami^^es, is next to cutting of
throats, and therefore God forbid that Papists themselves should be so served:
let them have power to do good to themselves, but none to do hurt to others,
then may Papists live happily, and Protestants securely.

The manifestation of much zeal to hinder the growth of Popery it self, would
be one good way ^o secure the minds of men, against the fear, and ^read of
Papists.

It would take off the chariot wheels of popery, or make it drive on heavily,
if first of all, Ministers, and other learned men, were excited and encouraged
to write and preach against the most considerable, and dangerous tenets of the
Papists, spa^ing their persons, whilst they oppose their errors, and so not
contending against love, though they contend earnestly for the Faith. One I
have heard of (a person of worth and learning far above the rate of his years)
who was put upon this work by some in great authority, and has discharged it
excellently well, and brought forth an Elephant (for so I call his book for the
size of it) in less than half the time that Elephants are said to go with
their young. There are also two other pregnant Divines (no old men neither) who
have each of them given us an iliad in a nutshel, a mass of Divinity and reason
against popish doctrines within a small compass, who as I am told have from
persons of eminency received many thanks for the same, and very good
encouragement. Were there many more that could come up to the first three, as
champions against popery, and were they in all parts of England put upon it and
quickened, we might hope that popery would dwindle amongst us every day till at
last it come to nothing.

Whosoever shall set himself to oppose the growth and spreading of popery in
England, will much promote this design, by suppressing, or preventing all such
books in our native tongue, as have lately come forth, or are coming forth in
favor of that Religion. Those of more ancient date are so much dispersed
already, that there can be no recalling them, and besides that, men will hardly
read them more than they have done, whereas a new book for the novelty sake,
and in expectation of some new thing that has not been said before, will have
many readers. Popish arguments are not so weighty but that we dare let
scholars peruse them, and therefore I have said nothing of the suppression of
those popish books which are in the latin tongue, but only in the English,
lest common, and ignorant people should thereby be seduced. Now Papists of all
men ought not to quarrel with us, if we deny the common people the use of their
books, in their mother tongue, as being unsafe for them, since they withhold the
book of God, the holy scriptures from the Laity under pretense of their being
in danger to wrest the same to their own destruction. If truth can hurt men
what will not error do? A heedful suppression of all Novel English popish
books, would be greatly to the suppression of all popular fears, as with
respect to Papists.

We have severe Laws (if I mistake not) against those persons who compass sea
and land to make people Proselytes to the Romish religion, making them thereby
twofold more the children of hell than themselves, at leastwise in this
respect, that they persuade them to believe those gross errors, which they
have more wit than to believe themselves, so binding heavy burdens upon others
which they themselves will not touch with the least of their fingers. I think
the law is wont to accuse: and indict them, as for seducing the Kings Subjects
from their Allegiance, which to do is a great crime, but do they not also
seduce men from their Allegiance to the King of Kings? These are a seed of evil
doers, and must be looked a ter: Ants do bite the corn which they carry to
their mole-hils to the end it may not sprout again, so far forth, I wish them
bitten. It is too much that they take upon them to make a God or Idol of
Wafers, let them not make fools, or which is worse, Idolaters of men. Let them
not by their meats (or poisons rather) destroy those for whom Christ died. As
long as Papists have liberty for themselves, and their families, they have
little reason to complain, if they have no liberty to make other families such
as themselves. If seducing Jesuits be narrowly watched and punished, both the
fear of Papists, and popery it self will be much diminished.

What a buzzing is there in the ears of people concerning some preachers (no
professed Papists neither) who seem to affect the language of Ashdod, and to
the great amusement of people, make their pulpits eccno to Rome ever and anon.
Who speak sometimes at such a rate, as if they had a Pope in their belly, or
had a mind to appear as popishly affected as they durst. The lashers out of
popery, are the men who have all along fomented the Jealousies of the people,
and made them fear they should be overrun with Papists, as the sluggards
ground is said to be with weeds. If such men were taught either to preach more
honestly and orthodoxly, or else for ever hereafter made to hold their peace,
the justice done them might greatly abate the peoples fears, as their
hetorodoximony have inflamed them.

Whilst Papists play least in sight, I mean whilst the exercise of their
Religion is very obscure and private, so long that proverb is made good What
the eye sees not the heart rueth not, but if it should chance to show its head
in public; if it came forth like a bridegroom, out of his chamber decked and
trimmed, to take the eyes of its beholders, if it come forth with its luscious
music, tempting the people to dance after it; then will the mouths of men's
fears, and complaints also, be wide opened, then will they suspect it will bear
down all before it. Since then their Religion is impure, and the people
extremely jealous of them, and it, let them with the Adulterer seek the
twilight, yea the black and dark night. Let them steal their waters (if they
will have any) and eat their bread in secrecy, so it may be as sweet to them,
and not so bitter, and vexatious to others; so shall they not need to fear
others, neither will others be afraid of them.

Lastly, if there shall appear a forwardness in those whom it concerns, to make
as much as can be made of all hints, and intimations given them of danger
impending from the designs of Papists, I say if all such informations, shall
from time to time ^esifted to the very bran, and the very bottom of them dived
into (that they may despair of ever carrying any design undiscovered, and hid
under slight pretenses) thereby will the hearts of men be greatly secured
against the fears of Papists, being ^o dealt with as the Psalmist prays that
wicked men might be, when he says, Ps. 10.15. Search out his wickedness till
thou find none, i. e. no more. The more ^ealousy magistrates do, or shall
express of Papists, the less will the people be afraid of them. When
Magistrates are awake and watchful, people will venture to lie down and sleep.

The fifth of November Plot had certainly taken effect, if King James had not
been possessed with a great jealousy of Papists and their designs, which led
him to such an interpretation of that letter whereby he found it out; as others
did not give, nor himself would otherwise have given: so that fear and
suspicion are (as we see) good keys to open the cabinet counsels of Papists;
and but for them we had been lost long ere this.

I deceive my self if I have not now treated of one of the most singular
expedients whereby to encourage the English nation to any worthy undertaking,
and particularly, that of rebuilding the City, viz. by securing the minds of
men against that fear, and dread of Papists, and of their designs (which is so
generally upon them) that being once done, (as I have propounded the best, and
most moderate ways that I know for the doing of it) men will go forward with
their work, like giants refreshed with wine, mighty to run their race.

DISCOURSE XXX.
That to be thankful to God, and men, for the good beginnings of a new City, is
one good way to perfect it.

WE are doubly indebted for that part and proportion of another London, be it a
tenth, or whatsoever it is, which we see already: First to the great God, of
whom it is said Ps. 127.1. Except the Lord build the house they labor in vain
that build it. Nextly, and subordinately, to men for whatsoever they have
contributed thereunto, by their advice, authority, bounty, industry, or
otherwise; and particularly for that excellent, and prudent Act of Parliament,
which was quickly made in the case, besides an additional Bill for that
purpose, which had passed the honorable House of Commons, and seemed to meet
with no obstruction in the honorable House of Lords, but want of time to pass
it: and which we doubt not, when the two houses shall come together again, will
be readily agreed to, and made into an Act.

How noble a precedent of thankfulness for a good beginning (and no more) is
that we read of, Ezra 3.10. And when the builders laid the foundation of the
Temple of the Lord, they set the Priests and the Levites to praise the Lord, v.
11. And all the people shouted with a great shout, when they praised the Lord
because the foundation of the house of the Lord was laid. Though the ancient
men who had seen the first, did weep at the same time with a loud voice
(because the latter was not to be compared with the former;) yet the rest of
the people gave thanks, and shouted for joy. And certainly they took a right
course to have another Temple brought to perfection, in being so thankful for
it, whilst it was yet but imperfect. They that will see a mercy finished before
they give thanks for it, resolve to trust God no further man they can see him.

The sacrifice of praise (whereby God is glorified) is not to be deferred till
such time as the work of mercy has brought forth, but is to be offered, so
soon as there is but a conception, or at leastwise, any life and motion in it;
to discover that it has conceived. As the hearty sucking of a child brings
down more milk into those breasts in which there was but little at the first:
so a thankful heart brings down more, and more mercy, and fills those breasts
more full, which by our daily receivings we are as it were emptying. What
Christ said to Nathaniel in reference to his believing, John 1.50. Because I
said I saw thee under the figtree believe thou? thou shall see greater things
than these, may be applied to thanksgiving; If for a little mercy we have
received already, we can be daily thankful, we shall be sure of more. We should
be thankful for the least of mercies, for that we our selves are less than the
least.

What better copy can we write after than that of Ezra (that holy scribe?) Ezra
9.8. And now for a little space grace has been shown from the Lord to leave us
a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place; that our God my
lighten our eyes (so Jonathans were with a little honey) and give us a little
reviving in our bondage. You see he was thankful for a remnant, for a nail, for
a little reviving, and God gave more afterward. The seed of mercy always
prospers when it lights upon the valley of an humble heart, and is soakt with
the warm showrs of affectionate thanksgivings. So as the great God could have
hindered the work we are now in hand with, either by invading us with the
Plague, or plagueing us with an invasion, or otherwise, not one house might
have been built at this day, of all that were burnt, nor so much as one
foundation laid, whereas now (thanks be to God) some hundreds of houses are
already finished: (several of them more stately than before) so that now we may
allude to what the Psalmist speaks, Ps. 48.12, 13. Walk about Zion and go
round about her: tell the towers thereof, mark ye well her bulwarks, consider
her palaces, that ye may tell it to the generation following. So may I say,
walk now about London, mark ye well her palaces, etc. that ye may tell the
generation to come, how many goodly buildings were in London, within less than
two years, after the greatest part of it was burnt to the ground. This is the
Lords doing and should be mavelous in our eyes.

Have not men, as instruments, contributed something (and that considerable)
toward the rebuilding of the City? (such I mean as had no houses there of
their own to build) and ought they not to be thankfully acknowledged for what
they have done? I doubt not but many had a hand in the forementioned Act that
had no private concern in London. So to eye men as to overlook God is the
greater fault of the two, but to overlook men when, and wherein they deserve to
be thankfully eyed is likewise a fault. Ezra has set us a good pattern Ezra
7.27. Blessed be the Lord God which has put such a thing as this in the Kings
heart, to beautify the house of the Lord, v. 28. And has extended mercy to me
before the King and his counselors, and before all the Kings mighty Princes,
etc. Here, though the chief honor, and praise, was ascribed to God, yet the
King, and his Counselors, and Princes, were owned also. The King is said to
have beautified the house of God, though God to have put it into his heart so
to do.

Whenever favors are received, be they great or small, thanks becomes a
debt, and it is but just to pay it. How should they look to prosper who can pay
what they owe and will not? and when it is but thanks that is owing, or
expected, who cannot pay it? It is a perverse thing to withhold thanks from
them that have deserved at our hands; out of a conce it they might have
deserved more. They that do for us more than they might have done (be it more
or less) have earned our thanks, and more it is like they will do, if they find
us thankful. Some will scatter their bread upon the waters by way of trial,
whether they shall find it again, I mean they show lesser kindnesses at the
first, to see if they shall find men thankful, and when they have found them
so, they open the hands of their bounty much more wide, and their latter
favors are such as speak the former, to have bin but a kind of earnest. It is
like that Leaper who alone of all the ten that were cured, did return to give
thanks; had some favor above all the rest added to his cure, it being usual
with God to thank men (I mean to reward them) for their thanks. And who knows
but that our Rulers may have farther intentions of kindness toward the poor
City, exceeding all that they have done for it already (I had almost said as
the last cloud which Elijah saw did exceed the first, 1 Kings 18. if such a
thing were possible) if they shall but experiment that they are owned, and
acknowledged (as I hope they will be) in, and for what they have done already.
Tertullus that great orator spoken of Acts. 24. may inform us of the best
rhetoric wherewith to prevail for future kindness, who being about to court
Felix, to be his friend against Paul, bespake him as follows, v. 2, 3. Seeing
that by thee we enjoy great quietness, and that very worthy deeds, are done
unto this nation by thy providence. We accept it always and in all places (most
noble Felix) with all thankfulness.

DISCOURSE XXXI.
That to seek much unto God, by Prayer, and Fasting for success, would be one
of the best ways to promote the City.

ALL great undertakings (and such is the building of our City) should be usherd
in, and carried on, with prayer, and fasting. In every thing by prayer and
supplication let your request be made known to God, is the rule given, Philip.
4.6. And if by prayer in every thing, then doubtless by fasting also, in things
of greater weight, and moment: ought our requests to be made known. Prayer
alone can do much, but joined with fasting it may prevail yet more. Our Savior
speaking of a sort of Devils says, This kind can come forth by nothing but by
prayer and f^sting, Mark 9.29. He says not by prayer only but by fasting also.

Satan is the great obstructer of every good work 1 These. 2.18. We would have
come unto you (even I Paul) once and again, but Satan hindered us. Never had
that fowl fiend a greater mind to obstruct the building of any City in the
world ( Jerusalem only excepted) than I believe he has to obstruct the
building of London. How shall we cast him out but by prayer and fasting? Six
other evil Spirits there are (if I may not call them Devils) which do
vehemently oppose the rebuilding of London, and must be cast out by the means
forementioned. First, the spirit of Fear, Discouragement and Despondency,
Nehemiah 4.10. And Judah said, the strength of the bearers (...) burdens is
decayed, and there is much rubbish, so that (...) are not able to build the
Wall. And our adversaries said, they shall not know, neither see, till we come
in the widst amongst them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease, v. 11.
This one spirit should it so rage and domineer, as God might suffer it to do,
might utterly prevent the building of London.

But what think you of the Spirit of Envy, and malice, is not that as bad? That
Spirit opposed the building of Jerusalem, and so it will of London so far as it
can, or dare. Nehemiah 2.10. When San^allat and Tobiah heard of it, it grieved
them exceedingly, that there was come a man to seek the welfare of the children
of Israel. Nehem. 4.9. The breaches began to be stopped, then they were very
wroth, and conspired all of them to fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder it.

Another evil Spirit, which does, or may hinder the building of London, is that
of Jealousy, and suspicion, not only in, but of, and concerning that City.
This Sanballat made great use of to hinder the building of Jerusalem, Nehem.
6.6. It is reported among the heathens (said he) that thou and the Jews think
to rebel, for which cause thou buildest the wall that thou may be their
King, etc. So some men have the unhappiness to be jealous of their wives,
though as chaste women as are in the world, and others are so wicked as to
persuade them to it: now this impertinent, as well as evil spirit, must be
kept, or cast out by prayer, and fasting, that London may be rebuilt.

A spirit of anger, and discontent, may obstruct the building of London, as
much as any of the rest, if God should leave that spirit to do its worst? So
sullen as the discontents of men do sometimes make them, they will enterprise
nothing, but will hide their hands in their bosoms, and not so much as bring
it to their mouths again, as is said of the slothful man, Prove. 19.24. and say
as he Prove. 22.13. There is a Lion without, I shall be slain in the streets.
Men in high discontent, grow desperate, and care not what becomes of any thing.
This Spirit also must be cast out or kept within some bounds, by prayer, and
fasting.

There is also a private, selfish, self-seeking spirit, which must be
disposessed, that any great, and good undertaking, may be carried on. Were all
people of that spirit, none would contribute to the building of London but such
as had private ends, and particular concerns of their own. But if compassion,
and good will toward others, and a regard to public good, do not quicken that
work, it will go on but slowly, or but little of it be for the use, and
advantage of those who have most need of it.

How easy were it to reckon up yet more evil Spirits, which by prayer and
fasting, should be cast out, that the building of London may not by them be
obstructed? One is a Spirit of Strife and contention, a wrangling Spirit (as I
may call it) a Spirit averse unto composing, and agreeing of matters, upon just
and equal terms, when the case is clear, and easy to be decided. If the
reverend Judges must determine all, and every controversy betwixt Landlord and
Tenants, and none of them will agree amongst themselves: (neither can they
begin to build till they are agreed:) how many hundreds of houses will by that
means be retarded? nor will so much as the foundations thereof be laid so soon,
as otherwise the houses themselves might have been completely finished. Some
are of that humor that they never think well of a private de(...) not in the
plainest case) and when they are offered better terms than the Law would give
them) but to Law they will, whatsoever it cost them, and how long soever the
controversy be like to de^end, how much more in this case, where they ^^n have
Law for nothing, and are sure to have ^^ick dispatch, when they once come to a
hearing? ^et may some for ought I know wait another whole ^ear, or upward, ere
their turn will come to have ^^eir cause heard before the Judges, all which
time ^^eir houses must lie in ashes; and if such be their ^^mour there let them
lie. If none but Moses will ^erve their turns to end every small difference,
let ^^em stay till he can be had: but in Moses his time, ^^e rulers of
thousands, and the rulers of tens (as it might be our tithingmen) they judged
every small matter, and only greater matters were brought before him, Exodus
18.22, 26. Not one brick had been ^id (as I suppose) in many scores of houses
that are ^ow built, if they that were concerned therein as ^andlords, and
Tenants, had not agreed of themselves, their time for hearing before the Judges
being (...) may be not yet come. So that if God will cast, (...) keep out that
Spirit of contention, which is in ^^me men, and which might possibly enter into
^ore, which disposes men to admit of no determination but that of the Law, and
Judges, which ^^ey cannot avoid (which shows they would never ^gree if they
could help it) I say if that Spirit were ^^st out, and men would save the
reverend Judges (...) labor, and themselves so much time by making ^^ir
propositions on both sides, and mutually accepting of them; then a much greater
dispatch might ^e made with our City, than is otherwise like to be: Now that
Spirit must be cast out like all the rest, by prayer and fasting. 2 These. 3.16.
Now the Lord of ^^ce give you peace always by all means.

Seventhly, here is a spirit of slumber spoken of, Romans 11.8. which if it have
not ceased upon Londoners as yet, it soon may, for what more incident to men,
when they are sad and heavy hearted, than to grow heavy eyed, and to fall
asleep? Christ having told his Disciples that his Soul was exceeding sorrowful
even unto death, Mat. 26.38. (which words, it is like, filled them with sorrow
too) presently they dropped asleep though he had besought them to watch with him
but one hour. There is a great sadness and discontent, upon people at this day,
and thence no small danger of a Spirit of slumber, and sleepiness to ensue,
which is an evil spirit, a spirit that would never suffer the City to be
rebuilt, for who can build in his sleep? this spirit also should be kept out by
fasting and prayer, unto him who never slumbreth or sleeps.

And now it appears that if London be built again in any competent time,
there are as many evil spirits to be cast, or kept out of it, as there were
Devils cast out of Mary Magdalen, viz. seven, Mark 16.9. which I have called by
their names. Nay give me leave to conclude, that I am verily of opinion, that
all the Devils in Hell (God permitting them) would set themselves to oppose and
withstand the building of London, which shows how great need there is of
fasting and prayer, to carry it on, and make it fail as it were before the wind.

I may not stand to discourse the reason and use of fasting in conjunction with
prayer, or why prayer alone might not do as well. Fasting is a practical
acknowledgment of our unworthiness of those good creatures of God, which on
such days, we abstain from, and by consequence, of all others (for there is
par ratio) which are as good as they. By fasting we acknowledge that we are
unworthy of meats, and drinks, and if of meat to eat, much more of houses to
dwell in; which to be deprived of, were the less punishment of the two. Now
they that have deserved the greater punishment, to be sure have deserved the
less. Now a hearty acknowledgment both in word and deed, of our great
unworthiness, is one of the main, and most prevailing things upon a day of
humiliation. If then their uncircumcised heart shall be humbled (says God) and
they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity, Levit. 26.41. Then will I
remember the land. By confessing we deserve no house or home (as by our fasting
we do) if we fast sincerely) what do we but accept the punishment of our
iniquity? which is the way to find mercy.

But since our rulers have appointed an anniversary fast; upon the account of
the City, some may think all that I have said touching this matter to be
needless, but really it is not so. For first it does not thence follow that the
fast they have appointed will be religiously and strictly kept; (and as good
never a whit as never the better, says our proverb) or that by a great many,
it will therefore be kept at all.

Neither secondly does it thence follow, that one fast in a year is as much as
need to be, or as God does expect from us, upon so solemn an occasion. Rulers
may think it not fit to anticipate the piety of the people, by leaving nothing
at all to be done by them of their own accords, and as a free-will-offering.
Moreover they are to make such Laws, as all or the generality of men may be
able to observe: Now all men are not in a capacity to fast frequently; yea some
it may be (so much greater is their leisure) can better keep one fast every
week, than others can keep two in a whole year. So that though it may be no
fault in our Magistrates, to enjoin but one fast in a year, in order to
imploring mercy for the desolate City, yet it may be a great fault in the
people (to whom it is as lawful to fast, as it is to pray, without special
command from their superiors, as having a command for him that is supreme to
pray always; that is at all opportunities, and fasting is but a necessary
concomitant of prayer as the case may be) to observe no more than one day of
religious fasting, throughout the whole year, upon so great an account.

We read that the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of
Jephthah four days in a year, Judge, 11.40. Now what was the loss of Jephthahs
daughter to the loss of such a City as London was: (though she were made a
sacrifice) but if that perpetual virginity, whereto she was consigned over by
her fathers vow, (as some understand it from v. 39. Who did with her according
to his vow, and she knew no man) were all they went to bewail, four days in a
year, one would think that the loss of such a City as London, might better
deserve four weeks or months, every year to lament it, and which is more to
implore mercy for it, whereas the condition of Jephthahs daughter was
irretrievable, whether she were put to death, or whether it were only that by
her fathers vow, and her own superadded consent, she was obliged to continue
single, all the days of her life. Now David's example may tell us, that when
our fasting, and mourning can do good, as he thought it might for his child
whilst it lived, and we believe it may to our desolate City, then chiefly, if
not only, ought we to give way to it.

How often men should fast upon the loss, and for the recovery of such a City
as London was, can be brought within no rule that will take in every man, only
so often as God shall afford them real opportunities, of which some have ten
times as many, within the compass of one year, as some others have.

But this may encourage us to be as frequent in prayer and fasting, as we can,
namely that no such service, rightly performed, shall ever be in vain.
Physicians need not be farther invited to make frequent visits to their
patients, that need it, than by finding they are always welcome, come as often as
they will, and do never lose their labor. This is just the case: let us make
as frequent applications as we will, or can, to the throne of grace, for our
selves, or others, in such manner as becomes us, we shall be always welcome,
and not lose our labor once. For God is nigh to all that call upon him in
truth, in all things that they call upon him for, Deuteronomy. 4.7.

What better or more suitable examples of praying and fasting, and of the good
success thereof in such a case as that of our City, I say what better examples
can we desire than are afforded us in those two famous men, viz. Ezra and
Nehemiah, Ezra 8.21. Then I proclaimed a fast that we might afflict our selves
before our God, to seek of him a right way for us. Namely when he and others
were going from Babylon to Jerusalem, to rebuild the Temple of God there, v.
23. So we fasted and besought our God for this, and he was entreated of us. Se
also Nehemiah 1.4. And when I heard these words I sat down and mourned certain
days, and fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven, viz. when he heard that
the wall of Jerusalem was broken down and the gates thereof burnt with fire, v.
3. The thing he prayed for, was that he might find favor in the Kings eyes; to
go up to Jerusalem, every way furnished to build that desolate City. Now v. 8.
it is said, And the King granted me according to the good hand of my God upon
me.

Now I wish that upon all that I have said, the resolution of men may be to
keep that Anniversary fast, which the Magistrate has appointed for the City,
in the most solemn way that can be; and over and above that, to keep as many
more such days in private (though in public they cannot, without public
leave) as they shall have opportunity to do. For as Israel prevailed against
Amaleck as much by Moses lifting up his hands, viz. in prayer as by the peoples
brandishing their swords in war, Exodus 17.11. (for when he let down his hand
Amaleck prevailed) so it is a real truth (how few soever do believe it) that
those who are builders, in the common acceptance of that word, viz.
Carpenters, Bricklayers and other artificers, do not more truly contribute to
the building of such a City as London is (in which religion, as having been
long known and professed there, does claim a great interest) than they do, who
with tender regard to its recovery, do earnestly apply themselves to prayer,
and fasting. The bridegroom of England (as in a civil sense I may call London)
though in a spiritual sense Christ himself likewise is so called) being taken
away, fasting is now in season, for says Christ (to which we only allude) when
the bridegroom shall be taken from them, then shall they fast. As the mother of
Augustine comforted her self with this concerning him, viz. That a son of so
many prayers, and tears, should not miscarry, so may we comfort our selves
concerning London, if it be a City, as he was a son, of many prayers, and
tears, that it shall not miscarry, but go out its full time, and be brought to
its intended perfection.

DISCOURSE XXXII.
On Ezra 6.14. And the elders of the Jews builded, and they prospered through
the prophesying of Haggai the Prophet and Zechariah.

INtending to treat of all the helps we can think upon, as for the rebuilding
of London, that of good Prophets, who in former ages have been very
serviceable, even to the purposes of building (witness the text above
mentioned) may at no hand be omitted: I have showed before, that good
Magistrates may contribute very much to such a work, as is in hand, (viz the
restoring of the City) and now I shall make it as evident, that good Ministers
also might much contribute thereunto. It is said in express terms that the Jews
builded, and prospered through the prophesying of Haggai. It is like, that
Haggai did not lay one stone in the building of the Temple, and yet all things
considered, no man was more instrumental in that work than he, for he it was,
who in the name of God put them upon it, and encouraged them in it, Haggai 1.4.
Then came the word of the Lord by Haggai saying, is it time for you O ye to
dwell in your cieled houses, and this house lie wast? v. 8. Thus says the
Lord, go up to the mountain and bring wood and build the house, and I will take
pleasure in it. v. 13. Then spoke Haggai in the Lords message to the people
saying, I am with you says the Lord. And Haggai 2.4. Be strong O Zerubbabel
says the Lord, and be strong O Jeshua the high priest, and be strong all ye
people of the land: for I am with you says the Lord. In like manner we find
the prophet Zechariah encouraging the people Zech 8. from v. 7. to 15. and
Zech. 12.2, 3.

Now as it is in war, they that beat the drums, and sound the trumpets, thereby
animating those that engage in the battle, and drowning those doleful noises of
shriekes, and groans, which would otherwise dishearten the Soldiers, do, or
may do as much service, though themselves do not strike one stroke, as those
that fight most skilfully and valiantly, yea each of them is, or seems to be,
of greater use than any one single soldier, because what they do has an
influence upon the whole company, or regiment; putting heart and spirit into
every man: even so may it fall out in building (and every other undertaking of
great consequence) viz. that Gods Prophets, or Ministers, though it be not
proper for them to be mechannically employed therein, yet may each of them more
advance, and promote the business, than any ten men that are so employed.

They (if I may so allude) are the greatest builders of all, who (as is said of
God) do build without hands. Tongues may either help or hinder more than hands;
help if united, and engaged for the work: but hinder, if divided, as in the
case of Babel. There was a prophet Jeremy, who lived a great while since
Haggaies time, and much nearer to ours, whose influence upon the people was so
great, for the exceeding veneration they had both for his life, and doctrine,
that I verily think that the interest of ten such prophets as he, were enough
to build such a City as London, if all England could but afford men and moneys,
wherewithal to do it.

Doubtless Haggai, and Zechariah were men of eminent holiness, and that brought
them into so much esteem with the people. It was not merely as they were
prophets, nor yet as men of good abilities, that they were so much had in
honor. Hophni and Phineas were priests, and able men, it is like being the
sons of Eli: but yet the people had no respects for them, yea for the greatness
of their sin, men abherred the offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.17.

Sanctity is so essential to a prophet, to a minister, that where it is not in
truth, or in appearance, at leastwise, where at leastwise it is not thought to
be; it is, as it were natural to men to withold from such persons that
veneration, and esteem, which as prophets is fit for them both to deserve, and
have: not men of the greatest parts, and abilities, but men of the greatest
zeal, and holiness, or reputed for such, are generally they who carry the
greatest stroke with the people, as if they thought that such Elijah's could
take up others to Heaven in the same chariot with themselves: or that the Ship
in which those Paul's do sail, must needs come safe to land, at leastwise all
the passengers be spared, and therefore would choose to imbarque with them. The
very semblance of sanctimony (where it may be it has not been in truth) has
made a greater interest for some men, and made them greater leaders of the
people, than the substance, and manifest reality of parts, and gifts, could
ever make others. But then suppose a Minister to have the true Thummim the
truth of grace and holiness, I mean (which one would think should be more
universally owned, than the mere show or shadow thereof) and besides that to
have the Urim also, I mean, a fair proportion of parts, and gifts, as for his
work, a man so qualified would compel a very Herod to pay him reverence, and to
be much persuaded by him, as he was by John the Baptist, for the very reason,
Mark 6.20. For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man, and a holy,
and observed him, and when he heard him he did many things, and heard him
gladly. We read that John was a shining light, as well as a burning light, John
5.35. but it was for his burning, and not so much for his shining light, that
Herod did reverence him, and do many things by his direction. Herod was no less
than a Prince, John but a mean man (to see too) The same John had his raiment
of Camels hair and a leathern girdle about his loins, Mat. 3.4. Yet, for that
he was a just, and a holy man, Herod feared him, who doubtless would not have
feared a loose, unholy prophet (one that he had known to be such) no not in all
his pontificalibus, if for the gravity, majesty and glory of his habit, he had
outvied the most reverend Pope. A holy prophet commands more respect in a hairy
garment, and a leathern girdle, and his word shall go farther, than shall the
word and authority of an unholy one, were his habit as rich as a very Prince,
and his titles of honor, more than are the grand Seigniors.

I see then, if a Zerubbabel would have his word to prosper, he must have holy
prophets about him, as was Haggai and Zechariah (or those that are generally
esteemed and reputed such.) For otherwise it is little service that can be done
for Princes, by those that serve them in the capacity of Ministers, or
Prophets, unless those prophets of theirs are generally in request as good and
holy men, whose lips the people are willing should preserve knowledge for them,
and to receive the law from their mouths.

Now every such prophet as Haggai and Zechariah was, is able to do a Prince
more than knight service, whether he have a City to build, or any other great
design to carry on. The hands of Moses had flagged, and so Amaleck prevailed,
if Aaron, Exodus 17.12. had not held them up, and what is Aaron called but the
Saint of the Lord. They must be Aarons, or such as he in point of repute) viz.
Saints who shall be found able to bear up the hand of Moses whilst he is
conflicting with Amaleck. I mean with any great opposition, or difficulty; nor
can our Aaron be well spared whilst Amaieck is yet unabdued.

No persons more able to make the people for any good purpose than those
prophets for whom they have great respects; which can be only such as are
generally owned, and accounted of as good, and holy men.

Therefore they that are such, ought in Point of prudence, as well as upon
other considerations, to be obliged, and encouraged when any great work is in
hand; that by their means, and by virtue of their interest, others may be
brought in, even the body of a nation, to help forward with it. Such men are
certainly the Chariots of a Nation and the horsemen thereof: as was said of
Elijah. They that have a great interest of their own, they, and they only, can
make a considerable interest for others also, if obliged thereunto. They that
are really holy can do much with God, and men, they that have but a great name
to live, or for holiness, can do much with men: they that can do either, are or
may be of great use to them that shall employ them; but they that can do both,
will (where they take) be incomparably serviceable.

If any shall object, and say, that they of all men are most dangerous, if
touched with the least dissatisfaction, who for their piety, and parts, are had
in great veneration with the people; and that ubi mali nemo pejus, is most
applicable to them, that if they have an ill resentment of things, none can do
worse things than they, nor yet so bad: to that objection, I reply. We ought
not to look at what men can do, and to use them accordingly, but at what men
will, or are inclined to do. Doubtless God himself, could do more hurt to the
world, than all the Devils in Hell, put together in respect of his omnipotency,
but because of his unchangable holiness, righteousness, and goodness, he can do
the world no injury at all. Good men will not dare to do the hurt they could
(yet neither should they be tempted to do it, if they durst) Ministers that are
pious, and capable of doing worthy service, should be treated as friends, and
to be sure they will never hurt their friends, who are taught of God to love
their very enemies, they will never render evil for good, who make conscience
of rendering good for evil. Paul and Apollo and Cephas are yours, if you be
Christ's: use them as your own, and you will never have cause to fear them, nor
much cause to do it howsoever they be used, since they have learnt to pray even
for them that use them despightfully.

Good men have a power to do mischief, but no will, but to do good they have
both will, and power: therefore the mischief they can do is not so much to be
feared, as the good they are able to do, is to be hoped for and encouraged.

Surely a blessing from Heaven is wont to attend the labors of a good
Ministry, and the encouraging of those labors, (as well as a curse to wait
upon the contrary) And if the blessing of God will not help to build the City,
I know not what will.

Time was, that David himself was afraid of the Ark of God, and therefore would
not remove it unto him into the City of David, but carried it aside into the
house of Obed-Edom, 2 Samuel 6.10. but in three months time he saw that he was
worse scared than hurt, v. 11. It was told King David saying, the Lord has
blessed the house of Obed-Edom, and all that pertains is him, because of the
ark of God. So David went and brought up the ark of God, from the house of
Obed-Edom into the City of David with gladness. He concluded that that which
had blessed the house of Obed-Edom would bless his City, and doubtless so it
did.

That building work may be promoted by good prophets, or ministers, I shall
prove by one text more, and so conclude this Chapter, viz. Ezra 5.2. Then rose
up Zerubbabel and Jeshuah, and began to build the house of God which is at
Jerusalem, and with them ^ere the prophets of God helping them.

DISCOURSE XXXIII.
That to be deeply affected with the hand of God in burning the City is one
good way to have it built again.

TO be affected with the burning of the City is one thing, and to be affected
with the hand of God in burning it is another. They may lament the City with a
great lamentation; who take no notice at all of the hand of God, that was
stretched out against it, but altogether cry out upon men, as if evil
instruments could have burnt such a City, without the great God concerning
himself in it more or less. Whereas the truth is, if men were instruments in
the burning of it (which for me shall rest upon proof) yet God had the
principle hand in it; for wicked men are but Gods hand, and sword, Ps. 17.14.
Deliver my soul from the wicked which are thy sword, from men which are thy
hand.

Now God would that his hand should be taken notice of, for he loves to be
acknowledged as the author of those judgments that are inflicted by him. Who
gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robber: did not the Lord? Isa. 42.24.
Is there any evil in the City and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6. That
passage Isa. 26.11. shows us that God cannot endure to be overlooked when he
smites. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up they will not see, but they shall
see, and be ashamed, yea the fire of thine enemies shall consume them.

That we may be duly affected with the burning of the City, there are several
things to be taken notice of, besides that which I have suggested in the first
place, viz. that God did it. Now that such a God, should burn such a City, a
God slow to anger, gracious, merciful, long suffering, abundant in goodness, I
say that such a God, should burn so ancient, so famous, so professing a City,
is a very affecting consideration.

Another is this, viz. that God did never burn any City but when he was greatly
angry. God did never burn a City in cool blood (if I may so speak of him after
the manner of men.) Isa. 42.25. He has poured upon him the fury of his anger,
and it has set him on fire round about, yet he knew not, and it burned him,
yet he laid it not to heart. I knew a good gentlewoman, who beholding the
flames of London (by which she lost not one pounds worth of her estate, did
thereby receive so great an impression of the wrath of God against he City, (as
her self told me) that she presently fell into a languishing distemper (though
before of a healthful, cheerful constitution) and in despite of all the
remedies which her loving husband, one of the most eminent Physicians in
England, could supply her withal (which the bills I have seen have assured me
to have been as effectual as could be used) she out-ran her husband to the
grave, whose many infirmities made it probable he would have arrived there many
years before her. If she were too much affected with the manifestation of Gods
wrath, I doubt that most others are but too little.

Another affecting consideration is this, that God is never angry without a
cause, nor yet above the cause given, or more than he has cause for. There is
never anger on Gods part, but there is provocation on ours, and provocation
proportionable to that anger, Ps. 107.17. Fools because of their transgression
and because of their iniquity are afflicted. If we can slight their anger who
will be angry for nothing, and they know not why themselves? to be sure his
anger is not to be slighted, who is never displeased but there is a just cause,
and a good reason for it.

God would that we should be more affected with that wrath of his which is the
cause of judgments, than with those judgments which are the effects of his
wrath. As Joab doubtless was not so much troubled for the loss of his corn, as
for the displeasure of Absalom, which was intimated thereby. Surely David was
grieved at Saul's throwing his javelin at him, though it hit him not, because it
did betoken the displeasure he had against him. David does not deprecate
chastisement, but anger. Ps. 6.1. Rebuke me not in thine anger, chasten me not
in thy hot displeasure, and it is said Be ye afraid of the sword for wrath
brings the punishment of the sword, Job. 19.29. as if the wrath of God were
the very edge of the sword, but for which we should have no cause to fear it.

God sends judgments on purpose to make his anger known, against sin, and
sinners, therefore says the scrip. God is known by the judgments which he
executes, Ps. 9.16. and Romans 1. it is said, The wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven against all ungodliness of men. Judgments are the revelations of Gods
wrath, and as such they are most of all to be taken notice of.

How angry was God think you when he burnt our City? It is an expression that
imports much wrath, when the anger of God and his jealousy is said but to
smoke against a man, Deuteronomy. 29.20. But in this case it did not only smoke
against London, but flamed out. Now to be sensible of the fury of Gods anger,
which has set us on fire round about, and to lay it to our hearts more than
any thing else, (like ingenious children who are more troubled at their parents
frowns; than at the smart of the rod,) I say thus to do, might conduce very
much toward the building of our City. For says the scripture, Humble your
selves under the mighty hand of God that he may exalt you in due time, 1 Pet.
5.6.

DISCOURSE XXXIV.
That greatly to bewail those sins, both of our own, and others which helped to
burn the old City, would help to build the new one.

WHat those sins were I have showed at large in my Treatise concerning the
burning of London, whereunto for the avoiding of Tautologies, I refer thee.
Some it may be can cry not guilty, in their own persons, as to several of them
saying as he, I thank thee O God I am not so nor so, viz. no Idolater, no
Adulterer, etc. but who can wash his, or her hands, in innocence, as to every
of them, or throw the first stone at another, as being himself without any sin
therein mentioned.

As the Prophet Oded said to the men of Israel, who dealt severely with their
brethren of Judah, whom God for their sins had delivered into their hands,
(...) Chron. 28.10. And now ye purpose to keep under the ^^^^dren of Judah, and
of Jerusalem, for bondmen ^^d bondwomen to you: but are there not with you,
(...) with you sins against the Lord your God? so say I (...) any that shall
think themselves so righteous as ^^t they need no repentance: But are there not
^ith you, even with you sins against your God?

Let us then in the first place bewail our own sins, (...) David did (that man
after Gods own heart) say^ng as he, Ps. 38.18. I will declare mine iniquity, I
^ill be sorry for my sin, and doing as he, Ps. 6.6. All (...) night make I my
bed to swim, I water my couch with ^^y tears, viz. of repentance, for his sins
whereby ^e had provoked that anger of God, which in the beginning of this Psalm
he deprecates

Let us in the next place bewail the sins of others, ^^^ch we were bound to do,
though we had none of ^ur own: much more being as it were brethren (...)
iniquity with other men, having been partakers in the sins of others, and made
our selves by one means, or other accessory thereunto. This did not ^ot, yet
vexed he his righteous Soul from day to day with the filthy conversation of the
wicked Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.^. And as for David he tells us that he beheld the
transgress^rs, and was grieved, and in Ps. 119.136. he says, Rivers of waters
run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law. Thus Ezra mourned for the
sin of the people in marrying Cananitish wives, Ezra. 9.1. (though he had done
no such thing himself.) And thus Nehemiah bewailed the sins of all sorts of
men, Nehemiah 9.33. Thou have done right but we have done wickedly, neither
have our Kings, our Priests, nor our fathers kept thy law, etc.

It is better than nothing to be affected with the judgments of God themselves
(not to be as if we were seared with a hot Iron, or past feeling) it is better
than that to be affected with the displeasure of God manifested in, and by
those judgments; but it is best of all, to be grieved at the causes of that
displeasure, whether in our selves or others, viz. our own and the sins of
other men. It is some ingenuity in a Child to resent a correction, and to be
ashamed, when his Father has as it were spit in his face, it is more to resent
his parents anger, and frowns, but it is most of all, to be troubled for his
faults, unless it be more than that, to be troubled even for the faults of
others, which shall never be laid to his charge. A child may be sorry his
father is offended, and yet not be sorry for the fault (as such) whereby he
gave him the offense. Therefore to lament the causes of Gods anger (which I am
now exhorting to) is more than to lament the effects, or the anger it self.

But the question is, how the doing of this would help to build our City? Now
to that I answer, that our City (blessed be God is in a fair way to be built,
if our sins hinder not: neither shall they hinder it (how great soever our
former provocations have been) if our hearts do but serve us duly to lament,
our own abominations, and the abominations of one another, Ezekiel. 9.4. And the
Lord said unto him, viz. unto the man with the inkhorn by his side) Go through
the midst of the City, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh,
and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof. This
mark was for preservation, and deliverance, whilst others were devoted to ruin
and destruction; like that blood which was sprinkled upon the posts of the
Israelites, that their doors might be passed over, and the destroying Angel not
come into their houses, Exodus 12.23. Lot who vexed his soul with the ^^thy
conversation of the wicked, had a Zoar, a ^^^tle City provided for him and his,
when fire ^ame down upon the Zodomites, where in 1 Pet. 2.9. ^^e Apostle
infers, The Lord knows how to deliver (...) godly, viz. from those flames
and calamities, ^^ich destroy others. Though the houses of wicked ^en, like
these in Sodom, should suffer the vengeance ^eternal fire, that is, be
condemned by God, al^ays to lie in the dust (which yet is more distinction ^an
God does ordinarily make in this world) yet doubt not but such as mourn in
Zion, shall have ^ave to build the wast places, and shall have beauty (...)
their ashes.

Now is Londons seed time, the City it self is to ^esown. Sow in tears and you
shall reap in joy. He (...) goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed,
shall ^^^btless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves (...) him, Ps.
126.5, 6.

DISCOURSE XXXV.
^^^t to reform throughout England, whatsoever is manifestly amiss, and can be
reformed, would admirably promote the City.

Have discoursed of Humiliation, upon several (...) accounts, but what
signifies Humiliation, with^^ Reformation, for who was ever truly humbled, ^^t
did not truly reform? A thorough Reforma^^on has been a work so long spoken
off, and so ^^ttle perfected, that some may be apt to think of ^at, as of the
Philosopher stone, (which for so ^^ny ages has baffled the most ingenious
chemists) that there is no such thing attainable. I say of Reformation, as
Divines do of sanctification. Ther^ is a perfection of degrees, which cannot be
attained in this life, but then there is a perfection of parts, which may; some
reformation there may be o^ all things or kinds of things that are amiss, all
o^ a complete reformation, can hardly be expected in this life, of any one
thing, or kind of things which is not as it should be.

Solomon places it amongst the vanities which h^ had seen under the Sun, that
that which is crooke^ cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting can
not be numbered, Eccles. 1.15. Seeming thereby t^ mean, that there are some
evils in the world (an^ those not a few) that will never be mended, tha^ are
like incurable diseases, or like those defects i^ nature, which can none be
supplied. Ex. gr. if a man be born blind, or deaf, etc. But he would no^ have
us to think, that none of all those things tha^ are amiss in the world can be
rectified, or reformed. There are a great many moral, and political diseases,
as well as natural, that may be cured though some are incurable. Some bones
that are out of joint, may be set; and some that are broken may be made whole
again, though all cannot.

I mention that all and every thing that is amis^ in the world, cannot be
mended, to the end people may not be discontented, and say with Jona^ they have
reason to be angry to the death, so long as they see any thing in Church, or
state, that is not as it should be, or that would be better otherwise. For they
that live by that principle, shall be always, and in all times, restless, and
malcontent, Men must be more than mortal men, before they cease to be guilty
of any failings, and oversights: or of turning aside, more, or less; either to
the right hand, or to the left.

But on the other hand, it is as certain that there are many wilful
miscarriages, and presumptuous iniquities in the world, which men might avoid,
as well as unavoidable infirmities. So much David intimates, when he says,
keep back thy servant from ^esumptuous sins, Many things are left unreformed,
not because men cannot reform them, or do think they ought not, or need not so
to do, but because they will not, and because they love darkness better than
light, and evil more than that which is good. Romans 1.32. Who knowing the
judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not
only (...) the same but have pleasure in those that do them.

I meddle not with the reforming of those things which men may rationally
doubt, whether they be amiss or no; or with those peccadillos, which are like
smaller faults in pointing, or printing, which no ways disturb the sense, or
make it unintelligible, but with the greater Errata's that are committed, even
so great, that it is hard to be understood whether they that do such things
have any thing of Christianity, besides the name, and profession. Let men pluck
the beams out of their eyes first, and then they will see to pull out the motes
afterward.

I exhort not to the reforming and altering of every thing that any body shall
find fault with, for then we shall never have done, then we shall make as ^ald
a business of our reformation, as befell the man in the fable, whose young wife
pulled out all his gray hairs, and then come an old one afterward, and pluck
of all that were not gray, viz. all that were lest: or as a Limner, who having
hundreds looking on, as he is drawing a picture, should put in and put out
according to every ones fancy, and suggestion.

But if there be things which every body finds fault with, and which the
consciences (if not the tongues) of all people do condemn, and cry out upon,
which they that run, may, and do read the evil of, and the iniquity that is in
them, doubtless such things ought to be reformed. As the boy said to his
Father, Father is that true that every body says is true? so say I is not that
evil which every body confesses to be so, or cannot deny so to be? and ought
not that which is manifestly evil to be reformed, if it can be so? will not
otherwise our sins separate between God and us, and hinder good things from us?
will not those Achans, our wilful unreformed sins) trouble us continually, and
cause God to say, as to Joshua of old, There is an accursed thing in the midst
of thee: therefore ye cannot stand, Josh. 7.13. Neither will I be with you any
more unless you destroy the accursed.

As for the persons concerned in reforming, they are as many as are concerned
in the rebuilding of London, (for therein is its rebuilding concerned) or as
many of them, as have any thing that stands in need of being reformed, and who
has not more or less of that? For in many things we all offend.

Here I could mention diverse sorts of reformation necessary to be pressed, and
practiced, viz personal, and that both internal, and external, domestical,
national.

It were endless to point at all things which it were needful for us to reform.
But first of all, if men declare their sins like Sodom, if they publish them in
the face of the Sun (as did Absalom) if they swear and curse, in all companies,
and in the open street, not caring who hears them: if men, women, and children,
do grosely and notoriously profane the Sabbath, by working or playing; if they
that be drunk, will be drunk in the day time, and reel along the streets ( as
if they had eaten shame and drank after it, as our proverb is.) If Atheists
will speak blasphemously of God and Christ, scornfully of Scriptures,
contemptuously of all religion, and that in all, or most places, where they
come (as if they studied to make proselytes to infidelity, and to draw others
with themselves to Hell) and if other sins put on a whores forehead, and a brow
of brass, and appear with broad and open face, as if no body had any thing to
say to them, or as men might do that were recti in curia, I say when sins, yea
the worst of sins, shall in that fashion, stare all Law and authority in the
face, it is high time to reform. For if Laws cannot thrust sinners into
corners, and make them like Owls to fly the light, and sins to become the
hidden works of darkness (as they are called) the adulterer to seek the
twilight, and to act si non taste tamen caute, cautiously, if not chastely, I
say, if laws cannot confine sin to those regions of darkness, to which it
belongs, without some speedy reformation, Laws will be out of countenance, and
sin will give Law, virtue will be counted a vice, and vice a virtue,
drunkenness, and whoredom will challenge rewards, whilst sobriety, and chastity
shall be exposed to punishments, and as the Prophet complained, Mal. 3.15. Now
we call the prond happy, yea they that work wickedness are set up, yea they
that tempt God are even delivered. So it will be again, if the impudency of
sin, and sinners, be not chastised; and then the second part of Phaetons
tragedy will be acted, viz. Sin got into the Chariot of the sun, I mean to be
visible, and conspicuous, 'twill set the world on fire.

Though it be above the power of Humane Laws, (and of those that make and
execute them) and destroy the being of sin in the world, yet not the
visibleness of it, whereby it spreads exceedingly, flows in like a Torrent that
has broken down all its banks and bounds, bids defiance to all virtue and
goodness, and says in effect, as Adonijah did when David grew old, I will be
King, 1 King. 1.5. I say, Laws can smother sin, and fire when smothered can do
no such hurt as that which breaks out, and has full vent. Laws can make sin,
and sinners do, as is said of the Beasts of the Forest, Psa. 104.22. The Sun
arises, they lay them down in their dens, and that they shall do at most, but
as is said of them; v. 20. Thou make darkness, and it is night, wherein all
the be^sts of the Forest do creep forth.

Laws do a great matter in restraining the publickness and openness of sin,
because private sins cannot contract public and National guilt, because
Authority cannot prevent them, as they may do those which are public; neither
is God so much dishonored and defied, or Religion so much brought into
contempt by them, though God is greatly displeased with them also. In Judahs
days sin sought a covering, or was made to seek it; for Tamar intending to
prostitute her self to Judah put on her vail; and it is said. Genesis 38.21. When
Judah faw her, he thought her to be a Harlot, because she had covered her face.

To suffer people to be debauched by such things as have a manifest tendancy
thereunto, is utterly a fault, and it is plain should be reformed. Our corrupt
natures need no incentives to sin; give them an inch of that, and they will
take an Ell. I shall here mention but two things (though it is like there are
more) which have been complained of as great irritamenta malorum, great
provocations to sin. The first is filthy foolish Balads, read and sung up and
down, whereby (it is said) the meanest and younger sort of people, who cannot
go to the price of any higher entertainments, have their minds extremely
vitiated and corrupted; those obscene Sonnets, being, as it were, short
Catechismes of wickedness, whereby children are trained up in the way, in which
they should not go, and elder persons confirmed therein.

The other is such Plays (for with such only I shall meddle) which contain in
them lascivious, or otherwise profane passages, whereby (it is observed) that
persons of a higher quality than those Catechumeni of the Devils, who receive
their instruction from Balads that are sung to them free-cost, and want a few
farthings to pay for them) are notoriously debauched. The Ancients were so
sensible of the great mischief that did accrue by Plays stuffed with wantonness
and impiety, that (as Bishop Ushen has observed) they have inserted a passage
against them in the Baptismal Vow, viz. that we should renounce the pomps of
the world: Now (...) (said he) did of old signify Stage Plays, which having
been found (as they were managed) exceedingly to corrupt the hear's and lives
of men and women, they laid an engagement upon children at their Baptism, to
shun and avoid them.

The ill living, and ill preaching of some Ministers (I say of some, for
blessed be God all are not such, but alas there are too too many of them) is
another thing that calls for speedy reformation. Those blind Sampsons that are
fit for nothing but to grind in a Mill, to turn round and round, where they
cannot go out of their way (blind I call them from their gross ignorance,
Sampsons from their great strength (yet not such as Sampsons was) but such as
the Prophet denounces a woe against, Isa. 5.22. Woe unto them that are mighty
to drink Wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink.) I say, those blind
Sampsons have already taken hold upon the Pillars of the Church, and will (if
not prevented) go nigh to tumble it down upon the heads of themselves and
others. It has been observed of the Papacy, that if the good and mortified
lives of some few of their Clergy, had not made some amends for the great pride
and luxury of the rest of them, that Religion had never been able to stand to
this day, and it may be verified amongst us; neither may we trust to that
alone, but should remember what the Poet says, Immedicabile vulnus ense
recidendum est ne pars sincera trahatur; that is, gangreened and incurable
members must be cut off, or else those that are sound will be endangered.

If any thing, but what is of absolute necessity, does hinder the spreading of
Soul-saving knowledge, and its covering the Land as waters cover the Sea, I
only say if it be so (for I will leave it to others to judge what is of
absolute necessity to preserve the peace and safety of Church and State) we may
be sure that God is provoked thereby, and that the Reformation thereof is
indispensable. When the Jews obstructed the Salvation of the Gentiles, they are
said thereby to have filled up their sins, and that wrath came upon them to the
uttermost, 1 These. 2.16.

I am loath to proceed in rehearsing what I think were necessary to reform, and
shall therefore choose to say no more but this: Let those that have power in
their hands, reform but all those things which they think in their consciences
ought to be reformed, and that no good account can be given thereof to the
great God, when they shall stand before his Tribunal; I say, let them reform
but so much, (which is also certainly within the verge of their power, though
there may be difficulty in it) and when they have so done, that both London,
England, and all the three Kingdoms, will reap the happy fruits of it, I make
no question.

And now that I have bespoken a Reformation, of what is not disputably, but
manifestly amiss, that God may bless us in our great design of rebuilding
London, it may be expected, I should express whom I would have to be the
Reformers. If then the question be put concerning the reforming not of a
person, or family, but of a Nation, and of such abuses as are National: I
profess sincerely that I am utterly an enemy to a popular Reformation (further
than of their own persons, and families) that is, unto the people, or body of
the people, or any party from amongst them, rising up, and saying, This and
that is amiss either in Church or State, and we will reform it: As our Savior
replied, Luke 12.14. Who made me a Judge, or a divider of you? So may I say to
the people, who made them Judges? or who has authorized them to be Reformers?
If those waters use to overflow their banks, instead of making the Land
fruitful, (as Nilus did Egypt) they will drown and swallow up all: The Law
says, a mischief ought to be endured, rather than an inconvenience: Now for
the common people to have a power of judging and determining what is amiss, and
altering all things at their pleasure, were an inconvenience, in the sense of
our Law, viz. a standing evil, and principle of mis-rule; whereas to deny them
that power, is a rule that is generally good and safe, though it should admit
of some exception now and then, and breed what they call a mischief.

As the Wisdom of God has thought fit to constitute Husbands to be the Head of
their Wives, because though here and there a woman (one of a thousand) may have
more wisdom than her Husband, and could govern the family better than he, and
to such it is a mischief; (though but what they deserve, for choosing Husbands
that have less wit than themselves) yet the generality of women being not so
fit for government as men are, an inconvenience much worse than that mischief
is avoided thereby, viz. by placing the headship of the family in the Husband.
The like may be said of Gods placing the sole power of public reformation in
Magistrates, and men in Authority, and denying any such power to the common
people; because though the community of the people might now and then do better
things than are done by persons in power, yet generally they would do worse,
and be the Authors not of better order, but of more confusion: People may
humbly represent to those that are in Authority, what they take for grievances,
and implore the redress of them, so far as to their wisdom shall seem fit
(beseeching God to incline their hearts thereunto) but that is all they can do.
This Paragraph I have added as a grain of salt wherewith to season what I have
said, as touching some things which seem necessary to be reformed, the notice
whereof taken with this grain of salt, can do no body any hurt: There is no
hurt in seeking a Reformation of what is manifestly evil, but only in seeking
it from the peoples hands, from whom it is not to be sought, but only from the
Magistrate. Could we whisper in the ears of Magistrates, (which we have not
opportunity to do) what we suppose does need their reforming hand, by my
consent the people should never hear of it, their Errata's should be mended (if
it were possible) before the people did ever so much as know of them, nor have
we presumed to acquaint them with any thing of that Nature, but what they knew
too well before, and do ordinarily complain of, though not where they should,
viz. to them that can afford them relief, to whom this Treatise directs all
its complaints, (if there be any in it) as to them by whom it is most fit they
should be heard.

Reformation is needful in two cases: First, in case there be good Laws, but
ill observed, notoriously broken and violated: There are not better Laws in the
World, than many, if not most of ours in England, as for the curbing and
restraining most kinds of vices, drunkenness, swearing, whoredom, etc. but yet
alas they abound, as if the Laws were rather for, than against them, which
shows one Law is too much wanting, viz. a Law to put the rest in execution. And
verily, they to whom the execution of Laws does appertain, are the persons upon
whom it is incumbent, and whose proper work it is to see those miscarriages,
which are contrary to good Laws, regulated and reformed. But secondly, It is
possible that Laws themselves (humane Laws I mean) may some of them not be
good, or not so good as they should be, and in that case a reformation of the
Law it self is as necessary, as in the former, a reformation by it. I am sure
that Decree of Darius, Dan. 6.17. That whosoever shall ask a Petition of any
God or Man for thirty days, save of the King, shall be cast into the Den of
Lions, was a sinful Law; as was also that of Nebuchadnezzar, That every man
shall fall down and worship the Golden Image, Dan. 3.10. Magistrates are not
infallible, in Cathedra, or in the Seat of Judgment; (as the Pope pretends
himself to be in St. Peter's Chair) nor do Protestant Magistrates pretend, that
they who sit in Moses his Chair, whilst they sit there, cannot err; they know
themselves to be but fallible men, and the Laws of such cannot be infallibly
good.

I confess that private men ought to be very tender of speaking evil of the
Law, and judging the Law: To allude to James 4.11. yet Laws may have their
faults as well as men, and when they have so, there are but two remedies I can
think of; and the first is, that those who are Legislators, or Lawmakers,
should either repeal, or alter them; as Nebuchadnezzar did his Decree, Dan.
3.29. and Darius his, Dan. 6.26. though the Laws of the Medes and Persians were
said to be unalterable: or if that be not done, that those who have power to
suspend the execution of unwholesome Laws, though not to repeal them, be
pleased to suspend their execution. I have only showed how an evil, or sinful
Law, may be reformed, and by whom, but not presumed to call any Law evil, but
that of Darius and of Nebuchadnezzar, which themselves by recalling did
acknowledge as such.

But for fear of tediousness, I would press hard for that kind of Reformation
for which we need not be beholden to any man but our selves, viz. personal and
domestical Reformation; I say to any other man (as for the two forementioned we
must be) for the Divine assistance must at no hand be excluded: We need ask no
man leave to let us be just, and chaste, and sober, and heavenly-minded, and
charitable, and filled with all the fruits of righteousness which are by
Christ, to the praise and glory of God; nor yet to suffer us to resolve as
Joshua did, and to hold that resolution, that we and our house will serve the
Lord. Let us not pull down that City with our feet, (our irregular walking I
mean) which we are building up with our hands. By what I have said, not only
the way of reforming, but the feasibleness of reforming in such a way, is
evident enough: Some things we have showed, may be reformed by those to whom
the making of Laws does appertain, (and by them only,) others by them to whom
it belongs to put Laws in execution, and many others by every private person.

Did not some think it a shame to reform, and to recede from what they have
once done: I should have more hope to prevail by what I have said; but some do
so carry it, as if perseverance were as necessary in that which is evil, as in
good. I am sure that same is no universal rule, Quod fieri non debuit factum
valet, (that is) that when a thing is done, it should be persisted in, though
it were such as ought not to have been done. I say that is no general rule: For
then might Noah have persisted in his drunkeness, Lot in his incest, at
leastwise Zacheus might have kept what he had gotten by fraud, and oppression,
which he did not dare to do, but offered to restore fourfold. Pilate did well
to answer, what I have written I have written, John 19.22. (meaning he would
not recede from it) because he had written as became him, viz. Jesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews (for so he was) but in case the inscription which
they would have had him to alter, had not been true, and good, he had been much
to blame for refusing to write any otherwise.

Shall men not be ashamed to sin, and yet be ashamed to repent? Is it beneath
us to cry God mercy, when we have injured him? Are we better than David and
Solomon, and all other great and good Kings, whose repentance is in the
scripture recorded to all future ages? Is that repentance below us, which was
not below them? As some do glory in their shame, so others seem to be ashamed
of their glory, I mean of that which would be so, viz. the manifestation of
hearty repentance, which is the best thing next to innocence. Prima conditio
est non peccasse, secunda vero penituisse. It is best not to sin, but having
sinned, the best thing we can do is to repent. S. Augustine is said to have
gotten more credit by his Retractations, and confessions, than by any thing
else: Men will never think faults to be no faults, because they by whom they
were committed, venture to persist in them; nor yet conclude from thence that
they who persist in them, do not know them to be such: for who knows not
drunkenness, and whoredom, and deceit, and oppression, to be heinous sins, and
yet how many do persist therein? He that is ashamed to recall and undo what he
has done amiss, is ashamed to repent: and he that is ashamed to repent, is in
effect ashamed to be pardoned, and to be saved. If men will to Hell for
shamefacedness who can help it?

How conducing a thorough reformation of what is manifestly, and confessedly
amiss, would be to the rebuilding of our City, were easy to inform our selves
from many texts of scripture; of which I shall name some few, and so conclude
this Chapter. Who contributed more (if so much,) to the building of Jerusalem,
and the Temple of God therein, than did Ezra and Nehemiah? and they two were
great reformers, in their time, Ezra 10. Nehem. chap. 5. and chap. 13. How did
Nehemiah bestir himself to reform the officers of the house of God, and the
violation of the Sabbath, and the Jews their marrying with strange wives, and
their wicked usury? Neh. 5.10. I pray you (said he) leave off this usury. Never
was there a more reformed, and a more reforming King than Hezekiah, After him
was none like him amongst all the Kings of Judah, neither was there any before
him for he clave to the Lord, and departed not from following him, 2 Kings
18.6. And never did man prosper better than he, v. 7. And the Lord was with
him, and he prospered whithersoever he went forth. See a promise to the case in
hand, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my people shall turn from their wicked ways (and what
is that but reforming?) I will forgive their sin and will heal their land. The
sense and meaning of those words is as much to our purpose as need to be, but
they that desire a promise in more express terms (which may be as well applied
to us, as the promise made by God to Joshua, Josh. 11.5. was by the Apostle, to
all believers, ( Heb. 13.5.) You may read it, Jer. 24.6. where God having said
of the Jews, They shall return to me with their whole heart, says this also, I
will build them, and not pull them down, and I will plant them and not pluck
them (...). v. 4.

DISCOURSE XXXVI.
That it might expedite the building of London if all its former inhabitants,
were considerably encouraged, to replant themselves within the walls.

I Doubt, that fire which brake down many other walls, will its self prove a
wall of partition, (that will never be broken down) between many Citizens, who
formerly dwelt together, I mean within the verg, and compass of the City: many
of which are now residing in the suburbs, and like to continue there. But
should the number of those that shall so do be very great, what was said of
Ru^en might be applied to London upon the same account, for the divisions of
Reuben Judge 5.15. (and so of London) great thoughts of heart. The Reubenites
there dwelling on the other side Jordan (as Moses had agreed they should, so
soon as they had conducted their brethren into the land of Canaan) which they
promised to do) and seen them quietly possessed of their inheritance) I say
their going to live on the other side of Jordan, and not on the same side with
their brethren, made that division, or rather was that division, for which
there were many thoughts and searchings of heart, Numb. 32. v. 16. ad 22. If
either a river, or wall should part those Londoners whom one City held before,
so as the division should be great, and the numbers of excluded or secluded
members, (if I may so call them) considerable, it would be very sad. For who
will contribute toward the rebuilding, and reflourishing of London, that has
himself forsaken it: sine animo redeundi, without any purpose of returning to
it again?

Nevertheless, justly Londoners cannot be compelled to plant within the walls
again, neither may they be so threatened as were the Merchants and sellers of
ware who lodged without Jerusalem, to whom Nehemiah said, Why lodge ye about the
wall? if ye do so again I will lay hands on you, Nehem. 13.21. (I say it were
harsh to compel them against their interest, to replant themselves within the
walls, since many of them have taken long leases of their houses in the suburbs,
(and indeed could get no shorter) and have given great fines, and know not how
to put off the houses they have taken, and to reimburse themselves without
unsufferable loss, and diminution. And possibly here and there one, is well
situated for his business, has found the bees to come swarming over to his
new hive; I mean has as many customers, and as good a trade as ever. Let such
dwell in the tabernacles they have purchased, who find it is good being there.

The mean time let all prudent ways be thought of, whereby to invite, and
entice burnt-out Citizens, to come back to their old stations, as bees that
have taken their flight, are by such noises, as to them are pleasant music,
allured to come back to their hives.

Here I cannot but observe, that in some cases men ought not to be punished for
not doing, so and so, when on the other hand, for so doing, they may, and ought
to be rewarded, or some ways considered: or that several things may be
encouraged, and and invited to by hopes of reward, which yet may not be imposed
with punishments, or threatenings. For Saul to promise unto David his daughter,
to be his wife, in case he did bring him so many foreskins of the Philistines,
was but reasonable, but had he commanded him, upon pain of death, or otherwise,
to have gone upon that dangerous service, he had been a cruel taskmaster. As to
the case in hand, to set a fine upon the head of every Citizen, that would not
come back to live in London, would be very severe and unjust, though to propose
some considerable immunities, and privileges, to them that shall return, might
be a point of interest and true policy.

It is one of the false measures the world has been deceived by, and has done
a great deal of mischief, viz. that some men have thoughts there was no medium
to be used, between rewarding, and punishing; and that all that were not worthy
to be rewarded for what they do, ought to be punished, and that if they who did
so, and so were worthy of reward, they who did otherwise, or did not as they,
ought to suffer; which principle is clearly overthrown by the instances which I
have given. If the Romans did confer a reward upon every man that was the
Father of so many Children, it did not follow that he whose loins had not been
so fruitful, ought therefore to have been punished, and to feel the weight of
their loins, or so much as of their little fingers; in point of mulct, and
infliction.

Rewards to them that do such things will be sufficient in many cases, to cause
the generality of men to do them, though not every individual person, though no
punishment (farther than the necessity of such a reward) be assigned for them
that do them not. A double guard, viz. one in the van, by encouragements, to
them that shall do such things, another in the rear, by inflictions upon them
that shall not do them, is more than the nature of some things will bear, yea
more than is either necessary, or just; as in the case before us, in the
exciting of Londoners to replant themselves within the walls. Such as have no
mind to it let them alone; but such as shall do so, let them want for no
encouragement, make it as advantageous to them as it can well be made, let
their dignities, and privileges be multiplied, being looked upon as public
benefactors, and by that means the most will be brought in. I had not insisted
so long upon this notion, but that I think if it were applied, and made use of
where, and in whatsoever cases it ought to be, it might be of great use.

I shall not take upon me, to tell those that are in authority, what particular
rewards, immunities or privileges, should, or might be conferred, upon those
who have, or shall cast their bread upon the waters of London as hoping to find
it again, though not till after many days: I mean who have or shall build upon
the ruins of London with intention to return thither again. I say I shall not
presume to specify, or particularize what might be done for such, for that
were to anticipate the wisdom, and kindness of our Rulers, and Governors,
which can better both direct, and prompt them as to that, than I am able to do:
sure I am that persons invested with supreme authority, do seldom want rewards,
and privileges, to bestow upon them whose designs they have a mind to
encourage, and are usually conscious to themselves wherewithal they can do it.

When the Jews went back to their own land, many of them were unwilling to
dwell in Jerusalem, fearing (as is supposed) least the City should be besieged
again, and brought to great streights, Nehem. 7.4. Now the City was larg, and
great, but the people were few therein, and the houses were not builded: what
course was taken to rectify that (for it might not be suffered that Jerusalem
should be but slenderly inhabited) we read, Nehem. 11.1. The Rulers of the
people dwell at Jerusalem, the rest of the people also cast lots, to bring one
of ten to dwell in Jerusalem, and nine parts (viz. of the whole nation) to
dwell in other Cities. What was done amongst them by lot, may amongst us by
encouragement; viz. the City be planted, and peopled sufficiently.

As where the carcass is, there the Eagles will be gathered together; so where
privileges and encouragements do abound, there will be store of buildings and
inhabitants.

DISCOURSE XXXVII.
That to propound to our selves the best of ends in building, or attempting to
build the City, may much promote the work.

WE seek another City, a new London, we ask it of God; (who must build the City
if ever it be built;) but as we hope to speed, we must look to our ends in
asking it, James 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that you
may consume it upon your lusts. Though a good end cannot justify a bad action,
or any more than excuse it a tanto, or in part, yet where the end is bad, the
action cannot be good. It is a rule in Morality, that actiones specificantur a
fine; then, do bad ends always denominate the action bad, how good soever the
matter of that action be; as what is better than prayer and fasting? yet done
for such an end as Ahab did it, viz. to take away the life of Naboth, what
could be more abominable? If the plowing of the wicked be sin, as it is said,
Prove. 21.4. then the building of London may be so too, such, and so bad as the
ends of some men may be in the doing of it; for bad ends, mingled with good
actions, are like dead flies which cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send
forth a stinking savor.

Yet mistake not, as if I suspected Londoners to have any such ill design, as
Sanballat and Tobich did insinuate the Jews to have, when they attempted to
rebuild Jerusalem, saying, Nehem. 2.19. What is this ye do? will ye rebel
against the King? I dare say they mean nothing less; yet from other sinful and
unworthy ends in that great undertaking I cannot excuse all of them, I wish I
could, the most, or major part.

Some may design nothing but their own honor, in the stately houses which they
intend to build, as he that said Dan. 4.30. Is not this great Babylon that I
have built by the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? That is
no good end (ultimate end I mean) as appears by what befell Nebuchadnezzar v.
3. Whilst the word was in the Kings mouth, there fell a voice from heaven,
saying, O King Nebuchadnezzar, the Kingdom is departed from thee. Others may
aim at nothing but gain, and profit, as those St. James speaks of, Jam. 4.13.
Go to now ye that say, we will go into such a City, and buy, and sell, and get
gain.

I cannot say, that either of these two ends are unlawful, if but subordinate;
but if sole, or supreme, they are both so; for a higher end than either of them
ought to be aimed at in our most inferior actions, much more in so great an
undertaking, witness 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye
do, do all to the glory of God. Should the glory of God be aimed at, and made
our highest end, even in our common eating and drinking; and should it not be
so likewise in our building a famous City? shall God have no interest in that
more solemn work, or tribute of glory from it?

Some it may be would be resolved how the rebuilding of London can make for the
glory of God, and may think it is but canting, to speak of such a thing: But
they are much mistaken, for doubtless God may have a great deal of glory from
such a City as that, if the Inhabitants thereof (and others concerned in it,
for they it is that must glorify God) be but careful to do their duty, and to
improve so great and excellent a talent, as a City of London is, for the honor
and service of him from whom they shall receive it.

As the Justice of God was glorified in the destruction of London, so may his
great mercy be in the restoration thereof: It is the burden of David's Song,
Psa. 107.8.15.21.31. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and
for his wonderful works to the children of men. Now the rebuilding of such a
City as London was, will give men great occasion and provocation so to do; and
for that, as one great end and reason, it should be desired.

Doubtless it would be a great mercy to thousands of families, which are now
incommoded in their dwellings, and for the purposes of their Trade, if London
were up again, and were they fixed again in their former scituations, and
settled in their respective Trades, they could serve God much more without
distraction, and with much more cheerfulness than n^w they can, whilst they lie
under great inconveniences and discouragements: Now for those ends also (which
are pure and pious ends) shall we desire, and endeavor that London may be
restored: Now the thorns of care spring up, and choke the good seed which is
sown amongst Londoners, which care would be over in a great measure, if their
houses were all rebuilt, and themselves replanted and resetled in every of them.

London has been as great a bull-work to Religion, and as much a Nursing
Mother to it, as almost any it has had, at leastwise it was in a capacity to
have been so, and would be so again, if it were again what it was. Now that is
another Christian end which we should propose to our selves in pursuing the
restoration of London, viz. that it may be a Fortress and Fautrix to Religion,
and strengthen the hands thereof throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland, if
not in other places also. London has been that to Religion, that Locks and
Sluices are to those parts of the Thames where the water is but low and shallow,
which by lending a flush of waters to the almost exhausted channels, make way
for Boats and Barges to pass, that otherwise could not.

Ask Papists if the Protestant Religion would not be much more easily
conquerable by them, if no City of London either were, or might be suffered to
be again; and whether that has not been always held for a Maxim amongst the
Sages of their Religion? one reason of it is this, The greatest strength of a
Nation does lie in that part of it, in which is far the greatest number, and
gathering together of people, where it may be there are five to one of them,
that dwell together in any other City: I say (caeteris paribus) if in other
things they be equally strong, that place must needs be strongest, and
consequently most able to assist others, or secure it self, its Religion, and
other privileges, in which are most people, and those of good rank and
quality, cohabiting and imbodied together in one and the same Corporation; for
vis unita fortior, the main Ocean having much more water in it than any
particular River, which do all run into it, must needs have a stronger tide,
and more forcible stream than any of them has: So in this case.

I would have no lower, or meaner ends, than those which I have now named, to
be highest or uppermost with me, or with any others, as in reference to the
rebuilding of London; I say no lower to be our ultimate and highest ends in
desiring another London, than that men might be ravished with the mercy of God
in restoring a City to them, and them to it, and give him the glory of it; and
that Citizens being delivered from those cares and perplexities which are now
upon them, might serve God without distraction, and run the ways of his
Commands with cheerfulness, that undone families might be restored to some good
way of livelihood, whereby they, and those that shall succeed them, might be
not only maintained, but encouraged to maintain good works (as the phrase is,
Tit. 3.8.) and be more intent upon their general, as they have less trouble
from their particular callings, and worldly circumstances: And lastly, that the
true Protestant Religion (having the Laws of England on its side) might have
also an able Champion to stand up for it, when and so often as Goliah-like
Philistims shall bid defiance to it, I mean a City able with the blessing of
God, to secure it self and the Nation from the violence of those that are the
sworn enemies of its Religion.

Now what do I promise to my self would be the fruit and issue of Londoners
propounding to themselves such ends as these in building of their new City?
even that he who pondereth the heart will consider it, Prove. 29.12. and he that
loves truth in the inward parts (which truth, or sincerity, consists in
nothing more than in having our ultimate ends holy and good) will reward it,
and bless their enterprise accordingly; that if they ask a City for those ends,
they shall have it; if they seek it, for those reasons, they shall be sure to
find it; whereas others ask and have not, because they ask amiss, that they may
consume it upon their lusts. How did God reward Solomon, and give him more than
his desire, for asking what might better conduce to a good end, than most other
things, viz. wisdom; and for proposing to himself that good end in the asking
of it? With that passage I shall conclude this Chapter, 2 Chronicles. 1.11, 12. And
God said to Solomon, because thou have (...) asked riches, or honor, or long
life, etc. but have asked ^isdom and knowledge for thy self, that thou may
judge my people, wisdom is granted to thee; and I will give the riches, and
honor, such as none of the Kings have (...) that have been before thee, neither
shall any after ^^ee have the like.

DISCOURSE XXXVIII.
That for all men to consider how much it will be for their honor who shall
have a great hand in rebuilding the City, would promote the work.

HOnor to our selves (as I said before) must in no case be our ultimate and
supreme, but our subordinate end it may be: Solomon says, A good name is
better than precious ointment, (Eccl. 7.1.) and that a good name is rather to
be chosen than great riches, Prove. 22.1. If then a moderate pursuit of riches
be not unlawful, neither can that of good name be so; nor shall we sin in
looking after that precious ointment, provided we do not anoint our selves
therewith; as that Text admonishes, Let another man praise thee, and not thine
own mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips, Prove. 27.2. But it is best of
all when men's own works do praise them in the gates; as the phrase is, Prove.
31.31.

And now I have proposed a work to men (men of wealth and estate) that will
certainly praise them in the gates, viz. being very instrumental in rebuilding
of the City: He that shall be so, is like to have a name, and a renown upon it.
First, The name of a rich man, which some are not a little ambitious of: He
must needs be rich, will men say, who built so many houses at his own charge,
and honestly paid for them when he had done: How few do know, or take notice,
what Lands or Demesnes rich men have in the Country? they lie out of sight; but
he that lays out his money upon building in the Metropolis of the Nation,
becomes like a Beacon set upon a hill, so conspicuous, that his wealthiness
cannot be hid: Now wealth is more an honor to Citizens and Tradesmen, than to
Country Gentlemen, because in the former it is generally presumed to be all, or
most of it, of their own getting, the fruit of their own industry and
ingenuity, which are things worthy of praise: To him that was born, it may be,
in some poor thatched Cottage in the Country, to be the owner and builder of
many goodly houses in the City, what a renown is it?

To be a great builder, and to do it well, gives a man the reputation, as of
wealth, so of wisdom, of which the Scripture says, that it makes the face of
a man to shine. Posterity will think him to have been a wise man, who has
approved himself a wise builder, having built to profit, pleasure, and
convenience; nay, at such a time as this, he that shall lay out a good part of
a fair estate upon building the City, is like to purchase to himself the name
of a Benefactor, who is one of those good men the Scripture speaks of, for whom
some would even dare to die; meaning by a good man in that place, one that is a
friend to others, a lover of public good; one that has bowels of compassion,
a man of public spirit (as others call him) a Friend and Father to his
Country, etc. A builder of old wast places, a repairer of the breach, and a
restorer of paths to dwell in; which are mentioned as Titles of Honor, Isaiah
58.12. And thou shall be called the Repairer, etc.

One more title of honor will seem due to every man that shall employ a great
part of his estate (being considerable) in the rebuilding of London; and that
is, he will go for a man of courage, a man of a gallant and an undaunted
spirit; for men will think if he had not been such, he would not have
adventured to have been at so much charge in rebuilding part of a City, almost
the whole whereof (but a little before) was burnt down in four days time. To
be courageous must needs be honorable, for fortitude is a cardinal virtue.

Surely he will be thought (at leastwise by posterity) to have been a generous
man, and one that was not too fond of the world; a man that was far from making
the world his God (as too many do, for covetousness is Idolatry:) whosoever he
be that shall build a good proportion of the wast of London, for had he
idolized his gold and silver, he had never exposed so much of it to the hazard
of fire, after so late and great a warning, but rather done by it as Jacob did
by those Wives and children which he best loved, viz. put them in the safest
place, (in the rear of his company) lest he should chance to lose them.

Where these five ingredients do compound the ointment of a man's good name, how
precious and how fragrant will his memory be? a wealthy man, by his own
industry, and more than that, a wise man, witness both his well built houses,
and the estate he got to build them, a compassionate man, and one that was for
public good; a man of an undaunted courage, a man that could brook to lose the
estate he had gotten, or else he had never employed it so as it might easily be
lost; which shows, that though the world had smiled upon him, he did not love
it over much, which others are apt to do though it frown.

Who is not ambitious to leave such a name as this behind him? I mean who of
all those that are capable of so doing, that have wherewithal, Say not that
reputation, and honor, are but mere shadows, and glittering vanities, not
worthy to have any thing done for their sakes. For may not the same thing be
said of all the things of this world, of which Solomon pronounces All is
vanity and vexation of spirit, that is, partly so, commixed with vanity. Now
all the use we are to make of that consideration is to take heed we lose not
the things which are not vain, and which have no vexation in them, whilst we
overeagerly catch at those things which are but vanity, as when men lose
Heaven, and their Souls, to gain the world, but amongst earthly things some are
more eligible (and consequently less vain) than others (for of vanities the
least is to be chosen) for Solomon says A good name is rather to be chosen
than great riches.

Now all we call upon men for is to exchange a greater vanity, for a less; or
to purchase that which is less vain, by parting with that which is more so;
that is to purchase a good name, which is the less vanity of the two, by
parting with money, which is the greater. Men that have no sense of honor,
generally do nothing that is worthy of it, yet I would not have men too fond of
it neither. Est modus in rebus, Some feel no spur like that of honor, they may
be too proud, and ambitious: but they who are past feeling as to any such spur,
are commonly sordid, and as much forsaken of a good name, as they do seem to
slight, and contemn it.

Say not that the houses thou shall build may soon be burned again, and there
will be an end of thine honor. Not so neither (I hope,) ten to one but they
will stand longer than you shall live, and be a praise and a renown to you all
your days. If such a thing should happen when you are dead, and gone, it would
never trouble you, for as we read, Job. 14.21. His sons come to honor, and he
knows it not, and they are brought low, but he perceives it not of them
(speaking of one that is dead,) the like may be said of houses, as of sons. But
for ought you know, those houses which you now build may stand a hundred years
together, (as the Royal exchange had done) and it may be a hundred to that, if
the building be accordingly: But should they be burned before thy face (as one
lately was) that would not lay thy honor in the dust, or cause the houses
which thou have built to be forgotten, but rather to be more remembered, and
spoken of (as was the house in Mincing Lane, and its owner) so long as there
was no general, but only a particular conflagration.

It is usual to call their houses after their names, who are the owners of much
building; as Fullers Rents, or the like: but at such a time as this, when
building has so much need to be encouraged, if some greater respects were
shown to them that are great builders, as if their statue were allowed to be
set up, or some pillar erected in memorial of what they had done, I think it
were not amiss. The Holy Ghost has erected a golden pillar (for so I may call
it) to the perpetual honor of many persons, and families, who in their several
proportions, did help to repair Jerusalem, not omitting the name of the person,
(and he a ruler too) who took upon him to repair the Dung-gate, Nehem. 3.14.
But the dung-gate repaired Malchiah the son of Rechab, the ruler of part of
Beth-haccerem: he built it and set up the doors thereof, and the bars thereof.

DISCOURSE XXXIX.
That if the pleasure that is in Building, were understood by all men, more
persons of estates would be engaged in the reedifying of London.

WEre I a bachelor I should be prone to think that marriage were a pleasant
estate, and had comforts that did outweigh the troubles of it, observing so
many persons to enter into it, a second, third, and fourth time, who had
certainly experimented the manifest cares, and circumstances, which attend it.
In like manner, though I my self be no builder; nor ever was any such thing
personally, yet do I conclude there is a great deal of pleasure in it (to them
that have wherewithal) because there are so many who seem to be never well but
when they are building, though it expose them to a thousand cares, and
difficulties, and turn to no account of profit, nor is like to do, though they
be forced to do it with borrowed money, which they scarce know how to pay, etc.

Now what but the pleasure they find in building should make them amends for
all their care and trouble, hazard and loss, which they have sustained by it,
time after time? notwithstanding which, they are wedded to it, and do persevere
in it. I say what but the bait of pleasure tempts them afresh into the same net
(in which they have formerly been so much hampered, and entangled) I cannot
devize. Surely that pleasure which does or seems, to countervail so much pain
and vexation, as building must needs put them to, who are but indigent, and
(whose bags and purses have too much room within, whilst they are building more
without) I say that pleasure must needs be very great.

And yet the pleasure which some men have, in and by building, having so great
an allay from their cares, and fears, and straits, cannot be half so much as
others might have, whose purses and estates are commensurate with their
undertakings, and more than sufficient to build what they take in ^and.

I confess I would encourage such, and none but such to meddle with building,
otherwise than upon necessity. For if the spirit of building fall upon others
(those I mean who have not money enough to answer what they do (for a little
money will not answer all things, though a great deal can do much) it will
certainly cast them one while into the fire, and another while into the water,
as was that ^^natick man of whom we read, Mat. 17.15. I mean into great
perplexities, as is said of him, that ^e was sore vexed, etc. If the pleasure
of building ^e to them so refreshing, as water is to them that has therein, in
the midst of summer: yet the difficulty of it, to men under their
circumstances, will torment them like fire. But to them that have money enough
and to spare, building is little else but a mere pleasure, greater than that of
bathing ones self in a clear, crystal river, in a scorching day. Building of
Cities was that diversion which Cain made choice of, when he was most
perplexed, and surely he chose that which he found to give him most ^ase. Many
know not what the pleasure of building is, because they never tried it; who
should they ^nce try it would find as much pleasure in it, as they that have
found most. A manly, noble, useful retreation it is, to those that have a
genius that way, and can bear the prefent charge of it; and there is hardly any
thing which may be called, or made a recreation, that is comparable to it. As
for chesse draughts, tables, cards, and dice, which prove to many as expensive
(if not more) than building it self, what are they but childrens play, like
pushpin and shittlecock in comparison of building? and being such can afford no
such content to a larg heart, and a generous mind, as building can, which is a
recreation like it self.

Were I to give a reason of that vast pleasure which many men do take in
building (and more would, if they did but try it) I should chiefly rely upon
this, viz. that it is natural to men to take delight in all improvements, that
are of their own making, to see things, as well as persons, that do (as it
were) call them father: to see a handsome, thriving offspring of their parts,
pains, and purses, as well as of their bodies, to behold the visible fruit of
their minds, as well as of their loins, ex. gr. goodly houses of their
contriving, bespeaking, etc. Humane nature (as one observes) is not greatly
pleased, simply, and only, with our having much, if we make no more of it than
it was at first, (as if a man were born to a thousand a year, and should make
no more of it to his dying day) but with our making more of what we have,
though it be but a little: as if he that was born to nothing, get a small
estate about him, that he can make shift to live upon. To bring this down to my
purpose, Houses built in those places which were before ruinous heaps, are a
visible, and manifest improvement, which being withal of a man's own making,
seems to be an honor to him, and to carry some image, and superscription of
his worth and wisdom, by whom such improvement was made: goodly and well
contrived houses, are (as it were) so many looking glasses, in which the
builders of them seem to see the face of something in themselves that is
handsome, happy and excellent: they do as it were stand up and call them
blessed, succesful and prudent above many others: (with many other good names)
and this is pleasing to men, as it is to beautiful persons to be often looking
in the glass. If it be a huge grief, and vexation to men (as it is) to see, and
reflect upon those things, which do as it were call them fools, (as if they
have been notoriously cheated, and the like) then it must needs be as
delightful on the other hand, to contemplate those things which are, or are
like to be, great demonstrations, and lasting monuments of their owrth, and
wisdom, as wellbuilt houses, are commonly thought to be.)

Good men have other, and higher reasons, of that contentment which they take
in building, than that which I have given already (though that be common to
them also) one whereof is, it is a pleasure to them to set poor men at work, to
help them and their families, to live by their honest labor: Another is, it is
for the advancement of a public good, and good men know they were not born for
themselves, but also for the good of others; and therefore build they will,
though they chance to lose by it, because it is for the benefit of the
community that some body should build, and none but such as they who have
plentiful estates are fit to do it: What worthy person that has enough, and to
spare, would not be doing something (though himself lost by it, in point of
estate) that might be pleasurable to himself, profitable to others, and
serviceable to the public? None are upbraided by ungainful buildings, but
those that built for gain, and needed what they built for; but others are
perfectly excused by this, they built for their own pleasure, and for the good
of others: It is well for us, and happy for others, when we make that our own
private pleasure, which is no less a public good.

DISCOURSE XL.
That men of estates would be invited to build in London, if the advantage
which may probably (though not certainly) be made thereof, were duly considered.

IT is not for a Widow, that has but two Mites, to cast them into the treasury
of building; I mean, for one that is but poor, and has no more than will just
build a house, to lay out all that way; because though the profit accrewing
thereby may be great, (if no casualty fall out) yet casualties lighting upon
houses are so frequent, that it can be no man's wisdom to venture all he has in
the world in that one dangerous bottom. But as for those who have fair estates
otherwise, upon which they are able to live comfortably if the fire should do
its worst to all they have, or mean to have in houses, they are the persons
that are cut out for builders; to them I commend this Dilemma, to invite them
to turn builders (since some body must build, and no body is so fit as they)
viz. the houses you shall build will either stand or fall, be preserved or be
destroyed by fire, or otherwise; if they stand, your gain will be exceeding
great; if they fall, you are able to bear your losses; if they be preserved,
you are more than made (as they say;) if they be destroyed, you are far from
being undone.

Who would not adventure part of what he has to make a great deal more of it?
and who can make more of what he has, but by adventuring it? He must not keep
his money locked up in his Chest, that would have interest for it, but must put
it out, which he cannot do without some hazard, and yet who does it not for
improvement sake? Merchants must venture their goods to Sea, (though not all
they are worth at once) if they will get great estates; and venture they do,
though they know that Rents of Land (which they could purchase if they would)
are not so hazardous as goods at Sea. The Plowman will not sow all the grain he
has, but keep a part to sell and spend; but neither will he keep in all out of
the ground, fearing he shall never see it again, but allow enough for his seed,
in hope of a sufficient increase: Who trades for all ready money, and trusts
not any one of his Customers, least he should never be paid? or who trusts
Customers, and makes not some adventure, in hope that it will turn to account,
that Proverb is as true as it is trite, Nothing venture, nothing have; though,
venture all, and lose all, sometimes proves as true a saying; therefore the
middle way is best; neither venture all, nor venture nothing, but venture
something, though not all: And if you will venture (as all wise men think fit
to do more or less) why not upon building; if you have time and money
wherewithal to do it? Woe be to us if no body would venture, then farewell
London; if no body will venture their dust, that must lie in its dust and ashes.

Possibly you may make a less adventure in laying out your moneys some other
ways, as upon Land, etc. which is not obnoxious to fire, so as houses are, but
then your profit will be far less; Land may yield you but four or five in the
hundred, whereas you may probably enough make ten in every hundred, that you
shall lay out in building within the City. Now all will agree, that the hope
and expectation of a greater profit, may rationally induce men to make an
adventure, that is proportionably greater. So they say when interest was at ten
in the hundred, money had wont to be lent upon more slender security than now
it is, when it yields but six per cent. You see how hard David ventured to be
the Kings son in law, even upon the foreskins of two hundred Philistines by
whose hands Saul did hope to have made him fall, 1 Samuel 18.25. but doubtless he
would have made no such venture to have been son in law, to an ordinary
subject, where the advantage had not been so great, though he had liked his
daughter well. He that expects a great return from beyond the seas, must make a
proportionable adventure.

Purchasing of lands may prove more dangerous than building of houses in
London, for the title of lands may be naught, and so all may be lost, not only
the crop, but the soil; but for such as shall build in London, at this time,
all titles are decided, all controversies determined, before they enter upon
their work, so that their title is, and will be past dispute. Moreover if fire
should burn these houses (which are as it were the crop upon the soil) to the
ground again, (which God forbid) yet the soil would still be your own, and that
is generally said to be a third, so that your thirds (as I may call them) in
London, the fire cannot take from you.

Now admit you have ten in the hundred for all you lay out upon building in
London, if that City, or your houses in it, stand but ten years to an end (as
we hope with the blessing of God they may, ten times ten) you will in that
short time be repaied your principal.

Then as for Farms in the country, how frequently are they thrown up upon the
landlords hands? and no body can be found to hold them without great abatement
of rents, so that they often stand untenanted, and unoccupied. But houses in
London cannot lightly want for tenants, neither is their rent like to fall, but
rather to rise, as the City rises and as trading increases.

There have been often whisperings as if the interest of money were like to be
brought lower (and motions made to that purpose) viz. to four or five per cent.
If it should do so, money would yield but half so much as would the rent of
houses, and besides the principal would be in as much, or more danger, of being
lost, as our houses could be of being fired: for men do oftener lose their
principal by bad debtors, than their houses by fire. The necessariness of
houses within the walls for the use of Citizens is a consideration outweighing
all the rest as to matter of profit, for that amounts to so much as cannot be
well computed. Having then proved in these three last Chapters, that the
building of London, is Bonum honestum, jucundum, and utile, that is, both for
the honor, pleasure, and profit of those that have wherewithal to assist in
it, let him be thought a person that understands neither one nor the other;
that is, a perfect stranger to his own interest in every kind, (and such are
counted none of the wisest) who having estate enough otherwise, could with the
moneys which lie by him, or are at his command, contribute much toward the
rebuilding of London, and purchase to himself a great interest there, and yet
will not do it.

DISCOURSE XLI.
That the burning of a new and stately house in Mincing-Lane, should not deter
Londoners from going on with their building, but admonish them to build whole
streets together, etc.

LEt me take things as they come to hand, I have been lately advertised (and
was but yesterday, fully satisfied in it) that building upon the ruins of
London does begin to slacken, and that for several weeks past, scarce a fourth
part so many have entered themselves into the list of builders, as have done
formerly, which some impute to the great discouragement taken by the late
burning of a merchants house in Mincing Lane, which some are very confident was
done on purpose, and merely in design to dishearten, and discourage builders.
Whether it were so, or no, God knows, and time will discover. I have heard the
reasons of that conjecture (or some of them) but hearing that one is committed
upon suspicion of having been an actor in it, shall not presume to rehearse
them, or to interpose my private sentiment, be it what it will: who made me a
judge, or a determiner in the case?

But admit it were clearly proved (as ever any thing was) that, that new and
noble structure, did receive its fatal blow from treacherous and malicious
hands, I see no reason at all why Londoners should be so far affrighted at it,
as to desist from building, taking it for granted if they did proceed, their
houses should all in like manner perish, and be destroyed by fire, first or
last.

The burning of that house (howsoever it was intended, if it were intentional)
was (as it proved) but a warning piece to caution others (not against building,
but against the occasions, and opportunities of burning) and may (for ought I
know) prevent the burning of many more.

Some it may be thought that a new house could secure it self, and was like
green wood, that will not take fire, and (if I mistake not) the remedies
against another burning of the City, were not to take place till several months
hence, as if for present we had been out of all danger, defying all that fire
could do to us, partly with our bricks, and partly with the newness of our
buildings. But those things we have found to be a refuge of lies, and that in
despite of them, we were more secure, than safe. When men find that robberies
are committed at noon day (which they expected not, but in the night, or dusk
of the evening) they will soon agree to keep a perpetual watch.

Supposing that house to have been wilfully and designedly burnt, it may be
some body had a particular grudg at the owner of it, (which yet is more than I
know) and seeing it stand alone, thought they might take reveng on him and his,
without damage to any body else: and if that were the cause, all have not the
same reason to fear: for some may presume they have no enemy in the world so
malicious, at least so desperate, as to set fire upon their houses.

If some one or more, had malice enough to prompt them to the burning of that
goodly house, yet peradventure they had never made the attempt, if it had not
stood by it self, partly out of unwillingness to endanger the neighborhood
against whom they had no controversy, and partly from an apprehension that
their design could not so easily have taken effect, by reason of one or other
that would soon have espied the fire, and given notice of it to such as were at
hand to aid, and assist, the extinguishing it.

And now fearing I have not said enough to prevail with Londoners to build
whole streets together (upon which I have spent one Chapter already) I shall
take this occasion to supply what was therein omitted. Some of my arguments may
look like a digression from what the title of this Chapter pretends to; but if
I step out of my way to do my fellow Citizens a kindness, it is I hope but a
venial fault. I may go to far in the discourse of building alone, but I am sure
by the instance forementioned, I am fairly lead into it. How much easier is it
to burn those houses, which stand scattering here and there, and which may be
past quenching ere help can come to them, yea burnt to the ground ere any body
discern them to be on fire, than to do like execution upon those houses which
stand in the midst of neighbors? one or other of which will probably espy the
danger ere it be past remedy, and all of them be ready, to the utmost of their
power, to put a stop to it.

If that be not argument enough for building whole streets together, I could
easily produce many more. That it were so agreed upon, were best for them that
desire to sell their ground, best for them that resolve to build, and best for
them that would fain build, but fear their money will not hold out. First I say
it will be best for them that desire to sell their ground, and have no thoughts
to build, because in streets that are intended to be forthwith built, entirely
(and consequently soon inhabited, and customed for matter of trade) the soil is
like to yield double that value, that can be expected for it, in such places,
where those few houses that are built, for want of neighbors, are like to
stand (no body knows how long) without tenants or (which is almost as bad)
without a trade.

As for those that shall build, where a whole street is building together, they
will not be afraid to live in their houses when they have done (as others are
that have built in solitary places) nor can they want for tenants, if they have
a mind to let them, of better quality than Victuallers, and Alehousekeepers
(the usual seasoners of solitary houses, with smoke, and what is worse) nor is
it like they should want a trade, such as other places do afford, whilst
solitary houses are like to want customers, as much as neighbors, unless the
powerful attractive of good liquor, or the desirableness of obscurity for works
of darkness, shall draw them thither.

They that have soil of their own, in places that are, out of hand, to be
entirely built, need not want for money to build their houses, though they have
but little of their own. For surely the soil it self, and the rent of such
houses, (which we presume will presently be tenanted) will be a sufficient
security for so much money as went to the building of them, and who that has
money to spare (as doubtless there are some such) will not lend upon good
security, and upon so good an occasion?

Whilst men build successively, and not together, in one and the same street,
they give a continual annoyance to one another, and to all that pass by, like
them, that would be in an house, in which were several families, and one or
other of them, were washing, or scouring every day, one after another; by which
means the house would never lie clean. Now the streets cannot be paved, the
ways cannot be made good, filth and rubbish cannot be all removed, because the
streets are yet unfinished. We can hardly come at those that have built in some
places, for the lets, and impediments we meet with from them that are yet to
build.

Houses that stand alone, are like people in a single condition, from whom it
is not to be expected they should multiply: but where whole streets are built
together, there is as it were a numerous family of married persons, from whom
we may look for a second, and third generation, and who may quickly make their
present number manifold what it is. Hundreds will be desirous to build near
unto those streets (be it but in by-lanes and alleys) where is a neighborhood,
and a trade having an eye to safety, and that there will be something to do:
One goodly street would quickly be environed, and incircled with neighboring
houses, on every side of it; as if that were the mother, and these the
children: (the Olive plants round about her table) that the hen, and these the
chickens, gathering about her.

Who cannot easily persuade himself, that if the building of any whole streets
together, and at once, (one or more) were agreed upon, that those Honorable
persons who are to decide all controversies betwixt man, and man: as to the
present building, would so far encourage so good a work, as to vouchsafe those
whole sale Builders, (if I may so call them) the first hearing and determining
of all their Titles, and post pone the retailers, till they had done with them.
Now that by many would be accounted no small privilege, viz. To have the
precedence of build^ng, whilst others must wait several months longer, if not
years, ere they can begin to build, for want of a hearing before the
Commissioners.

Now these five last paragraphs you may call a digression if you please, but I
shall never repent of it, if it may attain its end, viz. to prevail with
Londoners to build whole streets together (some especially that are of most
consideration (and are the greatest roads and through-fares) which till it be
done, London will neither have the conntenance, nor the convenience, nor the
credit, nor the cleanliness, nor the trade, nor the safety of a City; neither
will any thing (or very little) be done to those inferior places, alleys and
such like, which are but appendices to more noble streets, and like their
handmaids will wait to see them go up first.

But to return to what I spoke of at the first, viz. that Citizens should not
desist from building, because of that one house, that was burnt in Mincing Lane.

First what will all the houses they have built already signify, if they shall
build no more? Is London yet any thing like a City? is it fit for the purpose
of trade. Though possibly more than a thousand houses are finished: and three
times so many foundations laid? will you lose all the cost and pains which you
have been at hitherto? shall your new houses stand untenanted, and go to ruin?
shall they have leave to burn them that will, because no body will dwell in
them? (for want of neighborhood and a trade) Is the fine City you had begun
upon come to this, or is this all it is like to come to? here a fine house or
two in a dirty street, and and there another. Think of that text Luke 14.30.
Least all that behold it begin to mock him saying, this man began to build, and
was not able to finish. What is a mother the nearer for having conceived, and
bred, with much sickness, and sorrow, if she cannot go out half her time? can
she rejoice in the untimely fruit of her womb? such a thing is London if you
now break off.

What discouraged by the burning of one house! The Israelites when by Gods
command they went to fight against the Benjamites, were twice defeated, and
lost two and twenty thousand men the first, and eighteen thousand the second
time, Judge. 20.21, 25. and yet they went up the third time, and prospered, v.
30. God would teach us an humble dependence upon himself, by some rebukes at
first, when yet he has kind intentions toward us afterward.

I hear the Gentleman whose house was burnt, is building it again (as fast as
he can) and he is to be commended for it. If the daughters of Sarah be not
afraid of any amazement, as it is, 1 Pet. 3.6. Why should they, who profess
themselves the sons of Abraham? He has been twice burnt out, you but once, why
should you be more afraid to build the second time, than he to build the third?
God grant him success answerable to his courage, and others a courage as good
as his. Men so resolved, would make those weary of burning, who think to make
them weary of building.

Who would comply with the design of an enemy, and gratify him at the first
dash? So do they who are so far discouraged by the burning of that one house,
as to desist from building, or from the thoughts of it; for they give them what
they desire, whom they presume to have kindled that fire for no other end but
to discourage those who had an intent to build.

A wise man will not seem to be moved at those things which are done, or
spoken, on purpose to make him angry; as knowing he shall vex his enemy, if he
can make him think that he is not vexed by him. Mical put an edge upon David
when she thought to make him leave dancing before the Ark, by scoffing at him,
as if he made himself vile, causing him to answer her, 2 Samuel 6.22. I will be
yet ^ore vile than thus, etc. It were better for us to resolve that for every
house they burn we will build two (God permitting) than that we will build no
more. If there be incendiaries that burn houses on purpose, ten to one but they
will be taken naping (and (...), as they say) one time or other, and when the
actors are discovered, the snare will be broken, and we for the future
delivered. If London were once up again, (being built as now it is with brick,
etc.) It would not be so easy to burn it, as it was before, (though God could
melt it down if it were all of solid Gold.) I say in an ordinary way, a general
conflagration would be with much more difficulty, and as for particular
burnings, men did always venture them, and build as cheerfully, as if they had
been liable to no such thing.

The excellent way of blowing up houses (little confided in, but rather dreaded
before) having gotten into use, and credit, since the burning of London, is I
am persuaded a great discouragement to the masters of powder plots, from making
any more attempts of that nature, with hope of a general success, so that if
they still design our destruction, they will take some other course; in
reference to which, either to build, or not to build, may be all a case, (I
mean) to which neither building will expose us, nor yet forbearing to build
will from thence exempt us.

Not to rebuild London for fear of enemies and their new attempts, is no better
policy, than for an army that were routed to refuse to rally and come into
order again (though they could) for fear of a fresh onset from the enemy, whom
they are in no capacity to withstand, or to defend themselves, unless they
rally again and stand to order. My humble advice upon the whole matter is this.
Be not terrified at a probable conjecture, so as if it were an absolute
certainty. It is yet undemonstrated how that house came burnt, though much
feared, and suspected to have been by treachery. Bless God it went no farther.
Build not alone but get as many as you can to build near, and about you. Get up
the whole City as fast as you can. The more of it gets up, the harder it will
be to get it down. Buds are not so easily destroyed as blossoms, or ripe fruit
as either of them.

DISCOURSE XLII.
That the due exercise of mercy and charity would promote the building of the
City.

AS cruelty is a desolating sin, Mat. 23.37. Your house is left unto you
desolate, said Christ to Jerusalem: upon that account, so mercy on the other
hand, is a building grace. It was an act of mercy in the Egyptian midwives, and
that contrary to a command (but a cruel one) with respect to which we read that
God built them houses, viz. For saving those poor infants whom Pharaoh had
appointed them to drown. One of the best ways to prevail with God for
whatsoever mercy we desire for our selves (whereof the building of London at
this day is one) is to show mercy to others. With the merciful thou will show
thy self merciful, says the Psalmist speaking of God, Ps. 18.25. We find a
bundle of promises, Ps. 41.1, 2, 3. Made to him that confidereth the poor, and
amongst the rest these two, viz. That God will deliver him in the time of
trouble, and that we shall be blessed upon the earth, and that God will not
deliver him to the will of his enemies. It is yet a time of trouble with
London, it lies still as upon ^^e bed of sickness, or languishing the will of
its ^^emies doubtless is that it should never be rebuilt: Let it therefore be
merciful to it self, in being ^erciful to others, that God may deliver it in
the time of trouble, strengthen it upon the bed of languishing, and not deliver
it into the will of his enemies. It is one of Solomon's proverbs, That the
merciful ^an does good to his own soul, Prove. 1.17. meaning himself. In being
charitable to others, we are most of all so to our selves. One of the Psalmists
characters of a good man is, He is ever merciful and ^^ndeth, Ps. 37.26. his
counsel is, Depart from evil and do good, (that is be merciful) v. 27. the
in^ouragement follows, and dwell for evermore: Christ his counsel is, Make to
your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail they
may ^^ceive you into everlasting habitations, Luke 16.9. and shall they want
temporal habitations, who make to ^emselves friends of that Mammon?

But where is mercy and charity to be found? may we not cry out with the
Psalmist, Ps. 12.1. Help Lord for the merciful man cease; (for so the word
chasid translated godly, does signify:) May we not say as the Prophet of old?
The Lord has a con^^oversy with the land, because there is no mercy in the
^and, Hoseah. 4.1. that is, there is none in compa^ison of that which ought to
be. There is but a little of that which looks like mercy, and charity; and part
of ^^at which looks like such is not mercy, but parti^lity pride, and self
love, as I shall show hereafter.

He that is flattered into the relief of those whom ^e does relieve; and will
relieve none but those that flatter him, that is, who will in all things say as
he says, and do as he does, and seem to think as he thinks, and not swerve
from him to the right hand, or to the left, which must needs be flattery (for
it can scarce be, that two men should not be sometimes of two minds) he that
has no kindness for any person (though an honest Jonathan) the arrows of whose
opinions, or practices, either fly beyond him, or fall short of him: he I say
is no merciful man, for he seeks his own things, and not the things of
others, he regards his own likeness in other men, but not their wants, and
necessities, he does not good to all that are of the household of faith, much
less to all men whatsoever, as he has opportunity, whereto the Apostle
^xhorteth. Solomon tells us that the borrower is servant to the lender, and
some-think it but reason they should be their slaves, to whom they not only
lend but give, and will give to none but them that will be their Slaves, or
their Apes rather, like vain persons that are in love with Parasites, and none
but such or like children that kiss the glass in which they see their own
faces. But I like the spaniel better that loves his master for beating him
(when he deserves it) than that masters humor who loves his spaniel for
fawning upon him, and slabbering him. We are commanded not to have the faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with respect of persons, James 2.1. But too many have
the love of Jesus Christ with that respect. One said, he did love Christ
dwelling in Augustine, but such men love themselves dwelling in others, but not
Jesus Christ, and his image. They relieve not a Disciple in the name of a
Disciple, or a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, to which the reward is
promised, but in the name of a fellow Disciple of theirs, not under Christ, but
under Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas.

Go thou partial lover to the good Samaritan, and ^earn his ways, who finding a
naked and wounded ^an in his way, as he was journeying, never stood (...) ask
him what opinion he was of, but when he saw (...) had compassion on him and
went to him and bound up ^s wounds pouring in Oil and Wine, etc. Luke 10.33.
(...) Paul tells us Acts 28.2. The Barbarous people shew^^ us no little
kindness, and yet Paul and his compa^ions were mere strangers to them, only
because (...) the rain, and the cold, they received them.

Serve your own bodies in that fashion, as you serve the mystical body of
Christ: Cloth your ^acks, but starve your bellies, be kind to one part ^^d
unkind to another, and see how it will pro^er with you. Is charity an evil
spirit, that you ^^us confine it to a circle, and that a very narrow ^ne, and
fear to let it come out? nay, God himself ^love: whom the Heaven of Heavens
cannot cir^mscribe. Give not the world to think that mer^^ and charity is
become nothing else, but oil pow^ed in to feed the Lamp of a party, and to keep
^^at bright and burning, but let your compassion be ^^ffused like so much
blood, throughout all the ^eines of Christ his mystical, and suffering body,
^^d assure your selves he loves no Saint (as such) ^ho loves not every Saint,
and relieves no man ^^th true compassion, who is not ready in proportion, and
to his power, to relieve every man, that ^ands in need thereof.

But as there is little kindly, and genuine mercy, (...) charity, in this part
of the world, so indeed ^^ere is but little of any kind; as there is little
real so there is not much in appearance, unless it be ^ere and there. Men lend
to God (for so they are said to do, who give to the poor) as if they looked for
nothing again, as men use to lend to those who they think never can, nor never
will repay them, viz. no more than they need not care, if they throw away, or
never see again.

Charity (so called) is usually but the paring of rich men's nails, or the crumbs
that fall from their tables: and children have no more from them than dogs may
lay claim to, (I mean the children of their heavenly Father, than wicked people
(if indigent) might expect. Many may be ashamed to sound a trumpet when they
give their alms, or so much as to let their left hand know, what their right
hand has done.

Should I serve up this indictment against all Englishmen, or Londoners, I
might well reflect upon my self; as David did upon himself, Ps. 73.15. If I say
I will speak thus, behold I should ^ffend against the generation of thy
children. For of some I could say as S. Paul of the Churches of Macedonia, 2
Cor. 8.3. To their power (I bear record) yea and beyond, they are willing of
themselves. There are that are ready to every good work. But alas how few are
they in comparison of them that are otherwise! As Solomon says, Prove. 30.13.
There is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes, and their eyelids lifted
up? so may I of some others, there is a generation, O how low and sordid are
their spirits? how much harder are their bearts than is the nether millstone?
Too many can say to a brother or sister that is naked and destitute of daily
food, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled, notwithstanding he gives them
not those things which are needful to the body. Men that have more than heart
can wish, of this worlds goods; how often do they shake their heads, and say,
alas such a man, or woman has a great charge, and little or nothing to
maintain it with; here their bowels seem to open, but they presently shut
again: and when they have given them their blessing, which is a short
ejaculation, that God would provide for them, and theirs; they seem to think it
is enough, as if their blessing, like as is said of the blessing of the Lord
could make men rich, or supply all their wants!

How vast is the disproportion betwixt the good which some men are able, and
that which they do? they give in forma pauperis, as some are said to sue, and
as if they had more need to receive than to give, as if they were poor Widows
they come with their mites. They seem to expect a reward for a cup of cold
water (or what is next to that) and should not fail of it, if they had nothing
better to give; but as the case stands with them, Christ will never return them
wine for that water, and they will find as cold comfort in giving, as others in
receiving it. Go offer it to thy Governor, said God by Malachy to those that
brought the blind, and the same for sacrifice, for I am a great King, so to
them who bring to this great King such despicable loans (for to him it is lent)
we may say go offer it to some person of quality, and see if he will accept it.

Some have thought that a tenth part of a man's annual revenue (that was able to
spare it) was a good proportion to be set apart for pious, and charitable uses;
and I have heard of a worthy Minister of London, who did impose it upon himself
to give away so much yearly and found those words made good, there is that
scatters, and yet increases. But how far are many from decimating themselves
upon any such account. Possibly not the hundredth part of their yearly revenue,
not the tithe of their tenth, is put to any charitable use, though they read of
holy Jacob, who made this voluntary vow to God, Of all that thou shall give me
I will give the tenth to thee, Genesis 28.22. Of many it may be said, freely they
have received, but how unfreely do they give? The rule is, He that gives with
simplicity, he that shows mercy with cheerfulness, Romans 12.8. But how many
give as if they gave with an ill will, as if it were rather to save their
credit, or to stop the mouth of their consciences, than to relieve their needy
brethren? nor can they handsomely wish that may do them much good, which is of
it self so little. If I might coin an odd expression, or two, for an odd thing,
I would say the world were full of scrapkindness, and fragmentall charity, a
few gleanings, but nothing of the sheaves, a few heat-drops as it were, that
never soak to the root. Here and there is a Dives, a rich man that has never a
child, or but one or two, etc. who if he had ten could have made a liberal
provision for every one of them, yet scarce any body is the better for him,
worth the speaking; nor would he grudg to spend upon every one of his children
(if he had twenty) annually more, than now he yearly expendeth upon all that
which he calls his charity.

Compare the bounty of many to their mere lusts, and humors, consider how much
they spend yearly, only to please their fantasies, in their most wanton and
unaccountable desires, so much for such a picture, so much for such a flower,
so much extraordinary for a horse of such a shape, and color: (and money so
laid out they never grudg to part with though it might as well have been
spared) I say compare their bounty to their childish insatiable fantasies
(always prompting them to superfluities and costly vanities) with their
liberality to good uses, and you will find the former has a Benjamins portion
in comparison of the latter, double at least, that cost, and charg, bestowed
upon it, and with more cheerfulness.

If rich men are but stewards, and not Lords of the estates which they possess,
having enough amongst them for the relief of those that are their fellow
servants, made poor by the providence of God, partly on purpose to try and
exercise their faithfulness and compassion (who bear the purse as well for
others, as for themselves) I wonder what account they either will or expect to
give of that their flewardship!

Some think to avoid that charg at the great day Mat. 25. Ye saw me hungry and
fed me not, maked and clothed me not (meaning by Christ the members of Christ)
who will not avoid it, for that they fed Christ but with scraps, and clothed
him but with rags.

Other nations (as they say) do far surpass and quite shame us in point of
charity. In Holland (they say none are suffered to beg, and yet none are
suffered to want, all their poor are provided for, but in this part of the
world, poor people must beg or want, yea may beg and want too.

It is a rule which admits of some exceptions, but is too generally true, that
they who have most, are willing to part with least, those that have many
children, and but midling estates, do more good many times than they who have
great est^^es, and few, or no Children: They that have but two talents, are
generally more bountiful then those that have five, as vessels that are not so
full have better vent than others have, that are as full as they can hold. Good
uses must needs be ill supplied, whilst all the burden, or the greatest part
of it, lies upon weaker shoulders; as water must needs be scarce, whilst
fountains are stopped, though cisterns run; and it must needs be night in the
hemisphere, when the sun is withdrawn, though the stars be kind, and hang out
all their ^^ghts.

Now understand what I have said, as a plea for charity not so much from
Londoners, or the generality of them, (who have been greatly exhausted, and are
rather objects of charity, than fit to be the subjects of it) but for, and
toward them, or so many of them as are brought into a low condition, whose
necessities cry aloud to all rich men, especially of the same body, as that man
of Macedonia did to Paul, Acts 16.9. Come over and help us. As the Apostle
says in another case, They that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of
the weak, and not to please themselves, so say I in this, the strong in purse
should help the weak, and not please themselves, with thinking that they have a
redundancy, whilst others want a sufficiency: but as the Apostle says, that
now at this time your abundance may be a supply for their want, 2 Cor. 8.14.
You may need them another time, as the Apostle adds, That their abundance
also, may be a supply for their want, that there may be equality.

There could not want money to build this ruinated City, if all men of
considerable estates would concern themselves in it, and do as the Jews did by
the wall of Jerusalem, every one that was able taking his part, Eliashib the
High Priest with his brethren the Priests, built the sheep gate, and next unto
them builded the men of Joricho, and next to them builded Zaccur the son of
Imri, Nehem. 3.1, 2. etc. Say there were fourteen, or fifteen thousand houses
burnt in London: are there not as many thousand rich men in City and country,
some of which were able to build many houses, and do themselves no hurt, and
all were able to build some? which being so; methinks it were a stark shame
that London should lie in the dust, or hang long in hand, as if all England
could not spare money wherewithal to rebuild it.

Methinks it is not handsome, it is not kind, (I had almost said it is
unnatural) for a rich Englishman, a rich Londoner especially, to dye and
bequeath nothing to London (in the case it now is) in his last will and
testament. Where can you find a better friend, or one that more needs it to
receive part of your last kindness, and of that estate which you cannot carry
out of the world with you, than is your dear mother the City of London, who now
fits as a widow, who now cries out to them that go by pity me, pity me all ye
that pass by, is there any sorrow like to mine? Is it nothing to you all ye
that pass by? behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow which
is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fiery
anger? Lam. 1.12.

A sacrifice well pleasing to God, might do much for the poor desolate City,
and what is such the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews tells us, Heb. 13.16.
To do good, and to communicate, forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
well-pleased.

DISCOURSE XLIII.
That the promoting of Love, and Amity throughout the whole nation, would much
conduce to the rebuilding of the City.

IF England were at unity with it self, if all the inhabitants thereof were in
charity with one another, if fellow subjects had that love, each for other,
that fellow members of the same body should, and use to have, or which the
members of each body use to have for their head, (for so is London to the other
Cities and Towns of England) then might we confidently expect to see London up
again in a very short time, and like a bridegroom coming out of his chamber,
decked, and trimmed. Whilst our heats, and animosities continue, whilst we bite,
and devour one another, methinks the fire of London is not quite out, but it
does reak, and smoke still, so far is it from being perfectly restored, and
completely rebuilt. But were we all of one heart (though not of one mind) could
we hit upon it to love as brethren from Dan to Bersheba, (I mean from one end
of England to the other) were all Englishmen compassionately affected with the
loss of London, and passionately desirous of its restoration, London would
spring up again like Jonah's gourd (as it withered like that) I mean in as
short a time, for a great City to spring up in, as one night was for a gourd.

No grace like that of love for matter of building, it builds up the body of
Christ (the best of fabrics) From whom the whole body fitly joined together,
and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, makes increase of the body,
unto the edifying of it self is love. Ephesians. 4.16. and since it does do so, what
building is there that love cannot promote? How much concerned were the
Israelites to restore the tribe of Benjamin, Judge. 23.6. They repented them ^^r
Benjamin and said, there is one tribe cut of from Israel this day. They
destroyed the inhabitants of J^besh-gilead, for not coming up to Mizpeh, and
gave them their daughters to wives: to the number of four hundred, which
proving not to be enough, they put them upon taking every man of them a wife of
the daughters of Shiloh, when they came out to dance; practices which I know
not how to justify, and therefore propose to imitation no more but this, that
others would be as earnest for the restoration of London, as they for the
restoration of Benjamin, (though not in the use of indirect means) and so it
will be, if that love be found amongst English men that ought to be. They said
( There must be an inheritance for them that are escaped of Benjamin, that a
tribe be not destroyed out of Israel, Judge. 23, 17. So would hearty, and
universal love, each to others, make all Englishmen to say, there must be
houses built for them that were burnt out of London; there must be another
London, that a tribe (or what is more than so) may not be destroyed out of
England, the utter destruction whereof we will labor to prevent with our
heads, and hands, and purses, and prayers, and with whatsoever else we can use
and improve for that purpose.

Now if the whole nation would engage it self, one way or other, in the
restoration of London, and put to its helping hand, how quick a dispatch would
be made, as if Orpheus with his harp had made the timber and bricks, and stones
to come leaping together, and orderly to dispose of themselves one by another,
as the Poets fained, that he made the woods, and mountains to dance after him.

But the great difficulty will be to show how, and by what means, the people of
England which are now so much at variance, and enmity, with one another, may be
brought first not to hate (for that must be the first step) and then to love,
and affect one another.

Loving parents cannot endure to see feuds, and fallings out amongst their
children, to hear them wrangle one with another, much less to see them fight:
nor if there be none of all that betwixt them, are they sufficiently pleased,
unless they observe them to have a hearty kindness each for other, and to love
one another, as brethren and sisters ought to do, who sprang from the same
loins, and lodged in the same womb: and when they see that, how great is their
joy!

But (as I said before) the first step must be to take men off from hating one
another (a disease to epidemical in England at this day) for which I would to
God I could propound a sure, and certain remedy. How and by what means, the
father of a private family, may keep his children from hating, and maligning
one another; from fighting or falling out each with other, is within my sphere
to discourse of, and may be no presumption in one who has been, and is the
father of so many children as God has made my self, to pretend experience in.
I shall therefore make bold to direct in that case (though not to say what
would destroy all, or the most of that enmity, which is between fellow
subjects, who have all one common and political Father, and in that sense are
brethren.

If parents would not have their children to hate one another, they must carry
an even hand toward them, not manifesting much more of love, and respect to
one of them, than to another, least of all so carrying themselves as if some of
them had all their love, and they had none at all for the rest. Parents should
temper their love and respect to their children, (or the expressions of either)
though not, ad pondus yet ad justitiam, that is, though not to show so much
respect to those that are but boys, and girls, as to those of them, that are
Men and Women, yet as much to the younger, in proportion to their years, as to
the elder in proportion to theirs, and so to those that are of meaner rank and
quality, and apparently of less desert, ought they according to their quality,
and desert, to give a respect proportionable, to what they give to the rest. If
this be not done, and if some children of the same parents, be used by them
with too much respect, and tenderness, others with too much neglect, and
hardship, the latter of these will certainly envy the former, as Joseph's
brethren envied him, because his Father had made him a parti-colored coat,
which he had done for none of the rest: especially if parents do respect those
children most, which seem to deserve least, it will create a world of envy,
witness that passage of the prodigals brother, who when he saw, how his broster
was treated beyond what himself had ever been, said to his Father, Lo these
many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy
commandments, and yet thou never gave me a Kid, that I might make merry with
my friends, Luke 15.29.

Brethren and sisters must not be suffered to father odious, and invidious
names upon one another, least thereby they be exposed to each others hatred. We
read of Joseph's brethren, that, They said one to another, behold this dreamer,
(or master of dreams) comes, Genesis 37.19. and the next words are, Come now
therefore and let us slay him, and cast him into the pit. It was not for
nothing that Christ was pleased to say, Whosoever shall say to his brother
Raca, shall be in danger of the council, but whosoever shall say thou fool
shall be in danger of Hell fire, Mat. 5.22. Our Savior well knowing the
provoking nature of disgraceful names.

Brethren must not be suffered to put ensnaring questions to one another, like
that riddle which Sampson put to the Philistines, merely to ensnare, and take
an occasion against them, Judge. 14.12. And Sampson said, I will now put forth a
riddle, if ye cannot declare it me, ye shall give me thirty sheets, and thirty
chang of garments: but what came of it? see, v. 15. It came to pass on the
seventh day that they said unto Sampsons wife, entice thy husband that he may
declare unto us the riddle least we burn thee, and thy Fathers house with fire,
have ye called us to take what we have? is it not so? What did it end in but
wrangling, when they saw themselves ensnared? Therefore I say parents must not
suffer their children, to pore and puzzle one another, with hard and
unnecessary questions, to engage one another in intricate disputes (upon great
penalties, to the loosing side) for certain it is that will end in quarrelling,
and that quarrelling in hatred and detestation.

Parents must not put their children upon doing ill offices one to another
(though they are such as are necessary to be done by some other hand) for that
will make them hate one another. What wise Father if he had a Sergant to his
son, would employ him to arrest his own brother? (though for ever so great and
just a debt) as knowing it would be worse taken from him, than from a stranger,
and that it is an office ill taken from whomsoever does it. How angry were
David's brethren with him when they did but suspect him to have come toward
them in the nature of a spy? It would be unseemly for one brother to be made to
scourg another (whatsoever his fault were) a Father would not be hated for
doing it himself; upon a just occasion, but so would a brother.

Parents must not encourage their children to complain of one another, and to
tell tales of one another, unless the fault committed be manifest, and
considerable. It is said that Joseph brought to his father their evil report,
viz. The evil report of his brethren, with whom he fed sheep: but did he not
lose their love by so doing? is it not probable that was one reason for which
they hated him? viz. for that they looked upon him as a tell-tale, and an
informer, which sort of people are always odious (especially where the thing
informed against is not universally odious) and therefore (saving in great
cases) had need to be taken up by none, but those whose office it is, and they
had need be well paid for it.

Greatly discountenance that hatred, and disaffection which does at any time
discover it self, in brethren or sisters one against another, and let them see
you cannot bear it, especially if you discern one to hate another, for that for
which they should love them, viz. for their goodness, for being better than
themselves. The spirit of Cain is in too many families, of whom we read that he
was of that wicked one, and slew his brother, and wherefore slew be him?
because his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous, 1 John 3.12. There
are that speak evil of others, because they run not with them into the same
excess of riot.

Let all superfluous occasions of wrangling, be taken out of the way. Saul
adjured the people, that when the Israelites were in pursuit of the
Philistines, that no body should eat any food, that day till the evening: now
suppose that hundreds of the people, being faint, and weary had done as
Jonathan did, and thereupon Saul had caused the rest to have informed against
them that had so done, what a deal of hatred, and heart-burning had that
procured? and how much better had it been that the people had never been so
adjured? Some humoursome schoolmasters have made such useless rules, and orders
for their scholars to observe as have procured nothing but perpetual trouble
to themselves, from the complaints of boys given to tell tales, and hatred to
those boys that were so given. The like it may be have some parents done
amongst their own children, who afterward have seen their error.

If any differences arise amongst your children, take notice of them,
interpose, and compromise them presently, least the wound of anger, and
dissension, not taken in time should fester into hatred. As soon as they begin
to be foes, make them friends again, for as Solomon says The beginning of
strife, is as when one lets out water, therefore leave of contention before
it be meddled with. Clap down the slluce presently, remembering that proverb,
Prove. 13.19. brother offended (viz. so long, as till he has fortified himself
in the Castle of his anger) is harder to be moon than a strong City, and their
contentions are like the bars of a Castle. Small heats and differences in the
Church (I mean that were such at first), when no course has been taken for
reconciliation, have in several ages broke out into a great flame, which has
made woeful havoc. How much more may a particular family be ruined by an
unregarded difference, which was but small at the first?

Lastly, as you would not that your children should hate one another, never
suffer them to aveng themselves, how much soever they be, or think themselves
to be wronged, I say let them never be their own judges, and avengers, but
submit themselves to the determination of their parents. He upon whom wrong is
taken for the present, will seek to be revenged again of him that took it, for
though persons will acquiesce in the decision of a lawful judge (as a Father is
amongst his children) yet they will never admit of him for a judge, whom they
know to be a party. Duels are seldom the end of strife, and boys that fight,
and are beaten one day, will try to recover their credit another, not taking
the victory before obtained against them, as any lawful determination.

Let parents when appealed to, always do their children right, though they have
more affection for one than for another, let them never humor that child which
they love more, by wronging that child which they love less: for justice is as
due to one as to the other, and besides that, the child whose injury is
confirmed upon him, by the partiality of his parents, will be tempted to bear a
greater grudg to the injurer, whose part is taken against him, than ever he did
before, whereas he could easily have forgiven the wrong which his brother did
him, if his Father would but have done him right.

These rules may do service in a family, and how much farther they are capable
of being extended, or now far forth the practice of them may take of a public
and national enmity, I leave to others to judge.

It was needful to show how hatred might be removed, or prevented, because
without that be done, there can be no love, but yet the mere absence of a
public hatred, and enmity will not build our City, without the presence of
love. They that have no hatred to London, will not hinder the building of it,
but enither will they help it, who have no love thereto.

But what can be done to make men love one another? what philtrum may be used
in the case? I am resolved, as I am a Father what to do: my children shall see,
that next unto the expressing of their love to God, I am not better pleased
with any thing than with the expressions of their love to one another. If they
speak kindly to one another, I will give them two good words for one, if they
signify their love by any handsome gift, or, token, I will take a time to
give them twice the worth of it, if they encourage one another in any thing
that is good, I will give them double encouragement when they do well. Let
children but observe that their parents are greatly delighted with their loving
one another, and that they with the hearts of their parents by it (who cannot
endure to see them morose, and churlish to one another, harsh and unkind, and
are sure to meet with them for it, as often as they observe them in such an
humor, they constantly fare the worse for it, and with them when they are
froward one to another, their parents show themselves froward (as God is said
to do) I say when children shall come to understand and experiment this, those
sparks of love to one another which they had before, will hereby be blown up
into a flame.

Call upon children to condescend to one another, and cause them to bear with
one another, if you would have them to love one another. Condescension may as
well make way for love, as love for condescension: it may as well be the cause,
as the effect of love. Where there is no yielding but each party stands upon
his punctillio's, there can be no agreement, and where there is no agreement
how can there be love? Persons that are in treaty of marriage have sometimes a
mutual, and reciprocal love, but some things there are which both parties stand
upon, and neither will condescend to, and so the match breaks off; whereas if
any third person could have overruled them, as to the punctillio's they stood
upon, and made them mutually condescend, the match had gone on, and their love
had daily increased. I remember the time when a certain college, at that time
full of factions and divisions, of alsenations, and estrangments, betwixt party
and party, did at last condescend to one thing, viz. To have a public common
chamber, to which it should be free for all the sellows of that house to
resort, every day, and converse together, as much and as often as they pleased.
This one condescension put in practice, brought them to a right understanding
each of other, and made them (so far as I could observe) to love one another
ever after: which instance I bring to show that a little condescension may make
way for a great deal of love. The use of a moderator (as such) what is it but
to make each party remit of its extremes, and condescend unto the other so far
as is just and fit? that at last they may come to a good comprimise; and by
that name his sacred Majesty is sometimes called, being styled supreme
moderator. Pride is a great obstruction of love and peace, for only of pride
comes contention, says the scripture, now condescension is some abatement of
pride, and therefore must needs tend to the advancement of love.

Another course I would take to promote love amongst my children, should be
this. I would hainously resent it, if I knew of any body that went about to set
them together by the ears, to breed quarrels, and differences amongst them: had
I a servant so given, he should never stay in my house; on the other hand, I
would call upon those that are about me, my Wife, my friends, my servants to
exhort and admonish my children, to love one another, to let them know how
great a duty it is, how pleasing to God, how delightful to parents, and to
press it much upon them: and but that I would not presume to speak like
Absalom, saying were I a great Magistrate, etc. I would say, were I such a one,
I would recommend it to Ministers every where to press the great duty of love
to our neighbor, which is a moity, or the one half of the Law of God, and has
as great a tendency to establish a Kingdom, and to make it flourish, as any
thing that I know, and to farther each particular grand design, such as is the
building of London.

I think of another honest policy I would use to make my children love one
another, viz. I would put them upon doing good offices one for another,
unbeknown to them that they were instigated thereto, any otherwise than by
their own love, and good will. If I threaten to correct one child, I would get
another brother or sister to beg his pardon, with as much earnestness, as if it
were for himself. I would now and then put a token into one child's hand, to
present his brother, or sister with, as if it were of his own cost and charg,
that what he has sown at my cost, he may reap in an increase of love to
himself, as if it had been at his own. I know as my employing them in bad, and
thankless offices one toward another, would purchase their mutual hatred to
one another, so my putting them upon offices of love, and kindness each to
other, would ingratiate them with one another, and increase their love, as
being mutual benefactors, and promoters of each others good.

Did I see a child that were of a better humor than the rest, who both by his
example, and counsel, did most promote peace, and love amongst the rest of my
children, I would let that child know that no natural, or moral excellency
whatsoever, could more have indeared him to me than that has done; and on the
other hand, that the greatest excellency of wit, and beauty would not with me
expiate, and compensate that vice, or ill temper, which is contrary thereunto,
viz. a disobliging, provoking carriage, a harsh and unkind disposition.

Now what I have said touching the way and means of promoting love in a
particular family, will appear more pertinent to the title of this Chapter, if
an expression which St. Paul uses, 1 Cor. 4.6. be here considered of, these
things I have in a figure transferred to my self and to Apollos.

Having propounded diverse other means for the promoting of an universal love
(though not every where under that name) that of prayer to God (that universal
remedy) ought by no means to be passed over in silence with which I shall close
this Chapter.

O God thou art styled love it self, for we read, 1 John. 4.16. that God is
love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him. Gal. 5.21.
We are variance emulations, wrath, strife, envyings, etc. These are the works
of our flesh which are manifest, howbeit thou have said, He that loves not his
brother, abides in death, and whosoever hates his brother is a murderer, 1
John. 3.15. We pray thee do thou cause brotherly love to be, and to continue
amongst us, give us to be kindly affectioned one to another, then shall we
experiment what thou have said, viz. How good and how pleasant it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity, as the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that
descended upon the mountains of Zion, for there the Lord commanded his
blessing, even life for evermore, Ps. 133.

DISCOURSE XLIV.
That the grace of Humility, and the exercise thereof might conduce much to the
rebuilding of the City.

CAn London be lifted up after it has been so much cast down? can there be
Pride in London, after it has been so much humbled by so great a Plague, so
great a fire, so great a dearth of trade? you may as well ask whether it were
possible for the heart of Pharach to be hardened after so many Plagues? and yet
the last left it rather more hard than the first sound it. How proud are the
fallen Angels themselves, though God has laid them as low as Hell? insomuch
that the Devil tempted our Savior to fall down and worship him.

Alas how many lives has pride? after it has been in deaths often (as one
would think) I say after it has been exposed to many deaths, yet said behold
it lives. Pride is one of the sponte nascentia, one of those weeds which spring
up of its own accord, and never need to be sown. We find these expressions,
Job. 8.11. Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow without water?
the meaning is they cannot rise up; (or pride themselves, as one renders it,
the word being the same as is used for pride, Prove. 15.25. and Isa. 16.6.)
unless the rush have mire to cherish it, and the flag have water* but Pride in
men and women, is such a thing, that it will spring up where one would think
there were no water to cherish it, it will blaze out where one would think
there were no fuel to feed that fire, men will be proud of any thing, rather
than be proud of nothing, proud of their shame (glorying in that as the Apostle
speaks) before they will be ashamed of their pride.

To be humble is one thing, and to have cause for it is another. Pride was a
sin that crept into Paradise, and ever since it has crept in every where, and
discovers it self to be in every heart more or less. Surely the fire (as great
as it was) has not consumed all dross. I doubt such demonstrations as the
Prophet gave of the Israelites their pride, Isa. 3.16. may be given of ours,
after all that we have suffered The daughters of Zion are haughty and walk with
stretched forth necks, walking and mincing (or tripping softly as it is in the
margent) as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet. If lofty eyes, if
eyelids lifted up, (Prove. 30.13.) if a proud look be signs of pride (as
Solomon does intimate that they are) if a haughty supercilious countenance, if
a stately disdainful carriage be demonstrations of pride, there is still to
great a remainder of that sin even in London it self: if an affection in
persons to live above the rate of their condition, to habit themselves as if
they were richer than they are (out of a desire to be thought so, mearly for
the honor of being accounted rich.) If exercising men's selves in things that
are too high for them, if an unwillingness in men, and women to leave of their
ornaments, as did the Israelites, when God threatened to depart from them, Exodus
33.4. Do show a want of humility, then I am sure humility is wanting. When God
did but threaten to come down in the midst of the Israelites, and consume them,
he said by Moses therefore now put off thine ornaments from thee, that I may
know what to do unto thee, Exodus 33.14. God has actually consumed us, and yet
we have refused to put off our ornaments, I mean such, and so many, as so great
a judgment did call upon us to lay aside. Do not some live at the same height
in all respects as they did before the City was burned? (though they themselves
were great sufferers thereby) as if they were resolved not to chang
countenance, or to seem moved in the least at any thing that God had done
against them, like sturdy boys that will not shed a tear, though they are
whipped till the blood come.

If we for our parts be not thoroughly convinced, that we were worthy of so
great a punishment as to have our City burnt, and to sustain all that loss
which any of us, for our own particular, did sustain thereby and that we really
deserve never to see our own houses built again, much less the whole City
together with them, if we think it was for other men's sins only, and not for
ours amongst the rest, that God gave London to the flames, or that it was not
from any controversy that God had with London, that it was burnt, or from any
controversy that God had with us, that our particular houses were burnt, but
merely from the malice and treachery of men. I say if we so think, we are
unhumbled to this time, then do we in our hearts contend with God, and charg
him foolishly, and sure I am, that, only of pride c^meth that contention.

If to this day we are seeking great things for our selves, viz. a great renown
by the houses we have built, or do intend to build (which is more than a
convenient memorial:) if we are ambitious of vast trades (as great or greater
than ever) hoping by that means to run through all the signs in the Zodiac of
that honor which London can confer (not content with a reasonable trade, such
as may be sufficient for us,) if we aspire to have London after the fire,
forthwith excel it self in all other worldly things, as much as it is like to
do in the magnifitence of its buildings, and cannot be satisfied in the
thoughts of its doing otherwise: (as a man whose profession obliges him to
wear good clothes, ought to be content if he cannot purchase every thing
accordingly) I say if we be conscious to our selves of all, or of any of these
things, certainly we are proud, and that in such a kind, and to such a degree;
as may hinder the building of our City, viz. by provoking God to blast that
worthy undertaking: for the scripture says, Prove. 29.23. A wans pride shall
bring him low, and Prove. 16.18. Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty
spirit befire a fall, and Prove. 11.2. When pride comes then ^^meth shame, all
which passages do show, that pride may contribute much to the pulling down of a
City, but never to the building it up.

Therefore in order to the building up of London I commend the grace of
Humility, for contrariorum contraria est ratio, contraries have contrary
effects; If a man's pride will bring him low, then as Solo^on adds in the same
verse honor shall uphold the humble in spirit, Prove. 29.23. If pride goes
before destruction, humility goes before exaltation, and if a haughty spirit
before a fall, then a lowly spirit before a rise, and if with pride comes
shame then where humility is, men's hopes and designs do usually not make them
ashamed, that is, do prosper and take effect.

Here I expect to be asked what is humility? as Pilate put the question, what
is truth? The answer is at hand, humility is that grace, whereby we are
inclined, not to think of our selves more highly than we ought to think, but to
think soberly, according to the measure which God has dealt to every one. That
description I gather out of Romans 12.3. Humility is radically seated in that
faculty of the soul which is called the Judgment or understanding, in that
faculty is the root of that matter. It is true there are several branches of
it, but they do manifestly spring from that root, viz. from sober thoughts of
our selves, or not thinking of a man's self above what he ought.

A man may think himself as good as he is to the full, and yet not be proud,
provided he do not think himself to be better than he is, or stretch himself
beyond his line. He that thinks himself to be no better than indeed he is, (all
things confidered) cannot but be numble. David professes his humility, Ps.
131.1, 2. Lord my heart is not haughty, nor my eyes lofty: neither do I
exercise my self in great matters, or in things to high for me, surely I have
behaved and quieted my self, as a child that is weaned of his mother, my sold
is even as a weaned child. From those words I gather, that though Humility be
first (at least in order of nature) in the intelect or judgment, as the
ointment was poured out first upon the head of Aaron, yet as that precious
ointment ran down upon Aarons beard, and upon the skirts of his garment. So
this grace diffuseth it self into the affections of men, and into the course of
their lives, which I collect from two expressions used in that profession of
Humility which David there makes: first (says he) I have quieted my self as a
child that is weaned of his mother, that passage seems to relate to his
affections, which are the tumultuating, raging part of the soul, and therefore
are called the ebbings, and flowings, or the tide of the will, and therefore
quieting is most properly to be referred to them. His meaning seems to be,
that whereas before he had strong, and impetuous defires, (a great ambition) to
some things which God saw were yet to high for him, as namely to come to the
throne, which God had promised him, I say whereas before he longed to be in
possession of that earthly Kingdom, which was promised him (as a child might
long for the breast) yet now God had humbled him, for so he says, my heart is
not haughty, he had no more desire to it (till the time that God had appointed
should be fulfilled) than a child has to that breast, from which it has been
fully weaned.

A mean and modest opinion, and judgment of a man's self, kills ambition at
the very root, and mortifieth our desires to those things that are too high for
us, as being sensible they would not become us; as a poor laboring man is not
ambitious to ride up and down in a Coach continually, as knowing it would no
ways suit his birth, and breeding, and poor condition.

He then is an humble man, who desires not any thing that is too great for him
(as too great an esteem, etc.) and therefore desires it not because he is
sensible he does not deserve it, it would not become him as Solomon says,
Excellent speech becomes not a fool, Prove. 17.7. And honor is not seemly for
a fool, Prove. 26.1. It would ill become him, as a Crown and Scepter, would do
the head, and hand, of one that is but a mean subject. Men are not ambitious of
those things that are extremely above them, because they cannot but see, and
known that they are above them, but of such things as are not very much too
high for them, proud men are ambitious, because their pride and self-love
causes them to think they may and do deserve them. Now an humble man not
thinking of himself above what is meet, knows what he deserves not, and
thereupon desires no more than what he does really deserve, and consequently
is not ambitious, for ambition is the desire of things that are too high for us.

Then from those words of David, nor my eyes are not lofty, neither do I
exercise my self in things too high for me. I say from thence may be collected
that the grace of Humility, as it is poured into the affections, so it is
poured out upon the life, as it is impressed upon the whole inward man, so it
is expressed in the outward; an humble inside and a proud outside, are
inconsistent: an humble heart, and a haughty look, a heart cast down with true
humility, and eyes mean time lifted up with pride, and a person exercising
himself generally in things that are too high for him, are incompatible. Now
the two latter, viz. The not exercising himself in things that are too high for
him, and the quieting of himself as a weaned child, did proceed from the first,
viz. that his heart was not haughty, that is, that he had no high conceit of
himself, and of his own deserts. Nor do I remember any one expression whereby
humility is set forth, and recommended, that is not reducible unto mean
thoughts of a man's self, or not thinking of our selves more highly than we
ought, as the root and original of it.

One phrase whereby the Apostle expresses Humility is this; In lowliness of
mind let each esteem other better than themselves, Phil. 2.3. And to like
purpose with that, are those words, Romans 12.10. In honor preferring one
another. What but mean thoughts of a man's self does make him, in honor to
prefer others, and to esteem them better than himself? neither need any man to
misconceive of himself, or think of himself worse than he is, that he may think
others better than himself: that is, secundum quid, I mean so in one respect,
or other. For they that in most things excel others, are usually in some things
excelled by them. 1 Cor. 12.8. For to one is given by the spirit the word of
wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, to another faith, to another the gifts
of healing, to another prophecy, to another diverse kinds of tongues, to another
the interpretation of tongues. Humility gives a man to see, and own what gift
another man has, which he has not, or not in so eminent a degree, and
measure, as another has it. So when the Apostle says as it is, Romans 12.16.
Mind not high things but condescend to men of low estate (or be contented with
mean things, as it is in the margent) he adds that which if practiced, will
cause men to condescend, and that is, Be not wise in your own conceits, or have
low thoughts of your selves. Humble looks, humble gestures, humble speeches and
expressions, an humble, modest, plain garb, and habit, and selfabasing equipage
(as was that of Christ when he rode upon an ass, the foal of an Ass) so far
as there is fincerity in those external appearances (which I add because some
in such things may but, induere personam; that is, may but act a part) do all
spring from lowly thoughts of our selves: as did the meek carriage of the
Publican Luke 18.10. And the publican standing afar off would not lift up so
much as his eyes to Heaven but smote upon his breast saying God be merciful to
me a sinner, which last words give an account of all the former, he was cast
down with the thoughts of his being a great sinner, and that made him do as he
did.

Every man would think meanly of himself, and be little in his own eyes, if he
did think soberly of himself, and not more highly than he ought, or has reason
to think, for the scripture says that every man at his best estate is
altogether vanity, Ps. 39.5. and surely men of low degree are vanity, and men
of high degree are a lie, to be laid in the balance they are altogether
lighter than vanity, Ps. 62.9.

We say of proud people that they do not know themselves, and when we promise
to humble them, we say we will make them know themselves, and most certain it
is if the best, and worthiest and happiest of men and women, did thoroughly know
themselves they could not be proud. For how can he be proud who knows, and is
convinced, that he has many things to cast him down; but no one thing that may
justly lift him up, all things considered? Now that is every man's case.

Who labors not under natural defects, finful defilements, and Divine
rebukes? and all of these are just occasions of being cast down. Does the wise
man glory in his wisdom, alas how defective is it? how little do the best
Philosophers know of the true reasons of any thing in nature? We know the use
of things but little of their causes, our knowledge both of God and of the
creatures, is not so much by a thousand parts as is our ignorance. Job speaking
of God says, Lo these are parts of his ways but how little a portion is heard
of him. Job 26.24. Our wisdom in comparison of the wisdom of God is but
foolishness; yea compared with the wisdom of Angels, yea of fallen Angels, is
but weakness. He spoke as truly, as modestly, who said, This only do I know,
that I know nothing (Hoc tantum scio me nihil scire) viz. In comparison of the
many things which he was ignorant of, and yet he was one of the wisest men in
the world that said it. If the strong man glory in his strength, how defective
is that strength wherein he glories? and how much more does he partake of
weakness? How soon were Sampsons locks cut off, and when that was done, what
became of his strength? How easily can a disease (such as it may be) take hold
upon the pillars of his house (who thinks his body to be as it were an
impregnable Castle) and pull it presently about his ears? as Sampson served the
Philistines. How defective must they needs be otherwise, and in other respects,
who have so much of defect in their greatest excellencies, and perfections? few
men excel in many things, none in all, and if such be the imperfection of men's
greatest perfections, how many defects and imperfections have all men to keep
them humble?

Besides natural defects there are sinful defilements, which is yet a more
humbling consideration, Ps. 19.12. Who can understand his errors? viz. the vast
number the heinous nature of them. Had we all kind of natural excellencies,
viz. wisdom, strength, beauty, yet ought we to abhor our selves as in dust, and
ashes; for our moral pollutions. Devils want not for natural excellencies, they
have strength and wisdom far beyond any man in the world, but being abominably
wicked (in spite of all that where in they excel) we count them odious, and
despicable creatures. S. Paul though an Apostle of extraordinary indowments,
both acquired, natural and supernatural, yet cried out (as one that was vile in
his own account) Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of death. He that shall set his guilt against his gifts, will find
the former exceedingly to outweigh the latter, and to minister to him much more
cause of humility, than the other can do of pride to have: a heart deceitful
above measure, and desperately wicked, (as who has not) and together with that
a life defiled with thousands of actual transgressions, how much greater a
cause of self abasement is it, than to have a great deal of wealth, power and
wisdom, can be of self exaltation? One would think, that Naamans leprosy should
keep him humble, though he were a great commander, and is there not reason for
us so to be upon every one of whom there is a worse leprosy: (though more
invisible) than was that of Naamans; the leprosy of sin I mean.

Think but of sin under the notion of folly, as both scripture, and reason do
represent it, and sinners as fools, and it will help to humble thee, for who is
not vile in his own eyes, when he is conscious to himself, that he has
notoriously played the fool, as Tamar said to Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.13. And thou
shall be as one of the fools in Israel: and when he had committed that folly,
and came to reflect upon it, how out of countenance was he? how mad with her,
and surely more with himself, for the fault was not hers, but his. If sinners
have not done foolishly, why do they repent when their eyes are opened? Or why
is repentance called by the latins Resipiscentia, that is, a return to wisdom,
and by the Greeks (...), as who should say an after wisdom? Awakened sinners
have played the fools, themselves being judges, and having so done have great
cause to be humbled, and as it were to lay their mouths in the dust, or cover
their faces. He that can view his sins, and not be humbled at the sight
thereof, can see his Savior pierced and not mourn.

To bring down the pride of man besides natural defects, and moral defilements
(which he that knows himself cannot be ignorant of) there are Divine Rebukes
which most men have fallen under, one time or other. Now the chastisements of
God are intended for the hiding of pride from man, Job 33.17, 19. As God said
to Moses concerning Miriam, If her father had but spit in her face, should she
not be ashamed seven days? Numb. 12.14. So it is intended, that when God by
his Judgments does as it were spit in the faces of men, it should put them to
shame, and shame is an humbling passion. So good a Father had never beaten us
with so many stripes, had never fetched the blood on us (as he has sometimes
done) if we had been good children; yea, if we had not bin very bad. Our
sufferings may therefore humble us, because in them we may read our sins, as
coming from his hand who does not willingly, or without cause afflict the
children of men, but if the living man complain, it is for the punishment of
his sin. Has God smitten us; yea, is he smiting, and shall we mean time be
supercilious? shall we knit our brows in pride, whilst he bends his brows in
anger? shall we nourish haughtiness under Gods frowns? Say unto God how
terrible art thou in thy works? Psalm. 66.3. God is terrible in his doing toward
the children of men, v. 5. it follows v. 7. Let not the Rebellious exalt
themselves. Fear is an humbling affection, Put them in fear, says the
Psalmist, that they may know themselves to be but men. Now when the Lion
roar^th, who will not fear? Amos 3.8. That is, when God displaieth his anger,
ought not every one to tremble at it? Notable is that passage, Job 9.13. If God
will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him. So far are
men from swelling with pride, when they take notice of Gods rebukes, that David
says, When thou (that is God) do correct man for iniquity, thou make his
beauty to consume away like a moth, Psalm. 39.11. He that shall often look his
face in that glass which shall represent to him those three things which I last
mentioned, viz. his natural and spiritual defects (which are many and great in
themselves, though not in comparison of other men) his moral defilements, and
pollutions; that is, his innumerable sins: and lastly, those many rebukes
wherewith God has corrected him for sin: I say, he who in the mirror of
serious ^ontemplation shall frequently behold these three things, and whilst he
lays all his endowments and enjoyments in one scale, shall lay these in the
other, cannot easily be lifted up, or think of himself more highly than he
ought.

I have evinced that every man has much to be humbled for, and under: If I can
also prove that no man has any thing to be proud of, or cause to be proud of
any thing; when that is made good, I shall then have demonstrated that he must
needs be humble that does but thoroughly know himself, and that does judge
himself no better, though no worse neither than indeed he is.

There are but four sorts of things that any man in the world can take a pride
in, viz. What he is, what he has, what he has done; And lastly, What he has
suffered upon a good account. As for the first of these, a man may know what he
is (as that he is a child of God, etc.) and yet not be proud of it, John 3.14.
We know that we have passed from death to life, etc. 1 John 5.19. We know that
we are of God, etc. For why should a man be proud of what he is by the mere
grace and favor of God? It was no pride in St. Paul to say, By the grace of God
I am what I am ( viz. a Saint, an Apostle, who was before a Persecutor) 1 Cor.
15.10. He that sees that there is some good thing in him toward the Lord, but
yet more evil than good, more flesh than spirit, more dross than silver, more
sin than grace, has no more cause to be proud of that little Grace and
holiness which he has, than a man cause to be proud of beauty, who has only a
white hand, or a handsome leg, all the rest of his body being ill favored and
deformed. If our sins preponderate our graces (I mean, if they be more and
greater than they (as in this life they always are) if there be in us a more
general indisposedness, than there is promptness, and readiness to what is
good; more earthly than heavenly mindedness; more self-seeking than
self-denial; more bad thoughts than good; more unruly than well governed
desires and affections (as who can say there is not) then have we more cause to
be humble, than to be proud, yea to be humble and not proud. If that grace
wherein we most excel (be it patience, or whatsoever else) be more deficient
than it is perfect, more remote from perfection than it is near to it, then we
who have but as it were put on our harness, have no cause to boast, which is
for them only who have put it off. How imperfect are those graces in which we
are most defective, if that grace be so defective in which we are most perfect.

Neither have we cause to be proud of what we have or possess, any more than of
what we are, for if we might be proud of either, we might with more reason be
proud of what we are than of what we have. (I mean of those good things which
are within us (and are as it were part of our selves) than of those which are
without us. A good descent, a good estate, a good report, a great and good
office, does constitute no man good, that is possessed of any, or all of them
(for a bad man may happen to have them all) and seeing such things do not make,
or denominate men good, they cannot redound so much to any man's praise as
inward goodness does, and therefore no man can pretend so much reason to be
proud of those things; for it is less honorable to enjoy what is good (which
the worst of men may do) than to be good our selves.

He that is proud of what he has, let me put the Apostles question to him, 1
Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou, that thou
did not receive? now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory, as if
thou had not received it? He that gave thee any good thing which thou
injoyest, could have withheld it from thee, and given it to him from whom it
is withheld, Prove. 22.2. The rich and poor meet together, the Lord is the
maker of them all. If thou art a rich man, he that made thee a man, made thee
rich; and he that made thee rich, and thy neighbor poor, could (and yet can)
have made thee poor and him rich.

I suppose thou have received evil things from the hands of God, as well as
good; the evil thou have received was deserved, so was not the good, why then
should undeserved good make thee proud, and not deserved evil rather keep thee
humble?

Art thou proud of the good and worthy things which thou have done (in one kind
and in another?) no reason for that, because it was not thou that did them
(as it is not the young scribler that writes a fair copy, but his master that
guides his hand,) but God who performs all things for thee, hear S. Paul, 1
Cor. 15.10. I labored more abundantly than they all (says he) yet not I but
the grace of God that was with me. And Phil. 2.13. It is God which works in
you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. If we instance but in temporal
things, see Deuteronomy. 8.18. The Lord thy God, it is he that gives thee power to
get wealth. If thy good deeds (which yet are not properly thine) be apt to lift
thee up, think of thy evil doings and of thy ways which have not been good.
Thy good deeds, may be like the basins and ewers which are sometimes drawn in
lotteries, but very sew of them, but they evil ones like the small plate, or
rather like the mere blanks there drawn, which are far the greater number. Some
hours thou have spent well, but how many more have thou misspent? some warm and
affectionate prayers thou have poured out to God, but how many more that were
cold and heartless? set one against the other and see how little cause thou
have to be proud? any more than a miser of his liberality, who makes a great
feast, but once, or twice a year; and pincheth his family all the time besides.
Think but of the good thou have left undone (that is, which thou might have
done and have not) and then (if thou can) be proud of the good which thou
have done; or show cause why thou should be so. Some good thou have done with
thy time, parts, estate, power, etc. But possibly thou could have done ten
times more, if thy heart had served thee: Is not then boasting excluded? if
thou have done but the tithe of that good which thou had power to do, whose
evil deeds besides are like the stars of Heaven, which cannot be numbered.

Neither have thou just cause to boast of thy sufferings, if thou have been a
great sufferer even for righteousness sake, considering first, what the Apostle
speaks, Phil. 1.29. To you it is given in the behalf of Christ not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. We should not take the honor
of our sufferings to our selves, or be proud thereof, fith God has given us
the grace whereby we suffer. It is he that has made us sufferers for his name
sake. (I mean willing to be such) and not we our selves. We should never have
been called to honor God by suffering (any more than glorious Saints and
Angels) had we not dishonored him by sinning. What any of us suffer for
Christ, is no ways comparable to what he has suffered for us, nay it is far
short of what we have suffered for sin, or upon the account of sin; for upon
that account are all, or the most of our other sufferings, and afflictions
which are generally more than those, that go by the name of persecutions, what
we suffer for the truth is usually much less than what the truth has suffered
by us: viz. by our uneven, and uncircumspect walking; so that our sufferings
may be looked upon as mere restitution made to the truth, and that but in part.
All which things considered, I see no cause any man has to be proud of his
sufferings, and if not of what he has suffered, nor of what he has done, nor
of what he has, nor of what he is (as I have proved particularly) then no man
has cause to be proud of any thing whatsoever.

Admit then a man should take himself to be much better than he is, every way
better, yet from thence no just cause would be ministered to him, to sacrifice
to his own net (which all proud men do) Since the best man in the world is
indebted to God, for all that good which he either is, or has, or has done,
or has suffered; and it is thought an unreasonable thing for a man to be proud
of his debts especially when he has not wherewithal to make satisfaction.

Having then proved that every man has great cause to be humble, and no man
has any cause to be proud from those premises, I draw this conclusion, viz.
That he who thinks soberly of himself, and not more highly than he ought to
think, must needs be an humble person, and that the formalis ratio, or essence
of humility does consist in knowing, and owning our selves to be as mean, vile,
and unworthy as indeed we are; and that from that fountain do issue all those
streams, which are commonly, and properly counted the expressions of Humility.

I may but assign the reasons why God may build a City for those that are
humble, rather than for those that are proud, and so pass on to another
Chapter. It may well be expected that God should do more for those whom he
loves, than for those whom he hates. Now the text says, Every one that is
proud in heart, is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 16.5. and Prove. 8.15.
Pride and arrogance do I hate: Six things does the Lord hate, yea, seven are an
abomination to him, and the first of them is a proud look. God has put a
strange enmity into men against the sin of pride, so far as it discovers it self
in others, in so much that the real worth, of a proud person is seldom owned,
and others do what they can to eclipse him, just as neighboring Princes do to
weaken any Kingdom or State that grows too great, and threatens to overtop
them. Some bigger stars to us appear less because of their great height and
distance from us, and those that are less than they (as the Moon for one) to us
appear bigger because they are lower seated, and come nearer to us. The proud
person is as the former, who keeping too great a distance from others, is less
accounted of, and the humble person as the latter, who shines more with the
rays of other men's commendation, than a proud man that has more brightness of
his own.

Many kinds of sinners do love one another, as such, viz. Fellow-drunkards,
fellow-gamesters, fellow-whoremasters; but proud persons are great haters of
their own order: I mean one of another, all hate pride in others, but none hate
it so much, as they that have most in themselves. We have heard of the family
of love, (a sect so called) but proud persons may go by the name of the family
of hatred, God having signified his hatred to them by leaving them above all
other sorts of men to hate one another. Proud men (so far as such) will not
suffer God to dwell with them, and in them; and therefore may not presume that
God will as much concern himself for them, and for their dwellings, as for
those who invite God to dwell in them, (for so by their humility they do) and
in whom God himself delights to dwell. Two texts will fully prove the several
branches of this second reason, viz. Ps. 10.3. The wicked through the pride of
his countenance will not seek after God: God is not in all his thoughts.
Therefore I say proud persons will not let God dwell with them. But as to
others God says, I dwell with him that is of an humble spirit, to revive the
spirit of the humble, Isa. 57.15. God will provide dwellings for them, with
whom himself delights to dwell, whilst others it may be shall go without.

God knows how little thanks himself shall have for building a City, or any
thing else he shall do, for proud persons who will certainly overlook his hand,
and power, and goodness, and ascribe all to their own, Deuteronomy. 8.12, 14, 17.
Beware least when thou art full, and have built goodly houses, and dwelt
therein, then thy heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, and
thou say in thine heart my power, and the might of mine hand has given me this
wealth. When their hearts were lifted up, then were they in danger to overlook
the power of God; and surely his goodness no less, for what the Jews said to
Christ touching the Centurion, viz. That he was worthy for whom he should do
this, so proud persons are apt to think that they themselves are worthy of all
that is done for them, either by God, or men; and who will be so thankful for
what he takes as a due, as for what he takes as a curtesy, and mere benevolence?

To do great things for proud men (as to build a City for them) were to
increase their pride, and to make them greater in their own eyes who are too
great already, therefore the text says, Beware least when thou have built
goodly houses and dwelt in them, thine heart be lifted up, Deuteronomy. 8. When God
has made men humble, then (and not till then) he has had his design in
ruining them; and therefore then it may be hoped he will go about to restore
them, Deuteronomy. 8.15. Who led thee through the great and terrible wilderness, that
he might humble thee and do thee good at thy latter end, (but first humble
thee.)

What should proud men do with goodly Cities? set them on fire with contention
(for of pride comes contention) and make them less desirable than a
wilderness? as Solomon, Prove. 21.9. It is better to dwell, in a corner of the
house top, than with a brawling woman in a wide house. Both from the promises
and threatenings of God, may humble men collect, that they shall fare better
than those that are proud. The threatening says, that God resists the proud,
and he whom God resists is but in an ill case, and unlike to prosper: God
seems to delight in crossing, and carrying headlong the designs of proud
persons, as of those that went about to build the tower of Babel, of Pharaoh,
and of Nebuchadnezar: and it is the temper of not a few men and women to love
to cross and set themselves against those persons, whom they judge exceeding
proud.

The word of promise is that the meek shall inherit the earth: and therefore
they have most reason to expect that God will build a City for them, and for
their sakes. Why should proud men be more adorned? they make too great a show
already, and are like meat that is stuck with many scuers, fairer to the eye,
but worse for spending, and most apt to be fly-blown.

Pride, and self confidence, or confidence in those things which men are proud
of) usually go together. Therefore the Apostle says, Charg them that are rich
in this world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches: and
Solomon warns men not to lean to their own understanding (viz. Such as are apt
to be proud thereof) now God delights to frustrate the designs, and enterprises
of those persons who trust in themselves, or in any other creature, and to show
them the weakness of an arm of flesh, Jer. 17.5. Cursed be the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, for he shall be like the heath in
the desert, and shall not see when good comes, but shall inhabit the parched
places in the wilderness, in a salt land and not inhabited.

Proud men are apt to affront God, and therefore it is not to be wondered at,
that God should not do as much for them, as for those that are humble: Give me
not riches (said Agur) least I be full and deny thee, and say who is the Lord?
Prove. 30.4. How can men affront God more, than in saying who is the Lord? and
so said Pharaoh in the pride of his heart, who is the Lord that I should obey
him? Proud men must be crossed, and frustrated, least they should think
themselves to be more than men, Ps. 9.20. Put them in fear O Lord, that the
nations may know themselves to be but men.

Considering then how many ways God is obliged (as it were) to resist those
that are proud, them and their designs, and how he has obliged himself by
promise to do great things for them that are ^^mble, viz. To teach them, to
dwell with them, (...) revive and comfort them, etc. These things ^^sidered, if
you would up with your City, down ^ith your pride, proud looks, words, habits,
ge^res, manner of living, and above all proud hearts which are the cause of all
the rest. Consider those ^ords, Lam. 3.29. He puts his mouth in the dust;
(...) so be there may be hope, and that in James 4.10. Humble your selves in
the sight of the Lord, and he shall ^^ft you up. No misery but Hell (nor that
neither) ^ill humble that person, that is not humbled by the ^urning of such a
City as London was, himself being greatly concerned in it. Till God have made
us kiss his rod, and so far forth accept the punishment of our iniquity as to
acknowledge that he was righteous in burning so great a part of our City, and
had been so if he had burnt it all; and would be so if he should never suffer
it to be built again, and till he have made us see, that except the Lord-build
the house and so the City, they labor in vain that build it, Psalm. 127.1. That
it is impossible for us by our own power and strength, to build us another
City; unless he who is the maker and builder of all things, shall consent to
and concur in it: I say till God have so far humbled us, though we may build
through his permission, we shall not build with his blessing, and if we
continue in the hateful sin of pride, he can give us a City in his wrath, and
take it away again in his wrath.

As therefore our City goes up, let our pride go down. It is too much for such
worthless creatures as we all are to think our selves to be any thing, but as
God influenceth and inspireth us (as a Trumpet can give no sound, but as the
trumpiter breaths into it) and therefore he said well, who said, that no man is
any thing more (meaning that good is) than what God makes him daily and hourly.
Paul says himself, though I preach the Gospel I have nothing to glory of, 1
Cor. 9.16. It is a very significant phrase both in our native tongue, that when
we would say a man is proud, we say he thinks himself to be some body, as if
every man were nothing, and those words were applicable to every proud man, he
that thinks himself to be something, when he is nothing, deceives himself,
Gal. 6.3. I find the same phrase in the Greek Testament, for we read of Theudas
boasting himself to be some body ((...)) which methinks is a fuller expression
than is used of Simon Magus, of whom it is said that he gave out, that himself
was some great one, Acts 8.9. (...). For the former implies, that for any man
to think himself to be any thing, in and of himself is a point of pride, and
such a kind of mistake, as if one should think a mere shadow to be a real body
or substance, Ps. 144.4. Man is like vanity, his days are as a shadow that
passes away.

When I observe how men do treat those that are notoriously proud, I fancy them
to be like the picture we see in some Almanacks, viz. A man every where pierced
with arrows from head to foot, because every body is ready to wound the
reputation of a proud man, and to make his name to bleed: and be confident that
the great God has as much displeasure against him as men can have. I say
therefore once again, as you love your selves, and as you love your City, be
humble, be lowly minded, take heed of lifting up your selves after that God
has cast you down. Conquer pride, and you conquer a third part of the world,
for S. John speaks of the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the
pride life, as if they three were all that is in the world, 1 John 2.16.
Conquer pride, and take the comfort of that excellent, and encouraging passage,
Joh 22.29. When men are cast down, then thou shall say there is lifting up: and
he shall save the humble ^erson.

DISCOURSE XLV.
That to seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, in the first
place (for Londoners generally so to do) were one of the best ways to obtain a
new City.

HE that reads the title of this Chapter will presently reflect upon, Mat.
6.33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness and all these
things shall be added to you, and in reflecting upon those words, will see a
plain proof of that proposition, whereof the title does consist, taking it for
granted that though meat, and drink, and clothing, be the only things
expressed in that place, of which it is said they shall be added to them, that
seek the kingdom God, yet all other needful things for this life, are there
implied, and intended, as by a parity of reason (which is a good sort of
argument) may be concluded. The foregoing words are, your heavenly Father
knows that ye have need of all these things, v. 32. From whence we may infer,
that all such things as our heavenly Father knows we have need, or necessity of
in this life, shall be added to them who seek his Kingdom in the first place.

Our ultimate, or last end, (so far as we foresee it our selves) is always
first thought of; it is first in intention, though it be last in execution. We
think of the end of our journey (or that which for the present, we intend shall
be so) before we se^ out, or enterprise the beginning thereof. In this sense
ought the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof to be sought by us in
the first place, that is, to be made our highest end, our ultimate design, to
which all other designs are to be referred, and subordinated, as for example:
If your ends and aims be regular they are in this order: you would have a City
that you might buy and sell, and get gain (that is the lowest round of the
ladder) you would do that, that you and yours might live, and comfortably
subsist, you would have a comfortable subsistence that you might attend upon
God, without distraction, and serve him with cheerfulness in the midst of all
the good things which he shall give you to enjoy: and you would serve God on
earth, in righteousness and holiness before him, that you might for ever enjoy
him in Heaven, and arrive to that glorious Kingdom, which he has provided for
them that love and serve him. This is your highest end, and thus doing, thus
aiming, you seek the Kingdom of God in the first place. For though that end be
the last thing in order of time, and of attainment yet it is first in order of
nature, for all causes are before their effects, now ends are causes, (as the
final cause is often spoken of) and the highest ends of any action is the first
cause thereof, that is, within our selves, and consequently it is the first
thing that is in our thoughts, it is the first mover, the great wheel or spring
that sets all the rest a going.

Now I say, in this manner to seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness of
it, if that were generally done by those that are concerned in London, would
make that desolate City to spring up as tender grass springing out of the
earth, by clear shining after rain, and cause the blessing of God to come down
upon it, like rain upon the women grass.

Religion (all things considered) was never a hinderance to any great and
worthy undertaking, but always a help and furtherance. The prophesying of
Haggai, and Zechariah (as I showed before) made the building of the Temple to
prosper. A religious standing still (to allude to those words of Moses, Exodus
14.13. stand still and see the salvation of the Lord) Will make the City go
forward, when a profane activity would but hinder it. Suppose the City should
require seven years time to build it again, some may think that doing nothing
to it upon the Sabbath day, is a great hinderance, and would be the loss, of no
less than one whole year in seven, but if we consider the curse which it
prevents, and the blessing which it procures, it will be found to be no loss
at all, and that the City in effect, and in due construction, goes up as fast
or faster on the Sabbath Day, than on any day in the week. Whilst we are
seeking Gods Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, God (though in an
invisible way) is adding to us, Jer. 17.24. It shall come to pass if ye hallow
the Sabbathday, to do no work therein, then shall there enter into the gate of
this City, Kings and Princes, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and this City
shall remain for ever. God who had set apart a tenth for his own use, gave the
Jews assurance they should be nothing the poorer, but much the richer for
paying of it, Mal. 3.10. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse that there
may be meat in my house, and prove me now herewith says the Lord of Hosts, if
I will not open the windows of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there
shall not be room enough to receive it. The Israelites when they were before
Jericho, besieging it, lost no time by carrying about the Ark, and sounding the
Trumpets as was appointed them, for it is said, It shall come to pass when ye
hear the sound of the Trumpet, all the people shall shout with a great shout,
and the wall of the City, shall fall down flat, Joshua 6.5. The Prophet was
angry with the King of Israel for smiting the ground but thrice, 2 Kings.
13.19. Thou should have smitten five or six times (said he) then had thou
smitten Syria, till thou had consumed it: whereas now thou shall smite Syria
but thrice. Alluding to that story, I would say, if we smote the ground oftener,
if we were more clothed with the Sun, and did more frequently trample the earth
under our feet, my meaning is, if we were more abundant in the duties, and
exercises of Religion, than most of us are, it would be no hindrance to our
worldly concerns, and particularly to that of building our City, but rather a
help and furtherance.

The practice of Religion, both in refraining what is evil, and doing what is
good, is never more necessary than when some great undertaking is in hand,
Deuteronomy. 23.9. When the host goes forth against thine enemies then keep thee from
every wicked thing; and are we not as much concerned so to do, when we have a
City to build, as at this day. Our way to have another City even upon earth, is
to imitate those worthies we read of, Heb. 11.16. But now they desire a better
country, that is, an heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their
God: for he has prepared for them a City.

When Saul went to seek his Fathers Asses, he unexpectedly found a Kingdom, but
it is to be feared that many will lose a Kingdom, whilst they seek for Asses, I
mean for poor trifles, an earthly house, or City, which are no better, in
comparison of a heavenly Kingdom. It is incident to us to invert Gods method,
we would seek other things either in the first place, or altogether, and have
the Kingdom of God added to us, we would seek earth, and find Heaven, but God
will not alter his method, and men by going about to do it, do endanger the
loss, of Heaven, and earth both, both of their interest, (if I may so call the
world which they live upon for the present) and of their principal which they
expect hereafter.

How unreasonable a presumption is it that God should mind our concerns, and we
not mind his? that God should regard our houses, if we will not regard his
Kingdom, the beginning, increase, and perfecting thereof, both in our selves
and others? By the Kingdom of God, I mean the Kingdom of Grace which is glory
begun, and the kingdom of glory which is grace perfected. Which being but
gradually distinct, (as the same person in infancy and at full age) I may speak
of as one kingdom, ( viz. specifically so, I speak of that kingdom as Gods
concern, because his glory is as truly concerned in it, as our good, his honor
as our happiness, And thence it is that they who refuse to be subjects of that
kingdom, are so severely threatened. Those mine enemies who would not that I
should reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me. It is said
of the Hebrew Midwives, that because they feared God he made them houses, Exodus
1.21. But will God build houses and Cities for them that fear him not, yea for
his enemies whom he has threatened to slay? at leastwise can they promise
themselves he will do so? or has he any where promised so to do? nay in Prove.
14.11. it is said The house of the wicked shall be overthrown, but the
tabernacle of the righteous shall flourish.

The children of rich and noble persons, need take no care for houses to dwell
in, let them but study to please their parents, and they shall want neither
houses nor any thing else; let them be good, and their parents will be as good
to them, as they can wish: and shall not his children whose name is El-shaddai,
God alsufficient expect as much from their heavenly Father?

But ere I proceed in speaking to men, let me speak a few words to God, on
behalf of my self and others, Lord give me more faith in this promise, this
double promise, (for so I understand it) that they who seek thy Kingdom, and
the righteousness thereof, in the first place shall have it, and all other
needful things with it, for so the phrase of adding, or superadding seems to
imply. And Lord give the same faith to others, for hundreds need it at this
day, who till of late never knew they needed it, or went about to make
experiment of it. O Lord! how fearful are most men to swim, when they are above
their depth? when they can feel no ground, under them, that mere sense and
reason can stand upon. We would fain be always in those shallows where lambs
may wade, but never cast into those depths, where Elephants must swim, but thou
Lord do sometimes try us with the latter of those; give us but faith enough
in that conditional promise, that they who seek thy kingdom, etc. shall have
all things added, and together with that faith, give us but the condition of
that promise, viz. hearts to seek thy kingdom, as we ought to seek it, and
having those two, we shall not doubt but to arrive at whatsoever is, and shall
be necessary, both for the life that is, and that which is to come!

To me it seems a little strange, that the great God having made the promise
of a Kingdom to such as seek it in the first place ( and by patient continuance
in well doing, for that I must add out of Romans 2.) Should add any promise of
things so much inferior to it, as are the good things of this life, the giving
whereof might so easily have been inferred, and concluded from the promise of
that kingdom, with a quanto magis, as the Apostle in another case, If when we
were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life, Romans 5.10. He that has
assured us of an heavenly kingdom, if we seek it, and the righteousness
thereof, will certainly in that case, not deny us an earthly City, or any thing
of that nature, seeing it to be good for us. But as young Virgins can hardly
persuade themselves their suitors do love them, unless they ever and anon,
present them with one thing or another, that might be spared, over and above
the solid offers they make of settling great and liberal joyntures upon them: So
the great God by way of condescension to our (weakness, knowing us to be much
what of the same temper,) has promised us the little things of this life, (for
so they are comparatively) over and above his kingdom, if we will but seek his
kingdom, and the righteousness thereof in the first place.

It is too apparent that the generality of men have a jealousy they shall lose
other things, whilst they seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof: therefore when men have any great and important work in hand, the
generality do borrow more time from religion, for and toward it than from any
thing else (I mean proportionably to the time they had wont to spend in it) ex.
gr. when they have building work in hand, possibly they will pray but half so
long, or so often, read but half so much, meditate of good things but a fourth
part so much, as at other times; so that the great tax toward such occasions
lies generally upon Religion, as if that could best admit of a defalcation of
any thing else, for few men content themselves with but half so much sleep,
half so much recreation as they had wont to use at other times. But say I,
never pinch thy general calling to promote thy particular calling, but rather
hope to promote thy particular calling, by giving full scope to thy general,
for in this as in other senses, the less is blessed of the greater.

Borrow time for thy building from thy rest or recreation, not from thy
devotion: Prayer and other duties are a help to building, but so is not
superfluous sleep, or needless recreation. Don't build first and pray
afterward, but pray first from day to day, and fall to building afterward,
neither ask the first blessing upon thy temporal building, be it an house or
City, but upon the building up of thy Soul in thy most holy faith: First that
thy Soul may prosper, and be a habitation for God through his spirit, and after
that thy house. It was a bitter Irony of him that said, O cives, cives,
querenda pecunia primum est, virtus post nummos! that is, that the Citizens of
his time sought money in the first place, and virtue afterward.

The kingdom of God, at this day, I mean the state of religion in the world,
and in the hearts of most professors, is much what in such a condition as is
the City of London, viz. low and ruinous, and very imperfect to what it shall
be when the seventh Angel shall sound, saying the kingdoms of this world are
become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, Rev. 11.15. Let us labor
in our several capacities to advance the kingdom of God, and if another London
be needful for us, (as who thinks it is not?) he will certainly advance our
City.

DISCOURSE XLVI.
Upon the observation of that full employment, which Carpenters, Bricklayers,
and all other Artificers, who relate to building, have at this day, compared
with the condition of scholars, under various revolutions.

IT is an ill wind (says our proverb) that blows no body good. Artificers
who relate to building have, at this day, more work than they can turn their
hands to. Surely Aristotle says true, viz. that Privation is a principle, and
that the corruption or destruction of one thing is the generation or production
of another. The burning of London has made way for all or most, poor trades to
live; but not for Scholars, they are the Camelions, that must live upon the
^aire (if they know how) unless they can be Camelions in another sense, viz.
assume the color of all things which they come near. Watermen tell us they
can earn twenty shillings a week with ease, (if they be good husbands,) that
many excellent scholars cannot do, nor half so much, though they ply their
learned oars ever so hard. They are the only men, who under several revolutions
have bin forced to stand idle in the market place, for that none would hire
them or set them at work.

If poverty and necessity (that ingens telum) may be compared to Lions (as by
the fright some have taken at the very roaring of them, at a great distance,
one would think they might) they and their families, have time after time been
consigned to the Lions Den, and erruditos instead of Christianos ad Leones,
that is, away with Scholars, as heretofore with Christians to the Lions, has
bin the great outcry under several changes. They have bin the only men, who did
they live ever so soberly, peacably, piously, and might they have lived ever so
usefully, and for public good, if not otherwise qualified, have not been
thought worthy to live. They might not eat, because they might not work, nor
might have leave to work least they should eat. They might not tread out the
corn, because if they did do so, their mouths must be unmuzled, and they have
leave to feed. It was no matter what their talents were (though the talents of
a Holdsworth a Featly, etc.) Talents of lead will give some men as good content
(if not better) than talents of gold. The world has thought that Scholars
pains might best be spared, which is such a paradox, as if they should tell us
that Souls are less worth than any thing else, which Christ tells us are more
worth than the whole world, for says he what shall it profit a man, etc.

It is incredible what shifts Scholars, under several changes, have been put
to: one while because they would not take the Engagement, forsooth, out they
must. Let it be no more a proverb, that Quaevis terra alit arts, that is,
every country cherishes learning, for there is no truth in it. Musculus was an
excellent Scholar, and yet forced to dig in the town ditch, as some others of
his profession have bin in Cole-pits, and Tin-mines. Alas, how many Scholars
have bin tempted to wish themselves poor mechanics, or handicrafts-men; and
that when their parents sent them to the University, they had bound them to
some sorry trade, by which they might have been able to have got their bread,
and to have lived like themselves.

Surely Scholars would as fain live as other men, they love themselves and
their Families as well as others do, the light of learning in them, has not
extinguished the light of nature. If they have not lived as well, and as
plentifully as other men, it was because they did not dare to do so, or as
Nehemiah said, So did not I, because of the fear of God, Neh. 5.15.

Three Apprentiships at the University, with three degrees on a man's back, well
deserved, have not turned to so good an account to many, as one Apprentiship to
a mean Shopkeeper has done to many others. Tradesmen can live upon their
Callings, but Scholars have bin put to live upon their friends (if they had
any). Many excellent Scholars put out of the way of Learning, know not how to
earn a penny (as they say) if their lives did depend upon it. In times of many
Revolutions, Scholars are of all men most miserable, unless they be men of
such volatile wits, that they can turn every way, unless they be perfect
weather-cocks, or unless together with their wisdom they have an Inheritance.
It is expected that Scholars should be Commonwealthsmen, Protectorians,
Presbyterians, Independants, and every thing else that is uppermost, and the
way of their times, as if in that sense it were true, That every thing is good
in its season.

A Scholar must be every thing successively, or he must be nothing, or rather
nobody. He must change his shape as often as does the Silkworm, if he would be
clad as he is, that is, clothed with soft, and costly raiment. He must be like
a door turning upon the hinges, that is, this way, and the other way, if he
will come to any thing, though that be the comparison that Solomon uses for a
sluggard. He must either be materia prima, or he must be reduced to it; that
is, either susceptible of all forms, or stripped of all enjoyments. I write not
this to blame the policy or reason of state that has thought fit it should be
so, (though he that will, may censure those times whence I have taken the
instances of this kind of severity) but to condole the misery of Scholars in
regard it has bin so.

Many do distrust that saying which has bin applied to learning, viz. that
Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros: that is, that it softens the manners of
men, and suffers them not to be fierce. For who have bin more profound to
destroy one another than Scholars? If homo homini lupus be a Proverb, it has
bin no where more verified than amongst Scholars, who have bin lupi in fabula
one to another, and devoured one another maintenance, and livelyhoods, by the
imposition of Engagements, and such like Artifices, instructing aftertimes in
methods of policy, which the depraved nature of man is but too prone to follow.
Has it signified any thing to a livelihood in some times and places, for a
Scholar to be excellent at his Profession, and very virtuous besides? if
weighed in other scales, he has bin found too light, his little kingdom, I
mean his work and wages have both bin taken from him. He that would not provide
for his Family by going beyond the line of his Principles (if dissenting) has
bin so dealt with, as if he had bin worse than an infidel, and had denied the
Faith. For whilst Jews and other Infidels have bin permitted to live, and
provide for their Families, so might not he. He is a Cavalier, an Episcopal
man, or, etc. Sequester him, etc. A waggish Innkeeper was once (in my hearing)
commending an officious lie, (it may be himself had sometime tried the
sweetness of it) but what if all Scholars be not of his mind? yea, what if
none that are conscientious be? what if some could not, or durst not tell such
alye if it might save their lives? must they turn out upon it? as if lying were
a gift essential to a Minister whose work it is to Preach the truth, at
leastwise as if the Apostle Paul his becoming all things (...) all, were his
professing himself to be of every other man's mind, and his saying, and doing
whatsoever others would have him; the contrary whereof does plainly appear from
Gal. 2.11. where speaking of Peter, he says, That he withstood him to the very
face, because he was to be blamed, etc.

If a man had written as many books as ever Gro^^us did, and to as good
purpose, to have bin able to have underwritten his name to a small Script (an
Engagement or such like thing) might when time was, have done him more service;
yea, the other it may be, none at all. An excellent Artificer, Lim^er, or such
like, of what Nation or Religion soever whether Jew, or Turk, shall be set at
work by every body, rather than a bungler, of whatsoever Judgment, but it uses
not to be so amongst Scholars. Though Shibboleth and Sibboleth differ but by
one letter, and that near in sound, yet the right pronouncing and due
distinguishing of them, uses, as to Scholars, to signify more than their
knowledge of all the letters in the Alphabet besides, and of all the words made
out of those Letters, and things that are signified by those words.

Why does our Mother, the University, put such respect upon her sons, that are
Fellows of Colleges? why will she have them capt as far as they can be
discerned? are they there lifted up that they may take the greater fall?
(Tolluntur in altum, ut lapsu graviore ruant.) Are they there so honored, that
they may be elsewhere more despicable? there they sit with the sons of Nobles,
but how soon do many of them come to sit as it were with the dogs of their
flock? if there they be clothed in Scarlet, they quickly come as it were to
embrace dung-hills.

Some Scholars that have had excellent Libraries, could neither sell their
books without great loss, nor keep them without great vanity. For what should
they do with books that can make no use of their learning? any more than a
Musician with a great many Lutes and Viols, who is not permitted to play one
Lesson upon any of them? Some have even idolized their Books, their Books have
bin as it were their God, and yet those very persons have bin forced to an
unhappy Transubstantiation, viz. to turn that their God into bread.

If Scholars continue Batchelors, (as few of them do in that sense) make
themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake (alluding to Mat. 19.12.)
possibly they may be received into some good Family, and be there entertained,
so as the Prophet was by the Shunamite, 2 Kings 4.10. Let us make a little
Chamber in the Wall, and let us set for him there, a bed, and a Table, and a
stool, and a Candlestick, and it shall be when he comes to us, he shall turn
in thither. I can but think what hard shift the Sons of the Prophets made in
Elisha's time, The place where we dwell, said they to Elisha, is too strait for
us, Let us go unto Jordan, and take thence every man a beam, and let us make us
a place where we may dwell. Surely it was but a sorry house that those young
Prophets could build, and with no more materials than every man his beam; it
seems to have bin no other than a Booth, or Bower, or Tent, built by the
water side; yet that was as good a dwelling as the Sons or Pupils of the
Prophets did at that time expect.

But if Scholars happen to marry (as most of them do) and after they have so
done, come to have their Olive plants sit round about their Table, and then an
^our of temptation come (an Engagement is ten^ered, or some such thing) they
must take it, or turn ^ut; how miserable then is the case of these poor tenants
at will? against whom an Order of Ejectment presently commenced, and forthwith
they and ^eirs exposed to beggary, or what is next to that.

Scholars are generally more Prolifical than other ^en. Aarons Rod blossomed
when none of the ^est did, Numb. 17.5. I know one at this day that ^ath no less
than ten sons all alive, besides a sample of the other sex: by the fullness of
his Quiver, he may seem to be an Archer, but he is no other than a mark, though
the greatness both of his charge, and of his worth (in the main) considered, it
were heartily to be wished, that all Arrows shot toward him, might be like
those which Jonathan shot toward David, all of which either went beyond, or
fell short of him. Scholars, though the Fathers of many sweet children, do
often lie at their mercy who were never Fathers themselves, and therefore know
not what the heart, or care of a Father does mean!

When ever it is so that the condition of Scholars is so deplorable, I know no
remedy in the case, but Prayers and tears, Faith and patience in the use of
humble persuasions, and petitionings, and if they will not prevail, each of
them must sit down and say as did the Prophet Jerem. 10.19. Woe is me for my
hurt, my wound is grievous. Truly this is a grief, and I must bear it. Surely
when God shall do good in his good pleasure to Sion, and build the Walls of
Jerusalem then all such workmen as need not to be ashamed, shall be employed
and encouraged: Mean time let Patience have her perfect work, that ye may be
perfect and entire, wanting nothing (even whilst you seem to want every thing),
James 1.4.

May it not consist with patience for Scholars to give their grief some modest
vent, to prevent the breaking of their hearts, and that loosers take leave to
speak, which our proverb says should be given them: then we will proceed a
little. Scholars must not be pitied because having wit, and learning, it is
supposed they can shift, (though indeed none are more shiftless for the world
than they) none more like to sheep than they, of which it is reported, that if
they have once lost their ways, they can never find it again. Scholars under
hatches, must keep a perpetual fast, or at leastwise disfigure their faces, as
if they did do so, or else it will be taken for granted, that because they
smile upon the world, the world does not frown upon them. Scholars must
generally live either in the torrid zone of a polemical zeal, I mean a zeal for
polemical, and disputable matters (which the light and temper, and ingenuity of
some men, will not permit them to do) or else they must live in the frigid zone
of a cold, and almost starving charity.

If Scholars be not honest, and conscientious, it is not fit they should be
Ministers, and if they be conscientious, they run a great adventure? For was it
not one while contriving (and who can secure after ages from the like snares)
that Scholars shall be put to abjure that family, and government, to which the
body of the nation had sworn allegiance; as if they could do all things by an
omnipotency of distinctions, or as if they were never to be trusted, till they
had taken Achitophels council viz. to be with their Fathers Concubines, in the
face of the Sun, I mean to do some horrid, and odious thing.

It is one of the unhappinesses, of Scholars, that their pains of all men's, are
most undervalued, so that if it were left to peoples liberty, always and ^n all
cases, to reward them as little as they please, ^f there were no dues of theirs
demandable by law, ^eally I think the major part of them would be the ^oorest
of all people, that do not beg about the ^reets. It was a great truth though
ill-favouredly applied by him that said, He could have the pains of Scholars
good-cheap. If ever the maintenance of Ministers, should become arbitrary
(which the world has long been struggling for) but for the pleasure of
knowledge, and the hopes of saving Souls, were I to begin the world, I had
rather be a Cobbler, than a Scholar, and one I have heard of, that was forced
together with his preaching, to apply himself to the work of a Cobbler, (to eake
out his maintenance) as if the Souls of men, and the soles of shoes, had both
belonged to the same function.

Let Scholars live single if they can, for if they have not the gift of
continency, all their other gifts in point of livelihood, may amount to little.
Compositors they say may earn their twenty shillings a week, whereas composers
of books (unless it be here and there one) may have their labor for their
pains.

Who are so much the objects of wonder, and of envy, as Scholars if they do
arrive but to a mediocrity of estate? as namely to have two or three hundred
pounds a year of their own, yea but a living of some such value, which is
theirs but for life, how much notice is taken of it? whereas if a tradesman
arrive to an estate of eight or ten thousand pounds, it makes no great noise,
or if a country Gentleman be born to a thousand, or fifteen hundred pounds a
year, (be he one whose wit, and worth, is as little as his wealth is great) it
is not so much observed, as if a Minister, though of excellent gifts, and
graces, have but a fifth part so much. Such are commonly counted covetous
because rich, unless they prevent that infamy by being more liberal than they
can well afford, I had almost said prodigal. I was about to say in some heat,
pull down Universities, breed up Scholars in hospitals, they are reserved for
alms. Some who draw at that lottery, may have Basins and Ewers, but the most of
them have but blanks. If Scholars will marry, let them marry Chambermaids, if
they must to service again, they can better do it than they who never knew what
it meant.

It is the Scholars path which usually is spread with most snares, they must be
spoken to in parables, that seeing, they may not see, nor understand, least
they should be healed (if I may so allude) smooth Jacob (or what is said to be
as smooth, and plain as he) must apply himself to Scholars, with having skins
about his neck, and hands, that being taken for rough Esau he may get the
blessing from them. If the kernel they are to swallow be soft and easy (or said
so to be) yet the shell is made so hard, that it shall even break their teeth,
ere they can come at it. Take one instance for all, viz. in the forementioned
Engagement we know it was so worded, that many good men left their places, were
they livings, or fellowships, or headships, rather than they would meddle with
it, and yet whosoever he was that commented upon it, represented the sense and
meaning thereof, as so just and fair, and harmless, that if it had sounded no
worse in the text, than it was sensed in the comment (and why men's words should
not be as plain as their meaning I know not, or why things to be subscribed
should be so phrased as to need a comment, and that comment not to be allowed
neither, I know not,) it is like that many more had taken it. It is vain for
Scholars to be conjurers, (as they say) if they want money, and if they have
money enough, they need be no ^onjurers (that is no very good Scholars) Simon
^an do without Magus.

The world is no where more unequally dealt ^^en amongst Scholars, Captains and
Colonels, and some gown-men, almost as illiterate as they, ^ave in days of
yore bin admitted to the highest ^egree that Universities can confer; as if
learning were no ways essential to those degrees, or as if (...) were no
affront to salute a man Salve Doctor sine ^^ctrina: whereas on the other hand,
the time has ^in when persons of as great learning, parts, and pregnancy as
any of their standing, have stuck in ^^e birth of their first, and meanest
degree. Those words of Solomon are no where more verified, than amongst
Scholars. Eccles. 9.11. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding,
nor yet favor to men of skill, but time and chance happens to them all. As if
the word Clergy, did belong to men of that name, because of their preferments
falling to them as it were by mere lot, or chance, without perceding election
of fit persons, amongst whom it should fall, and could not fall amiss; as in
the Apostles case, Acts 1.23. Masters of learning often go a foot, whilst those
that are not worthy to be their servants, or to carry their books after them
(for matter of learning) ride on horseback, what he said of Heaven, I may say
of earth. Surgunt indocti and terram rapiunt, dum alii cum doctrina in abyssum
paupertatis detruduntur. Nay more than so, learned men under hatches, are
scarce owned to be learned. They censure them at pleasure, for poor Scholars,
who make and keep them poor men. Ingenious Wild gives us a second part to the
same tune with thy Ah Poor Scholar, whither will thou go? Were Scholars bred
up in Universities to learn the illiberal Sciences of Cutting Tobacco, selling
Tallow Candles, Carding, and Spinning, they and theirs for bread (whilst others
Card and Dice for their pleasure). Are these the Arts in which they have
commenced Batchelors and Masters? or were they trained up to live by breaking
Laws? or not to know which way to get food and raiment for them and theirs
without doing it? for no Paternoster, no Penny is as true a rule, as no Penny,
no Paternoster.

In the days of his Majesty's exile, and about twelve years since (as near as
I can guess it) there was a Proclamation set forth by those that were then in
power, that no Cavalier (as they then called them) should teach any School,
etc. I confess that Proclamation did vanish like an ignis fatuus, and came to
little or nothing (for Middlesex, I am sure, was full of such Schools at, and
after that time): but suppose it had bin insisted upon, how many Scholars must
have bin starved, that had no other way to live? or must have broke the Law (if
that could have bin called a Law) to have kept themselves and their Families
from starving? If Laws be stone walls, hunger will break through them, as our
Proverb is, Hunger will break through stone walls. If those Walls be built as
high as the Tower of Babel was intended, hunger will scale them, as the Poet
tells us, Graeculus esuriens in coelum si jusseris ibit. The hungry Greeks
would climb Heaven for bread, before they would go without it. If those be
stolen waters which men come by against Law, how often have Scholars bin fain
to bear up themselves with those words of Solomon, Prove. 6.30. Men do not
despise a Thief if he steal to satisfy his Soul when he is bungry.

There is one shift more that some good Scholars ^ave bin put to, and that is
to beg their bread, not ^ut that they would rather have stolen employment (if
that be theft) had not the Laws of that time bin ^oo hard for them, than have
so done, but being too strictly observed to get any sufficient employment for
the purpose of a livelihood, they have rather ^eg'd than starved. I my self
have bin sought to for some relief, in as good Latin as I would wish to ^ear,
or as any man need to speak, and found the party in other discourse, Learned
and fluent to admiration, O tempora, O mores, Tell it not in Gath. He that can
speak Latin but so as not to break Priscians ^ead, makes my bowels yearn
toward him, if he come a begging; but if I meet with a Terence, or Cicero, or
Erasmus, that is forced to turn Friar Menlicant, it almost breaks my heart, and
the money burns in my purse till I have relieved him.

I can but think how much it adds to the misery of Scholars brought to want,
to see how some rich ^^rmugians, who are as defective in wit and inge^uity, as
Scholars can be in money, do seem to ^irn at them, and to laugh in their
sleeves, and to ^less themselves, as if they had all the wit, because they have
all the money, or if they are sensible of their weakness, how it pleases them
to think that they have the staff in their hands, and will make Scholars smart
under the want of money, as much ^s themselves have done under the want of wit
and Learning. Nil habet in sese paupertas durius istis quam quod ridiculos
homines facit.

Methinks it is a sore disease that I have seen under the Sun, for Scholars to
be made as it were the oft-scouring of all things and some of them such too, ^s
they of whom the Apostle says the World was not worthy. Oh that I knew an
effectual Antidote against that Pest, that cruel Plague which first and last,
has slain so many hundreds, if not thousands of Learned and useful men. My
mind gives me I could say something which would signify very much (though not
all I would have it) toward the prevention of it. It grieves me that any
honest Scholars (truly so called) should at any time want the favor and
countenance of Rulers, or that Rulers should want their service.

One while I think if Covetousness had never bin in the World, if it had not
bin for certain Ahabs who thirsted after Naboths Vineyard, it had never fared
so ill with Scholars; whilst some have contrived to add house to house, and
land to land (to heap Pelion upon Ossa) as if they would dwell alone in the
earth: others as worthy as themselves, by virtue of those contrivances, have
bin brought to great exigencies; for if some will have all, others must have
nothing.

Otherwhile I think a great deal of Pride and Selfconceit has bin the cause of
this, some having thought so well of themselves, as if nothing could be too
much, or too good for them; and so meanly of others, as if no condition were
too bad for them, or as if they could never be filled with poverty and contempt
enough, though God knows that the persons whom they have so contemned, and
blasted with some ugly name as might be, Disaffected, Malignant, etc. have some
of them bin no ways inferior to them, if not much their betters upon a true
account.

Sometimes I ascribe it to the Disingenuity of those men who have trampled
others under their feet, and devoured them, as the greater Fishes do the less.
I have thought they could not but know that some of those whom they have ill
entreated, and plucked the bread out of their mouths, were more righteous ^^an
they; yea, more able, learned, painful, use^ul than themselves were, or could
ever expect to ^e; I say that they who have heaped to themselves ^^perfluities,
by multiplying those places, which ^^ngly enjoyed, did but supply the
necessities of better men than themselves; I say, I have sometimes ^hought they
knew all this, and yet had the Conscience (as they say) or rather the
disingenuity to per^st in it, as if all were lawfully their fish that came ^o
their net (though drained out of other men's (ponds) and all theirs de jure, or
of right, that were so de facto, or by actual possession, though they star^ed
mean time whose right it was. Places of grea^er preferment, seemed ill to
become other men, whilst the famous Bishop Usher (that unparalled Oracle of
Learning) stripped of his other enjoyments, was but only Minister of
Lincolns-Inne? If then notorious Pride and Covetousness and disingenuity, be
^ut reformed by men's selves, or restrained by others, the undoing of Scholars,
that are worthy and peaceable men, is a mischief that will not return upon the
World, nor will the loud cry of so horrible and unchristian an oppression as
that has bin, ever pierce the Heavens, and pull down the Judgments of God as
formerly it has done. There is not a Scholar (truly so called) that is, who
has true Learning, and knows how to use it) but might do good service in
Church or State, or both, if due care be but taken that his Talents be not
misimployed, and himself be incapacitated to do disservice (though his
Principles may not in all things be commensurate with the Public standard.)

That a Church or State may be sufficiently secured, that service, and no
dis-service, shall be done them, by those that somewhat differ from them in
Judgment, and practice, is evident enough, by that great trust, which has time
after time, bin reposed in men of skill in Military, and Naval Affairs, who
have bin fully understood to have had differing sentiments as to some points of
Religion, and yet have bin entrusted with those Offices and Places of Command,
which have, and do capacitate them to do an hundred fold more mischief,
undiscerned, and not to be prevented (if they were disposed to it) than
Ministers and Schoolmasters in their Spears can do.

Let as high assurances of peaceableness under the Government be given by
Ministers, as are required of Officers who have the greatest Commands either at
Sea or Land, and what is looked upon as Security enough for a greater trust, may
in reason be thought not insufficient for a less.

When the work of Scholars is public, and themselves set as lights upon a
Hill, their miscarriages cannot be hid, and there will be many Witnesses and
Judges of what they say, and do amiss. If they shine well there, they need not
to be undone, and if they burn, but shine not, it is easy to put them out, and
to prevent their undoing others. It is hard for a Candle to shine under a
Bushel, and not burn the bushel under which it shines; but there is no danger
of a Candle that shines in an open place. If Scholars will abuse that public
Liberty whereby they are enabled to live, and to do good to others, let their
penalty be great: He deserves no Pulpit that cannot use it peaceably, and
without giving just offense. But on the other hand, let them Preach the Gospel,
and live upon the Gospel, whose work it is (and whose character, for that work
is said to be indelible) if they will but manage it as a Gospel of peace, and
as the Gospel of men's Salvation.

Let not former Offenses be remembered against Scholars, more than against
other men, especially those of which themselves were never personally guilty.
If their Fathers (I mean persons more aged and eminent than themselves) are
thought to have eaten sour Grapes, let not their teeth be set on edg, their
bands made stronger, or their yoke made heavier, because of that, for that were
to perpetuate wrong to the end of the world, and to make it boil higher and
higher under every Change.

It were no difficult matter to lay competent obligations upon all men of
Learning and worth, (especially such whose expectations are not high, and who
would be thankful for that which were really but a competency) which being
done, it would become their Interest to save that vessel in which themselves
were Imbarqued, and to endeavor the Peace of them in whose Peace they
themselves should have Peace, as it is Jer. 29.

To secure themselves against Learned men (or some of them) as real or supposed
enemies, has bin the trite Policy of every age, but to secure them to
themselves as cordial friends, and to oblige them to be such, were I think, a
Policy beyond that; for then might they not only avoid the hurt, but receive
all the good that all the Learned men of their time could do them.

All this have I discoursed in a very earnest, but innocent passion, for the
good of Scholars, as many of them as are also good, and peaceable men, and in
true compassion toward the interchangeable and alternate miseries which I have
seen upon Scholars of several persuasions, who are, and always were dear to
my self, as good Scholars and good men.

Let Artificers not take it unkindly, that I took occasion by their being in so
much employment, to bewail Scholars that are, or have bin out for a long time
together, and by the riches they may hope to get, to bewail the deep poverty of
many Learned and pious men: We envy you not, go on and prosper, Do worthily in
Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem, and build the City (though in another
sense) as Rachel and Leah did build the house of Israel, that is, a great and
renowned City, as that was a Family; Build up your own Estates so far as justly
you may whilst you Build other men's Houses; But oh that my head were Waters,
and mine eyes a Fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the
slain of the Daughter of my People. I mean over the condition of Scholars,
Learned and worthy men (or many of them) who under most Changes and
Revolutions, have bin, and are like to be undone.

DISCOURSE XLVII.
Of the rebuilding of Churches.

HOw earnestly were it to be wished, that men, and women of Estates, would
apply their charity to the building of Churches? Did I call it charity? surely
that word is beneath the thing: for what is given to Gods use immediately, or
to the use of his worship, and service, is not Charity (strictly so called) but
Piety. Our charity extends not to God, but to the Saints that are upon the
earth: for God receives no alms for his own use, but tribute, as do Princes.
Yet I have let the word Charity slip, because whatsoever is given without
constraint, and of a willing mind, is vulgarly called by that name, (and
loquendum cumvulgo is no ill rule) at leastwise when it is given to those that
want it: now though the great God do not want Churches, ( Acts 17.25. God
dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands,
as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all life, and all things.)
Yet his servants do want them, yea and money too (many of them) wherewith to
contribute any thing toward the building of them, and Churches are given as to
God, in one sense, viz. as places dedicated to his worship, so in another sense
to men, as good accommodations, and conveniences, for that public worship
which they should tender unto God; now upon this latter account it is perfect
charity to build Churches, though in respect of the former it was piety, now
where piety and charity go hand in hand, where they greet and kiss each other,
they speak the work excellent, in which they two concur, and give great hopes
of good success to them that shall take it in hand, as the appearance of Castor
and Pollux both at once, had wont to be construed by Mariners as a good presage
of a prosperous voyage to ensue.

As needful a work as I do apprehend it, to rebuild Churches, I would not say
one word of it, if I did not think there were persons enough in England, to
bear the charg of it: and do themselves no great hurt. There are, whose cups
are full, and do overflow, who have enough, and to spare, who have more than
heart can wish, that is, need to wish, for matter of estate, etc. Many wealthy
persons have no heirs of their own bodies, nor can expect any, nor kindred it
may be that are very near, and dear to them: others have heirs of their own
bodies, but not fit to be made heirs of their whole estates (or haeredes ex
ass) because they can expect no other, but that they will quickly run out all,
and bring themselves to husks, as did the prodigal, Luke 15. Or as that great
Lawyer prophesyed of his eldest son; to whom he said in his last Will and
Testament, that he left his estate to be scambled away, and imbezled, for he
could hope no better. (neque enim de illo melius spero)

Have such persons as these nothing to spare toward the rebuilding of
Churches. If God had given them many children, (whom he has been pleased to
write childless) they could have given every child a fair portion, and made
them all rich; and will not their hearts serve them to give the value of one
child's portion, or of what they could have given to one, if they had had seven,
or ten children (as they have none) toward building up convenient places for
the worship of God? would such a proportion undo them? yea would they so much
as feel it? what if the wealthy parents of hopeless children, did say to them
as David said to Mephibosheth? Thou and Zibah divide the inheritance, so in
this case, thou and the desolate Churches, and other pious uses, shall even
divide my estate betwixt you; surely in this case (...), that half is more than
the whole, is as true as in any, viz. that half a fathers estate, is more to be
given to a hopeless child, than the whole of it, to one that is good and
hopeful.

Others (it may be) have a child or two not unhopeful, (but that is all they
have) and the estate is so great as would have richly provided for many more;
if such shall pretend that they have nothing to spare to good uses, neither
would they have had, by the rule they go upon, if the whole world had bin
theirs, for their rule is this, that whatsoever they have, be it ever so much
they must leave it, entirely to their Children, be they ever so few: yea though
they have but one, he or she must have all, and by that means they load them
with thick clay, till they break their backs again, they tempt some loose
persons to steal them, if they be daughters, or to inveagle them if they be
sons, they make them see so great an estate before them, that they think they
shall never come to the end of it, they begin to think of dividing it, as the
mother of Sisera and her wise ladies spoke of his dividing the spoil, To every
man a damsel or two (Judge. 5.30.) a prey of diverse colors of needle work, on
both sides meet for the necks of them that take the spoil, I say they begin to
think of dividing, or dedicating it, so much to Bacchus, and so much more to
Venus, and so much to other heathenish Gods, and Goddesses of pleasure. Thus
some destroy their children as that Tarpeian Virgin was destroyed, by
overwhelming them with bracelets, I mean with riches more than they know what
to do withal.

Were it not better that some part of such an estate were given to good uses?
went to build Churches? A private man's estate may be too great, as well as to
little, as some Kingdoms have been, which have sunk with their own weight (mole
ruerunt sua,) A ship may have too much ballast, as well as too little, and a
boat may be overset by too great a sail. When those that have more than enough
for them and theirs, have so much wisdom as to hear, and so much grace as to
confess it, it will appear that England does not want for money, sufficient for
the rebuilding of Churches. I doubt not but some who have but midling estates,
and many Children will contribute freely to the building of Churches, and
should not they much more who have great estates, and no great charg, but few
children, or all bad, or none at all? If this be not a reasonable motion
(themselves being Judges) let it be refused.

Many are at great expenses every year, upon things of far less consequence
than is the building of Churches: I would beg but a year or two's revenue, such
and so great, as some men spend upon their lusts, be they the lusts of the
flesh, or the pride of life, I say no more, as from them, for and toward the
re-edifiing of demolished Churches. Alas that men should be more free, and
bountiful to their sins, than to their Souls, to works of darkness, than to
works of piety, to damn their Souls, than to promote the means of saving them.

Synagogues of State swarm every where, and are carefully provided for. There
are Temples to Bacchus, and Venus almost innumerable, and much frequented. Men
are about to build for themselves better houses than they had before, and while
they they so do, would it not be a great shame if they should build no house
for God? must God be but as it were a sojourner, whilst we dwell in ceiled
houses? must the Ark remain as it were in tents? must religion be but a tenant
at will having here and there a room afforded it, upon mere courtesy? There are
(for ought I hear) but a moity of Churches to what were formerly intended to be
built, though the inhabitants of London, are like to be as many as ever: if the
piety of this time will not extend to that moity, it will be thought to be not
half so much, as was the piety of former ages.

How gladly would the Hugonites in France rebuild their Churches, which were
wilfully pulled down; if they might have leave to do it? we have leave and
encouragement, and shall we not build ours? How much more decent, how much more
convenient, how much more public, (generally) how much more unsuspected, and
unliable to cavils, and exceptions from the world, is the exercise of religion
in Churches than in private houses? How did Infidels take occasion (though most
unjustly) by the primitive Christians, their assembling in private, to charg
those horrid things upon them, which they could never have done, if they had
met in public? What religion is there in the world, that has not public
temples erected for the exercise of it (whether Jewish, or Mahumetan, (if it be
but permitted.)

What noble Temples have been erected to idol Gods, which are no Gods, as that
at Ephesus to Diana? It has been a custom amongst the Jews to throw down the
book of Esther upon the ground, because the name of God is not found in all
that book: I do no more commend them for it, than Moses for throwing down the
two tables of the Law: but this I Will say, God may justly do so by London viz.
throw it to the ground again, if his name be not so far regarded, and recorded
there, as by building up places for his public worship.

Do you build Churches, and then trust God to provide good Ministers, provide
you candlesticks, and God will take ca^e for burning and shining lights, as
when Isaac said Behold the fire and the wood, but where is the lamb, etc. And
Abraham said God will provide a lamb for a burnt offering, Genesis 22.7. The
people found beasts to sacrifice, the priests presented them to God, and God
found fire from Heaven to consume them, in token of acceptance, Ps. 20.3. The
Lord remember all thy offerings, and accept, (turn to ashes it is in the
original) all thy burnt sacrifice, for that God did show he was willing to eat
of that meat which they had provided for him. The widow spoken of, 2 Kings
4.4. She found vessels, and God found oil to fill them. Shall Papists build
many and magnificent Churches, for the purposes of their Idolatry, and shall we
build none, or none in comparison, for the true worship of God? They will go
nigh to say that protestants in England had never had any Churches worth the
speaking of, but that men of their religion built them. How kindly did God take
it, that David did but purpose to build him a house (though he were prevented)
and from Solomon that he did it? How great encouragements were given to
building of the Temple, Haggai 1.4, 8. Build the house, and I will take
pleasure in it, and be glorified says the Lord.

What if there were a more visible presence of God in the temple at Jerusalem,
where he dwelt in the thick cloud, and in many sensible tokens of his presence?
yet there is as real (though invisible) yea sometimes as comfortable a presence
of God in the places where his people now do or may assemble to worship him,
and God in such Churches as ours, is or may be served in as pure ordinances,
and in as acceptable a manner, as he had wont to be in the temple at Jerusalem.

There was indeed a ceremonial holiness in that temple, and in the utensils
belonging to it, which is not in our Churches, and in the utensils thereof,
that is to say, that temple, and the apurtenances thereof, were so peculiarly,
and entirely dedicated to God, and to his service, that they could not without
profaneness be put to any other use, neither at one time nor at another.
Therefore our Savior whipped the buyers and sellers out of the temple, telling
them it was a house of prayer, and we read of the shewbread that it was not
lawful for any to eat, but only for the Priests, Mat. 12.14. Doubtless
Belshazzar, and his company, were profane in drinking their wine, out of the
vessels of the temple, Dan. 5.2. and that was counted as part of their sin: but
we challeng not to our Churches, and the utensils thereof, such a holiness as
this, viz. of being appropriated to the use of Religion, and to no other use,
at any time and upon any occasion whatsoever, witness the liberty given in many
parts of England, to teach school in public Churches, though consecrated;
implying that the exercise of that civil employment there, is no ways opposite
to that which is meant by the consecration of Churches. Like instance might be
given in the performance of academical exercises, such as are making of
speeches, managing of philosophical disputes, not only in private Chapels, but
in the most public and eminent Churches, belonging to both our universities.
Now they that allow such things, do thereby intimate that they attribute no
such ceremonial holiness to our Churches, as did belong to the temple at
Jerusalem, which to have so employed had been great profaneness, but that they
conceive that all civil, and secular uses, and employments are there, and then
only, to be banished from our Churches, when the service of God is there
celebrating, or to be celebrated. Just as we look upon the bread, and wine that
is brought to the Communion Table, to be holy, only so far forth as it is made
use of in, and for the purpose of the Lords Supper, and during the time of that
administration, but when that is over, what remains may be used as common
bread, sopt into wine crum'd into milk, or otherwise which may not be done to
it, whilst the Lords Supper is celebrating: so in this case, when, and so long,
as there is any occasion, or opportunity of religious service to be performed
in our Churches, they must be wholly at the service of Religion, and all things
else must avoid, and give way: but when religion has no present use, or
occasion for them, at all such times, they may be for the use of those civil,
and secular affairs, which have need of them, and cannot be elsewhere so well
accommodated.

This notion may (for ought I know) remove a stumbling block out of some men's
way, which would have kept them from the contributing to the building of
Churches, as thinking that Churches, by virtue of that which is called the
consecrating of them, were looked upon to be as holy as ever the temple at
Jerusalem was, and in the same kind, viz. of ceremonial holiness; whereas
indeed there is no such thing intended, as appears by the allowance given to
put them to common uses, as to teach school in them, etc. but only as a
religious man would dedicate his own house to God, as resolving to serve, and
worship God in it, though not to use it only for the purposes of Religion, so
are Churches dedicated to the uses of Religion, primarily, and principally, and
for as often as Religion has occasion for them, but so as not to be to those
purposes solely, and only to them, and to no other, in which peculiarity, and
entireness of Dedication, did consist that Ceremonial holiness which was in the
Temple of Jerusalem. The places in which we worship God, for, and during the
time we are actually worshipping, are, or should be as holy as the Temple was;
that is to say, wholly devoted to the service of God, and to no other use for
that time (as I said of the bread and wine in the Communion) though afterward,
they are free for other uses. Melchisedeck who was both King and Priest, was
not the less holy as a Priest, because he had also the secular employment of a
King, neither are our Churches any ways profaned, by being sometimes put to
uses that are but civil, and not Sacred.

Moral Holiness there was none in the Temple of Jerusalem, for places are not
capable of such holiness as persons are, viz. that which consists in genere
morum, as in loving of God, and delighting in God, etc. for that only
reasonable creatures are capable of: neither was there any intrinsecal and
innate holiness in the Temple, such as is in part of that which we call the
Moral Law, which was good, and holy in it self (quaedam Deus voluit quia in se
bona) but the Temple was holy only by Divine Institution and separation to Gods
Service, which otherwise had bin no more holy than another place.

Lastly, A Relative holiness (or what may be so called) was all that could be
attributed to the Temple, for it was holy, only in relation to those holy uses
it was set apart for, and those holy Ordinances and Privileges, and
manifestations of God, which were there to be enjoyed, only because it was by
Gods appointment separated from all common uses, at all times, and appointed to
relate wholly, and only to the service of God, therefore we call it
Ceremonially Holy. As it were matter of mere Ceremony to bow toward a Chair of
State, as well when it is empty, as when the King is in it. So if our Churches
ought always to be used with the same Reverence, and Sequestration from all
things of a Secular nature, when the service of God is not actually performing
there, as when it is, then were they Ceremonially holy, but it is not so, as I
have showed, therefore in the case of our Churches, what was said of the Altar
may be inverted, viz. it was said of old that the Altar did sanctify the Gift;
but in this case, the Gift sanctifies the Altar, that is to say, the holiness
of our Churches being nothing else, but their relation to holy things, when
those holy things are not present, when no Ordinance is administering, for that
time they may be put to other uses, because the special presence of God in our
Churches, is only then, when his Name is there Recorded, and his people met
together in his Name; whereas God was always specially present in the Temple,
by the visible manifestations of his Presence, as namely, by the Cloud in which
he dwelt, etc. Our Churches do relate to as holy things, and as holy
Ordinances, as the Temple did, only those holy things are not so constantly in
it, as was the presence of God in that Temple, where he constantly dwelt.

I have beaten out this notion, to let you see that there is no such great odds
betwixt the Temple at Jerusalem and other places built for the service of God
(neither of them being morally holy, and both of them being relatively holy,
only the Temple was so continually, and our Churches are so but pro die and
nunc, or during the time of Religious administrations) I say the odds between
them is not so great, but that an Argument may very well be drawn from Gods
approbation of what was intended by David, and done by Solomon toward the
building of that Temple, to evince what acceptance they are like to meet with,
who for sincere aims and ends, do, or shall contribute their assistance to the
building of Churches.

I could easily multiply reasons why, though it is good to draw nigh to God any
where, and to worship him though it were in Mountains, and dens, and Caves of
the Earth, as the Primitive Christians were forced to do, yet it is most
expedient, and of great use, that public places, such as those we call
Churches, should be erected for the Worship and Service of God. For first of
all, no man knows how soon the door may be shut against the exercise of
Religion in any private place, I mean by them that first opened it, or by those
that shall come after them. Where Religion dwells but precatiously, or upon mere
sufferance (and not by the sanction of Law) it may soon be cast out (like Agar
and her son) because there she is not Mistress, she cannot call the house her
own. If the Landlord, or Landlords shall take pet at any thing, then out she
must, and so be hunted from place to place, as often as offense is taken, which
to take, is the commonest thing in the world.

I am mistaken if private and small Assemblies will not necessarily multiply in
infinitum, if places for public Worship be not built. If a great Family were
crowded into a house, in which every room were very small (like Cabins in a
ship) it were impossible that whole Family should eat, and drink, and converse
all together, but every one must eat and drink by himself, or only some few in
a company, which would be very uncomfortable, and a great disorder.

Some may think that the variety of Opinions which are in England at this day,
would cause as great multiplicity of Assemblies as now is, though there were
ever so many public Churches: but I am not of their mind, for that I have
taken notice, that where men of good lives, and of good abilities, have
Preached, the Congregation has consisted of sober persons, of very different
persuasions, whoout of a respect to public Ordinances, have there presented
themselves, though it may be scarce two of them of a different sort, are
ordinarily found together at the same private Meeting. I do not at all despair,
but that some little prejudices which now keep good men asunder, will in time
wear off, and that (with the blessing of God) what I have written in this book,
will somewhat contribute to it, or they themselves, by degrees, will see the
vanity, groundlesness, and ill consequence of their divisions, and when that is
done, one Church will hold them, whom now a few cannot.

The inconvenience and ill consequence of having many divisions, and
sub-divisions of Christian Societies, more than is needful, or than use to be,
is greater than can easily be foreseen. If one and the same Church or Society
break into ten, or twenty distinct Churches, or Societies, every one of them
under several Teachers, and going their own way, will they not have less love
for one another, less converse together, less of Majesty and Authority, less
strength and power to withstand those that shall oppose and set themselves
against them, than they had when they were all together? Who had not rather
have any thing whole than in small pieces? who will give so much for parcels,
and remnants, as for that cloth, or stuff, which is cut out of the whole piece?
Bread that is cut, dries and spoils presently, and they say that beer drinks
smaller, and dies sooner, when there is but a little of it, than when a great
quantity is put up together. Should an army be divided into as many regiments,
as there are companies in it, and into as many companies, as there are
squadrons, it would be nothing like so able to deal with an enemy, nor would it
be half so capable, as now it is, of good government, and discipline.

Surely a good government in the Church were better than none at all; nor can
the Church well subsist without some government, any more than a State can do:
but certainly the Church can at no time admit of any government, either of one
sort, or of another, in case it were so, there were no public Churches, or
public congregations: for if it happen there be ten, or twenty societies, for
one that use to be, that have no relation to one another, nor no certain places
of meeting, who can take an account of them, or have a due inspection over
them? If a master that has two hundred scholars, should divide them into fifty
several forms, or Classes, reading distinct Authors, how impossible would it be
for him to teach them all? whereas if he reduce them all to five or six forms,
with the help of an usher, or two, he may teach them well enough.

Let there be no government in the Church and then all will be Prophets, all
will be teachers, or as many as please to make themselves so, and as can gain a
few people to hear them, the people will make to themselves Prophets of the
lowest of the people, as did Jeroboam: (now it is a great evil to make teachers
of them that are none, as well as to make no teachers of them that are, or
ought to be such) and they that preach will preach what they list, none
controlling them) and practice how they list and the end of that will be woeful
ignorance, error, dissension and confusion, which cannot be prevented, unless
the Church (that great school of Christ) do consist of larg forms or Classes, I
mean public Churches and congregations, to which the masters of assemblies may
have an eye, be those masters of assemblies of one judgment, or of another. If
scholars repair to their schools at school time, and there receive the
instruction of honest and able masters, (if it be their happiness to have such)
they may better be trusted as to what they shall do at other hours, either in
their closets or chambers, when they are by themselves, or in company, and
consultation one with another.

Public Churches will make way for Christians to testify their union, and
communion with one another, by joining there together (whatsoever opportunities
over and above those, they shall make use of in private.

Solomon tells us, that the borrower is servant to the lender, Prove. 22.7. If
there be public places erected, primarily, for religious worship, then
religion will be in a condition to lend: (as when Churches are lent, at such
times as they can be spared, to such as teach school, and cannot be otherwise
provided) but if there be no such, Religion must borrow, and so become a
servant, which ought to be every ones master.

Private places of worship frequented by those who altogether refrain the
public, are ordinarily called by some name of distinction, and appropriation,
as namely the place where the Quakers meet, or the Anabaptists meeting house,
or such like, whereas public Churches carry no such names of distinction with
them, nor pretend to any other, than to keep open house for all comers, that
have a desire to wait upon God, in his ordinances, (be they of twenty several
judgments) and that methinks is much better: for till names of distinction
cease divisions will continue, and I see no reason why they who agree in the
fundamental doctrines, and practices of Christianity, should not be willing to
pray and hear, and sing Psalms together, (where those duties are piously and
solemnly performed) though they differ about twenty little things. Even
infidels should be admitted to public prayer, and preaching, how else should
they believe in him of whom they have not heard? or how should they be
converted? and as for those who in the judgment of charity are true believers
though varying from us, in some small opinions, and practices, I know not why
we should exclude them from fellowship with us in the Lords Supper, which is to
rail in the Communion Table in the worst of senses.

To have no public Churches would carry such a face with it, as if no Religion
were owned, established, and countenanced, or any thing more than tolerated,
and connived at (like a tolerable evil, rather than an indispensable good) or
rather as if all Religion were persecuted, and driven into corners.

If Religion be exercised only in private places, vice has as much liberty as
that comes to: drunkenness, and whoredom take their freedom in private houses,
and shall Religion appear no more publicly than they? as if it also were a
work of darkness, and ashamed to show it is head.

If I thought that all the reasons I have alleged, would not prevail with men
of estates to contribute freely toward the building of Churches: I could
upbraid them, by telling them that which is no news (for were it news I would
not tell it them,) viz. that several places of good capacity, have been erected
by a sort of people that are generally none of the richest, and who when they
did it, had cause to fear least some creature or other, would cause their
ground to wither, and expose them to the scorching Sun. I say some persons have
adventured under those perilous circumstances, to build larg places for the
exercise of their Religion, all their discouragements notwithstanding: if then
the people who are richer than they, who have leave and encouragement, to build
public Churches, and may have many thanks for their labor, who have the law
of the land on their side, and all the power of the nation divided amongst
them, whose Churches are as like to stand as the City it self is, or will be,
when rebuilt; I say if they have not so much love for the nation, for
themselves, and for Religion, as to build us more Synagogues in lieu of those
that were burnt, the Chapels of ease I spoke of, or shrines (what shall I call
them) will rise up in judgment against you.

If you will not build public Churches, who are like to have the greatest
interest in them, when they are built, I was about to say those poor people I
mentioned but now, (as hardly as they are thought of) would (I am persuaded
spare money from their backs and bellies, to build more Churches, if they might
be sure they should be theirs, as much as yours when they are built again: nay,
be it how it will be, such is the love, the soberer sort of them do bear to
public ordinances, that I question not but they will bear their full
proportion; whenever trial shall be made, what every man will freely
contribute to the building of public Churches. If those that speak little of
the Church, should do more for it than some that have the Church, the Church,
ever in their mouths (as the Jews of old, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord, Jer. 7.4.) it would be a woeful shame.

But why should I seem to mistrust, or doubt of the piety, and bounty, of the
true sons and daughters of the Church, toward their distressed mother? who
has not heard of that noble Lady (whether now living, or dead I know not) who
out of her own estate has given some thousands of pounds toward the
rebuilding, of the Church of S. Dunstans in the East, (now in a good
forwardness) and of what the liberal Minister of that place, is said himself to
have given toward that good work? even more than many good Ministers have in
all the world. Their zeal (I hope) will provoke many. I hope it will, and I do
earnestly desire it may: for a sad climax runs in my thoughts, and I am much
persuaded if it should come to be tried, it would prove to true, viz. no
public Churches, no legal maintenance; no legal maintenance, in time no able
Ministers, (for who will study to be starved?) no good ministry, no good
preaching, no good preaching, no conversion, no conversion, no salvation. But I
hope beter things than that the Churches which are demolished should not be
rebuilt, much less the Churches that now stand should be demolishe^.

That sun of charity (or piety rather) which has begun to rise in the East,
will I hope, visit all the dark and desolate corners of Londons hemisphere (for
that I take to be the figure of it) and not give over its circuit, till having
refreshed every dolesome and gloomy place, at length it set in the west: where
the other Church of that name of (S. Dunstans I mean) is standing at this day.

I am loath to say that the rebuilding of Churches in London, if it be not done
by voluntary contribution, and by way of free will offerings, it will certainly
be done by constraint, and compulsion from authority: and if authority be
forced to interpose, in a matter of this nature, it will be no small shame and
reproach to us, and seem to signify that we would not be religious but upon
force, which is to be no more religious, than they may be said to be honest,
who never pay their creditors, but when they strain upon them (or make
distress) which is indeed for creditors to pay themselves.

Time was when the bounty of men toward the Church was such, and so great,
that Laws were made to limit, and restrain it, for that men were ready to say
to a father or to a mother, as the Pharisees did, Mat. 15.5. It is a gift,
(Corban) viz. to the Church by whatsoever thou might be profited by me: and
we find Moses was fain to set bounds to the sea of the peoples liberality
toward the tabernacle in his time, saying hitherto should it go, and no
farther, Exodus 36.5. And they spoke unto Moses saying, the people bring much
more than enough, and Moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be
proclaimed throughout the camp saying, let neither man nor woman make any more
work, for the offering of the sanctuary, so the people were restrained from
bringing. I wish that at this day there were an overplus of liberallity toward
the demolished Churches, I mean more contributed, than would serve to rebuild
them, that like as the oinment which was poured upon the head of Aaron ran down
upon his beard, and upon the skirts of his garment, so that what is more than
enough for the re-edifying of Churches, might go to the rebuilding of
Hospitals, and public Schools, and of one place more, viz. the late famous,
but now desolate foundation of Sion College.

DISCOURSE XLVIII.
That the people of England are most unworthy to see another London.

THe rebuilding of London would be a national mercy: but how unworthy is this
nation of it? Never did people more justly sorfeit a City, and every other
mercy, than we have done. As Africa is full of monsters in nature, so is
England in manners. As if we had traded for vice, instead of other commodities,
with all foreign parts: we have amongst us the drunkenness of Germany, the
pride of Spain, (but not so grave) the levity and lasciviousness of France, the
atheism, hypocrisy, reveng, and the unnatural lusts of Italy. We have much of
the Indian disease amongst us (for so some say it was at first) and are forced
to spend a great deal of their commodity, I mean their Lignum vitae, that is,
their guaiacum, using that tree of Life (as they call it) as an antidote
against the poison of that forbidden fruit, which is too commonly tasted of.

England has done wickedness as it could, that is, with all its might.
Profanness is come in upon us like a flood: men glory now a days in their
shame, and seem ashamed of that wherein they should glory. I hear that some are
ambitious to be thought more wicked than they have been, or could be. There are
(they say) that will boast of those sins which they never did, or had
opportunity to commit. There are that strive to bring virtue into disgrace, and
vice into request.

If men would learn to sin, we can teach other nations those oaths, and
execrations, which possibly they never heard elsewhere, and will be afraid at
first to make use of, such as Dam them, ram them, sink them into Hell, body and
soul: with several others, yea we could teach them such profound blasphemy as
would even astonish them at the first hearing, and make their hair stand an
end, yea such as I dare not here recite.

Englishmen declare their sins like Sodom: They that are drunk, are drunk in
the day time, as well as in the night (some are seldom sober night or day:)
they sin with a whores forehead, and with a brow of brass. We have many
Absaloms now a days, that do as it were spread a tent in the face of the Sun,
and there display their wickedness. England has all the sins of the seven
Churches of Asia, for which God has long since destroyed them, and given their
land to the Turk; Ephesus left its first love to God and Religion, Rev. 2.4.
and so has England done. Were there those in Smyrna who blasphemed saying they
were Jews, when they were of the Synagogue of Satan? and are there not many
such in England? were there those in Pergamos, who taught the doctrine of
Balaam, who taught Balaac to cast a stumbling block before the children of
Israel, viz. By setting fair women on work to tempt them to commit both fleshly
and spiritual whoredom, both Adultery, and Idolatry: Numb. 25.1. And are there
not such in England? and as some in Pergamos held the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans) which thing (says God) I hate, (namely the doctrine of wives
being common, for that is said to have bin the doct. of the Nicolaitans) and
have we none that pretend it to be their opinion, as well as make it their
practice so to do? Was Thyatira charged with suffering the woman Jezebel, ^o
seduce others to fornication, and idolatry? Rev. ^.20. And have we no Jezebels
amongst us, that do ^e same thing? had many in Sardis but a name to ^ive,
whilst they were dead, and is not that the case of many in England at this day?
Was Laodicea charged with lukewarmness, That she was neither ^^ld nor hot, Rev.
3.14. and does not that sin exceedingly abound amongst us? Did the Laodiceans
think themselves spiritually rich, and to have need of nothing, when they were
poor and miserable, etc. And do not many amongst us do the same thing? I find
but one of all the seven Churches that did escape reproof, and that was
Philadelphia, but it is scarce to be discerned, that there is any such Church
amongst us, that from its love of the brethren, or brotherhood, or whole
fraternity of Christians, deserves the name of Philadelphia: for as iniquity
abounds, so is the love of most men waxen cold.

I could proceed to higher things, and say, we have learnt to bring serious
preaching, and preachers upon the stage, and to bring some thing like
stage-plaiers, now and then into the pulpit. Had not his Majesty by his most
excellent Proclamation against profanness, discountenanced the attempt some
were going about (as one would think) to make Religion the mark of a Rebel, and
profanness the test of loyalty; vilifying such persons, as no good subjects,
who would not swear, and curse, and health it, and drink themselves drunk, etc.
Now we have Hectors for Atheism, for Popery, and what not? that is, there are
that will undertake openly to justify, and patronize, atheism, popery, etc.
Our land is full of blood, violence, fraud, oppression. May it not be said O
England, England, as of old O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. We are disjoynted,
both as to spirituals, and temporals like one that is newly come off from the
rack? we have been smitten, and yet have revolted more and more. Hell is broke
loose upon us, I scarce forbear that homely proverb we have, even raked Hell
and scummed the Devil. All flesh amongst us has corrupted it self, we have
exceeded the line of the wicked.

Will God build a new City for us? why should he? our sins are out of measure
sinful. Some of us are an encouragement to evil doers, and a terror to them
that do well. We speak evil of those that run not with us into the same excess
of riot: he that departs from evil makes himself a prey amongst some men. We
are full of envy and strife, from whence comes confusion and every evil work.
We love the worst men and things best, and the best worst. Some of us will
neither be good our selves, nor suffer others to be so: as Christ said to the
Scribes and Pharisees, Ye shut up the kingdom of Heaven against men, for ye
neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in,
Mat. 23.13.

The people of England are generally in extremes at this day, some are almost
mad with mirth, and others almost dead with melancholy. Some are all of a foam
with anger, and others all of a froth with lightness and drollery. Atheism,
Idolatry, Profane swearing, Sabbath-breaking, ill carriage in and toward
relations, Murder, Adultery, Theft, Fals-witness, Covetousness; are the ten
great sins, (the ten predicaments as I may call them which all sins are reduced
to) and these our land does woefully abound with. For matter of robbery, we are
even a den of Thieves, for filthiness a cage of unclean birds, for strife a
Meribah, or as Meshec, and the tents of Kedar, for blood an Aceldama: Our
Mosesses many of them break both the Tables of the Law, of which by office they
are keepers. Our Aarons too often make Golden Calves, there are many Achans
that trouble us sore, some by stealing the babylonish garment, I mean by their
propensions, and stealing on toward Popery, witness their own suspicious
expressions in public, (if not more than suspicious) others again by stealing
the shekels of silver and the wedg of gold, (alluding to Josh. 7.21.) I mean by
their deceit and oppression, both of which are perfect theft.

We are many of us more brutish, than was Balaams Ass, who seeing a sword
drawn against him would not go forward, and as brutish as the Prophet his
rider, whose madness was rebated by the Ass, for that he would switch and spur
on nevertheless: that is, we will not see the hand of God, which has time
after time, been lifted up against us, but go on still as Pharaoh did toward
the redsea, though we (as he of old) have met with many rebukes and strivings
of God, with and against us. We have many Jonasses who sent by God to Nineveh,
will go for Tarshish, that is, many that are found fighters against God, as if
they were stronger than he: many of us live, as if we had no sense at all of
Heaven, or Hell, or could demonstrate that our Souls were not immortal, or were
by profession Sadducees, and not Christians. Now as to this whole charg, I
would say as Job does, Job 24.25. And if it be not so now who will make me a
liar, and make my speech nothing worth? Will God build a City for us, or for
such as we? why was not Sodom and Gomorrah built again? why was the building of
Jericho prohibited? and not the rebuilding of London? might we not rather think
that if there were no Hell, (as certainly there is) God would make a Hell on
purpose for such as we?

DISCOURSE XLIX.
On Gods being the maker and builder of all things.

THe less and greater world are both of Gods making, as the Apostle declares,
Heb. 5.6. But he that built all things is God. He made us (says the Psalmist)
and not we our selves. The upper and lower world are both of them Gods
workmanship. He made a Chaos out of nothing, and out of that Chaos all things.

How fitly is the world compared to a building? what a stately roof is the
Heaven over our heads? what a goodly floor is the earth under our feet? certain
it is these could not make themselves, nor could any thing else that was made,
make it self: For whatsoever was made, sometimes was not, and and that which
sometimes was not, or was nothing, could never have been, but for him who
always was, or who did exist from eternity, who calls himself by the name of
I am, I never knew that creature yet that could create any thing, that is, that
could make any thing out of nothing, were it but a mote in the sun, or if there
be any thing more mean, and inconsiderable then that.

Who can make a building to stand as the world does stand, hanging upon
nothing, but poised as it were with its own weight? By the work of creation, or
building a world of nothing; does the true, and the living God, distinguish
himself from all that are but called Gods, and particularly from Idols, Jer.
10.11. The Gods that have not made the Heavens, and the earth, they shall
perish from the earth, and from under these Heavens. Men and Angels, can no
more make a worm, than they can make a world.

How fearfully and wonderfully are we our selves made? what a curious house is
the body of man? what crystal windows are his eyes? How full of rare
workmanship? how many doors are in that building, some greater some less, by
which to let in and to let out: every pore in the body being as it were a
several door, which when they are all shut, we find the house so hot, there is
no enduring it, till we can open them again.

What strong and firm timber are our bones, compared to such a building as the
body is? what pretty hinges are the Vertebrae, or turning joints? what neat
rafters are the ribs? what strong pillars, and supporters are our legs? what
wonderful contrivances are there, that man, though a walking dunghill, I mean
though he always carry about with him a great deal of filth, and excrement, of
several kinds, yet should be no offense to himself, or others, though that be
many times hard to prevent, even in great houses, many of which have
unavoidable nucencies.

What a kitchen is the stomach? what dairies are the breasts of Women? what
delicate thatch is the hair upon our heads, what drains are the glandules, and
emuncteries of the body? what cunduit pipes are the veins, and arteries? what
chimneyes are our mouths; always letting out smoke as we experiment in frosty
weather, when our breath can be discerned, as being by the cold condensated?
What handsome lattices are the pores of our bodies to let in air by? what
spouts are the nostrils? I stand upon no order, but only design to enumerate
most things in the body, which bear a proportion to building, or to a house,
taking them as they come to hand. To proceed then, what a roof is the head?
what window-shutters are the eyelids? what little wickets are the valves? what
locks, and keys are the sphincteral muscles? what props, and shores, are our
hands, and arms to keep those houses from falling to the ground, when they are
in danger so to do? Whither might I not pursue this allegory? methinks I am in
a kind of meander wandering backwards and forwards, and cannot find the way out.

What pretty closets and butteries, are the several ventricles of the head, and
heart, etc. what partition walls are the midriffe, and the mediastinum? what a
long entry is the throat, and meat-pipe? what bloody slaughter-houses are the
liver and spleen? (and yet without annoyance) what a cistern is the bladder?
what a stove is the heart, heating the whole body by certain pipes without any
visible fire? how are pipes and small vessels conveying such nourishing juices
as the body stands in need of, laid into every part of it? what neat plaistring
is our flesh? what curious painting, or coloring is the blood that is in the
faces of sanguine, and ruddy persons? how is every man built three stories
high, for so I call the three venters, as Anatomists do style them, viz. the
head, breast, and belly:) and how many good, and necessary rooms are there in
every one of those stories? what a house within a house, is a child within the
womb? and how little ground does one (yea sometimes two or three together)
stand upon? Thus have I taken a short, and a confused Survey of the little
world (our bodies I mean) the maker and builder whereof is God. Well may I cry
out with the Psalmist, Ps. 104.24. O Lord how manifold are thy works, in wisdom
have thou made them all.

How many artificers and laborers go to the building of one house, where men
are the builders? Carpenters, Bricklaiers, Plaisterers, Smiths, Joy^ers,
Glaziers, etc. each of these ordinarily have their several employments about
one house, ere it be brought to perfection, besides a Surveyor to supervise the
work, and poor laboring men to be subservient thereunto: God had no such
trouble in making the whole world, he did but speak and it was done, he made
all things by the word of his power. The building of one house by men,
requires a great deal more time, than God took to make the whole world in,
that is, than six days, and he whose pleasure it was to be six days in making
it, could ^ave made it in one minute, or moment of time.

Must we attribute to God only the building of ^e world at first? or must we
not also acknowledge ^im, the author of all the buildings which have been ^^er
since, whether Cities, Towns, Villages, or particular houses? It is said we are
Gods offspring, Acts 17.28. and why, but because we are the children of Adam
who was the Son of God, Luke 3.38. The ^ause of the cause, is the cause of the
effects. By ^he same reason, God having made men, by whom ^ouses are built (
for every house is builded by some ^an, Heb. 3.4.) and given unto men all that
wisdom which they have for building (as for every other purpose) ( Exodus
33.35.) it being he that gives men leave to build, when he could hinder it, and
opportunity to build which he could easily withold, and strength to build,
which he could ^ave denied, and success in building, which none ^ut himself
could give, these things considered, we see great reason for what the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord build the ^^^se they labor in vain that
build it.

DISCOURSE L.
Of the rebuilding of those houses of clay, wherein we now dwell, or of the
Resurrection of our bodies.

OUr bodies are houses that must be demolished, and it is as probable by fire,
as any how: for fevers are a kind of fire, and they destroy a great, if not
the greatest part of mankind. Howsoever dust they are, and to dust they must
return. Yet so surely as they shall fall, so certain it is that they shall rise
again; there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of those just and
unjust, Acts 24.15.

I doubt not of the possibility of a Resurrection, since I am sure of the truth
of a Creation, and to raise the bodies of men out of dust, is not of more
difficulty, than to raise a world out of a Chaos, and that Chaos out of nothing.

To say though such a thing as a Resurrection be possible, yet it shall never
be, were to deny that principle which is common to most Religions in the world,
and which is the main foundation they are built upon, viz. the doctrine of a
future estate, or of a life after this.

Christ told the Jews, that if they destroyed the temple of his body, he would
raise it up again in three days, and so he did, and that he did so, I say the
evidence, and assurance we have that he did do so, is the great prop and pillar
of our Christian faith: therefore the scripture says of Christ, that he was
declared to be the son of God with power, by the resurrection from the dead,
Romans 1.4. If Christ had not risen again the third day (according to his
promise) his disciples had certainly renounced all confidence in him, and taken
him for an impostor, and not for the Son of God, and Savior of the world: but
we are well assured that both they, and many hundreds of others, who lived
about the same time, or not long after them, did strenuously assert that Christ
did rise from the dead, and did seal that truth with their blood, that being
the main article against them, that they did so believe: as S. Paul says, Act.
13.6. Of the hope and resurrection of the dead, I am ^alled in question, and
Acts 25.19. They had certain ^uestions against him, of one Jesus which was dead
whom Paul affirmed to be alive. But if there be no resurrection of be dead,
then is Christ not risen, (as the Apostle argu^th, 1 Cor. 15.13.) but that
Christ is risen, the suffeings of so many, near unto Christ his time, I say
^eir suffering unto death, for the seal of Christ, whom they had not known to
have been the true Messiah, if he had not risen again (according to his
^romise) do abundantly witness.

Can thou believe that all mankind must perish? (...) it must be, if Christ
be not risen, for says the Apostle, v. 17. If Christ be not raised, your faith
is ^ain, ye are yet in your sins.

Can thou believe that God will suffer the best ^en in the world to be of all
men most miserable from first to last? Surely such as have hope in Christ, are
men of the best l^ves of any in the ^orld: But if Christ be not risen, then
they that ^^ve hope in Christ are of all men most miserable. The ^ive arguments
which I have given, may convince any man (that is not obstinate) both of the
possi^ility, and futurity of a resurrection, that is, both that (...) may, and
shall be.

But some will say, how are the dead raised up? and ^ith what body do they
come? To which objection, or ^estion, (stated by the Apostle in those very
words, 1 Cor. 15.35.) I answer, that it does not appear that the houses of
wicked men, (their bodies I mean) shall be any thing more beautiful, at the
resurrection than they were before, or freed from those deformities which they
carried to the grave with them, (but as those trees fall, so they shall rise)
or if they should, what would it signify? when neither they, nor others could
see it for want of light? Did goodly houses, or Churches, look beautifully, in
the midst of flames? when nothing but the wall of fire, that was round about
them could be seen? but sure I am, the houses of good men (that is their
bodies) shall all, and every of them be beautified at the resurrection, and
whereas some of them were like houses that are low built, others like rooms
that are shelving (or garret-wise,) others dark, like dungeons, others slight
and thin, like paper-walled houses, those and all other inconveniences, shall
be removed, for then shall their vile bodies, be changed, and fashioned like
unto Christ his glorious body according to the working whereby he is able to
subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3.21.

Now the souls of men go about like snails, carrying their shells upon their
backs, (which makes their motion slow) but their houses, or bodies, after the
Resurrection, shall be no more clogs, or impediments to their souls, than wings
are to the flight of birds.

Here our earthly houses (that is our bodies) do soil, and stain the souls that
inhabit them, as the bare walls of new buildings, use to do the garments of
those that dwell in them, but at the resurrection they shall no more do that,
than those rooms defile our clothes, which are hung with the newest, and
neatest tapistry. Those houses which have no filthiness in themselves (and such
will our bodies then be) can convey none to others.

How glad would the wicked be that these their houses of clay might never be
rebuilt? how much rather could they wish they might be annihilated? For in
these very houses must they dwell with consuming fire, and everlasting burnings.

Consider the bodies of good men as the Temple of God (for so they are called,
1 Cor. 3.16.) and as the members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6.15. Know ye not that your
bodies are the members of Christ? consider them as sleeping in Jesus, for so
the expression is 1 These. 4.14. (as if the bosom of Christ were the Urne in
which those ashes were laid up) I say consider them under that threefold
notion, and you will see no cause to wonder, that so much care should be taken
of those demolished Temples, as to rebuild them, of those lost members, as to
restore them, and of those scattered ashes, and dispersed dust, as to gather
them together again.

Most houses of note (as public Halls, etc.) and wherein persons of
considerable quality were concerned, that were lately burnt down, are like to
be built again, and the owners thereof do think, that in point of honor, they
can do no less, and shall not the Temples of God, which are the bodies of his
Saints, I say, shall not they be rebuilt? is it not for the honor of the great
God that it should be so?

I have showed how much more glorious the new houses of the Saints, I mean
their new bodies, will be, than were their old ones, oh then how glorious a
City will the new Jerusalem (that is, Heaven) be, which shall consist of all
such stately houses, as the bodies of the Saints are designed to be? even so
glorious as the firmament would be, if every Star therein were as big, and as
bright, as is the Sun it self. Mat. 13.43. Then shall the righteous shine
^orth, as the Sun in the kingdom (...) father (...).

I question whether at that time, when Christ was transfigured, before some of
his Disciples, his body did appear so glorious as it does in Heaven, and yet we
read, Mat. 17.2. That then his face did shine as the Sun, and his raiment was
white as the light. The glory of the body of Christ in Heaven, may be more than
that which is there described, if cannot be less, and what says the Scripture,
1 John 3.2. When he shall appear, we shall be like him: and our vile bodies
fashioned like his glorious body.

Who would be able to know the bodies and visages of those Saints, that he
shall meet in Heaven, or any one of them, (unless it shall be revealed to him)
being so much changed for the better as then they will be? Abraham will not, of
himself discern, that that was the house in which Isaac dwelt, or that the
materials thereof are the same, nor Isaac that his Father Abraham (when upon
the earth,) dwelt in that house; I mean in that very body (for doubtless for
substance, it will be the same, Job. 19.27. whom mine eyes shall behold, and
not another) which will then appear as much more magnificent, than it was in
the world, as is the palace of a Prince, than the cottage of a poor peasant.

We know what manner of house Lazarus dwelt in, when he was in the world, so
patcht, so leprous, that I had almost said, the very dogs began to pity him,
(of whom it is said that they lickt his sores) yet that despicable house of
his, will at the Resurrection, be metamorphosed into so stately a dwelling, as
would even dazzle Dives, or the rich man's eyes, if he should have leave to
behold it.

What matter is it, if the souls of diverse good men dwell but meanly, and
ill-favouredly in this world (...) is, (...) ^andsom and deformed bodies ^ith
(...) they do (...) sojourn, as it were in te^^ and what if they be black as
the tents of Kedar?) what (...) the houses which they now live in, be scarce
wind-tide, or water-tide, will scarce keep them ^arm, or dry? What if the
keepers of the house do ^remble, and the strong men bow themselves? What if the
^lver cord be loosened, or the golden bowl be broken, or the itcher be broken
at the fountain, or the wheel be broken ^t the cistern. (which are Solomon's
expressions to set forth bodily infirmities) what if their present ^wellings be
ever so homely, si^h they are not their ^ome? these their earthly tabernacles
will soon be ^estroyed, and when they come to be built again, ^hey shall be as
the palaces of Princes, fit for them who must live, and reign with Christ for
ever. Had ^ur Sovereign then been sure to possess h^s throne as now he does)
it would but little have troubled ^m, that he was forced to hide for a time in
a hol^ow tree (since called the Royal Oak) and as little should the
inconvenient habitation of Christians ^ouble them (I mean the weakness or
uncomli^ess of their bodies for the present) since these ^ld houses of theirs
shall quickly be pulled down, and the new ones which shall be provided for
them, ^t the Resurrection of the dead will be past all ex^eptions.

I see no reason, on the other hand, why ungodly ^en and women, should pride
themselves in those lately houses, in which their Souls do now dwell I mean in
the amiableness, and beautifulness of their bodies.) since those houses must
shortly be ^abitations for worms, where they will breed, and ^ed and board, and
dye and rot, and be buried, even ^n those fine bodies which they are now so
proud ^f, and when those houses come to be built again (I mean those bodies to
be raised from the dead) then will they be in worse condition then ever, that
is eternally hanted and possessed by Devils (worse than vermin) for what less
can those children of disobedience expect, in whom Satan now rules?

It is a consideration which may greatly comfort good men, that at the
Resurrection, they shall not only have better houses then ever they had before,
but those houses shall have far better inhabitants than they formerly had, even
the Souls of just men made perfect, whereas their former houses were inhabited
by the Souls (though of just men) yet full of imperfections. It will then be
their happiness to have Sanam mentem in corpore Sano, Souls and bodies
prospering both alike.

What troublesome houses are our present bodies which need repairing every day
by meat and drink, and every night by rest and sleep; which are in continual
danger of being thrown down by one means, and by another; but those new houses,
(or bodies) which believers shall enter into at the Resurrection, will need no
meats or drinks, wherewith to repair them, for then shall they be (...), that
is, as the Angels of God, Mat. 22.30. shall be obnoxious to no element (whether
fire or water) or to any other creature, shall be incapable of being destroyed
for they shall be raised incorruptible, 1 Cor. 15.52. and Luke 20.36. Neither
can they dye any more.

How strange is it then that we should read of any which shall be accounted
worthy to obtain that world, and that resurrection from the dead, the state of
the resurrection being so glorious as it is? well may it be said they are
children of God being the children of the resurrection, for so the better
resurrection is called, the resurrection, by way of eminency, though besides
the resurrection of life, there is also a resurrection of condemnation, John
5.29.

Two extremes there are which may prejudice the Doctrine of the Resurrection;
One is a vein of allegorising every thing. We read of some who erred saying,
The Resurrection is past already, 2 Timothy 2.18. and they must needs be such as
took the Resurrection for some other thing than the raising of all men from the
dead, viz. in some mystical sense. Others will allow of no figurative
expressions, and such, if you tell them of a Resurrection, may (according to
their Principles) tell you that Christ is the only Resurrection, because of
what is said John. 11.25. I am the Resurrection (meaning causally etc.)

But whilst we speak of the ra^sing or rebuilding of our bodies, O the
admirable power and wisdom of God, that is able to build with such Materials,
some part whereof must be fetched out of the bottom of the Sea, other parts out
of the bowels of living Creatures, out of the entrails of Worms and Fishes
(and such like) which have fed upon them.

Who but he that is omniscient, could tell where to find that broken,
scattered, and dispersed stuff, wherewith the bodies of men shall be rebuilt?
or if they knew where it were, who but he ( whose Arm is not to short for any
purpose) were able to come at it? Where is that Artificer that can distinguish
betwixt dust and dust? the dust of one house and of another, if the dust of
twenty houses were mixed together and laid in one heap? or who can build a
house of mere dust? I say, who but the great God can do either of these? and he
will do both.

Neither is the condescension of God, appearing in the Resurrection of his
servants, less admirable than are the demonstrations of his power and wisdom,
in that he shows himself mindful of his people, in the lowest condition they
can be in, even when he has brought them into the dust of death, as the phrase
is, Psalm. 22.15.

The peculiar respects which God bears to them that fear him, will be most
conspicuous at the Resurrection, for then the houses of his servants shall
overtop the houses of all wicked men, the Mountain of their houses shall be
established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills
of others (alluding to Isa. 2.2.) For the upright shall have dominion over the
wicked in the morning, Psalm. 49.14.

I can but think how the Souls of just men, when they have put off these
earthly Tabernacles, will long to be possessed of their new houses, Romans 8.23.
We our selves groan, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our
body: And well then may we long for that time, considering that he who has
called the bodies of his Saints the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19.
will be much more graciously and visibly present in those Temples so refined,
as they will be at the Resurrection, than in those we carry about with us, so
defiled and polluted as they are at the present.

It is the least thing I can say of the Resurrection of the just, that when
that time shall come, all their defects, and deformities of body shall then be
done away for ever; and yet what would not some men give to be cured of one
bodily defect? be it blindness, or deafness, or lameness, and to be restored to
any limb or sense they want but for that little time they have to live? But
alas how many defects and deformities are there which no Art of man can cure?
To such as labor under any of them, I would say, Have patience but a little
while, get part in the first Resurrection, that you may have interest in the
second, viz. the Resurrection of life, lay up a good Foundation for the time to
come that thou may be recompensed at the Resurrection of the just, Luke
14.14. Make shift for the present; for a short season, a sorry house may serve
the turn, when death and the Grave, which must swallow thee down for a while,
shall deliver thee up again (as the Whale did Jonah) thy next house shall be a
Palace, that is, the body which thou shall receive at the Resurrection, or
which thou shall rise with, shall be as free from defects, and deformities, as
is the glorious body of Christ himself.

I cannot sufficiently admire the happiness of those persons who live under the
strong and comfortable expectations of a better Resurrection, Heb. 11.35. that
is, of a better condition after death, than ever they had before it. Lord fill
my soul, and the Souls of all thy children, with that blessed expectation, and
do thou enable me and them to say, with thy holy Apostle Paul, and those whom
he there joyneth with himself, We know that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1.

FINIS.
Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Golden Bible on London Bridge.
MR. Sedgwick's Bowels of Mercy. fol.

Tho. Taylor's Works, the first vol. fol.

2. An Exposition of Temptation, on Matthew. 4. verse 1. to the end of the
eleventh.

3. A Commentary on Titus.

4. David's Learning: A Comment upon Psalm. 32.

5. The Parable of the Sower, and of the Seed, upon Luke 8. and 4.

Divine Characters in two parts, distinguishing the Hypocrite in his best
dress, by Sam. Crook. B.D.

A Learned Commentary or Exposition on the first Chapter of the second Epistle
to the Corinthians, by Richard Sibbs, D. D. fol.

A Commentary on the whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Ephesians, by Mr. Paul
Bain, fol.

A practical Exposition on the third Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, with the Godly Man's Choice, on Psalm. 4. ver. 6, 7, 8. By
Anthony Burgess, fol.

The dead Saint, speaking to Saints and sinners living, in several Treatises.
The first on 2 Samuel 24.10. The second on Cant. 4.9. The third on John 1.50. The
fourth on Isa. 58.2. The filth on Exodus 15.11. By Samuel Bolton, D.D. fol.

Colloquia Mensalia, or Dr. Martin Luthers Divine Discourses at his Table with
Melancthon, and several others. Translated by Henry Bell, fol.

The view of the Holy Scriptures. By Hugh Broughton, fol.

Christianographia, or a Description of the multitude, and sundry sorts of
Christians in the world, not subject to the Pope. By Ephesians. Pagitt. fol.

These six Treatises following, are written by Mr. George Swinnock.
1. The Christian Man's Calling; or a Treatise of making Religion ones business,
in Religious Duties, Natural Actions, his Particular Vocation, his Family
Directions, and his own Recreation; to be read in Families for their
Instruction and Edification. The first Part.

2. Likewise a second Part; wherein Christians are directed to perform their
Duties, as Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, in
the conditions of Prosperity and Adversity.

3. The third and last part of the Christian Man's Calling, Wherein the
Christian is directed how to make Religion his business, in his dealings with
all Men, in the Choice of his Companions, in his carriage in good Company, in
bad Company, in solitariness, or when he is alone, on a Weekday from morning
to night, in visiting the sick on a Dying-bed; as also the means how a
Christian may do this, and some motives to it.

4. The Door of Salvation opened, by the Key of Regeneration.

5. Heaven and Hell Epitomized: and the True Christan Characterized.

6. The Fading of the Flesh, and the flourishing of Faith: Or, One cast for
Eternity, with the only way to throw it well; all these by George Swinnock M.
A. Large Octavo's.

A learned Commentary on the fourth Chapter of the second Epistle of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, to which is added, First, A Conference between Christ and
Mary. Second. the Spiritual Man's Aim. Third: Emanuel, or Miracle of Miracles,
by Richard Sibbs, D. D. 4 to.

An Exposition of the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon, by Will. Greenhil, 4 to.

The Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace opened: Preached in New-
England, by Peter Bulkeley, 4 to.

Gods Holy Mind touching Matters Moral; which himself uttered in ten words, or
ten Commandments; Also an Exposition on the Lords Prayer, by Edward Elton, B.
D. 4 to.

A plain and familiar Exposition of the ten Commandments, by John Dod, 4 to.

Fiery Jesuit, or an Historical Collection of the Rise, Increase, Doctrines,
and Deeds of the Jesuits. Exposed to view for the sake of London, 4 to.

Horologiographia Optica; Dialing Universal and Particular, Speculative and
Practical; together with the Description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method,
by Sylvanus Morgan, 4 to.

Praxis Medicinae, or the Physicians Practice, wherein are contained all inward
diseases from the head to the foot, by Walter Bruel.

Regimen Sanitatis Salerni, or the School of Salerns Regiment of Health,
containing Directions and Instructions for the guide and government of Man's
Life, 4 to.

Christ and the Covenant, the work and way of Meditation; Delivered in ten
Sermons, Large Octavo's. By William Bridge, late of great Yarmouth.

Heart-treasure: or a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the head and heart
of every Christian, with soul-inriching treasure of truths, graces, experiences
and comforts, to help him in Meditation, Conference, Religious Performances,
Spiritual Actions, Enduring Afflictions, and to fit him for all conditions,
that he may live Holily, dye Happily, and go to Heaven Triumphantly, by O. H.
with an Epistle prefixed, by John Chester, Large Octavo.

A Glimpse of Eternity, by A. Caley.

A Practical Discourse of Prayer, wherein is handled the Nature and Duty of
Prayer, by Tho. Cobbet.

Of Quenching the Spirit, the evil of it in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered, by Theophilus Polwheile.

Wells of Salvation opened, or Words whereby we may be saved: with advice to
Young Men: by Tho. Vincent.

The sure way to Salvation: or a Treatise of the Saints Mystical Union with
Christ; wherein that great Mystery and Privilege is opened in the nature,
properties and the necessity of it by R. Stedman, M. A.

The greatest loss, upon Matthew. 16.26. By James Livesey, small Octavo's.

Moses unvailed, by William Guild.

The Protestants Triumph, being an exact answer to all the sophistical
Arguments of Papists: By Chapter Drelincourt.

A Defense against the fear of Death. By Z. Crofton.

Gods Sovereignty displayed. By William Geering.

A sober Discourse concerning the Interest of words in Prayer.

The Godly Man's Ark: or City of refuge in the day of his distress, in five
Sermons; with Mistress Moors Evidences for Heaven By Ed. Calamy.

The Almost Christian Discovered; or the false Professor tried and cast. By Mr.
Mead.

Spiritual Wisdom improved against temptation, by Mr. Mead.

A Divine Cordial.

A word of comfort for the Church of God.

A Plea for Alms, in a Sermon at the Spittle.

The Godly Man's Picture, drawn with a Scripture-pensil. These four last were
written by Tho. Watson.

The Doctrine of Repentance useful for these times, with two Sermons against
Popery, by Thomas Watson.

The True bounds of Christian freedom; or a Discourse showing the extents and
restraints of Christian liberty, wherein the truth is settled, many errors
confuted; out of John 8. ver. 36.

A Treatise of the Sacrament, showing a Christians Privilege in approaching to
God in Ordinances, duty in his Sacramental approaches, danger if he do not
sanctify God in them; both by Sam. Bolton, D. D.

The Lords Day enlivened, or a Treatise of the Sabbath, by Philip Goodwin.

The sinfulness of Sin, and the Fullness of Christ, two Sermons; by W. Bridge.

A serious Exhortation to a Holy Life, by Tho. Wadsworth.

Ovid's Metamorphosis Translated Grammatically, by J. Brinsley.

Comfortable Crumbs of refreshment, by Prayers, Meditations, Consolations and
Ejaculations; with a Confession of Faith, and sum of the Bible.

Aurifodina Linguae Gallicae, or the Golden Mine of the French Language opened,
by Ed. Gostlin. Gent.

The difference between the spots of the Godly and Wicked, in four Sermons; by
Jer. Buroughs.

Four Centuries of Select Hymns, collected out of Scripture, by Will. Barton.


