A True Protestant Bridle: OR SOME Cursory Remarks UPON A SERMON Preached
before the LORD MAYOR, AT St. Mary-Le-Bow, Jan. 30th 1693/4.

In a Letter to Sir P. D. Bar.

Odi prophanum Vulgus --

LONDON, Printed and are to be Sold by most of the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, MDCXCIV. Price Six Pence.

A True Protestant Bridle: OR SOME Cursory Remarks UPON A SERMON Preached
before the Lord Mayor.
SIR,
I Hope these short Officious Remarks will gain your Pardon, if not
Approbation, since they are wholly levelled against the Licentious Principles
which are so much in Vogue; and which Naturally tend to shake our Fundamental
Establishment, and (under the Pompous Appearance of Christian Liberty) to
Shrivel Their present Majesty's by Degrees into a mere Fairy Queen, and an
Emperor of the Moon.

Among all the Vicious and Impertinent Humors of the Age we live in, there is
none more equally Lamentable and Ridiculous, than that of Aspersing things
Venerable and Sacred, and speaking Evil of Persons Illustrious in their
Generation: This is commonly the Refuge of Mean Varlets, who have no other way
to make any Tolerable Figure in the World, but by finding Fault with the
Conduct, Performances, and Inadvertencies of Great Personages: It Is an easy
Province that any half-witted Pedant may aspire to, without the Art of
Thinking, or Gift of Ratiocination; and he that is neither Honorable nor
Beautiful, nor Learned, nay the Sport and Triumph of Ingenious Conversation,
can, without any Talent, play at Criticizing, and readily Commence Godly and
Censorious; and when he is once arrived to this height of Confidence; with what
Pride and Scorn will he trample upon his Superiors, and look down upon the
bravest, and most Accomplished Men in the World? Hence it comes to pass, that
every Notion-struck Tradesman, and Purse-proud Mechanic (whose Learning and
Education never carried him higher than the Gazette or Counting-Book) can run
down the whole Ecclesiastic Order with an Infallible Wink or Nod; and will
take a kind of Malignant Delight in making Remarks upon the little Spots of
Bright and Elevated Souls: Hence it is, That they who are most Incapable of
receiving Instruction, are most forward to give Advice; and he that is Purblind
in the most Obvious Matters of Religion and Polity, thinks himself Qualified to
Expound Mysteries, and Spell out the Fates of Kingdoms: They, who by their
Studied and Enormous Villainies, are fit to be Objects of Public Justice, are
most forward to Reproach the Names and Memories of Kings; and some have been
seemingly serious in Publishing Pleas for Peace, after they have been Nursed,
Trained up, and Hardened in the Black Art of Scisme and Rebellion: Nay, what is
most deplorable of all, every little half-Conforming Theologue, that is
Illuminated into Distraction, can justle Omnipotence out of his way, give
encouragement to a Multitude to do Evil, and represent the Mild, the Peaceable,
and Salutary Doctrine of Non-Resistance (which has been the Glory and Palladium
of the Christian Church in all Ages) as an Antichristian Mormo, and Bugbear to
a Kingdom.

Among such Doughty Champions for Truth, a late Prevaricator at Bow, has
descended to List himself: He tells us, The pretense of a High Court of Justice
to judge of their King, was an upstart Opinion hatched by the Heat of War; That
'twas an Insect of a Days duration; and is now disowned by all sorts of People
amongst us. Sermon. p. 16. That Flattery is one of those Sins, which by their own
particular Energy occasion the loss of a good Prince, and thereby bring
Affliction to a People, p. 17. That this Detestable Sin of Flattery has drawn
Princes to Aspire at Arbitrary Power; and God knows, how great a Share it had
in the Calamity which we Lament this Day: That the Notion of Passive Obedience
has proved Fatal to those that have hearkened to it, That Liberty gives the
True Relish to all the Comforts of Life: page 18.

To all which I Answer, That Our Reverend Teacher, like some Blind and
Bewildred Traveller, seems to have lost his Way; and while he affects to
Dictate so Magisterially out of the Common Road (as if he had got a Dutch Synod
within him) he falls into a Complication of Absurdities; each of which is a
most Intolerable Blunder. For First, The pretense of a High Court of Justice
cannot properly be called a Novel Upstart Opinion, since Buchanan and Knox, and
some English Apers of Swarez and Mariana, had, by their Dangerous Tenets, and
Pulpit Suggestions, given ample and sufficient Encouragement to such
Proceedings. However, That we may not insist upon Ceremony, the main
substantial part of the Tragedy, was the Black Result of Deliberate Malice,
both Roman and Fanatic; and was so far from being the Random Product of the
Heat of War, that the Design was carried on by Dark Conclave, Clandestine
Cabal, Painful Preaching, Long Prayers, Frequent Fastings, Godly Sorrow for the
Sins of the Nation, much Mortification, Seeking of the Lord, and all the
Coolest Methods that can be thought on.

Secondly, It was so far from being an Insect of a Days duration, That, as it
was the most Prodigious Monster on this side Hell (and never Equaled by any
Poet's Invention, Enthusiastical Draughts of Antichrist, or Melancholy Vision
of a Pining and Despairing Lover) so was it also Nursed with all Imaginable
Tenderness and Care, Christened by Milton and other Famous Apologists, and
borne about with great Ostentation and Triumph. And whosoever shall peruse the
Secret History (propagated throughout the Nation) the Works of Milton (of ever
Blessed Memory) the Letters of Ludlow (that precious Orator in Christ Jesus) I
say, whosoever shall peruse the Writings of these Legendary Scriblers, and
observe withal what kind Entertainment they have met with in the World, amongst
the well-affected, the harmless, and the hidden ones; will readily conclude,
That there are Thousands among us who are so far from disowning, that they
secretly Applaud, the Glorious and Triumphant Villainy.

Thirdly, I do readily grant, That the detestable Sin of Flattery had a Finger
in the Delusion, which led to this Fatal Catastrophe, and the Kingdom's
Funeral; Nothing can be more plain, if we do but open our Eyes, and the
Histories of those times together. Indeed 'twas such Nauseous, Masking, and
Dawbing Flattery, as was never Practiced before: 'Twas an Incurvation of Mind,
a Degeneracy and Baseness of Soul, beneath the wretchedness of those Creeping
Spirits of Old, that have Magnified the Spittle, Spots and Freakles, and Adored
the Deformities of Persons in Authority and Power. The Rabble were Deified out
of their Wits by the Officious Fawning Demagogues of the Times, and Carest into
all the Absurdities of Speech and Action: They were made the Divine Fountain of
all Authority, by a Godly Legerdemain; and abused into such Vain and Glorious
Idea's and Notions of themselves, that they ran stark Mad at last with Zeal and
Reformation: By the help of Grace, a Company of Weavers grew as Infallible and
Definitive, as a Synod or General Council; and a Zealous Brother, by Virtue of
his Saintship, scorned to give the Wall to his Prince that was Unregenerate.
Now when such Fundamental Follies as these are entertained as Oracles, I appeal
to the Sense of Universal Mankind, how is it possible for the most obliging
Monarch to sit secure in his Throne, or withstand the Shock of an Imperious
Rabble?

Whatever Charms the Vicious Arts of Flattery may have, to draw some Princes
into an Affectation of Arbitrary Dominion, it is plain, That the Soul of our
Royal Martyr was as much above Flattery in the days of Prosperity, as it was
above Fear, Malice, and all other Temptations in times of his Solitude and
Trial. Whatever Peccadillo's in Government looked that way, were no matter of
Choice, but Fatality; and cannot be Construed his Crimes, but his Misfortunes.
And surely to Rake into the Wounds of Afflicted Majesty, is a Base and Cowardly
Assault, and somewhat more than Barbarous and Inhumane: The Benign Temper of
the Witch of Endor (under more provoking Circumstances) abhorred such Cruelty
as this, which is fit only for the Conscience of a Devil.

Fourthly, That the Notion of Passive Obedience may sometimes prove Fatal in
respect of Temporal Advantages, is as Plain and True, as any of Mr. Dod's
Sayings: And so Humility, Patience, Modesty, and other Christian Virtues may
prove a Bar to Preferment in Bad Times; and the Evil Consequences do no more
Conclude against the one than the other. The Unkind Insult of a Tyrannical
Prince does no more give Allowance to Subjects to shake off the Yoke, than the
Immusical Conversation of a Supercilious or Complaining Wife does Licentiate a
Bill of Divorce. There is no State here so Propitious and Serene, but it may
sometimes be Overcast, or Sullied with a Cloud: There is no Condition on this
side Heaven so Guarded and Secure, but may be attended with Calamitous and
Fatal Appendages: And whenever this happens by a just Nemesis, or severer
Providence, an Absolute Resignation to the Divine Will becomes our
Indispensible Duty, and may prove our Glory and Consolation too, if we are not
antecedently wanting to our selves.

The Common Popular Orators of the Age, that can harangue so fluently about the
Tremendous Consequences of Passive Obedience, do seldom seriously weigh, or
else studiously Conceal the Consequences of Rebellion, which will be ever found
to be more Durable and Mischievous. This St. Paul well knew, and therefore
founded this Important and Inviolable Duty upon Reasons that are perpetual and
unalterable: For, as he instructs us, the Supreme Magistrate is the Ordinance
of God; His Power is Ordained of God; he is the Minister of the Great Immutable
God, and not of the Giddy and Capritious Multitude: Now these Reasons hold good
equally at all times, subsist under all the Alterations of the World, are the
same now in England, that they were at Rome heretofore; and consequently the
Duty must be so too: It Is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

I know the Patrons of Resistance tell us, that this Obligation indeed does
take Place and Sway; where sic volo, sic jubeo is a Law; and the Magistrates
Will the Sole Political Standard; and that, Because Religion alone does not
Authorize Resistance. But when it is once stamp't a Civil Right, and is
interwoven and mixed with the Polity of a Nation; we may stand up in Defense of
our Legal Rights, and, by Virtue of this, we may Resist for our Religion. This
is the Ultimate Refuge of our State-Libertines: All their various plausible
Sophistry dwindles to this at last; and this, I think, is soon reducible to
nothing:

For it is purely precarious; nay, includes a lamentable Mistake: And that,
because this Evangelical Duty was directed to Persons that were vested with
Civil Rights, and suffered the most horrid Rapes and Usurpations. The Imperial
Prerogative was bounded by Law; and became a Civil Establishment in the days of
Augustus, (as Strabo and Dio report) by the Concurrent Suffrage of the People
and Senate; and the Roman Government was Civilis non Tyrannica dominatio in the
Days and Language of Tertullian. The Roman Subjects were as great Asserters of
their Liberties, and looked as big, upon the account of their Privileges, as
the Freeborn People of England: How great their Immunities, and yet what
Illegal Invasions were made upon 'em: How Unjust their Tortures, and yet how
Resigned and Passive they were in their Persons (even when the Valerian Law was
in force to defend their Rights) may be seen and read in the Complaining
Apologists and Historians of those Ages; but the particular Instances would
swell this Discourse into too large and troublesome a Volume.

But alas! Such Examples as these do rather Upbraid, than instruct the Zealots
of our Days; who Act, and Demean themselves after such a rate, as if the
Christian's Portion were only in this Life, and Religion were to be Modeled
according to Conveniences of State. There is nothing Heroical and Gallant left
among us: All that is Puissant and Brave has fled the World. That Spirit of
Christianity, which Enlightened and Adorned the Primitive Ages, is now
degenerated into Empty Cant, or loaded with Invectives: Would you know, what is
become of Christian Resignation? Why, with some it is Heart-fixedness,
Nothingness and Broken-heartedness. By others it is called the Venom of the
Dragon, the Tare of the Wicked one, Court-Flattery, and the Fawning of the
Serpent: Or, (to speak in the Old Style of Brain-less Mr. Vicars, and Earless
Mr. Prynn) it is Kixey Conformity, Popish Pedlary, Babilonish Trumpery, and
Devilish Malignancy against Christ.

In the last place, Enter Liberty (with all its Train of Artillery:) This has
been a Famous Actor indeed upon the Stage of Humane Affairs: It has been a
Protection of all Sorts and Degrees of Criminals rand Debauchees; It can Swear
and Fight, Plunder and Kill through all the Points of the Compass: Backbiting,
Perjury, and Libelling of Princes; Sodomy, Incest, and all Unnatural Lusts have
defended themselves with the Pompous Name of Liberty. Liberty! That can
Transform a Jesuitical Band of Regicides and Conspirators, into a Bright
Constellation of Saints and Martyrs: Liberty! That can change the very best of
Kings into the worst of Tyrants; and give the blackest Villains an Apothesis.
Liberty! That can Convert a Kingdom's Wealth into the Possession of the Saints,
and make a Creeping Mendicant Cloak-Man, an Heir or Executor at his Will and
Pleasure.

In short, There is no greater Slavery or Oppression in the World, than a
Lawless and Unbounded Liberty: 'Twas an affectation of this that made our First
Parents Rebel against God, and has prompted others to Rebel against his
Vicegerents: 'Twas a Sin of this Complexion that occasioned the Unparalled
Murder of our God-like Martyr, for which our Land Mourns at this very Day; and
which seems to continue (like the First Transgression) a lasting Curse and Debt
upon Posterity.

And thus, Sir, have I (as briefly as I could) animadverted upon some of those
Pious Frauds, that Adorn and Recommend this plausible Two-handed Sermon. There
is a Vein of Crafty and Ambiguous Sense and Expression running through a great
part of the Contexture; and this, I believe, he takes to be a Choice and
Wondrous Perfection; though it is really his Blind side: It may suit well enough
with a Dark and Snbtle Disciple of Old Noll; but Ill becomes an Ingenious
Servant, much less a Minister, of Christ. He has indeed a peculiar Knack at
wounding with a Sly, Oblique, and Paltry Suggestion; at Stabbing and yet
looking another way, as if he were wholly Innocent and Unconcerned: Ex. Gr. But
had they lived under a King, who by an Open Example and Eneour agement of
Debauchery, should have drawn the People from their Covenant with the Lord, and
by Secret Favors, etc. p. 4. These, and the rest that follow, are very
perilous shrewd sayings in good sooth. He Will make (no question) an hopeful Old
Man in time, if he have already such a Reaching and Penetrating Noddle. I dare
engage (in this fit of Conscience, or Spruntness) he would not have spared the
Wisest of Princes upon Record, had he chanced to have stood in his way. Blessed
Jesu! To what a wretched Height can Ingratitude, and Spiritual Pride exalt it
self? Does not such Purulent Spittle argue a Man's Soul to be Tainted and
Ulcerated with Malice? Must a Solomon's Frailties be thus Aggravated and
Exposed, and all his Virtues and Wisdom be forgotten? Was it not enough, That a
Just, Kind, and good Natured Prince should be Reviled and Conspired against
while alive; but must he be persecuted again, even beyond the Grave? Tell not
this to the Unconverted World: Publish it not in the Streets of Rome or
Jerusalem; lest Turks and Infidels shake the Head at us; lest the Greeks and
Romans again laugh us to Scorn. I must further add, That our Author seems to
take as much pains to Lessen, if not Encourage, the Crying Diabolical Sin of
Rebellion, as some have lately took to Mollify Damnation it self: People may
not pretend to a Legal Jurisdiction, yet have a Right of Self-Preservation:
i.e. They may Rebel for Conscience sake, or by Virtue of an Inward Call; but
they must have an Especial Care lest they hurt their Prince, while they Fire
and Shoot at him; They must only fight to make him a Glorious King. He would
surely make a most Profound and Notable Expounder of Ezekiel, and I believe his
Nurse was little less than a Sibyl; or at least a Mighty Woman at Riddles: But
I shall content my self with more plain and familiar things.

Now that Man is a perfect Minor in Understanding, and under Years of
Discretion; that does not know, that Rebellion is a Dangerous, and Infinitely
Encroaching Thing: And, if it be not stifled in its Seed or Principle, it will,
when it is kindled, bid defyance to all Control, and run along like an
irresistible Burning: And (however some may Mince and Palliate the matter)
'twill be found a Maxim of Eternal Verity, That whosoever gives Power to any to
rise up against their Prince, and take the Crown from His Head, gives License
to others to take his Head from his Shoulders.

I have looked upon this last Assertion of our Author, with more Scorn and
Severity than otherwise I should have done, because it carries with it an
Ungrateful and Rude Intimation to His present Majesty, and proclaims aloud,
what he is to expect upon Nonperformance of Articles. It Is an Ungenerous,
Dastardly, and Creeping Innuendo to a Valiant and Brave Prince, who is
undoubtedly the Greatest Hero of his Age, and has a Soul large enough to
Animate more than Three Kingdoms: And pray God defend both Him and us, from the
Raging of ohe Sea, and the Madness of the People; or from the French and Bloody
Roman on the one hand, and a Domineering Kirk, and Oliverian Inquisition on the
other.

And now, Sir, after all this, I hope you will not think that I am so vain an
Animal, as to be enamoured of the Gallows, to court Racks and Wheels, or to be
fond of being stuck round with pointed Daggers, and looking like the Man in the
Almanac: For I do ingeniously own, that I do naturally shrink at the
apprehension of such a Fate, like other Ordinary Mortals: But though I am
neither Valiant, nor yet weary of the World; and (having hitherto had but a
small Taste of the Pleasures of Sense, in comparison to what an Innocent Man
might enjoy) am willing enough to have my Portion and Share in those Limited
Pleasures, to which the more Delicate and best Complexion'd Youth are inclined;
Though I could freely and cheerfully Aspire here below to enlarge my Knowledge,
satisfy my Inquisitive Fancy, and entertain my Curiosity with a new Scene of
things; yet am I much more ravished by Reading, and Reflecting upon the Passive
Virtues, and Moral Gallantry of Brave Men in former Ages, that have despised
the World, and enlightened Mankind with their Incomparable Sufferings for the
Truth. How do I Adore the Memory of Socrates, of Seneca, and Epictetus, Men who
were in the World, but not of it; and who could part with Lives to preserve
their Innocence and Virtue? How am I Transported beyond the bounds of Humane
Joy, at the History of Ignatius, and the rest of the Inspired Martyrs, who by
Divine Aid vanquished Impossibilities; dreaded no Scourges but those of a bad
Conscience, and feared no Fire but that which is Everlasting? But, above all
the rest, I am Surpised and Amazed at the Victorious Perseverance of our Royal
Martyr, who at so great a distance from the Times of Primitive Trial, (and
under the greatest Temptations) carried the same Zeal in his Bosom, and Sealed
the same Faith with his Blood and Dying Confession.

Such was the Fate, and such the Perseverance of that good Prince; whose Love
to all Mankind, and Ardent Zeal for the Church, made him Experiment the Scorn
and Envy of Men here below, and rendered his own Glories more large and
diffusive in another World; and I do solemnly profess, I had rather choose to
undergo all his Sufferings and Disgraces, joined with his Love and Constancy,
than to be raped up immediately amidst a Quire of Angels.

If any poor-spirited Pedant should Object, that while I Attack the Blind side
of our Teacher, I seem to reflect unhandsomly upon his Lordship; I shall only
Answer in short, That I own his Lordship's Knowledge, in many Things, to be
much Superior to my own; but know at the same time, that his Lorship is so
Wise, as never to pretend to fill an Infallible Chair, and therefore I shall
not fear to declare my Dissent from him in Opinion. I do further own, That I
have ever been passionately Warm against the Pharisaical Zealots of the Age
(our Savior himself was so) yet never insulted over the mere Infirmities, much
less the Misfortunes of any; but have ever loved a Sweet-Temper'd and Ingenuous
Dissenter. This Principle in me (Sir) I am sure you must approve of, because it
is your own; and because it is so (as well as for other Reasons) I have paid a
particular Honor to your Person, ever since my first happy admission to your
Friendship; and in you, I am sure, I do at once honor a Resignation becoming a
Primitive Hero, and a Learning that adorns the Style and Character you bear.

I am, etc.

A SUPPLEMENT TO THE Preceding Letter.
HAving hitherto endeavored to persuade our Wandering Pilgrim, that he is got
into Bypath, and out of his way to Jerusalem; I think it is my Duty (as I am a
Christian and Englishman) to Direct and Conduct him into the Right Road, before
I take my leave of him: This I shall Attempt, by informing him how he might
have spent some part of his Canonical Hour of Preaching with more Justice and
Decorum: Therefore, considering the Villainous occasion of the Solemnity, I
humbly conceive he might justly have Entertained his Audience after this manner;

Christian Friends and Brethren,

We have seen a Perverse Generation of Men risen up among us, that by the
strength of Faith, without Understanding, will be Holier than Apostles, Wiser
than Philosophers, and by the mere Power of Imagination will pretend to dictate
to the Holy Ghost: They talk much of Christ, yet despise his Ordinances;
Nothing but Meekness and Humility is in their Mouths, and yet they will not
suffer even God himself, to govern the Church and the World in his own way; and
they Esteem it a more Infallible Sign of Grace to rail against Non-Resistance,
and other Gospel Injunctions; than to love the Brotherhood, or to Honor the
King. Whatsoever is Essentially good, or Praiseworthy, they run down into
Heathen Notion and Chimera; and whatsoever is Ridiculous and Brutish in our
Natures, they Conseorate into Zeal. They will be Testy and Malicious, Malapert
and Censorious for the Glory of the Lord; they will Backbite, and whine for
Jesus Christ's sake; and warp their Countenances into Artificial Deformity for
the Edification of the Brethren: They will justify Contradictions, and
Self-evident Nonsense by the Assistance of the Spirit; they will be
passionately fond and enamored of the Lord Christ, while they violate his
Laws; and maintain an intimate and close Communion with God, while they Rob
Churches, Defile Altars, and Assassinate Kings.

Such precious and Dapper Saints were those, that Reformed our Church and
Nation heretofore into Profanation and Ruin; that distinguished the best of
Kings out of his Titles, thrust him out of his Throne, Exposed his Royal
Children to Dangers and Temptations, nay, Religiously sent them a begging into
the World: They deceived the Simple with abundance of Holy Phrase, with
Chapter, Tone and Verse; with Bibles in their hands, with Hymns and Spiritual
Songs in their Mouths, and by saying a Long Grace before their Canibal Riots:
Nay, so Zealous and Demure, so Sanctified were they amidst their Heathen
Barbarities, that, in their own Conceits, they were little less than Gods: They
saw the Wickedness of Man was very great, and that every Thought and
Imagination of his Heart was evil: And though they could not, in that Age of
Miracles, command the Elements, or cause the Waters to overflow; yet they were
resolved to punish Mankind another way, and overwhelm Three Kidgdoms with an
Inundation of Blood. Hereupon Saint Cromwell, like the Destroying Angel, was
Commissioned to punish the Inhabitants of the Land, and obtained that High Seat
from whence Lucifer fell, by imitating his Apostasy and his Pride: Lying and
Murder were Refined into the Nicer Arts of Equivocation, and Cutting of Throats
in the Spirit of Meekness: Blind Zeal was dubbed with the Name of Vision and
Inspiration; and whole Armies appeared in Mahomet's Colors for the Defense of
Christ. Bind their Kings in Chains, and their Nobles in Fetters of Iron was the
Text. A Solemn League and Covenant was the Comment: Rebellion and Bloodshed,
Plunder and Sacrilege, Profanation, and Atheism were the Application and
Uses.

And what could be the Import and Tendency of these things, but to repeat the
Scorn and Crusifixion of our Savior, and to play with that Sacred and Awful
Name, at which the Devils tremble? If such Practices as these be the Christian
way to Heaven; if a Blind Zeal be the best Light to our Feet, and a Lanthorn to
our Paths; if, by being Christians, we must cease to be Men; if Sedition,
Slaughter, and causing Divisions be the way to that Peace which passes all
Understanding in the Kingdom of Heaven; may it be my good Fate to pass an
Eternity among the Heathen Philosophers: 'Twill certainly be more tolerable for
Plato, and Cicero, and the rest of the Gallant Morallists, at the last day;
than for any such Fallen and Degenerate Christians: And if that be true, which
is said of Aristotle, that he breathed out his Soul in this Pious Invocation, O
Being of Beings, have Mercy upon me! I had rather have my Portion with that
Heathen Publican, than with such Christian Pharisees.

When I consider the Infinite Power of Almighty God, and how Terrible he is in
his Judgments, together with that Infinite distance betwixt God and Man; and
observe again with how much Hypocrisy Men can creep into his Presence, or else
run away from the Temple where he dwells: I cannot but conclude in the Words of
Job, When I consider I am afraid of him. Every Prevaricator is a Conspirator
against a Church, and every Scismatical Affectation of Singularity is a Plot
against the Constitution of a Government: It Is in vain to pretend to style our
selves Sons of the Best Church, while our Principles are the same with those of
other Men; or to boast of being Members of a Church Reformed, without an equal
Reformation of our Lives.

Would you know, my Brethren, why I am so severely Zealous in a good Cause? I
will give you this Reason for it: When Persons and Things Sacred are again
Despised, Heaven it self is concerned; and can any Faithful Minister of Gods
Word hover and fluctuate in a Blind Neutrality, when Omnipotence bears a part
of the Calumny? No, silence at such a time becomes an unjustifiable Stupidity,
and a Lazy Acquiescence is little less than a Rebellion against Heaven. And
though Self-preservation should Chide me for it, and Danger seem to beccon me
to a forbearance; Though Jesuits and Kirk-men, Anabaptists and Quakers,
Sweet-Singers, and Muggletonians; nay, though the Prince of Darkness himself,
and the King of Terrors should oppose and stand in my way; yet Honesty shall
ever be my Security, and Orthodoxy my Protection.

As for my part, I can no more Digest the Fulsom and Crude Tenets of Milton and
Ludloe, together with the Black and Dirty Divinity of our New Mechanic
Apostles, than I can the Dreams of a Bridget or Juliana, or the whole Council
of Trent: Whatsoever our Churches Fate may prove, I am absolutely bound to it,
and if Suffering must be her Lot and Portion, I had rather choose to bear a
part in the black Solemnity, than to be Dignified by her Fall: Which the God of
Infinite Mercy prevent, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA,
PAge 14, line 12, for Apothesis, read Apotheosis. page 19, line 5, for with
Lives, read with their Lives.


