A SCOURGE FOR George Whitehead. An Apostate Quaker: An Espouser of Doctrines
and Practices tending to Romish-like Bondage: A Persecuting Defamer of the Real
Christian-Quaker: A Public Informer against William Pen, to his Defamation:
The Author of a Scandalous Book, (written against my Seventh Part of the
Christian-Quaker, etc.) Styled, Judgment Fixed, etc.
THe Impartial Reader perusing the two Books, out of which the ensuing
Doctrines are collected, may easily be convinced that G. W. (if he wanted not
Schollarship) might (as Author of one, and Approver of the other) sooner obtain
Preferment at Rome, than amongst the real Christian Quakers.

He owns himself to be a Member of a Weekly Meeting, held in London, termed, a
Second-days Meeting: The said Meeting have approved R. B's Book of Government,
which pretends to show, [ R. B's Anarchy; Title Page] That, the Ancient,
Apostolic Order of the Church of Christ is Re-establish't amongst the People
called Quakers. And on that foot treats on the Order and Government pleaded for
by him and his Brethren: Notwithstanding one part of the said People disown all
Pretenses to the Outward Establishment of, or Subjection to any Outward
pretended established Government over themselves, as a Society of People; (that
only excepted, wherein Charles the Second now Reigns King of England, etc.)
having proved a pretense to an established Government, I shall next note some
Doctrines; which, as applicable to the Governors, are very pernicious.

First, G. W. in his Apostate Incendiary, page 16. thus asserts; I affirm, that
the true Church is in the true Faith, that is in God; and we must either
believe thus, as the true Church believes, or else it were but both a Folly and
Hypocrisy to profess our selves Members thereof. And in the same page further
says) That he who seems to own the Church of Christ as a member of her, and
yet tells the world that it is a most dangerous position that we are to believe
as the Church believes, is a treacherous Enemy to the Church of Christ.

Secondly, It Is averred on the behalf of the Church, That they have power to
decide and remove differences arising between themselves touching outward
things, and on that occasion assert, not that the assent of parties differing
ought first to be obtained, and therefore the power asserted is absolute, and
the sentence in Pursuance thereof, definitive; since no appeal is declaratively
admitted. See R. B's. Anarchy, page 39.

Thirdly, In R. B's. Anarchy, page 48, it is thus written; 'Whether the Church
of Christ have power in cases that are matters of conscience, to give positive
sentence or decision, which may be obligatory upon believers? The Answer is in
these words. J answer affirmatively she has.

Fourthly, In R. B's. Anarchy, page 68, it is thus asserted; There never will,
nor can be wanting in case of controversy, the Spirit of God to give Judgment,
through some or other, in the Church of Christ, so long as any Assembly can
properly, or in any tolerable supposition, be so termed. Secondly, that God
ordinarily has employed such, whom he has made use of in gathering his
Church, though not excluding others. Thirdly, That their, de facto, giving a
positive Judgment in such cases, will not import Tyranny and Usurpation,
neither will the pretenses of any contradicting them, or refusing to submit on
the account they see it not, excuse them of being guilty of disobeying God.

What greater Door can be opened to blind obedience? and yet the aforesaid
doctrines are Vindicated by G. W. and his brethren, under the Notion of being
the Church of Christ, and so consequently invested with the authority before
asserted, but the actions of some of George Whiteheads brethren espoused by
him, have proved them to have been the Synagogue of Satan; and therefore on due
consideration of the preceding Citations, may not an honest man of the Church
of England reasonably thus say unto my adversaries? How unjust have you been in
representing our Church as being kin to the Church of Rome for a small
Ceremony, and yet have had the impudence to account your selves defamed, when
justly compared to her? Does it not now appear that your Principles smell too
rank of Popery; and that not in a Ceremony or some little Circumstance, but in
Doctrine, whereby the very life and props of the Romish See and Power (opposed
by Reformed Protestants,) is asserted and vindicated. Thus much as to G. W. and
his brethrens Doctrine.

Before I speak of the Practical Part of their Religion, I shall put the Reader
in mind that where ou^ward forcible Power is wanting; a false Church cannot
seize the Body and Estate: No thanks therefore to G. W. etc. who wanting such
power, do not so do. The Church of Rome though invested with outward power was
not guilty of that, until such time she promulgated such kind of Doctrine as
before is cited; and that with application to her self, even as G. W. etc.
terming themselves the Church of Christ, designs these with application to
themselves, and not to advance either the Pope or Church of Rome.

Having thus premised, I shall add a few instances of a lower sort of
Persecution being the utmost that G. W. and his brethren are capable to
inflict, viz. Excomunications, or what imports the same, together with
Notorious Undeserved Defamations being one Practical Part of their Religion.

J. B. by a Meeting in London was Excomunicated so far as Excomunication can be
imported, by these words, viz. That we do not only testify against that Spirit
which has, as aforesaid, led him into that disorderly Practice, but also
against him whilst joined thereunto, nor can we have Spiritual Communion and
Fellowship with him, until unfeignedly he shall return unto the Truth by
Condemnation of that work and spirit. See F. B. de Christiana Liberate. p.
198, 199. Note the disorderly Practice and Work was (as their paper expressly
signifies) his dispersing into several Parts of this Nation my Books, styled
the Christian Quaker. But in their Paper they do not insert one sentence
thereof, as demonstration, that the Book was erroneous. Oh deed of darkness!
And though they exorted him, when before them, to condemn what he had done, and
read some Objections to part of the Book; yet refused to give him Copy thereof,
though frequently demanded by him; further adding as an inducement to answer
his demand, that if he found the Objections to be as they said, he should
readily join with them in condemning what ever should appear to be evil.

G. W. and his brethren, vindicate a Paper given forth by C. M. and 65 more
against John Wilkinson and John Story, proved in my seventh part of my
Christian Quaker, page 22 to be worse in some respect than the Bull of Leo
against Martin Luther. My words on that occasion are as follows. In the Paper
given forth by C. M. and 65 more against John Wilkinson and John Story, treated
on in the second part of the Christian Quaker. page 92. it is thus said, And we
do hereby reprove and judge that Jealous Rending and separate spirit, and them
(meaning J. W. and J. S.) and their separate Company, and that by the spirit
and power of God, and we warn all unto whom this comes to beware of the said J.
S. and J. W. whose way at present, is not the way of peace. Whosoever peruseth
the said paper may percieve it in some respect much like the Bull given forth
by Pope LEO, the tenth Anno 1520. against M. Luther, but yet in one m^in poin^
greatly differs. For in the Bull against M. L. there are 42 Articles of
Doctrine condemned, and ^e Bull ordered to be read in every place to the intent
that the ma^ter for which he was prosecuted, as an Heretic, might be known;
but in the aforesaid Paper subscribed by C. M. etc. there is no mention of any
particular Doctrine or Vitiousness in life for which they are persecuted by
their brethren, but instead thereof these general Recriminations, viz. That
they have evil designs and persevere in them, by word, writing, and Practice,
etc. See also more on this Subject in the second part of my Christian Quaker,
page 80. Had G. W's. brethren (whose practice against J. W. and J. S. he has
vindicated) been but as plain as Leo was, the spiritual Cheat would have long
since been more obvious: and though G. W. in his Judgment Fixed, page 16.17.
takes notice of the above comparison, yet amidst all his pretenses to Divinity
and Law, the greatest arguments brought by him to invalidate the force of the
said comparison, are these ensuing Questions, viz. And is not this matter of
fact to set up a Standard of separation? Where then is his comparison between
Pope LEO the tenth and US, and how was the Pope's Proceedings more just? For
these impertinent questions I may reckon with him a little more anon.

Next, take an instance of one amongst many more of his Notorious Lies, page
59. he thus says, Seeing W. R. esteems the Popes (yea even the worst of them)
good enough to bring us in comparison with, and to cite and make them as
instance against us; as Leo the tenth, page 6.22. Pope Paul the third, page 19.
and 28. Julius the third page 31. it may not be amiss to give some description
of these Popes according to a late History or Abstract of the lives of the
Popes printed Anno 1679. ( and then G. W. proceeds to signify that Leo was
rankt amongst Athiests. That Paul the Third was rankt amongst Magicians,
Conjurers, Warryers, Blood-suckers, Paracides, Jmpoysoners and Favorites, of
Whores. That Julius the Third was rankt amongst Sodomites (adding instances to
prove them such and having so done, does, page 55. thus query) What worse
Persons upon Earth, could our Adversary have compared G. F. and our Friends
unto, or brought in comparison against them in Church Proccedings or Spiritual
Censures, Behold his horrid Injustice and Envy.

Instead of a large Comment on this notorious Falsehood I shall transcribe what
I wrote in my seventh Part of the Christian Quaker wherein the Names of Pope
Paul, and Pope Julius are inserted, and leave G. W. to be further corrected by
his Brethren, according to his merit.

Page 19. What difficulty there may be for one of the Laity to have a just
Hearing and Redress in Rome, upon a complaint to be made against the Pope, I
will not pretend to be fully acquainted with; yet, this I know, that a Cry for
Justice, when relating to G. F. has not been hearkened to in London, by one
Part of the people, called Quakers, unto whom I have addressed. See Preface,
and Postcript to the Christian Quaker in 5. Parts. It Is well if the Endeavors
of the Penman ( meaning the unnamed Author of the Accuser, etc.) who
peradventure may expect Advance in the Government contended for; be not as great
to keep off the stroke of Justice, when relating to G. F. as Card. Scombergs,
were to keep off the Reformation from the Court of Rome in the days of Pope
Paul the Third, not knowing how soon it might be his own turn to ascend the
Papal Chair.

In the 27th. page I cited an Agreement, or Order, made at a Quarterly Meeting
at Ralph Fretwell's, in Barbados, the 23d. day of the 10th. Month, 1680, in
these words: I desire to give up my whole Concern, if required, both Temporal
and Spiritual, unto the Judgment of the Spirit of God in the Men and
Women's-Meetings, as believing it to be more according to the Universal Wisdom
of God, than any particular Measure in my self, or any Particular's with which
the Men's and Women's Meetings have not Unity. On this occasion, I signified,
that G. F. etc. wrote to the Persons concerned, and did not only call them,
Dear Friends; but concluded, That the Spirit of God has given them Life, and
will bring them to the City of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and
Church of the First Born, which are written in Heaven. And so subscribes in
these words: Your dear Friends and Brethren in our Lord Jesus, in whom you have
Life, Peace, and Salvation. On these words, unto which G. F. and G. W.
subscribed their Names, I thus observed; This shows no Dislike to the said
Paper, nor yet Dis-unity with the Persons; and yet they in other parts seem to
dislike the wording thereof: for in their Letter to them, they also thus say;
Now, Dear Friends, if this Order, or Judgment should come into the hands of any
Apostates, or Opposers, they will make ill work with it, and say, we set up an
Arbitrary Power over Men's Consciences and Properties, in an Implicit Faith and
Submission, without inward Conviction, etc. and that it was like the
Scotch-Covenant. Then I made this further Observation. This shows their sense
what Apostates may say, but does not declare that such their Saying might be
rational: And why so? That Is a Secret I will not pretend to be revealed to me:
but yet I might have inserted the Case amongst the aforesaid Instances, wherein
they were at Union, or Disunion with the Papistical Party; and doubtless, in
one of them I might have hit the Mark. For I well remember, that Petro Soave
Polano, in his History of the Council of Trent, informs these latter Ages, that
in the days of Pope Paul the Third, great Zeal was raised in some, that a
Reformation might begin in his own House [meaning the Court of Rome, and the
Ministers most immediately relating to him.] And though he did not positively
contradict a Reformation, when a true Representation of matters, worthy
thereof, were presented before him; yet the Policy of that day admitted of no
real Reformation, but instead thereof, only a mere noise of what was
represented as worthy of Amendment, was permitted to go abroad in Germany, etc
amongst the discontented Pa^ty, expecting a Reformation; but no Prosecution
unto a real and through Amendment. And, why so? This, amongst others, was one
express reason, That it would give occasion to the Lutherans to brag, that they
had enforced the Pope to make that Reformation. (Further adding) That by the
Reformation 'twould be confessed, that the things provided against, were
deservedly reprehended by the Lutherans. Which would be a great abetting to
their whole Doctrine. Had the Party espousing the Pope's Interest, said,
'Twould give occasion to Apostates, or Opposers (for such the Lutherans were
accounted) to make ill work with it, it would then have been as pertinent an
Example in Terminis, to show a Union, as now it is doubted, 'twill appear in
substance, etc. 'Twas a notable aim, indeed, to aim at a Power over Persons
both in their Temporal and Spiritual Concerns. [Mark] 'twas not over a Tenth
part, that might have been accounted Jewish, or like the Priests, but over
their whole Concern in Temporal and Spiritual Concerns. Moreover, page 30. I
thus proceeded: What are the Marks and Tokens observed by G. F. and his Party,
as worthy of the term Apostate in their sense. To which I thus answered: I will
not undertake to give an answer in the largest extent of their meaning; but yet
from the aforesaid Record of Disunion with John Ansloe's Proceedings in
Marriage, compared with the Quarterly-Meetings Refusal to read a Paper of some
Friends Complaint against the said Record, telling them, (on that occasion)
they were all deceived, or deluded; does, at least, give a just cause of
Suspicion, that the Non-acceptance of any Such new Order or Prescription from
G. F. or the General-Meeting, has been deemed matter of Apostasy: if so, I
must then say, that our Adversaries have therein exceeded in their Impositions,
the Doctrine held forth by some of the very Romish Religion it self. And then I
proceeded to give an Instance in these words; 'Twas the Plea of the Counselors
of the Parliament at Paris, in the time of Pope Julius the Third, Anno 1551,
with respect to the Decrees of the Council of Trent; that though the Authority
of the whole Universality is transferred into the Major Part, when the Cause is
common to all, and nothing belongs to particular men; yet, when the Whole
belongs to all, and every one has his part, the assent of every one is
necessary, and prohibentis conditio potior; and the absent not giving their
Voices, are not bound: Of this sort are Ecclesiastical Assemblies; and be the
Council as populous as it will, the absent Churches are not bound, if they
think sit not to receive it. This has always been used in ancient Times; That
the Councils being ended, the Decrees should be sent to be Confirmed by the
Churches that were absent; in which, otherwise they had had no Force: which
every one that reads Hilarious, Athanasius, Theodoretus, and Victorinus, (who
handle this Particular) may see plainly; and it happened sometimes, that some
part of the Cannons were received by some Churches, and some left out, as every
one thought sit for their Necessities, Manners, and Uses: And Sir Gregory
himself does witness, That the Church of Rome did not receive the Cannons of
the second Council at Constantinople, nor of the first of Ephesus. This, I
suppose, the Learned R. Richardson, to whose Ingredients (sufficiently
Papistical) the Penman has referred, knows to be true, and is now cited on
this Occasion, that the Impartial Reader may consider, whether, in the most
charitable Construction of G. F. or his Party's Actions, under the Form of
Government contended for, they have not (notwithstanding the Penman's
Detestation of Popery) gone one large step, in point of Imposition, beyond what
is allowed by the Doctrine of some, owning the Church of Rome to be the
Apostolic See.

I doubt not, but that every Impartial Reader will hence discern G. W's great
Injustice, by accusing me of horrid Injustice and Envy, as aforesaid, for my
thus writing.

G. W. seems ( page 49.50.) to be much disturbed at one or two Sentences in the
Seventh Part of my Christian-Quaker, page 20. Therein I related, That the
Bishop of Bitonto, in an Oration in relation to the Council of Trent, and
Commendation of Pope Paul the Third, exhorts all to submit themselves to that
Council; which, says he, if they do not, it will be justly said, The Popes
Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness better than Light. And then
I thus proceeded: Whether that Expression may be a proper Looking-Glass for the
Penman and G. F. to see their Faces in, when they conclude it the Fruit of
Darkness, not to submit to their Councils and Outward Directories, I shall
leave to the Consideration of the unprejudiced understanding Reader, with this
further Information, That G. F. when accounted a Minister of Christ's Light,
did then signify, That 'twas below Wisdom to jangle about Outward Things. And
yet since has been a great Instrument to cause Janglings about such things. On
this Occasion G. W. page 49. 50. thus says; What a false Looking-Glass have
thou represented here! Thou may remember that our frequent Testimony has
been, and still is, to excite People to Christ's Light within, as being that
true Light which is come into the World, and to his Council that proceeds from
his light and not to the Popes or any of his Councils. Who so ignorant, that
cannot see the Sophistry contained in this Answer: I am well satisfied, their
sin is not a design to be under the subjection of a Pope at Rome. Oh! that they
were but as free from Lusting after the like Power that he and his Cardinals
are invested with; if they were, methinks G. W. who, I suppose, from his
rendering F. B. a Fool, hate, not to be accounted witty; should, on this
occasion, have inserted (instead of these words, and not to the Pope, or any of
his Counsel) such an expression as this and not to G. F. above another; as if
our desires were to testify against a Pope of Rome, and yet plead for one set,
or to be set up amongst our selves, nor yet to the Second-days Meeting; as if
we were against the power of the Cardinals at Rome, and yet execise the like
(so far as capable) amongst selves: had he so said, and accordingly, for the
future, acted, it might have removed many a Stumbling Block out of the way.

And since G. W. accounts F. B. a Fool, as before is signified; surely then G.
W. takes himself to be a wise Man; which occasions me to examine how wise he
may be esteemed amongst witty and honest men: for Children and Fools may be
pleased with Hobby-horses, and Knaves may applaud Forgery and Perversion for
Sound Truths. First, then note, that if I had compared G. F. G. W. and their
Friends to any Action committed by Pope Julius, etc. that had not been
justifyable, he should have detected me thereof: but that being wanting, a
witty man on sight of G. W's Book, may conclude, that there was some Comparison
made, and that 'twas a true one: if so, would it not naturally follow, that G.
W. etc. in such a witty man's sense, are as bad as those Popes rank't by him
among Atheists, Magicians, Conjurers, Warriers, Blood-Suckers, Paracides,
though not directly, or indirectly so accused by me.

This Just and Righteous Account of G. W. renders him a Notorious False
Accuser, a Scandal to the Profession of Christian Religion, and sufficiently
inclined, as well as gifted to write Books wrongfully, to stain the Reputation
of the men of his Indignation: I hope, his brethren, for the future, will be
ashamed to sit under his Pharisaical Ministry, whilst no Satisfaction is given
by his real Repentance for the Errors and evil Facts whereof he is guilty;
especially, if the sense of his Guilt be so great, as to decline the public
Meeting (herein after proposed) for the clearing of himself, if he can.

I now come to prove G. W. a public Informer against W. P. which I term, to
his Defamation, because the Matter of Fact whereof he stands accused, is in
some respect more condemnable than a Popish Practice deservedly testified
against by Reformed Protestants. Now to the Matter in hand.

Page 61. G. W. infers from my words, that they who subscribed the Paper
against J. S. and J. W. being 66 in number, were Persecutors of their Brethren:
and then affirms (without Evidence) that I know W. P. to be one. The said Paper
against J. S. and J. W. is already proved to be worse, in some respect, than
the Bull given forth by Pope Leo the 10th. against M. Luther. And G. W. has
not written one word that really evidences my said Comparison untrue: what I
take to be the Force of his Argument, will hereafter follow: besides, it is
worthy Observation, that the said Paper was directed to Mens-Meetings; who are
therein exhorted to warn J. S. and J. W. wherever they come, to go home, etc.
and therein, say they, you will acquit your selves in Gods Sight. From which
Exhortations it is evident, that the Subscribers of the said Paper, which G. W.
vindicates, endeavored to impose on the Persons to whom they wrote, exhorting
them to wa^n J. S. and J. W. as aforesaid, and that without leaving the Persons
so exhorted to a Convincement in themselves, that their so doing might be
Christian-like; but instead thereof, gives them this assurance, namely, That
therein you will acquit yourselves in Gods Sight. From all which, it is evident,
that if W. P. did subscribe the said Paper, he then merited the aforementioned
Reflections limited to that Matter, for so doing; and in particular, these two
things might then be laid to his charge. First, That he was concerned in a
Paper importing Excomunication, though not so termed; and that against two
ancient Ministers, without mentioning therein any particular matter of false
Doctrine, or evil Fact vindicated by J. S. and J. W. Secondly, That his
endeavoring, that such to whom 'twas directed, should warn them to go home,
etc. as aforesaid, implies a design of Imposition without Conviction, and a
Justification of Implicit Faith and Obedience, both which took their Rise from
the Sea of Rome; and was, and yet is hateful to the true Reformed Protestants.
That now the Reader may know the force of G. W's Argument against my
Comparison, take it in his own words, page 61. viz. As for their not mentioning
any particular Doctrine, or vicious Life, that others might know the Matters
alleged against them, what would infer? That therefore the Popes Bull
against M. Luther was more reasonable or just. That Is a mistake, for thou
confessedst a Judgment given against that Jealous, Rending, and Separate
Spirit, from which thou have not cleared them: and was that no reason then, to
give others Notice and Warning against such a Spirit: Is Schism no sin, or not
reproveable? This occasions me thus to say, G. W. is not so plain as Bonner,
for he usually told the Protestants for what he Judged them, and was not
ashamed of the Pope's Cause; if he designed to judge or reprove men for not
owning the Pope and his Clergy to be the Church of Christ, and that they ought
to believe as the Church believed, he would have plainly said so, and not
instead thereof, tell them, I judge you for being of a Jealous, Rending, and
Separate Spirit. This, in Bonner, without Explanation; would have been called
Canting Language; and until G. W. does explain his meaning by those words, he
subjects himself to Derision and Scorn; and though he has insinuated, that I
compared him, etc. to a Pope rank't amongst Conjurers, yet he wrongs me
therein; and I must confess, that his aforesaid Argument is no great Sign of a
Conjurer. But notwithstanding G. W. has informed, as aforesaid, against W. P.
yet W. P's. Address to Protestants, afterward Printed, Anno 1679, cleared him
from all such Pernicious Principles, that G. W. as before is manifest,
vindicates, and such Rome-like Practices, tending to Bondage, as G. W. is
become an Espouser of, by owning himself one with, if not one of those that
subscribed the Paper against J. S. and J. W. though he pretended to this
Purpose, that he was moved or warned of God, not to subscribe the same: I shall
quote a few words out of W. P's. Address to Protestants, to show W. P's. S^nse
in his own words, page 149. 150. For all Societies are to govern themselves
according to their Institution, and first Principles of Union, where there is a
Violence on this part, Tyranny, and not Order, is introduced. Now since
Persuasion and Conviction began all true Christian Societies, all Christian
Societies must uphold themselves upon the same free Bottom, or they turn
Antichristian. Page 186. The Apostle requires not men to receive him without
Evidence, and refers them to that in their own Consciences in the Sight of God.
Many more Instances might be cited, to show W. P's Detestation of Popish-like,
enslaving Principles, and Practices; though George Whitehead, now sinking in
his Reputation as a Christian, seems to shelter himself under the Umbrage of W.
P. Such mean tricks may get G. W. a Name, with such an one as he scornfully
terms F. B. namely, a Fool, but not with men of Understanding, Honesty, and
good Conscience. But if W. P. has been the Author of any thing Printed since
his Address, etc. whereby his aforesaid Assertions are denied, or weakened, far
be it from me to term any man, manifesting the same, an Informer to his
Defamation, whilst persisting therein; for I have had my share in Detecting
(by the 8th. Part of my Christian-Quaker) some Principles, or Assertions
reputed his, that are not now to my purpose to treat on; and not having any
Reply from him, in dislike of what I wrote, Charity obliges me to suppose, that
(if his Name was not wrongfully made use of) it has been instrumental to
convince his Conscience of the Truths vindicated by me.

Now take an Instance of G. W's scurrilous Language against my self, etc.
namely, Their insolent Abuses, cruel Envy, Outrage, Madness, and Confusions of
certain Persons, turned Apostate Informers, treacherous Hypocrites, false
Brethren, deceitful Workers, betraying Iudases, Devils incarnate, who have lost
their first Love to truth, become degenerate, without natural Affection, Dogs
that are without, Wolves, Raging Waves of the Sea. See his Introductory Epistle.

G. W. is not only contented so to fame himself, as a Church Governor, but he
has also so confidently discours't of Skill in Law, as that he is taken to aim
at the Repute of being a very Learned Lawyer: How so? The unnamed Penman of the
Accuser, turned my word Concerned into Represented, and as such treats thereon.
On that Occasion I replied thus; It may be said of many Thousands of our
Visible Native Countrymen, that they are at some times, and seasons exercised
in an outward Order, under the Government of the King; but if thence they should
declare, that they are the Representatives of the King's Government, 'twould be
deemed a mode of Speech tending to the Annihilating of the King's Prerogative.
For this, G. W. thus treats me, Herein the man is under a mistake, in this
Allusion his Skill in the Law and the King's Prerogative and Government has
failed him. The truth is, I gave no Instance to illustrate my Assertion; I
shall now supply that defect, by instancing one thing amongst many that might
be mentioned. Many thousands of our Native Countrymen, are, on the 1st day of
the Week, exercised in an orderly manner, in hearing and uttering Religious
Service, established by Law under the King's Government.

Of all these it may be said, That they are exercised in an Outward Order,
under the Government of the King; but it cannot be said of all such, that they
are Representatives of the King's Government, which chiefly is represented in
his Courts. Methinks G. W. should be ashamed of his ridiculous Opposition on
the foot of his Skill in Law, for that by a contrary Assertion to what I laid
down, every common Porter (if a Native) exercised as aforesaid, might then be
declared a Representative of the King's Government, though no legal Officer.
This puts me in mind to note, that G. W. has lately published in his Name, a
Book, styled, Due Order of Law and Justice, against irregular and arbitrary
Proceedings. I shall a little examine how well such a Title becomes his Book.
He opposed giving J. B. Copy of the Meeting's Objections against my Book; for
the spreading whereof, he was declared against, as aforesaid: this was sign of
great Disorder and Injustice in G. W.

If G. W. handles the Matter of Law well, I know he must then thereby condemn
his own, and his Brethren's Practices: if ill, then it may become a shame to
put such a Title, by which he may obtain the Repute of a Learned Lawyer, from
such as know him not. (O proud Conceited Man!) Even as G. F. was reputed to be
inspired with the Knowledge of Tongues, by subscribing to many framed Sentences
in diverse Languages; (witness his Battledore) though he is not gifted to write,
or speak sense in his Mother Tongue, in a Through-Discourse, or Debate on some
Subjects, if some of his Books and public Discourses may be thought a proper
Proof in the Case. The remembrance of this can never credit G. W's Reflections
on F. B. for want of Schollarship.

I shall now add something touching G. W's Hypocritical, Pharisaical Spirit,
though he is guilty in diverse parts of his Treatise, of many Errors more than
this Paper detects him of; yet, at length, he speaks on this wise; Thou
know, O Lord, that though thou have endued me with a Christian Spirit, and
with Faith, Patience, and rejoicing under all my Sufferings, etc. yet, thou
have also endued me with the Spirit of Righteous Judgment, Understanding, and
Zeal for the Glory of thy Holy Name and Truth.

Methinks G. W. should have considered, that though he may deceive Fools, and
have now and then a Smile from a Hypocrite, yet that God cannot be deceived by
telling him a parcel of Lies; but his great Sin is, his (as it were) calling
God to witness, by saying, Thou know; when in reality, 'twas in a Case
wherein a notorious Lie dropped from his Pen; for his very Book will appear in
Judgment against him, that at the penning thereof he was far remote from acting
the part of a Righteous Judge. And many Instances, not herein cited, might be
collected to prove the same: it is so notoriously wicked, that it is no marvel to
me, that G. W. justifies the unnam'd Penman of the Accuser, (page 52.) though,
by W. P's Rule in his Winding Sheet for Controversy Ended, the said Penman, for
not putting his Name to his Work, may be compared to a very Night-bird, a
Wanderer, one that looks and creeps up and down like a Vagrant. And though in
the Seventh Part of my Christian-Quaker, an Hue and Cry is recorded after the
Name of the Penman; yet, I suppose, G. W. was ashamed, or afraid to become an
Informer in that Case, by a positive Discovery of the Man's Name. His
Confession, page 52. that he has a share therein, and sees no cause to
retract, but stand by it; is no positive Discovery.

I hope G. W. will accept these few Lines as a sufficient SCOURGE, to correct a
part of his Errors, and to abate a part of his Wrath, Pride, and Confidence:
if not, I now make this offer unto him; That I shall be ready to meet him in
some Public Place to be agreed upon between us both, where Liberty may be
allowed, that any Persons whatever may freely hear; and my end is, that I may
then have opportunity, to treat more largely on the foregoing Subjects, and
that he, on behalf of himself and Brethren, may have opportunity to vindicate
themselves, if he can, from the guilt of Error now laid, or that further may be
laid to his charge, by reason of what he has wrote in his Book, Styled,
Judgment Fixed; though frequently read, Judgment Fired: which would have been a
very proper Title to his Bundle of Wrath and Malice. For since it is so, that
one Part of the people, called, Quakers, are principled from the Second-day
Meeting's approved Council, not to read my Books, and that another Part need no
further evidence to convince them, that G. W. etc. stand by and espouse a wrong
cause, and that others termed Newters will not concern themselves in the
Controversy; there is no reason to trace G. W. (nor yet any other) Book against
me in all it is Perversions, false Quotations and other Evils and Errors by a
through Answer; especially since a few lines are sufficient to manifest, that
the Root from whence their Bulky-Rubbish springs is evil. The Lord soften G.
W's Stony-Heart; that he may be Converted and Healed.

POSTSCRIPT.
W. D. wrote to G. W to know whether he would stand by this Doctrine, namely,
that there can be no unity without Conformity, and that the People of God, or
Children of God are, or must be in uniformity. G. W. writes to W. D. and cites
the Doctrine, and then adds his answer in th^se words. Ans. True, 1st. with
respect to a Conformity to the death of Christ, to the Image of the Son of God.
2dly. They must be in uniformity, with respect to the unity of the Spirit, the
unity of the Faith; and being of one Judgment according to their measures of
Degrees and Growths in Christ, as they come to be of one Heart and Soul united
in Love, there is a uniformity in Substance, though not genera^^y (nor is it
required) in all Circumstances.

Hence I observe, that G. W. strains the word unity to import uniformity, and
to be as a Proof that Gods Children are, or must be in uniformity; and yet he
confesses to Measures of Degrees and Growths in Christ, which admits of various
Forms; though the unity in Spirit may not be broken. Next I observe from the
latter Part of his words, that there are Requirers of uniformity in Substance,
though not generally in all Circumstances. Hence I query, 1st. Who has power
so require God's People to be in uniformity? 2dly. What are the Substantial
Forms that must be and cannot be dispensed with? 3dly. What are the
Circumstantial Forms that may be disp^^s^d with, and not required? 4thly.
Whence the Requirers had their Power to enjoin uniformity? 5thly. Since Christ
is the Substance, whether they are not usurpers who require his members to
subject to outward Forms, terming some Substantial, and others Circumstantial.

W. R.

LONDON, Printed, 1683.


