A TRUE BELIEVER'S Testimony Of the WORK of True Faith; Who has believed in
CHRIST JESUS the True LIGHT, Who Enlighteneth every One that comes into the
World, that all men through Him might believe.

Wherein are many Excellent things held forth, which through Faith in the Light
are seen, learned, and certainly believed, etc. and are profitable for all to
read.

With a Visitation to the Called of God everywhere.

By a Servant of the Lord, Geo. Rofe.

London, Printed for Rob. Wilson, in Martins le Grand, near Aldersgate, 1661.

To the READER.
Reader,
Whosoever thou art that shall read this little Book, Be it known unto thee,
that I have not given it forth in any desire to appear unto men to be a setter
forth of Books; but in the Innocence and simplicity of my heart, as it was upon
me from the Lord, who moved me thereunto by his own Spirit and Power, else I
should not have set my Pen to Paper, to appear in Print; So if thou read in
Innocence and simplicity of heart, thou may see that my End is, to manifest
the living Truth of God, and to establish many in the Faith; which if thou
truly desire after, then have regard to the Light, which Christ has
enlightened thee withal, that thou may read with a sound Mind, and a good
Understanding, weighing and considering seriously as thou read (and not
making light of it) and then thou may come to understand those things which
thou never understoodst, and to see the Faith in Jesus Christ, who is the true
Light and Truth, by which we are carried through Nations, and upheld in all
Conditions both by Sea and by Land, having the Promise of an Everlasting
Kingdom; after which we earnestly press, and labor to bring People to; for
which sake all the Kingdoms of the World are against us: But we do assuredly
believe, That the Truth shall overcome them: And though we have nothing on our
parts, but the Truth of our God to uphold us against all our Enemies, (who are
as the stars of Heaven in multitude) yet they shall fall, and dye away, and
waste as the Dew, and every Mouth shall be stopped, and every Power confounded,
which rises up against us, and the Truth of our God in which we live, and in
which we have believed: which if thou desire to believe in, fear not, though
thou may meet with Difficulties, but believe in the Truth and true Light, and
thy Faith shall give the Victory, Farewell.

G. R.

A True Believer's TESTIMONY of the Work of True FAITH, etc.
AFter that from my Childhood, I had often both desired, and sought after the
Lord, in sighs and groanings, and many tears; and strong cryings, the Lord in
his own time, manifested Himself to me, by the Light which enlightens every one
that comes into the World, that all through it might believe; in which Light I
came to see my self when I first believed in it: and when I first came to hear
it speak in my heart, and to own it, I came to hear the Word, by which Faith
comes, for it preached Faith unto me; and by Faith in it I came to see all that
ever I did, and to have all my sins brought into my remembrance, and set in
order before me, by the Light, which comes from Christ the Author of Faith, who
enlighteneth every one that comes into the World, that all through Him might
believe.

By Faith in the Light I came to see Judgment kindled in my heart, and the
thoughts, and intents and purposes of my heart revealed, and to own the
Judgments of God upon all that ever I did, and that God was Just, Holy and True
in all His Ways, and in all his Judgments.

By Faith in the Light I came to see, if I forsook not the vain course of life
in which I lived, the Wrath and Judgments of God abode upon me.

By Faith I came to see how all the world live in wickedness, and ignorant of
the true God, not knowing the way of Eternal Life.

By Faith I came to see all the World With its Ways and Worships, are to be
denied, they acting all they do, in that nature, and with that spirit and mind,
which transgresses and is without the Faith, and out of the Light; and that
which is out of the Faith and out of the Light cannot please God, for out of
the Faith none can please God.

By Faith I came to see where the Enemy of Man's soul lodges, and how he
dwells in the hearts of all Transgressors, to turn the purposes of every heart
unto Evil, and to corrupt the thoughts of every mind.

By Faith in the Light I came to see the Judgment of the World, and the Prince
of the World judged and cast out.

By Faith I came to see the Seed which is immortal, which through Faith it has
pleased the Father to reveal in me, and Thousands of his Sons and Daughters,
which by Faith he raised from the dead, through his own Spirit, which makes us
to differ from all the World.

By Faith I came to see the Image of God renewed in his Seed, which Seed is
Christ, one in the male, and one in the female, who is the Lamb of God, which
was slain from the Foundation of the World, which God is raising in many Sons
and Daughters, to work out that nature which has transgressed, that the Sins
may be taken away, and the Transgressions blotted out.

By Faith I came to see, that no one is in the Covenant, nor in the Promise,
which is Life Eternal, who are not come to believe in the Light, and to witness
the Word of Faith in the heart and in the mouth, to give them Victory over
every evil Temptation, every evil Lust, every evil Desire, every evil Thought
and Word, which the Light checks and reproves for.

By Faith I came to see, that it is the true Light, which enlightens every one
that comes into the World, which manifests every ones evil, and reproves the
evil of every heart, and checks for every evil word, work, thought and deed,
and that this Light is spiritual and eternal, and never changes, but is the
same; though when man or woman changes their Obedience, it changes its
Administration; it preaches the Gospel truly in them, even the Day of the
Vengeance of God, to that which transgresses; and Peace, Love and Good Will to
every one that obeys and works Righteousness, both to the Jew, and likewise
to the Gentile, without respecting or accepting any person, but witnesses the
Truth in all, as in the sight of God.

By Faith I came to see that the Light which enlightneth every one (that all
men through it might believe) is the very ground of the knowledge of all Good,
and is indeed the very Life of God it self, in which his Seed is known, in
which God has placed the Promise, not only to live ever, but that all that
believe in it might live by it: Because I live, therefore I will that ye live
also. And this is the Promise in the Seed, before the World began, even Life
Eternal, which in the Saints abides, when the World shall be no more; who
through Faith have overcome the World and inherit Life Eternal, and this is
Jesus, the only true God and the Savior of the World, who is from Generation
to Generation.

By Faith I came to see, that the Light which enlightneth every one which comes
into the World, answers the Law and the Prophets, and is the Life of them
both, condemning every Transgressor and Transgression; in which Light, the Law
being manifest, condemns the Jew that has the Law, and sins under it; and
condemns the Gentile, who having not the Law in the letter, sins out of it;
and by the Light all the World will become guilty, that every tongue may
confess to God, and every mouth may be stopped, when by the Light (which
enlightens every one) every ones deeds will be manifest; for that records them
all in the Book of Conscience, and brings them all into remembrance before God,
and testifies of them between God and man, so that all come to be left without
excuse.

By Faith in the Light it is given me to see how all the World live in vanity,
transgressing the Light, and the Law and the Prophets, and those things that
are noted in the Scriptures of Truth; and it is nothing they have more set at
naught, and less esteemed on, and less regarded than these, and less regarded
than the Lord and his Truth, and the Scriptures (or writings) of it, though so
highly cried up in words.

By Faith I see, they prefer even those things which are as naught, and worse
than naught (for they corrupt their minds) before the Truth and Scriptures of
it, even in those things in which they transgress the Apostle's Doctrine, in
following the fashions of the World, in wearing of Gold and Pearls, and costly
things, and Rings on their hands, and Jewels in their ears, and Ribbonds, Toys,
Baubles, and costly Laces of Gold and Silver on all parts of their Bodies,
according as the lusts of Ignorance, and the treachery of the proud, earthly
Nature, and earthly sensual Wit, invents Fashions, to the great Dishonor of
God, and their own Bodies in which they should bear the Image of God, and
sanctify their Vessels unto Honor: but alas! the Body which should be for the
Lord, that is given up to be fornicated after those unprofitable things
beforementioned, and many more in the Fashions of the World, in which many
have given up themselves; and in vain Bowings, and vain Complements, and vain
Traditions, and vain Flatteries; and though they will say their hearts are not
in those things, yet by Faith in the Light I have seen long ago, That all who
live in such things, and say their hearts are not in them, deceive their own
souls: for, by Faith I have seen long ago, that none can live in such things,
but they do it to please that which is vain and of the Vanity, and out of the
Spirit of the Truth.

By Faith I have seen, that it is hard for many to let the World go; for many
hang in it until they become ready to pass away, and perish with it: But
blessed are they whose part is in the World to come, who have denied themselves
and this World, and let the Kingdom of this World go; whose part is in that
which is Immortal.

By Faith I have seen that none can come highly to esteem of the Truth, and the
Scriptures of it, but who believe in the Light, that by Faith they may deny the
World, and all things thereof, and their own selves also; for that which loves
the World, the Wrath of God is upon it, the Love of the Pather is not in it;
this denies the Father and the Son, and highly esteems of the Scriptures, and
never comes to Yea and Nay in all Communications, neither fulfilleth the Royal
Law and the Prophets; for this is selfish, and lightly esteems of, the Law and
the Prophets, and will not fulfill them, in doing to all men as men would be
done unto.

By Faith I see this Principle which is earthly, and hangs in the earthly
Nature, is a snare to thousands in this the Day of the Lord; and earthly things
are ready to ensnare many, when they by Faith have overcome many other things,
which were snares unto them before: but blessed are all they that dwell in the
Faith, in the Light, in the Power which gives Victory over the World, and over
all that appertains unto it. My Kingdom is not of this World (says Christ:) He
that will enter into my Kingdom, he must deny himself, and take up his daily
cross, and follow me: for none can enjoy two Kingdoms, nor serve two Masters.

By Faith in God I received Power to deny my self, and to cross my self in the
love of all things, and all delights beneath the Truth of God, and to lay hold
on the hope of Salvation, though for its sake I suffered with the rest of the
flock of God in the hatred of the World, in Reproaches, in Stonings, in
Tumultings, in Scourgings, in Stocks, in Prisons, in Fetters of Iron, in
Bruisings, in Woundings, in Travels, in Rejection of all the World; and yet by
Faith have rejoiced over them all in hope, accounting all things as nothing to
be compared with the Glory which God has revealed in his own Seed, and the
Power which by his own Son he has revealed in me.

By Faith it was confirmed unto me, that the Law and the Prophets, and Christ's
and the Apostles Writings, the Scriptures, are certainly Truth declared from
the Lord, and the Words of the most High God, which I never doubted on from a
Child, but that they were to be believed by all.

By Faith I came to receive an understanding in those things noted in the
Scriptures of Truth, and to be satisfied concerning all things therein
contained; for in the day when I sought Knowledge, and was ready to be
encumbered in seeking out the mystery of things by Faith in the Light, I
received the Answer of God, which I read in the word of Faith in my heart,
which spoke on this wise, faying, That I needed not to seek Knowledge, but to
wait upon the Lord, and to have my mind truly bowed before Him in the measure
of his Life, and whatsoever thing I stood in need of to know, and that the Lord
saw it expedient, He would certainly give me the knowledge of it, and to
understand it in the Lord's own appointed time: Which Word has been as a Stay
to my Soul, and I have seen God fulfilling it from day to day, who has made
known Himself to me, and given me His Truth; who requires nothing of any one
under Heaven but that which He first gives; who condemns none but for
disobeying that which He gives.

By Faith I see all the Professors of the World are aiming at the wrong Mark,
and seeking the wrong thing, and in the wrong Way; for they are seeking after
Knowledge, and to grow high in Wisdom and in Profession of words, when as they
should seek after the Life, and wait for the Power of God, which should lead
them in pure Obedience to the Lord and to his Truth; which Life and Power if
they miss on, they will be but as if they had precious Ointment of the
Apothecary, but, alas, Flies have corrupted it, that it cannot cure: Even so,
if all the knowledge of the World whilst mixed with earthliness and enmity,
neither does it stand in the Power of the Lord, which redeemeth out of the
World, and gives to seek after God, and feel after Him, in his Life to walk in
his pure living way, which who come into, shall not want Wisdom nor Knowledge,
but shall have it in the gift of God.

By Faith it is given me to see that the same Life which God has in these last
days made manifest, and declared to be the Light of the World, and does
enlighten every one that comes into the World, was in the days of Old; which
is the Heart of God, by which he purposes and upholdeth all things; which Life
in due time was declared to be his Son, and made known in the Church while in
the Wilderness, and was the Rock which followed Israel, of which they drank,
when they were joined unto the Law, and baptized into Moses in the Cloud, and
in the Sea: by which Moses He was seen, that God would raise Him up in the
midst of the People, for all the People to hear, that he that would not hear
Him might be cut off: So that certain it is, the Law did prophecy that the Son
of God should come; and not only so, for he was manifest in the days of Noah,
preaching to the Spirits in Prison, whose day Abraham saw and was glad; by
which Life the Prophets wrote of his Sufferings, which they saw and witnessed,
(should certainly be fulfilled) before the Seed was raised up through the
Virgin, which Seed is Christ who is come, and has taken the Seed of Abraham
and David, and suffered in the body, which Sufferings by Faith in the Light
(which He has enlightened every one withal) are clearly seen and believed, to
be done and fulfilled according to the Scriptures; So that by Faith in the
Light it is seen, and certainly believed, that the Lord's Christ is come in the
flesh, has suffered and is arisen in Glory in the Kingdom of his Father,
having suffered and fulfilled all things that was written of Him, being
declared by signs and wonders and mighty deeds, to be the only begotten Son of
the Father, the Prince of all his Saints, the Kings of the Earth and Priests
unto God; and all these things has he done and suffered, as it was written of
Him in the Prophets, That He being the firstborn among many Brethren, and the
first begotten from the dead, might have the pre-eminence, being in all things
a Captain, and Example in all Godliness and Humility, humbling Himself unto
death, even the death of His Cross; that in all things (He being our Example)
we may follow Him in His Sufferings and Death; who in that He dyed once, dyed
unto Sin, in that He lives, He lives unto God, Death has no more dominion
over Him. So likewise is every one, dying unto Sin, to live unto God, that the
residue of the days may be spent in the Service of God, and the death which
has reigned in the mortal body, and subjected the Creature unto Vanity, may
have no more dominion, but may be swallowed up and consumed unto the end in the
Victory of the Judgments of the Life.

And by Faith it is seen that it is a greater Mystery to know Christ to be the
firstborn, who must be witnessed born first in Man, before Man can be born
again; and be begotten from the dead, before Man can be begotten from the dead:
He that reads, let him understand; he that reads, must read by Faith in the
Light: and blessed is he that reads, and hears, and sees, and has part in
these things; he shall give Glory to the Lord, and to his Christ, who is
translating many Sons and Daughters out of the Kingdoms of this World into
Himself, and into His Kingdom, to praise and glorify and magnify Him for ever.

By Faith it is seen that Christ is certainly manifested to be that which was
written of Him, namely, to be a Covenant of the People, and Light of the
Gentiles, and Salvation of the Ends of the Earth, who is able to save to the
utmost all that come unto God by Him; who has freely offered up himself once
for all, and by the one offering has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified; and not only so, but being an Atonement for Sin, has appeased the
Wrath of God toward all, so that He is become a Propitiation for the Sins of
the whole World, having obtained Favor with God; so that time and space is
given, and a day of Visitation unto all; that the Long-sufferings of God
waits toward all: And this is the Liberty and Advantage; which Christ
through his Death and Sufferings has purchased for All, that all Men having a
Visitation, and time, they might Repent and turn to the Lord, by doing
Righteousness; which, if they neglect their time, and through impudence and
impenitence and hardness of heart, continue in their sins and unbelief, and so
treasures up Wrath against the day of Wrath, and the revelation of the
Righteous Judgments of God; such shall certainly perish, and receive the
greater Condemnation, when the measure of their Iniquities are full; and all
the Sufferings of Christ will be laid to their charge, who have pierced the
Just, by resisting the Grace and the Light, which from the Just is come, to
witness against all Transgression, and does testify against it in every ones
Conscience: and this all shall see to be true, that the Sufferings of Christ,
will be but to the greater Condemnation of them that continue in Wickedness,
though by His stripes are they made whole who turn unto Him: but the Just when
He appears, the Families and Kindreds of the Earth shall weep and wail over
Him, when every Eye shall see Him, and them that pierced Him shall behold him;
for He shall come in the Glory of his Kingdom; and in the Power of his Father,
to sit as Judge upon all the Families and Kindreds of the Earth, pleading with
them by Sword and Fire, and righteous Judgments, taking Vengeance on all who
have not wrought Righteousness on the Earth, nor walked prudently amongst Men,
to show forth his Praise, and the glory of his Grace, in obeying unto an Holy
Life and Pure Conversation: and as he comes, rises and appears, He destroys
the spirits of Belial, and consumes the Transgressor, that His Covenant of
Peace and Life for evermore may be established with and in His Seed in which He
comes, and in which he reveals himself in the Children of the Covenant, in
Mighty Power, that his Presence may go along with them and his Arm may defend
them, and his Glory follow after them to be their Re-reward: And the Spirits
and Life of all the Children of the Promise, the Heirs of Eternal Salvation He
upholds, who give themselves up unto Him and to the Appearing of his Glory, and
the Light of His glorious Gospel which shines in their hearts, that they may be
unto Him as the Tower of Sion and the Bulwarks of Jerusalem; in them has the
Star arisen which has shined from the North, and is broken forth in the
Darkness of the Night, and is shining toward the South, it rises in the East,
it looks toward the West, and there is no place for its going down: The Lord
has Multitudes of People, He gathers them as the Bands of the Earth, He
suffers the Nations to afflict them for a season, He chastizeth with the Rods
of Men, that He may prove them all for His Glory: And yet a little while and
the Rage of the Heathen shall sink: He corrects his People for their Good,
and chastizeth them for their Peace-sake, that He may build up his Nation which
He has visited, and establish his Seed which he has gathered, and multiply
his People: Thy Throne O God, endures for ever, and the Scepter of thy
Righteousness; who let not Sufferings and Trials to come upon the Seed
which thou has chosen, and the People which thou have visited, to destroy
them, but to establish them; that when thou have tried them as Gold, they may
be established, and fitted for thy use: that they may be humbled and all fear
before thee, and wait upon thee, that thou may renew us all from day to day,
and night after night, in thy Life, to do thy Service, to fit all thine to
Glory and Praise, and Honor immortal; for thy great Name thou art spreading
over all the Earth.

By Faith it was given me to see wherein the Worship of the true God
consists, and how He must be worshipped in the Spirit and in the Truth, which
the Father seeks such to worship him, as worship Him in the Spirit, as worship
Him in the Truth, and in the true Light, which enlighteneth every one; in which
none can see the Worship, but who come into the Faith, and into the Humility,
and into the Fear, and into the Waiting, and into the Zeal for God, which bows
the heart before God; and the heart being bowed, then the Consideration is come
into, and the Inquirings into the Knowledge of Life, and the sinking down to
feel the Spirit which brings the Truth into Remembrance, and also brings to be
still and quiet, and wait in stilness and quietness, and silence; then God is
seen and felt, and his Life which gives the Creature to feel after God, who
comes to be felt in his Life which enlighteneth the Creature, and gives the
Creature liveliness to wait for the renewing the strength, and God reveals his
Word, his Power and his Requirings in the Creature which works in the heart and
in the reins, and runs through the mortal body, and is weighty in operation, to
give Power and Dominion to the Creature, to the end that it may have full power
and strength to resist the Assaults of the Devil, and to have its mind staid in
stilness and quietness, and silence and waiting for the Love and Virtue and
Mercies of God; which being felt, then the Lord is admired and bowed unto: this
is Worship, to bow before the God of Heaven, that all that is in Man may be
bowed down, and submitted under the Life and Power, then he worships, he boweth
down to the higher Power, his soul abhors all defilements, his thoughts are
staid on God, his heart is kept tender and open, and he is refreshed in the
Enjoyment of the Life, and of the feeling of the Presence of the Lord and of
his Power, by which the Creature comes to admire the infinite Love and Mercies
of God, and the Riches of his Grace, that after so long living in disobedience
the Lord should reveal his Power, and make known the Riches of his Grace to
such a Creature that has been as altogether unworthy; but the Lord has done
it for his Seeds sake in Man, which never consented to, or took pleasure in
sinning, but hungered and thirsted after God, and breathed after God, and moved
in the Creature toward the Lord, even while the Creature was yet subject to
vanity; and for the Seeds sake the Lord is merciful, full of compassion,
long-suffering, and slow to Anger; and blessed are all they that turn unto Him
in the obedience of His Seed, and in the Faith of His Son, they shall see his
Mercies, know his Presence, feel his Life, Power and Spirit, which bows and
brings to worship God.

By Faith it is seen that none are more sensible of the feeling of the Presence
of the Lord, than when they are still and quiet, and wait in silence and
stilness, even when met together, and when alone: for, by Faith many are come
to see, that the Lord is very near, and that they feel his Presence when they
wait upon Him, and his Life breaks forth in his tender Love, to the great
refreshing of the soul, and quickening of the Creature; this takes away
weariness and leanness from the soul, and removes the multitude of vain
Thoughts which have lodged in Man; so, that though they may often appear, yet
they become stilled as though they were not; for when any thing appears
contrary to the Will of God, the Light is near and ready to administer Judgment
upon it, and to give the Creature to apply its mind to Judgment, through which
God redeems out of the Encumbrances, and reveals his Noble Spirit of Life,
which stills the Thoughts, and the Desires and Affections which would raise
Lust and War in the flesh; so that Man comes to wait out of himself, and out of
his own thoughts and imaginations, in the Life, the Promise it self, where it
feels the Riches of the Love, and of the Mercies and of the Grace, and of the
Power, which brings into the Glory, and into the unspeakable Life and Love,
where the mortal body becomes filled with Immortality and Life, which swallows
up mortality in Victory, and Conquest, and Dominion, and the delight of all
mortal fading things: and this has made me bold and confident in the Lord of
my Life, to give up my whole strength for the witnessing forth the Truth
through Faith (which by Faith is received of God) even through the Nations, by
Sea and by Land, as the Lord requires, which I account Eternal Salvation,
though for it I suffer many things: but all is good, and for good.

By Faith it is seen how exceeding good it is to wait upon the Lord, and to be
still and silent before Him, and in all things to eye Him and fear Him, then
the Encumbrances come to be taken away, and the Darkness and Doubtings
dissolved, and Courage and Boldness for God received; which gives to fulfill his
Will, and to receive his Peace, and to get Conquest over all the Enemies of the
Soul in every partiticular; and this gives Peace in all the World, and
satisfies concerning outward things, and enjoyments, and gives to see the end
of them all; and that the loss of Estates, Friends, Relations, and the
destroying the outward body; all is as nothing, and but a parting with that,
which must be parted with, be it sooner or later, the Will of the Lord be done;
for, we praise God, we have found Christ, and all things else is but as dung
and dross, and must be parted withal.

By Faith in the Light man comes to see Him that is invisible, and to the end
of all visible things and delights, and to be made willing to let all the
Honors, Preferments and Riches of the World, and the Great Name and Reputation
to pass away, as that in which Life is not to be found, and to be satisfied;
if he loses any thing for the Lord's sake, and the Gospels sake, he shall
receive his Reward.

By Faith it comes to be seen that every one having Food and Raiment, they are
therewith to be content; and that the labor of all, in the works of the
Creation, is to be for the Glory of God, and for the Praise of God, and the
Honor of God; and every ones Labor is to be for the Lord, and not to incumber
themselves, with taking care to lay up in store for Generations to come, and
for a Son or a Daughter, which its not known, whether they may glorify God
therewith or no; so that every one in his present Generation is to preach
Righteousness in all things, that in all his works he may preach for God. Noah
a Preacher of Righteousness obtained mercy with the Lord in his Generation, who
obeyed God, even God that has created Heaven and Earth, and all that lives
therein; who waters the Earth with the dew of Heaven, and causes it to fall
upon the tender Grass, so that it buddeth; and to mollify the Clods of the
Earth, that the Seed yields increase, Seed for the Sower and Bread for the
Eater; who satisfies every living thing that has life and breath, both in
Heaven and in Earth, and in the Waters under the Earth, so that upon Him the
care of every creature is to be set, and the expectation of every Creature is
to wait upon Him; who is the Provider for all Generations, from Generation to
Generation, unto a Thousand Generations; that his Works might be seen unto all,
and the Wonders of his Mercies throughout all Generations, to the setting forth
of his Praise unto all Generations, that the works of his Hands might all
praise Him, and He might be extolled by all his Creatures: But certainly
Generations have abused themselves, and dishonored the Lord Almighty; and the
Enemy of Mankind has had his strongholds in bewitching thousands and ten
thousands to set their hearts on earthly things, and earthly delights, more
than God; so that they have forgotten God their Savior, and rebelled against
the Rock of the whole World, who has founded the Sea and the dry Land in
Himself, and every Creature in his Power; who reserves the Wicked in his Wrath,
and places them in His Displeasure unto perpetual Generations. And indeed this
is the ground of the snares of all the world, the Enemy having bewitched the
minds of People, to delight themselves in earthly things, they have forgotten
God their Savior, and defiled themselves with themselves, and with the rest of
the Creatures; having their thoughts tempted to the creatures, they give
themselves up to be earthly and carnally minded, and to have the burnings of
the lusts to run into the greatness, and height of glorying in the Creatures;
and this is that which separates the families of the Earth from God, and which
causes the enmity, and the warrings, and envyings, and discord in all the
World, against which the Law it self was given; for in that Nature which
delights as before stands the sum of the Transgression of the Law, from which a
man must be born and redeemed, before he can love the Lord with all his heart,
and mind and soul, and serve Him with all his strength; and to love his
Neighbor as himself; and to do unto every one, as he would be done unto; which
fulfills all the Law: but the Earth is the Snare, and the parting with it the
fear of many, and the keeping many from the Covenant; though man, in giving all
things up to the Will of the Lord (and himself too) gives but the Lord's Own to
Him, which the Lord requires, that in all things He may be served and honored;
and who gives not up freely, the fear with which they feared the Lord will
bring upon them, and the thing which they put far off He will bring near and
make them suffer in: Therefore ye Families of the Earth, if you will come to
the Covenant of God, give up to the Lord in all things, whose right it is, and
shake your selves; come out of the love of the World, and the delights of those
things in which thousands have perished, that Satan may not tempt you; for when
you are tempted, and overcome, and defiled, you have first let your thoughts
out to take pleasure or liking, and to love that (or those things) at which the
Temptation points, else you could never be so easily overcome, as to make Sin
the greatest pleasure in the World: for, if you believed in the Light, and
walked in the Light, in the Fear of God, and in Humility, you would see the
Thoughts, and judge them, and not suffer the Eye of the Mind to look on that at
which the Temptation points, to take delight in that, and to love that, and
to advantage thy self in that; and then the Tempter should not overcome thee,
neither would thou like the Glory of the World, though tempted to it: This is
the great Temptation, which blessed is he that overcomes, and gets the
Victory through the Faith, by which Faith Abraham forsook his Father's house
and native Country, and wandered a Pilgrim and a stranger in a strange Land,
seeking a habitation, which was not an Earthly Tabernacle, but Eternal in the
Heavens, whose Builder and Maker was God. By which Faith, Moses chose to suffer
Affliction with the People of God, rather than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin
for a season; and would not dwell in the King's Court, nor be called the Son of
Pharoah's Daughter. By which Faith the Saints chose to wander in Sheepskins
and Goat Skins, and in Dens and Caves of the Earth; suffering the spoiling of
their Goods with joy; giving up their Bodies to suffer all manner of Tortur^s:
these overcame the great Temptation, and loved not their Lives unto Death: Of
whom the world was not worthy; who through then faith suffered all things, not
accepting of deliverance: By which Faith many in this Age give themselves up in
the like Sufferings, having the Evidence of a better Kingdom than that of this
World; counting all things as nothing that we may win Christ.

By Faith in the Light the Covenant of God is seen, and the Spirit of Life
received into the heart, to be a Guide and a Ruler; which writes its Law in the
heart, and puts it in the mind, in which the Directions for the whole course of
a Man's Life and Conversation comes to be read, as Man comes to take heed unto
the Grace which brings the Salvation and saves the Soul, and the Creature daily
from the snares of the Devil, in teaching the Creature, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, they may live soberly, righteously and godly in
this present evil world, and so come to know the Promise of the Covenant
fulfilled in them, which says, That all the People of God shall be taught of
God, and established in Righteousness far from Oppression, which none comes to
witness but who believes in the Light, the Grace which changes the heart; for
said God, I will make them a new heart, and give unto them a right Spirit, that
they may have all One heart, and all One way, and serve me all the days of
their life without fear: Which none comes to witness, but such as believe in
the Light, and wait in the Light to feel the Fountain of Life and Power opened
in them, to wash them from Sin and from Transgression, as the Lord said; for,
if this be not witnessed, the Iniquities will oppress the Soul, and defile the
Creature, and the old treacherous (...) ^ill abide, which will make the nature
treacherous, and yield its members, members of obedience unto Sin, and so to
transgress the Law, and so to be in hatred of God; and this keeps from knowing
the holy Anointing of the Soul with the Power of the Highest, which teaches
all things; that the Saints need no man to teach them, but the Anointing in
them teaches them all things which are Truth, and of it is no Lie; and this
Anointing in them gives them to know the Father and the Son, and to have an
understanding to know all things, both of the Law and of the Gospel, that they
need no man to bid them, Know the Lord; for the Seed of the Covenant is in
them, the Heir of Life, by which they see the Lord teaching them all; so that
All know Him, from the least to the greatest, and are All taught of Him, and
have ceased from man, whose breath is in his nostrils) and love Him, and keep
His Commandments, which to them are not grievous, but joyous, though for their
Obedience they may suffer, and have suffered by the Wicked in Bodies and
Estates.

By Faith it is seen how Christ is a Savior unto the utmost of all that come
unto God by Him, who in His first a^^^^ring in the Creature manifests sin, and
condemns for sin, who being believed in, destroys the sin, and works that
nature out of the Creature which has sinned and taken pleasure in sinning, and
so gives the pardon of the sins past, and gives the Creature to live in
obedience in the time to come, and so manifests Himself to be a Savior to the
Ends of the Earth, and that He is mighty to save, and to redeem his People out
of all Pollutions of Flesh und Spirit, that He may present them in himself
without spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, an Holy Church, a Spiritual House,
builded of living stones, an Holy Nation, a Peculiar People, a Royal
Priesthood, separated from sinners, and zealous of good works. And thus through
Faith Christ comes to be seen to be a whole Savior, and that the same Life in
which He manifests Himself in the Creature, which saves from Swearing,
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Theft, and the like gross evils, is as able to root out
the very ground of the Transgression as it is believed in, and to destroy the
earthly nature which has finned; and to save from all sin, and make man wholly
a right Seed, that he may be perfect, as his Father in Heaven is perfect and
holy; because God is holy, without which Holiness no man can see God; neither
can any out of the birth of the Holy Life see the Kingdom which the Children of
the Covenant see, and are Heirs of, being born again, not of corruptible seed,
but of the Word of God, which lives and endures for ever; by which Birth they
keep themselves that the wicked one touches them not: And this is the Victory
over the World, which tramples upon the World, and all its Delights and
Pleasures, Fa^hions and Vanities, and has put a cross and stop to that in
them, which was of the World; and he that is born of God sins not, neither
can he, because the Seed of God is in him, which keeps him from sinning, and
gives him to deny the Temptations of the Devil, which would draw to sin; and in
this are the Children of God and the children of the Devil manifest; he that
does Righteousness is Righteous, even as God is Righteous; he that sins is of
the Devil, and has neither seen God, nor known Him.

By Faith in the Light it is seen, that none can ever come to know the secrets
of God, but such as believe in the Light which has enlightened every one that
comes into the World: And there is not any that can ever come to be true
Prophets, true Ministers, true Teachers, true Apostles, true Elders, true
Pastors, true Evangelists, but such as believe in the true Light which
enlightens every one that comes into the World; for he that believes not in the
Light, he is not Zealous for God's Name, and for his Truth and his Glory, and
against all the wicked World, and its ways: And he that is not zealous for
God, he is dark, the World is i^ his heart, he sinks under the wicked, and
wants the true discerning Spirit, which should warm him with Power and Zeal,
and so wants the true Discerning, and the Openings, and the Revelations,
Visions and Prophesies, and the true Knowledge of Life Eternal, which the
Nations are to be turned unto, such cannot be Ministers of the Riches of God
under any name, nor do the work of God aright; for he that does Gods work
aright, must have it so wrought in him, that he may do all things according to
the Pattern that he sees of God; And he that is not zealous for God, he
receives not the true Wisdom, he cannot be a Prophet, but must be prophesied
against: he that is not zealous for God, he has not the Vision of God, nor the
Revelations; he cannot be a Teacher to open the Mysteries of God, but must
first have Judgment opened in himself: He that is not zealous for God, and
against all the World and its Deceit, he cannot be an Apostle, or a Pastor; he
cannot feed the Sheep and Lambs, but must first be fed with the Judgments of
God himself to bring him off the Earthly-mi^^^dness, in which he feeds, and off
the ^^^ghts of the sons and daughters of men, after which his eye looks and his
heart savours and would take pleasure in: He that is not zealous for God, he
cannot be an Elder, he cannot watch over Souls, but suffers the lusts in his
own flesh to lead him captive: be that is not zealous for God, is no
Evangelist, no setter forth of the Mystery of the Kingdom: he that is not
zealous for God, and against all the World, he cannot be a true Minister of
God, nor become worthy to receive the hidden Wisdom, and the Riches of the
Power which opens the eye, and seals the Instructions in the heart: He that is
not zealous for God, and for his Truth and his Righteousness, he cannot get the
Victory over the World, and over the Transgression, and the Error of his Life,
to crucify his earthly nature and mind; but his mind will be earthly, and
corrupted with the delighting in, and loving that, in which the seed of evil
doers delights; he will be taken in the captivity of the Enemy, and in the
Snare, and in the Cloud of Errors, and fall into Adversity, which he cannot
escape: He that is not zealous for God, cannot love God with all (...) heart,
but will reason with flesh and ^^^d about earthly things, and the sufferings of
this life, and will love something better than Christ, and so be unworthy to do
his Will, and to enter into his Kingdom; and cannot give up all things, suffer
all things, endure all things for Christ's sake: He that is not zealous for
God, cannot work the Works of Eternal Life, nor do the Work of God uprightly,
only for the Lord's sake, and in love to Him, looking for no other reward but
the Lord; which work the Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers of God and Christ
did through Faith, though contrary to the World, and its Teachers and Ways;
though for it they suffered many things, yet by Faith in the Light they were
upheld.

By Faith it is seen how just and righteous Joseph was, who though he was sold
into Adversity, and to be a Slave, yet stood faithful unto the Lord, even in
the Land of his Captivity, and would not hearken to the Entisememts of a
Whorish woman, though never so secretly, but rather chose to give up his Life
and his Body unto Sufferings and Prisons, than to transgress the Law of his
God; who through Faith gave up to suffer, rather than to enter into
defilements; and his Faith brought him through the Sufferings, and to be
faithful in Ten Temptations; so that by his Faith he subdued the whole Land of
Egypt under himself, and became Lord of it all; who was as a fruitful Vine upon
the Wall, and his Branches reached unto Heaven; who for his faithfulness was
greatly beloved of God, and made a Ruler over the sons of men.

By Faith it is seen how zealous Moses the Servant of the Lord was, who, as a
Servant, was faithful in all his House, who did the work of God uprightly; who
(when through Faith he had forsaken Pharoah's Court, and refused to be called
the son of Pharoah's daughter) sought to set up Judgment and Justice in the
Earth, and to establish Truth and Righteousness amongst men; who though he was
rejected by wicked, men, yet God made him a Judge and a Leader of his People,
and to appear before Pharaoh, to bring his People out of bondage; who refused
to lead them out on Pharoah's terms, but would have them go freely with all
they had; and he bowed not to the will of Phareah, though Pharaoh oppressed the
People the more.

By Faith it is seen when Pharaoh and his Taskmasters oppressed the Seed of
Israel most, they (to wit, Pharaoh and his People) were nearest Destruction;
for the Lord heard their Cry of Oppression, and delivered them, and overthrew
King Pharaoh and all his Host.

By Faith it is seen and believed, that it was just in Moses to sanctify the
People in the Wilderness (after he had brought them to stand still to see their
deliverance out of Egpt) though wicked men withstood him, and said he took too
much upon him; and Corah, Dathan, and Abiram gathered a Company against Moses
and Aaron the Servants of the Lord, who, with their Company, perished in their
Gain-sayings; for the Earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up quick, and
many feared because of their Cry. This is a true Figure to all Earthly minds,
whose Cry will be great, who are swallowing up in the mouth of the Earth, and
so goes down to their home quick, because they withstand the Sanctification,
and do not believe they shall be cleansed and perfected in this life.

By Faith it is seen, that it was just with God to plague Israel in the
Wilderness, because they followed not the Lord fully, though He was unto them a
Cloud by day, and a Pillar of Fire by nighty, (to preserve them from the Heat
and the Cold, and to guide them in the way wherein they should walk. You may
understand something by this, if you read in the Light) but went into
Fornication, and lusted after things that were not convenient, and looked back
into Egypt, to lust after the Fleshpots of Egypt; who ate and drank, and rose
up to Play, every one neighing after his Neighbors Wife, whose Carcasses fell
in the Wilderness.

By Faith it is seen how just it was with God to destroy the Kings of the
Amorites, and to give to the Children of Israel the Amorites, with their
Country, because they would not let them pass through their Dominions into the
promised Land of Rest; therefore was Og King of Bashan, and Sihon King of
Heshbon, destroyed with their People; and the Dominion of God came over them,
and their Dominion and their Earth, which was taken from them, though they
would not let the Righteous Nation pass through it, who were innocent and
harmless, and would have paid them for all: And though Balak sought
Enchantment, and hired Balaam to curse the People, yet God blessed them
altogether, and rejected Balaam, who would have cursed for Promotion and Wages,
whom God reproved by the voice of the Ass, for he was earthly; and though the
Lord blessed his People, yet Balaam taught Balak to cast a stumbling block
before the Children of Israel, namely, To Allure them with the Daughters of his
Land, to commit Fornication with the People of the Land, for which the Anger of
God was against His People; and by Faith Phineas stood on the Lord's part, and
thrust through Zimry and Cosby in their Fornication (though they were Princes
Children) and turned away the Anger of God, and received the Promise of an
Everlasting Priesthood: he was zealous for God, and took away the evildoers
from the Land.

By Faith it is seen how just it was with God to have Achan, destroyed, because
he disobeyed the Commandment of the Lord, when by Faith the Walls of Jericho
fell down, and his mind run into the Earth; he coveted the two hundred sheckles
of Silver, and the Wedge of Gold, and the goodly Babylonish Garment; for which
his Name became blotted out amongst the Tribes of Israel, though he hid his
deceit in the Earth.

By Faith it is seen, that it was just in Micaiah the Prophet of the Lord, that
he spoke the Word of the Lord faithfully, though against the King and his
Purposes, and the Four hundred Prophets, though he suffered for it.

By Faith it is seen, how just it was in Elijah to declare the Word of the
Lord, though he was called a Troubler of Israel for it, and his Life fought to
be made a prey upon; who was sent after into many Nations, and amongst many
People, because he pleased not Jezebel and the King, and their Priests and
Prophets: And it was just in Elijah when he witnessed against the Deceit of the
Priests of Baal (who were great in the Kingdom, and fed at Jezebels Table Four
hundred of them) to bring the People off them; whom he slew, when he had
faithfully manifested their Deceit to the People, though Jezebel sought his
life for it. Now these were zealous for the Lord, and feared not the face of
Man, nor to displease the Rulers and Powers of the Earth, whom the false
Prophets and Teachers ever sought to please, and to be in favor withal.

By Faith in the Light it is seen, that it was just in Samuel the Prophet to
testify against Saul and his People, because they fulfilled not the Word of
the Lord, but let their minds run into the Earthly things, in reserving the Fat
and the Best, in pretense of sacrificing to God; but God would have Obedience,
and not Sacrifice; and his Voice hearkened to, before the fat of Rams; So that
Disobedience was as Witchcraft, and Stubbornness as Inquity and Idolory; And
Saul saved Agag King of Amalek alive, whom Samuel slew: And the good Spirit of
God departed from Saul, because he had disobeyed.

By Faith it is seen, that it was just in Nathan the Prophet, to Reprove David,
King of Israel, because he had transgressed.

By Faith it is seen, that it was just with the Lord to rend the Kingdom out of
the ^and of Solomon and his Son, because Solomon transgressed the Commandments
of he Lord, and followed not the Lord fully ^o do his Will, but took Wives of
the Daughters of the Heathen, who drew his ^eart into Idolatry.

By Faith its seen that it was just and true Faithfulness in Mordecai the Jew,
who feared and worshipped the living God, that he would not bow down before
proud Haman though he was the second Ruler in the Kingdom, and the King had
commanded concerning him, that all men should bow down before him and reverence
him; this faithful Mordicai would not bow, though it was the King's
Commandment; he was subject to the Higher Power, the Power of Truth, in which
he gave up his Life, and the Life of the whole Seed of the Jews in danger of
being destroyed, rather than he would bow, contrary to his Conscience; and God,
unto whom he bowed, wrought deliverance for him, and for his People, and
destroyed proud Haman and his house, who was in the lower power, who was
displeased that the Righteous bowed not before him. Here all may read their
figure, who are displeased that the Righteous will not bow unto them now, nor
reverence them with bowing Hat and Knee, and giving flattering Titles of Honor
to them, which for Conscience sake, and its Peace sake, they cannot do; but bow
unto God, worship God and honor God and obey every Just and Righteous Law of
man.

By Faith in the Light it is seen and believed, that the true Prophets of the
Lord gave forth a just Testimony against the false Prophets, and false
Teachers, and false Shepherds, and false Pastors: Isaiah the Lord's Prophet
gave forth a faithful Testimony against the Priests, the Shepherds of Israel,
and Watchmen, and said they were all ignorant, they were all blind, they were
all Shepherds that could not understand, sleeping, lying down, and loving to
slumber; yea, they were dumb dogs that could not bark; greedy dogs that never
had enough, every one seeking for his gain from his quarter. These had their
minds run into earthly things, and were justly testified against. And Jeremiah
justly testified against. such Priests, as bear Rule by their Means, and said
it was a filthy and horrible thing committed in the Land, That the Priests
should bear Rule by their Means, and the Prophets should prophecy falsely, and
the People love to have it so: but what will ye do in the end thereof, says
he? He likewise bore Testimony against such Priests and Prophets who were light
and treacherous, who with Lies and lightness made the People light and vain;
from whom Wickedness and Profaneness was gone into all Nations; They were to him
Sodom, and as the Inhabitants of Gomorrha; and said the Lord was against them,
who prophesied and used their tongues, and said, The Lord says, when as they
had no other word, but what they stole from their Neighbors: Therefore the
Lord said, he was against them; they ran, and he never sent them, and they
should not profit the People at all: who were telling their false dreams, and
with their Lies And Lightness made the People light and vain. This Jeremiah was
put into the Dungeon for his testifying faithfully of the Truth of God against
both Rulers, and Priests, and People; And they that trembled at the Word of the
Lord in his days, they were cast out, unto whom he spoke the Word of the Lord,
saying, Hear ye the Word of the Lord, ye that tremble at the Word of the Lord;
your Brethren that hated yon, and cast ye out, said, Let the Lord be glorified:
He shall arise your glory, and to their shame.

And through Faith Ezekiel testified against such Shepherds and Teachers, as
fed themselves, and not the Flock; who fed with the Fat, and clothed with the
Wool, and made a Prey upon the People; who flattered the Ungodly, and put
Cushions under their Armholes; speaking Peace to the Wicked, and justifying the
Ungodly for a thing of naught, while they put into their mouths, and feed them
with the fat; These were in Confusion, one building a Wall, and another daubing
it with untempered Mortar who healed up the hurt of the Daughters of the People
slightly, until they made the wound uncurable, and the souls that should have
lived became destroyed: This Ezekiel was a Sign and a Reproach amongst them,
and they accounted of him to be but an enditer of Parables.

And Hosea testified justly against the Priests who went in Cains way in envy;
he said, As a Company of Robbers wait for a man; so do the Company of Priests
murder in the way by consent, they commit Lewdness, etc.

By Faith it is seen, how just and faithful it was in Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednega, the Servants of the most High God, who would not bow at the King's
Commandment; not bow to the Image, nor serve the god which Nebuchadnezzar the
King had set up, though it was assented unto by the People, and the Image
dedicated before the Rulers, the Captains, and Officers, and People of the Land
and Commandment, That all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and People, when they
heard all the sorts of Music should fall down and worship; if not, to be cast
into the Fiery Furnace. But these faithful Servants of the Lord, though in
Captivity, regarded not the Kings Commandment, but served the living God, who
delivered them by their Faith out of the Fiery Furnace, and out of the hands of
Nebuchadnezzar, who would have forced them contrary to their Faith; who himself
was forced from his Kingdom, and driven from amongst: Men, etc. because he was
exalted in Pride against the Lord, and in the delight of earthly things; who
said, Is not this great Babel which I have built, by the might of my Power, for
the glory of my Majesty?

By Faith it is seen, that it was just in Daniel (who was come to pray in Faith
and in the Spirit) that he would not be restrained from serving his God in the
way as he was wont to do, though wicked Rulers and Princes betrayed the King,
to make a Law to ensnare him; which was called a firm Decree and unalterable,
according to the Law of the Medes and Persians: yet Daniel feared not, but
served his God according to his Conscience, though it was against their Royal
Law and firm Decree, which the King and Princes had made: and by his Faith was
delivered out of the Den of Lions, and God stopped their mouths. And these
things are a faithful Testimony against all changable Priests, who crouch, and
bow, and dissemble with every Power of the Earth, who can but give them a
Reward; and will change their Faith, Worship, and Religion, according to the
Will of every Power that rules as Chief in the Nations; so that People cannot
have any Certainty of trusting in them, nor in their Way, Faith, Worship, nor
Doctrine. And these things may serve as a Confirmation of all in the True
Faith, that they may continue in the exercise of their Conscience in the pure
Religion and Worship of God; believing, that that way which the Wicked may hope
to destroy them for their Faith and Obedience, that way God is able to deliver
and exalt them; as may be seen of Mordecai, the Three Children, Daniel, and
many others, who abode faithful to the death; and being thoroughly proved, were
exalted; and their Enemies, who hoped to have destroyed them, were destroyed;
and thus, through Faith and Comfort of the Scriptures, to have Hope and strong
Confidence in God.

By Faith it is seen, that Micah the Prophet of the Lord, justly and righteously
declared against the Judges that judged for Reward; and against that grievous
Abomination of the Priests preaching for Hire, and the Prophets divining for
Money, who spoke Peace, and cried, Peace, peace, while they put into their
mouths; but if they put not into their mouths, then they prepareed war
against them, Mica. 3. and yet they will lean upon the Lord, and say, No evil
shall come upon them: But for their sakes Sion shall be plowed as a field, and
Jerusalem shall become an heap, and the Mountain of the House of the Lord, as
the high places of the Forest. Mark what desolation here was because of these
things: though they said. No evil shall come upon them, and cried Peace, while
they put into their mouths, and gave them the hire, the Wages of
Unrighteousness, the Money for which they preached and divined.

By Faith it is seen how just it was in Amos to declare the Word of the Lord
faithfully, though against King Jeroboam and the Priests; and though he was but
an Herdsman, and a gatherer of Sycamore fruits, yet called thereunto of God;
against whom Amaziah Priest arose in Envy, to have expelled him out of their
Coasts; who complained against him to the King, and said, the Land was not able
to bear his words, and bid him flee Into the Land of Benjamin, and prophecy no
more at Bethel, for it was the King's Chapel, and the Palace of the Kingdom.

And by Faith in the Light it is seen how just it was in Malachy to declare the
Commandment of God, against the Priests who had violated the Law, and
transgressed that which they should have brought people to the obedience of,
and to the fulfilling of, that if they did not Repent, God would curse their
Blessings, and spread the dung of their solemn Assemblies on their faces, and
men should carry them away; yea, I have cursed them already, faith the Lord.
Now these Priests Lips should have preserved Knowledge, and the people should
have sought the Law at their mouths; for the Covenant with Levi was Life and
Peace for evermore, for he turned many from Iniquity to Righteousness: but
these violated the Law, and corrupted their doings, and transgressed that,
Which they should have brought people to the obedience of; for which cause God
rejected their doings, and cursed their Blessings, and they should be no more
Priests to Him: But unto us the true Priest is manifest CHRIST who has written
his Law in our hearts, and put it in our minds, so that we see the end of all
the Priests, and cannot seek the Law at their mouths who divines it out for
Money, and have no need to seek it of them; for we are come to the Everlasting
Law written in our hearts, the Covenant of God, wherein all know the Lord, and
witness Christ and his Spirit of Life, at whose mouth we have received the Law,
and He is the Preserver of our Knowledge.

By Faith it is seen, that it was just and righteous in Christ, to bid the Jews
do as the Pharisees said while they sat in Moses Seat, and read the Law, but
not to follow after their works, nor their traditions which were vain, by which
they made the Commandments of God of none effect, and this was spoken to the
Jews, who were under the Law (for under the Law, Christ was made of a Woman, to
Redeem them that are under the Law) and the Law was to be fulfilled, which
Christ is the End of, which he then witnessed unto, that it was to be heard
from their mouths; who when Christ was offered up, the End of the Law, the
everlasting Offering, the Apostles witnessed the contrary, that such as had the
Form of Godliness, and denied the Life and Power, from such turn away; for then
they made but merchandise of Souls after Christ was come, and offered up, the
everlasting Priest, who writes his Law in their, hearts, and puts it in their
minds, that by it all may be taught of God, and so come off from the Pharisees
and Priests, though they sat in Moses Seat, whose Worship was vain, teaching
for Doctrines the Traditions of men, drawing near with their mouths and lips,
while their hearts were far from God.

By Faith it is seen, that it was just and righteous in Christ to own the
Tything of Mint, Annis and Rhue, amongst the Jews, (though he condemned the
Priests, and Pharisees, and Jews, for omitting the weighty matters of the Law,
Faith, Mercy, and Justice) for that was in the time also of the Law, and of the
first Priesthood, and before the everlasting Offering, was offered up, which is
the end of the Law, and the sum of all Offerings; who blotted out the hand
writing of Ordinances, and nailed them to his Cross, which were against us; and
raised up another Priesthood, which was free, and sent forth Ministers to turn
People to it, who had freely received, and were freely to give: and the
Apostles never spoke of Tithes to Gentiles, (nor Christ neither) but witnessed
the contrary; and that the first Priesthood, which consisted in diverse
Washings, and Meats, and Drinks (under which the Tithes were paid)was changed,
and the Law also, by which it was made, and by which the Tithes were paid
under it, Hebr. 7. for the Law and the first Priesthood made nothing perfect,
as appertaining to the Conscience, but the bringing in of a better Hope did, by
the which we draw nigh unto God, which is Christ, who is revealed in his
People, an Anchor to their Souls, to keep them sure and steadfast, and he is in
us, the Hope of Glory; and he that has this Hope in him, purifies himself,
even as he is pure: So that it is clearly seen, they that take Tithes now, are
Antichristian; and they which pay them, deny the Everlasting Offering, by which
them that are sanctified are perfected for ever; who is the End of the Law, and
the changeable Priesthood; who has blotted out the hand writing of Ordinances,
nailing them to his Cross, and brought in the everlasting Righteousness, and
the Spiritual Priesthood, and the Hope which makes perfect, pertaining to the
Conscience.

By Faith it is clearly seen, that God in his faithfulness, has revealed his
Son to finish Sin, and make an end of Transgression, and to cause the daily
Offerings to cease (for which sake the Tithes were paid to the Priests and
Levites of the first Priesthood) and offered up himself upon the Cross, to make
peace between man and God, that all strife might be ended; so he blotting out
the Ordinances of the first Covenant, which were in old time, and ordains
obedience for all His, that so as he makes peace with God, they may have peace
with all men, and exercise a Conscience void of offense toward all, and love
their enemies, and resist not evil, do good against evil, bless them that
curse, pray for them that dispitefully use them; love their enemies, feed them
when they are hungry, cloth them when they are naked; if any one compels to go
a mile, go with him twain; and if they smite thee on the right cheek, turn the
other; and if they sue thee at the Law, and take away thy coat, let them have
thy cloak also; and do unto every one, as thou would be done unto; love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart and soul, and thy Neighbor as thy self; this
is the Royal Law and the Prophets, which the Gospel, (which is the Power of God
to Salvation) gives, every one to fulfill, who does believe in it, and obey it:
Now he that comes to this, needs not swear at all, but in all his
Communication, let his yea, be yea, his nay, nay. Here Is the end of Strife, the
end of Sinning, the end of Fighting, the end of Wrangling and Suing at Law, and
Swearing, and false Witness-bearing; the obedience to the Gospel, which is
received by Faith in the Light, which gives to suffer all things, bear all
things, forgive all things, committing every thing unto God, that judges
righteously; and he that comes to this, will not stumble at Christ's Doctrine,
which says, Swear not at all; nor at the Apostles Doctrine, who says, My
Brethren, above all things, swear not by any Oath, lest ye fall into
Condemnation, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, in all your
Communications; and then it will be seen, that there is not a wise man amongst
them, that goes to Law with his Brother, and does not choose rather to suffer
wrong; and that such have not the mind of Christ, who cannot suffer, though he
suffered for all.

By Faith it is seen, that Christ made it one of his greatest Businesses, and
one of his chiefest Works, to witness against the Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees; and witnessed the most Woes against them than against any, for they
laid heavy burdens upon the People, and devoured Widows Houses, and under a
pretense made long Prayers; these should receive the greater damnation, and he
cried, Woe against them often, and called them Fools, and Blind, and Serpents,
and Vipers, and asked them, how they could escape the Damnation of Hell, who
were blind leaders of the blind? these were witnessed against, for their
standing praying in the Synagogues, and being called of men Masters, and having
the chiefest places in the Assemblies, and the greetings in the Markets, and
walking in long Robes; and Christ commanded his Disciples, not to be called of
men Master, for one was their Master, ev^n Christ, and they were all Brethren;
and he bid them beware of the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, (to wit,
their Doctrine) for it was Hypocrisy; they say and do not: here he brought
them out from them, and did not bid them hear them any more, to do as they
said, for the Law was fulfilled, which Christ is the End of; and they were to
Preach the Gospel, and bring People off from the Temple, Synagogues and
Assemblies of the Priests and Pharisees, to the Light and Power of God, to
worship God in the Spirit, and in the Truth; and for Christ's witnessing the
Truth against these Priests, Pharisees, Scribes, and Rulers, and Jews, they
accused him to be mad, and to have a Devil, and to be a Blasphemer; and so the
Priests, Pharisees and Scribes, stirred up the Powers of the Earth against him,
to put him to death, and to render him odious to the Rulers; and said he was
not Cesars friend, and that he denied to pay Tribute to Caesar; and so through
lies and dissimulation, stirred up both Rulers and People against the Lord of
Life, the Lord of Glory, whom they took, with wicked hands, and slew, and
hanged on a Tree, whom God raised up from the Dead, against whom the Envy of
the Priests was not satisfied, but gave large moneys to raise lies of him after
his Resurrection, which were believed among the Jews unto this day.

By Faith it is seen, how just and righteous the Judgment of Christ was against
them, who were once bidden to the Marriage Supper of the Kingdom, (who when all
things on the Kings part were provided for them, began to make excuses, one by
one; the one hanging in the Farm, the other in the Yoke, of Oxen, and the other
taking a Wife, and could not come) to reject them all; and if the Jews, who
were first bidden, could not taste of his Supper, because of these things:
wherewith can the Gentiles be found worthy, but by coming out of them, into the
obedience of the Truth? and to come out of the Earth, out of the Highways,
and Hedges, and Streets, where there has been lameness, and blindness, and
hardness of heart, which the Gentile, if he comes in, has not the Wedding
garment, and to him it will be said, Friend, how came thou hither, not having
a Wedding garment? and he shall be taken, and cast into utter darkness, where
there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth: Therefore all are
to look about them, and mind to obey that which is of God, that you may have
the VVeding garment, the clothing of Righteousness; which, whosoever fears
God, and works Righteousness in all Nations, both Jews and Gentiles, shall be
accepted; but anguish, pain and tribulation, to the Soul of every one that does
Evil, to the Jew first, and likewise to the Gentile.

By Faith it is seen, how just and righteous it was for the Apostles and
Servants of Christ to meet togetter, in the Faith, and in the Fear of the Lord,
to wait together for the Promise of the Father; which said Christ, ye have
heard of me, and ye shall receive Power from on High, when the Holy Ghost is
come upon you; and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both at Jerusalem, and in
Judea; and they through waiting received the Promise, the Power from on High,
and the Holy Ghost came upon them; and through the Power of the Highest, were
moved to go into the Nations, and unto the People which dwelt upon the Earth,
Preaching the Gospel freely, as they had received freely, laboring in the
Power of the Highest, to turn People from the Darkness and Error of their
Lives, unto the Light, and to the Knowledge of the Light of the Glorious
Gospel, which shined in their hearts, to give them the Light of the Knowledge
of the Glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, and Preached the Word of
Faith in their hearts, and in their mouths; and that they had a more sure Word
of Prophecy, unto which they did well to take heed, as unto a Light that
shined in a dark place, until the day dawned, and the day Star arose in their
hearts.

By Faith it is seen, how just it was in the Apostles, to go forth, Preaching
the Gospel to all Nations, though commanded by the Rulers, to speak no more in
that Name, yet they spoke the more boldly; going into Markets, Synagogues, and
Assemblies of the People, though opposed by Priests, and Rulers, and People,
and cast into prisons, and under sore Persecutions and Bonds, and many Trials,
yet they went on boldly, not regarding the Commandment of men, but obeyed God
rather than man.

By Faith it is seen, how just it was in them, to witness against false
Worships, false Teachers, false Apostles, false Prophets, false Ministers,
laying them open by their Fruits, as Christ had said, when he prophesied, that
many false Christ's, and false Prophets should come, and should deceive many; by
their fruits ye shall know them; and by their fruits the Apostles laid them
open, who were false Ministers, Messengers of Satan, Ministers of
unrighteousness, transforming themselves into the likeness of the Ministers of
Christ, who went in Cain's way, envying, and persecuting the Just, and in
Balaam's way, for Wages of unrighteousness, and Promotion, and Gifts, and
Rewards; who minded earthly things, whose God was their Belly, and their glory
in their shame, whose end was to be destroyed; who with good words, and fair
speeches, deceived the hearts of the simple, and through covetousness made
merchandise of Souls, bringing in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and preach for Money and Price; when as the Lord said, Freely ye
have received, freely give, the Workman is worthy of his meat; these had eyes
full of Adultery, and could not cease from sinning, beguiling unstable Souls,
whose hearts are exercised with covetous Practices, cursed Children, which have
forsaken the right Way, and are gone astray, after the error of Balaam; who
loved the Wages of unrighteousness; but the dumb Ass speaking with man's Voice,
rebuked such madness in him, who was greedying after earthly things. And the
Apostles witnessed against such Teachers, that spoke things which they ought
not, for filthy lucre sake, who were proud men, who were covetous men, heady,
high-minded, treacherous, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy,
blasphemers, truce breakers, incontinent, fierce, dispisers of those that are
good, lovers of Pleasures more than lovers of God, having a Form of Godliness,
but denying the Life and Power thereof; from such turn away: for of this sort
are they which creep into Houses, leading silly Women captive, laden with sin,
and led away with diverse lusts, ever learning, but never able to come to the
Knowledge of the Truth; and as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these
withstand the Truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith,
being Evil men, and Seducers, waxing worse and worse, deceiving, and being
deceived; but they shall proceed no further, their folly shall be manifest to
all men. And Jude witnesses against such as were ungodly men, turning the
Grace of our Lord Jesus into lasciviousness, denying the only Lord and Savior;
and called them Wells without water, spots in their Feasts, feeding without
Fear, Clouds carried about with Wind, filthy Dreamers, that defile the Flesh;
who went in Cain's way, and Balaam's way, having men's persons in admiration
because of advantage, being separated, sensual, having not the Spirit: And the
Apostle witnessed against them, who were given to Wine, and that were Strikers
and Lovers of Money, and of filthy Lucre (and bid the Saints take heed of such
that were desirous of filthy Lucre) that were self-willed, who despised
Dominion, and spoke evil of Dignities, natural bruit Beasts, made to be taken
and destroyed; (as all the Priests of the World, despise that any can come into
that Dignity or Dominion, as to overcome Sin, and to be thoroughly cleansed in
this Life, and perfected.)

By Faith it is seen, that all these that testified against such as lived in
these Practices, before mentioned, were just and faithful unto God; and it is
likewise seen to be just and faithfulness in us, to declare against all such
that live in such Practices that they were in, which the Prophets, Christ, and
his Apostles, and all the Saints testified against, though the world could not
bear it then, to have their Teachers and Prophets declared against, neither can
they now; yet it is just with God, and in faithfulness to the Lord, to declare
against them, who are manifest by their Fruits, to be in the steps of the false
Prophets; by their Fruits ye shall know them, says Christ, for an evil Tree
cannot bring forth good Fruit, nor a good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit.

By Faith it is seen, that it was just with God to smite Herod the King (who had
stretched forth his hand to vex certain of the Church, and persecuted the
Saints) when he had made an Oration before the People, who gave a shout, and
said it was the Voice of a God, and not of a man, and that the worms should eat
him, because he gave not the Glory to God.

By Faith it is seen, that it was great faithfulness and obedience unto the Lord
in the Apostles, that they gave up themselves to do the Work of God, and
labored in the Truth, to turn both Jews and Gentiles to Christ, the true
Light, which enlightneth every one that comes into the World; and to the Grace
which has appeared to all men, which taught the Saints that denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, they might live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly
in this present World, and come to know the saving of their Souls, by the Grace
through Faith; and when the People did once believe, they came to receive Grace
for Grace, and had Faith revealed in them, from Faith to Faith, which gave them
Victory over the whole World, and over the Transgression of it, to be cleansed
from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of
God; and unto such the Apostles wrote Epistles, exhorting them to continue in
the Faith, and to persevere in the Hope, Watching and being Sober, having the
loins of their minds girt about with the Truth; unto these Salvation was come
nearer than when they first Believed; therefore they were to awake from sleep,
and rise, from dead Works, and to put off the deeds of the Night; for the
Darkness was past, and the true Light shined, and they were to put on the whole
Armor of God, to Arm themselves with the Armor of Light, that they might
withstand the evil Day, and might be able to quench the fiery Darts of the
Devil; that they might offer their Bodies unto God, a Living, Holy Sacrifice,
acceptable unto God, which was but their reasonable Service; not fashioning
themselves according to the Fashions of the World, but to be renewed in their
Minds, to prove what is that good and acceptable, and perfed Will of God: And
they were not to adorn themselves with Gold, or Silver, or Pearls or Plaiting
of Hair, nor costly Array, but with modest Apparel, to adorn the Doctrine of
the Gospel of Christ; Let not your adorning be with the putting on of Apparel,
nor wearing of Gold, or Pearls, ar broidered Hair, but let it be in the hidden
man of the Heart, with a meek and quiet Spirit, which with the Lord is of great
price; and their words were to be few, and seasoned with salt, that they might
administer Grace to the Hearers; that all things might be done in Order, and
decently, for the setting forth the Glory of God, and the Praise of his Grace,
by which they were called to be Saints.

By Faith it is likewise seen, that after the Apostles had once turned the
People to the true Light, and to know God shining in their Hearts, to cause the
Light to shine out of Darkness, to give them the Light of the Knowledge of his
Glory, in the face of Jesus Christ, in which they received the Anointing, which
gave them an understanding to know all things, so that they needed no man to
teach them; then they committed them to the Word of his Grace, which was able
to keep them from falling, and left them to assemble themselves together in the
Spirit, to worship God in the Spirit, and in the Truth, and not to forsake the
assembling themselves together (as the manner of some was) but to wait for the
Promises, and persevere in the Hope unto the end, waiting for the appearing of
the great God and his Christ; then they left them, committing them to the Grace
which was able to keep them from falling, and to the Spirit of Jesus, which was
able to build them up, and ^o keep them from the world unspotted, and to hate
even the garment spotted with the Flesh, and to present them Holy unto God,
without spot or blemish, or any such like thing; which brought them (...) one
another, and to have Union one w^^h another, and not with the world (for a
Believer and an Infidel cannot concord) then I say they left them, and did not
continue with them, as the manner of Hirelings ever was, to stay as long as
they lived, for great sums of Money, with one People (except they could get a
greater Benefice with another) whose day is as the cutting off Life from the
Earth, and going down to the Grave; but the Apostles day, was to do the joyful
Work of God, and to call many into the Light, the way of everlasting Rest, and
Peace, and Joy; who, when they had turned one People to the Light, left them,
and wrote to them from another People, unto whom they were gone to turn them to
the same Truth, and out of other Lands: So they saluted the Saints and their
Assemblies (which they had gathered) with the salu^ations of Peace and Love,
exhorting all to press forward to the Mark of the price of the High Calling in
Christ Jesus; namely, to the full attainment of the fullness of an Holy and
perfect Life, that they might all be presented perfect in Christ, and
sanctified throughout, in Soul, Body and Spirit, and being partakers of the
Divine Nature, and escaping the Corruption which is in the world, through lust,
and being partakers of the Faith, they might give all diligence, to make their
Calling and Election sure; adding unto Faith, Virtue, and unto Virtue,
Knowledge, and to Knowledge, Temperance, and to Temperance, Patience, and to
Patience, Godliness, and to Godliness, brotherly Love, and to brotherly Love,
Charity, (which is the band that keeps perfect) for if these things be in you
and abound, they make you, that you shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful, in
the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; but he that lacks these
things, is blind, and cannot see afar off, and has forgotten that he was
purged from his old sins: Wherefore the rather Brethren, give all diligence, to
make your Calling and Election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never
fall; and so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

This I have given forth, from the Innocence and uprightness of my Heart, as
moved of the Lord, which I send abroad, as a Testimony of the true Work of the
true Faith, and of its Effect; it being a few of those excellent Truths, which
through Faith in the Light, is given me to see, and to believe, and to witness
forth the true Testimony of the Saints, which justly and truly they through
Faith witnessed forth, to the Glory of God; and it is to be Printed and sent
abroad unto all People, but most especially to all the English in America, and
the West Indies, and the Islands thereunto belonging; which if in this I should
finish my Testimony, of Writing or Declaring the Truth of God, yet this shall
stand unto Generations to come, and to this present Generation, as a Testimony
of the Truth, learned by Faith, which shall be witnessed by the Light in every
one's Conscience, to be true; which whosoever believes in the true Light, which
enlightens every one, shall see greater things than these, and that by Faith
it is possible to know all things, and to know God, whom to know, is Life
Eternal: Farewell.

Written in Virginia, by a Lover of the Truth, and a Believer in the true
Light. G. R.

Concerning Waiting upon the Lord, in stilness, and in silence.
When Israel was in distress, they were commanded to hold their peace, and
stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, and the Lord should fight for
them, Exodus 14.13, 14. and when they stood still, then the Lord revealed his
Arm, and saved and delivered them: But when they distrusted the Lord, and
looked to Egypt for help, the Lord said, Egypt should help in vain, and to no
purpose; Therefore have I cried concerning this, their strength is to sit still:
Mark, to sit still was their strength; and in returning and rest shall ye be
saved, in quietness and in confidence shall be your strength, Isa. 30.7, 15.
But they would not, but said no, We will flee upon the swift. Mark, here is a
way of their own finding; therefore the swift should pursue them, and one
thousand should flee at the rebuke of one, and at the rebuke of five shall ye
flee, till ye be left as a Beacon on the top of a Mountain, and as an Ensign on
a Hill. Now mark, what became of them, who would not stand still, who would not
Wait; and Job being afflicted, and his Friends came to visit him, they sat
silent, waiting seven days, Job 2.13. And all may see it was the way of the
Saints to be in stilness, and in silence, and in waiting; for blessed are all
they that wait upon the Lord, Isa. 30.18. And David says, I wait for the Lord,
my soul does wait, and in his Word do I hope; my soul waits for the Lord,
more than they that watch for the morning; I say, more than they that watch for
the morning, Psa. 130.5, 6. and rest in the Lord, wait patiently for him, Psa.
37.7. And the Youths shall faint and be weary, and the Young Men shall utterly
fall; but they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength; they shall
mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they shall
walk and not faint Isa. 40.30, 31. And the strong Lion shall suffer want, and
the young Lion shall suffer hunger; but he that waits upon the Lord shall not
want any good thing. I will stand upon my watch, and set me on the Tower, and
will watch to see, what the Lord will say unto me (or speak in me) and what I
shall answer when I am reproved; and let all flesh keep silent before the Lord,
Hab. 2. for every man's own words shall be his burden, Jer. 23. Keep silent
before me, O Islands, and let the People renew their strength; for the Isles
shall wait for his Law, Isa. 42.4. Yea, in the way of thy Judgments, O Lord,
have we waited for Thee, the desire of our soul is to thy Name, and to the
remembrance of Thee; with my soul have I desired Thee, In the night: yea, with
my spirit within me will I seek Thee early; for when thy Judgments are in the
Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness, Isa. 26.8, 9.
Note this well, how they were to wait, and how they waited, and sought the
Lord: Hearken unto me my People, and give ear unto me, O my Nation, for a Law
shall proceed from me, and I will make my Judgment to rest for a Light of the
People; my Righteousness is near, my Salvation Is gone forth, and mine Arms
shall judge the People; the Isles shall wait upon me, and on mine Arm shall
they trust, Isa. 51.4, 5. For since the beginning of the World, men have not
heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God, besides
thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for him, Isa. 64.4. The Lord
is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that seeks him: It is good
that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord; it
is good for a man, that he bear the yoke in his youth; he sits alone, and
keeps silence, because he has borne it upon him; he puts his mouth in the
dust, if so be there may be hope, etc. Lam. 3.25, etc. And they shall every man
sit under his own Vine, und under his own Fig Tree, and none shall make them
afraid, Mica. 4. Therefore turn thou to thy God, keep Mercy and Judgment, and
wait on thy God continually, Hos. 12.6. Hence all may see the Practice of the
Saints, in the days of the Prophets; and how all are commanded to wait and
hope in the Lord, and to be quiet and still, hoping on the God of their
Salvation.

And Christ says, Wheresoever two or three are met together in my Name, there
am I in the midst of them, Mat. 18.20. And can ye not watch one hour? and what
I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch; for blessed shall he be that shall be
found so doing, when the Son of man comes, Mark 13. and the five foolish
Virgins, who waited not, nor watched to have their Lamps kept burning, but
gadded abroad, were shut out of the Kingdom, Mat. 25. and Simeon, a just man,
waited for the consolation of Israel, to him it was revealed, that he should
not see death, until he had seen the Lord's Christ; and when he saw the
Salvation of God, the Light to enlighten the Gentiles, and Glory of Israel,
desired to depart in Peace, Luke 2. And when Christ was ready to ascend to the
Father, he commanded his Disciples not to depart from Jerusalem, until they had
received the Promise of the Father, which said he, ye have heard of me; and ye
shall receive Power from on High, when the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye
shall be Witnesses unto me. Mark, when they had received the Power from on
High, through waiting, then they should be Witnesses unto Him, both at
Jerusalem, and in Judea, Act. I. And the Apostle exhorted the Corinthians to
watch, and stand fast in the Faith; Quit you like men, be strong, I Cor. 16.13.
And he told the Saints, that they were not of Darkness, nor Children of the
Night, but Children of the Light, and of the Day; therefore let us not sleep,
says he, as others do, but let us watch and be sober; for they that sleep,
sleep in the Night, and they that be drunken, are drunken in the Night; but let
us, who are of the Day, be sober, putting on the Breast Plate of Faith and
Love, and for an Helmet, the Hope of Salvation, I These. 5. And he exhorted
Timothy, to watch in all things, 2. Tim. 4.5. and they which should be found
not watching, the Lord would come upon them, as a Thief in the Night, Rev. 3.3.
Behold, I come as a Thief: blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame, Rev. 16.15. So now all
may see, that there must be a waiting, and there must be a watching, that ye
may stand in the Evil Day, that you may resist the Enemy of your Souls;
therefore put on the whole Armor of God, that you may withstand the Evil; put
on the Armor of Light, that you may be able to quench the fiery Darts of the
Devil, Romans 13.12. So now, all that come to know the Covenant of God, and to
walk in obedience to his Law, that he writes in the heart, and puts in the
mind; that every man need not say to his Neighbor, and Brother, Know the Lord,
for they shall all know him, Jer. 31. Heb. 8. These I say, must come to the
waiting, and watching, in the Light, which Arms against the Devil and his fiery
Darts, that you may come to be established in Righteousness; for all the People
of God shall be taught of God, and established in Righteousness, and far from
Oppression, Isa. 54.14, 15. Joh. 6.45. Now who comes to know this Promise
fulfilled, must come to know the waiting in the Light, the Armor of God, that
ye may know an UNCTION from the Holy One, by which ye may know all things, as
the Saints did, I Joh. 2.20, 27. who were anointed in their Souls, by the
Eternal Spirit, and the Anointing which they had received of God abode in them,
which taught them all things; so that they needed not that any man should teach
them, but as the same Anointing taught them all things which were true, and of
it is no lie; and as it taught them, they were to abide in Him.

And now all that come to wait and receive the Knowledge of these things, need
not any to teach them, but all shall be taught of God, and established in
Righteousness; so that they will not need any man to teach them.

Glory in the Highest.
A Visitation to the Called of God, every where.
FRiends, I consider the former days, when God first made known unto us his
Son, to be a Light unto us, to enlighten us, and every one that comes into the
World; which manifested unto us, all that ever we had done, and judged
Transgression in us, in all its appearances; then we believed in it, and had
Grace for Grace manifested, and Faith revealed, from Faith to Faith; so that
the Light being believed in (in which the Hope of Eternal Life came to be seen
and laid hold on) then was the Love strong, which ran forth toward die Lord,
and his Truth; and the breakings into true Tenderness, and into the true Fear
and Humility, and the real-heartedness for God came to be seen and felt, in
which the bringing out of the World came to be seen, and the true Zeal for God;
so that through obedience in the Faith to the Light, nothing was too dear to be
forsaken, and parted withal; and a true enquiring into the state and condition
there was to see, how it was between God and every Soul; and then in the Light,
both Words and Actions came to be weighed, and an enquiring into the Worlds
ways, of Deceit and Words, to deny them, their Ways and Words, and their
corrupt Language. Oh! the heart-breakings that were in that day, and the
revealings of Secrets, and the manifesting God's Power; which begat into the
true Cross, and truly to cross that mind and nature, which had transgressed,
both in thought, word, and deed: So that the Lord arose in the Glory of his
Majesty, to shake terribly the Earth, and to abase the flesh, and lay low the
glory of man, as thousands can witness; then earthly Enjoyments, and Riches,
and Preferments, came to be lightly esteemed on, and cast off; yea, all of them
that did let or hinder: Then strong was the Love of God, and mightily did his
Power work, to bring out of all things which were contrary to the Lord, and to
the rooting out every Plant, which the Heavenly Father had not planted. In this
day, Friends, could ye wrong any? Was not every one's care to be found
innocent, just, upright, and harmless, having your Consciences exercised, pure,
and void of offense, toward God and man? could ye then at all bow to the
World, or to their Ways, Worships, Manners, Words, or Performances? could ye
then partake with them, almost in any thing at all? was not this a precious
day, and a day of Love? could ye not endure all thing in this day, and suffer
all things, and bear all things? and was any thing too hard then to do or
perform? did not your Souls even hate all the corrupt delights of the Sons and
Daughters of men, in that day when the Zeal and Power of God broke forth? could
any temptation of the wicked ensnare you? was not the Light present to judge
and condemn every temptation, and through its Judgment to deliver you? Oh! the
Beauty and the Glory of that day, when God shook the Heavens, and made the
Earth to tremble, and brake stony hearts at his pleasure, and overturned
Babylon, as a thing of naught, and brought forth many Sons and Daughters unto
Glory; my heart is broken within me, when I call to mind this day, wherein God
did valiantly, and wrought excellent things: How were the hearts of many drawn
after him? how did their Love flow forth? how were they gathered by God? how
quick was the Lord to execute Judgment and Justice, and to set up his Truth in
the hearts, and to confound the wisdom of all flesh? He gathered thousands in
his Love to deny themselves, and all their own Wisdom and Knowledge, and to
become as little Children; yea, as new Born Babes, to wait at the breasts of
Consolation, that they might learn both what to do, and what to speak; yea, in
that day the Lord made of a little one a thousand, and of a small People a
strong Nation; so that nothing was too hard for him to do: When I saw it I was
glad, and trusted in the Lord, who in that day fitted many to his Service, and
for his Honor and Glory; for then he was swift in executing Judgment upon the
World, and in casting out the Prince of this World; so that he settled many to
wait upon him, and it was their delight to do his Will, for his Love
constrained them; and he was with them in their Assemblies, and blessed them
when they waited in stilness and silence; then were their tears as a Fountain,
and the dropping down of their eyelids, as the dew of Heaven. Oh! how precious
it is to dwell in the tender Love of the Lord, then they thought the time long,
until they were come together; and they waited in silence, until the Heavens
dropped down dew, and their Consolation came from God; so that none waited in
vain, who waited in the Lord; for the Mountains melted at his presence, the
Earth trembled, the Rocks were rent, and the Clouds vanquished away, and the
Glory of the Lord filled his Sanctuary, and he threw out the Buyers and Sellers
out of his Temple, and the Money Changers, and overthrew their Seat; then
clothed he himself with Zeal, as with a Cloak, for the day of Vengeance was in
his heart, and he sent forth his Sons and Daughters with his Word, to run to
and fro in the Earth, and gave them hearts, as the heart of a Lion, and
strength that turned away from none; so that his day of Vengeance became
proclaimed; for he ordained strength in the mouths of Babes and Sucklings, when
he shut out the Wise and Prudent of the World: This was the day in which God
opened the door of Confusion, unto the Diviners of the Earth, and turned the
Prophets and their Seers into madness; so that to them, all is become as the
Vision of the night; night is upon them, they cannot divine; fearfulness
surprises them, they have changed their work, and bless themselves in their
Railings, and Envyings, and Blasphemies against the chosen Heir, because he is
too strong for them, and holds them bound in the bottomless Pit, where they
have now neither beginning nor end, nor place to rest, but have stirred up the
smoke thereof to darken the Earth, and to corrupt the Powers of it, that they
may lift up their last weapon for them, and exercise their utmost and last
Power, and Strength, and Victory for them; but alas! has not the Lord our God,
in whom we believe, and upon whom we wait and serve, day and night, broken
their strength often times, as it were but a burnt thread or Flax, which had
been burned in the fire? has he not rebuked the Powers of the Earth, because
of them, and overturned the mighty from their Seats, because of their
hearkening to their deceits, who have been as Catter-pillers of the Earth,
destroying both good and bad, as far as they can reach? and has not the Lord
taken us out of their Prisons, and Bonds, and Persecution of murder, from time
to time? what valiant thing has not the Lord done for his Chosen, who believe
in his Light, that according as he has purposed, they may be ordered to bear
the Image of his Son? has he suffered any thing to be done, but that which
makes for his own purpose? have not sufferings confirmed and builded up many in
the Faith, when as they have been exercised in them for a moment, as it were to
prove them for good? and then has he not delivered out of them, in Glory and
great Dominion? and has he not done a double service this way, in suffering
these things? have not thousands been convinced thereby, and way made in many
places and Towns, for the Truth to enter? has he not manifested the deceit of
this Generation of Priests there-through, so that thousands never thought in
their hearts to have seen, nor that it had been in their hearts to have done so
as they have done? and if they have drank of our blood, is it not that they may
be overcome thereby, and by Faith and Patience? and have not they, and their
Rulers persecuted and imprisoned us, to make us grow, and increase, and be
strong, and established, and multilied? has not the Lord done valiantly
through all these things? (though the Evildoers weaken their selves, and
destroy their own Souls daily thereby) yea, and valiant things will he yet do,
until he has fully completed his purpose; for his Son shall Reign, and he
shall certainly overturn all that oppose his Work; and every one that rises
against him in it, it will be his own breaking in pieces; for the Lord is
making a short work, who will finish it in Righteousness, and will make all
serve for his own purpose, either to save, or to be destroyed. Now seeing these
things are so, and that all has wrought for good, who should not Fear? who
should not Love the Lord? who should not hold fast the beginning of their
Considence unto the end, and their Faith which God gave unto them, when they
first received the Light, which brought into the Work, and into the Power and
Zeal for God, and into the Worship, to be bowed in all things unto the Lord,
and into the Silence, and into the Meetings, and Fellowship, and Waiting upon
the Lord? Now when I consider the infinite Love, and unsearchable Wisdom of God
in all things that he suffers and does, and how he turns all to his own end,
my heart is even broken within me, and my bowels yearn after many, that many
might come to believe in the Light, where they might see the unspeakable Love
and Wisdom of God; and for many does my soul travel, and seeks unto God with
earnest desires, and fervent Love, which I have seen the Lord answering; but
for many, who were once partakers in the Works that God began to work, in the
beginning of the day, and of the love and mercies which God began to bestow; I
could even bewail my self, and take up a lamentation over them, and could pour
down with mine eyes as a flood, and make my place solitary, because of the
leanness of many souls, and the faintness of many hearts: How soon was the
Lilly torn among the Daughters? how faded their Beauty away? and how was the
singing of Birds amongst them, so soon silenced? how came their Spring to be
turned into Winter, and their Sun to set in the East? their Morning turned into
darkness, their Sun was drawn over with darkness in the East, their Morning
came not forth in their haste; they stumbled, and while they were aspiring they
fell; their strength stood not in the Virgin, therefore they fell, and mingled
with the earthly, and that are them out; their Beauty became as a fading
flower, because they trusted not in God their Savior, but forsook their first
Love: The young men liked the Lord well, while they stood in his Innocence; but
when the Earth arose, the eye looked not toward God. Oh! that that liberty had
been stopped, and the sanctification come into, then should the Scepter have
been established, and the Cross have been kept down [that earing worm] and the
desire of the heart should have stood in the Lord, who therein fulfilleth every
desire in his own appointed time, but hastiness destroys many. Oh the sorrow
of the Just, and the burdens which have come upon the upright, because many
have stumbled by the way, and pierced their own souls through, and turned the
day of God into blackness to themselves, whose Authority and Dominion is fallen
in the Earth, and their strength fallen by the way, who have weakened their own
hands, and the Praise of the Work is given to another; but all this has the
Lord suffered, for the establishing his Chosen, and the building up his Elect,
on whom his Spirit rests; so that things which appear strange, the Lord turns
them all to good, and makes the evil to be as an example, that all may fear
and be humble before him; and assuredly every one that has tasted of the day,
and has not kept the Faith, nor walked unspotted of the World, even hating the
Garment spotted with the flesh; they shall bear their own burdens, and the
Truth is clear, and in it there is no insufficiency, though some have forsaken
their first Faith, and not kept to their first Love: But unto all ye precious
Sons and Daughters, who have kept the Faith, and grown up since the beginning of
your first Love, in the abundance of the Power and Virtue of the Lord, unto you
does the Salutation of my Love reach, and my Life springs forth, and streams
toward you, which nothing can hinder; for the Lord has enlarged me in his
Life and Power, so that my Soul flows forth, in the abundance of his Love
toward you, to be felt and known of all the Faithful; for my life and strength
is given up for the Service of the Lord, and cannot be separated from you, but
must be known and felt; though to the outward separated to the Work of the
Lord, yet in that which is always near, wherein the Lord does bless his Work,
and prosper his Truth, wherein I lie down in the Faith and Love, giving up, and
being given up in all things to the Work of the Lord, having the earnest desire
of my Soul, that we may all give up, with one consent, in Faith and Love, to do
the Will of the Lord, and not to stagger or be dismayed at any thing,
whatsoever shall come to pass in the Earth, we may witness forth the Truth
boldly, as we have already done, bearing all things, suffering all things, and
enduring all things joyfully; for the Lord is merciful, and will suffer nothing
to come upon any, but what will make for good, and to fit them unto glory, as
all abide-faithful unto him; and in this I bid you all farewell, for my Love is
with you, and my life reaches you, in the Salutation of Peace and Love, having
you often in my Remembrance.

And all ye who have tasted of the beginnings of the Work of the Lord, unto
whom the Light in some measure has appeared, yet the coming forward has been
but slowly; unto you, I say let the Light search, that you may see wherein your
hinderance stands, and what it is that lets; for in the true Light, and Love,
and Faith of it, there is no insufficiency, no weakness, no straitness, for the
straitness is in your selves, and of your selves, and stands in that which
opens the eye, to look into the pleasure of the delights of the Sons and
Daughters of men, and of earthly things; which when they are looked into,
something likes them, takes delight, and seeks to advantage it self in them,
and this is the snare and hinderance, which being given place unto, then the
Just suffers; and so that which should strengthen and build up in the Power
that ministers Judgment; yea, and through Judgment must the Just be raised:
therefore arise, be awakened, shake your selves, of the Encumbrances, and of
the Earth, that the Virgin-Seed may be raised, which will keep your minds staid
on God, and bring ye into the one Life, where ye may feel true satisfaction, in
the enjoyment of the Lord, and the Temptations ye may be redeemed out of, and
may see the Ground from whence they do arise, namely, the mind and nature which
has not God to be its full delight, but would delight it self in something
else; and when this mind is up, then it is easy for the Enemy to come and enter
in with his Enticements and Allurements, to entangle the mind, and lead the
Creature into the Cloud of Error; and in that thing to which the Creature has
been most addicted, will the Enemy most appear, to bring it into remembrance,
which when it rises, if it be savoured or liked, the Enemy has his advantage
to ensnare: But the Virgin-Seed delights in God alone, and is thoroughly
satisfied in the enjoyment of the presence of God the Lord, and this is that in
which the Judgment stands, and the Power which will keep out of the snare of the
wicked, unto which all must come before ye can grow into the plenteous
Redemption, and be made Heirs of Eternal Salvation, and the Blessings of his
Peace, which establishes man in his growth and liveliness, to grow up as the
Corn in the night season, and to be like the Trees bringing forth their
pleasant fruits, which who brings them forth, becomes encouraged and receives
confidence in God; but such as bring not forth the pleasant fruits, that which
should be their encouragement becomes their Judge, and rejects them in their
purposes, and so the growth in the Life they fall short of.

And all ye sons and daughters, ye young men and women in whom the Virgin-Seed
is arisen, which delights in God, and has its full delight in God, in which
the Power and Life stands to keep unspotted of the world; it is safe for us to
keep in Union with the Virgin, for she is the Lambs Wife, and makes her self
ready for the appearing of the Lamb, unto whom we have joined in our youth, and
she is become the Wife of our youth; therefore let none deal treacherously with
the Wife of his youth, but let the Virgin-Seed have the flower of her days in
delighting her self in God, and in doing his Will; I say, let none do violence
to his Virgin, but dwell in Unity with her, and to be delighted in God with
her, and to make ready with her, that all may be prepared against the Lamb
comes; for he that rejects

(...)
