THE Common-Wealths-Man UNMASQU'D: Or a Just REBUKE TO THE Author of the
Account of Denmark.

Quem Discordiae, quem caedis civium, quem Bellum civil delectat, eum ex
numero hominum Ejiciendum, ex finibus Humanae Naturae exterminandum puto.
Cicero. Philip. 3.

In Two Parts.

London Printed, and sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1694.

TO THE KING'S Most Excellent Majesty.
May it please Your Majesty,
THE Indignation I conceived at the Reading of the Author of The Account of
DENMARK, and the Rude Affront that is therein offered to Your Sacred Majesty,
has Transported me into this Presumption of Address: it is true, the Performance
looks like an Exhalation rising from the Bowels of the meanest and the basest
Earth; but such Exhalations have often darkened, and sometimes Eclipsed the
Sun. I might here take occasion to insist largely upon Your Majesty's
Character; but I consider I speak to a God by Deputation, therefore my words
shall be few. The more Brave and Generous among Your Reputed Adversaries,
confess you deserve to be Universal Monarch (if the highest Personal Merit and
Valor may lay claim to such a thing;) and may Your Embittered Enemies at
length see their own Errors by the help of that Light and Glory that shall
surround You. May the King of Kings conduct You in the Right Way, and lead You
on to a just Establishment of the Nation's Tranquillity, and Your own. Which is
the hearty Prayer of

Your Majesty's humble and devoted Subject and Servant, S. S.

THE INTRODUCTION.
I Have been for some time no unconcerned Spectator of those improvident Heats,
and darling Contentions, which, to the loss of the Common Cause of
Christianity, have long since spread themselves over the Western World; and
being quite tired out with contemplating the deformity of this black and
melancholy Scene, I was willing to give my Thoughts some Diversion, by
applying 'em to such worthy and important Considerations, as might afford some
little ease and serenity even in sullen and dark times; and make the short life
and leisure I enjoy, to pass away with some tolerable satisfaction. Riches and
Honor, or the Respect of men, are pretty popular Beatitudes; and all sensual
complacencies in their outward appearance, are very sweet and alluring; but
considered in their final issue and event, they do rather amuse than satisfy
the mind, and more affright than caress the Understanding; so that upon a full
and impartial prospect of things, unless we can find out some more solid
Principle or Basis of Security, the condition of mankind will appear
sufficiently sad, and uncomfortable in this World.

For man is become a forlorn and miserable Creature; and though he thinks himself
Lord of this Lower World, yet he is born a poor helpless indigent Slave; full of
wants, of fears, and disappointments: He fancies indeed, that he is some
God-like Being, and complements himself with Divine Epithets, and Titles of
Renown; but they serve only to add Solemnity to his shame, and advance the
sport and Triumph of his Misfortunes. Imaginary Fears and Jealousies devour his
Spirits, and insult over his blessings; nay, he is often imprinting that evil
upon himself by an improvident anticipation, which can but once befall him in
this life. He superstitiously trembles at the evil Influences of the Stars
above; and dreads every little Meteor of the Night: he sinks under the
apprehension of Eclipses, Comets, and ill Aspects of Heaven, while he carries
the causes of his Misery within himself. Could he but look within, and take a
true prospect of his own depraved Constitution, he would soon discern, That his
Affections and Lusts are the only false Lights, that misguide and betray him;
that Pride, Self-Love, Ambition and Discontent, are the only bad Omens, and
amazing Prodigies.

Neither are his hopes any better founded, or more proportionate than his
fears; they are not directed by the inherent worth or quality of the Object,
nor ballanc't by any determinate measures; but hurry him violently to
precipices and dangers, to vain Transports and Fantastical Illusions.

He meets with nothing that can terminate his desires, or allay the eagerness
of his restless inclinations: He proposes indeed strange possessions to
himselef; his thoughts are still busied with imaginary draughts of Elysium, and
Golden Provinces; and if he could but compass the design in hand, he could
fancy himself installed in Paradise again: But alas! He knows not the vanity of
the thing he admires, 'till the enjoyment of it has undeceived his judgment and
rectified his notions: And then he soon finds the disappointment as certain, as
the desire; and he is now more tormented with the dissatisfaction and loss,
than he was before with the Expestation.

Thus (as David phraseth it) Man walks in a vain Shadow, and disquieteth
himself in vain: He falls in Love, enjoys, and abhors; he chooses and hates the
same thing: It Is true, his reason commands him to be contented, happy, and
composed in every condition of Life; and yet he finds by experience, he cannot
^e so in any; but, as if he were still harast with some Malignant Distemper, he
lies changing and tossing from side to side, between undue Objects and
immoderate Desires. One while perhaps, through the unhappy Instinct of his
Original Pride, he effects the great and venerable name of Philosopher, of Lord
and Master over the Intellectual World: He considers with himself that a
Philosophical Life, and insight into Nature, is one of the Noblest Badges of
true Honor, the greatest Perfection and most useful Qualification that ^^n
adorn a Rational Creature: But finding at length, that this Lamp within him,
serves only to discover those Errors and mistakes, that before lay hidden and
unobserved; perceiving also, that the more he understands, the more he sees his
own Errors, and the greatest knowledge he has hitherto acquired, serves only to
make him sensible that he wants it; his discontent begins proportionably to
increase with his acquisitions, and his Hopes are driven to downright
desperation.

Besides, he observes that all knowledge is attended with great Toil and
Vexation; with ungrateful relishes, and many painful Impressions; That each
single Science will cost him many a Pang in the Performance; and that much
Study is a weariness to the Flesh. He feels his Soul extended, as it were, upon
a Rack, and all his faculties suffering a Convulsion; and as if he had adopted
the Woman's Curse also, and Contracted the whole Apostasy within himself; he
Travails with Pain, and brings forth with sorrow.

Being thus tired out with his Learned drudgery, in the next place perhaps, he
betakes himself to Morality and Religion; he has often been transported at the
sight of some brave and Virtuous Exploits; and resolves to make such delightful
Scenes, the future subject and entertainment of his Thoughts. He has heard of
Socrates, and other celebrated Worthies, that illustrated and Adorned the
Heathen Martyrology; he loves and even huggs the remembrance of 'em, and
pronounces 'em good and happy among Men. But alas! How vanishing are such Pious
Raptures, such Religious Impressions? How sweet and persuasive are th^se Baits
and Temptations, that hurries the Sinner another way? How frail is Nature? How
encroaching is Error? How weak is resolution? How strong is Passion and Lust?
How soon does the Man that had formed such fine and curious Ideas of Religion
and Virtue begin to falter and languish in his Duty, when he is brought forth
to action, or engaged in a passive vindication of the Truth? How is his Soul
put into an uproar, at the least touch or appearance of Evil, while his
Affections and Senses dispute the goodness of the Cause, and his Rational
Faculty stands by and unconcerned? The Man confesses, that his obligation
indeed is very great, but yet it is cruel too: It Is good, but yet not
necessary; it is just, but yet indiscreet; and therefore though he can sometimes
advance to a single Act of Piety, yet to gro^^ up to an ^niversal and Habitual
goodness, is a talk and torture not to be endured.

And now he begins to reflect a little upon the common Genius and Fashion of
the World; and accutely observes that the general Bent and Vote of Mankind is
directed another way: And why should he aspire to a Superiority of knowledge
beyond his Brethren, or pretend to be a wiser, or a better Man than they? Nay
he has more nicely observed, that a downright simplicity, regularity and
decorum of words and Actions, does but recommend the good Man to the title of a
Fool, and expose him to Laughter, beggary and contempt: That dissimulation and
baseness are the nearest steps and ascent to dignity, and splend^d
accommodations; while honesty is contented with a few worthless Caresses, and
pines and starves under Airy and Complemental Applauses.

Thus wearied quite with this perplexing Subject, this devout and melancholy
Employment; he thinks it high time to bid farewell to the World, as it was
fashioned and designed by God; and to go into the same, as it is new modeled
and tranform'd by the pride and artifice of Man: His Affections have hitherto
been confined, as it were, to the Cell and Cloister; and yet he found it hard
to keep 'em chaste and unspotted of the World: but now, like Dinah, they must
go abroad to see and visit the Daughters of the Land: His Thoughts are now let
loose to all the tempting varieties, all the charms and attractives of the
sensitive World: He studies all the meritorious Arts of Flattery and
Persuasion, and rallies together all the force and vigor of his soul and body
to greet the opportunities of secular Greatness: He courts Religion no longer
as a Mistress, and out of Love; but makes use of her as a Handmaid, to serve
his turn and advantage: sometimes we find him in the House of Rimmon, and
sometimes in the Temple; one while he seems to worship God, and yet when a good
occasion does invite, he can readily bow the knee to Baal: And at another
time, he holds it convenient for the design in hand, to hover in a dark
Neutrality between both.

THE Common-Wealths-Man UNMASQU'D: Or a Just REBUKE To the Author of the
Account of Denmark.
IF this be not sufficient to illustrate the Vanity of Fallen and Darkened
Mankind, I shall give a more full and comprehensive Character of it, as it lies
contracted within the compass of one Man; I mean the puissant and Heroical
Author of the late Account of DENMARK; who, while he pretends to new Lights and
Discoveries, and more than ordinary Refinements; is himself as great an
instance, as I know, of the depravation of of Humane Nature. He seems to carry
at once an infallible Chair, and a High Court of Justice within the narrow
circumference of his Brain; fancies himself to be wiser than the Clergy, both
Universities, the King and Parliament to boot; and there is nothing
extraordinary, honorable or sacred, but what he has perverted by a knackish
and politic Construction: And all this he has done under the specious pretense
of the All-attoning Freedom of the Subject, and masque of popular Liberty; such
a Liberty I suppose, and 'twill appear by the sequel, as happened heretofore,
when there was no King in Israel, and every Man did that which was right in his
own Eyes.

Now in order to carry on this Antimonarchical Project, and that Affairs may go
on in true Fanatical Decorum,

It Is first necessary, That the Clergy should be defamed, and blackened with
invidious Reflections. These are the main support, and known Pillars of the
Throne: And therefore that the one may be more advantagiously pulled down, it
is held convenient by the choice and secret ones, to run a Tilt without
distinction against the other. This was the exact method of the Saints in the
days of Civil Broils and Desolation; when they were carrying on the luscious
Work and blessed Trade of Sacrilege and Plunder: Every Loyal and Conforming
Minister was rendered as Antichristian, and vile a piece of Formality, as a
Dancing Master was at Geneva, at the beginning of the Reformation; and he that
was blessed with a comfortable and plump Benifice, was in as Eminent Danger as
the Fat-man in Londonderry. These things are too universally known, and
infamous, to be any longer insisted upon. Let us see how near our Prefacer's
Copy approaches the Original.

Pref. The Ecclesiastics of most Religions, who are allowed to understand and
prosecute their own Interest best of any People, though they be generally persons
whose function obliges them to a sedentary and studious course of life, etc.

As some of the well affected heretofore blended Popery and Prelacy together,
that they might the better destroy both under one Denomination; so here the
Popish and conforming Clergy are involved in the same condemnation; and none
seem excepted but the new Mechanical Priesthood. 'Twould have been much more
Civil and ingenious, had he cried out in a Language of a Modern Poet, That
Priests of all Religion's are the same.

This is a very black and invidious charge; and only lets us understand that
Travelers may talk by Authority: I do ingeniously own, that I know not one
Quality more unbecoming a Man, that aspires to true Christian Wisdom and
Philosophy, than an immoderate thirst after Wealth and Dignity; and may he be
branded with the Name of Judas (for me) that sets too high a value upon this
glittering insignificant Lumber of the World, and dare's grasp at more than an
Honorable Maintenance, which the Scripture allows, but our Prefacer seems to
deny. 'Twas one main scope of the Evangelical Writings, to extinguish in us an
inordinate Love of all Earthly Things; and so long as the Primitive Fervours
did remain, all such unchaste and idolatrous Desires were restrained and
mortified: But when the love of the World began to be advanced to an undue
pitch, the love of God was proportionably abated, and the mystery of Godliness
was quickly changed into the Mammon of Iniquity. When the Episcopal Office,
which was at first accounted a degree of Martyrdom, was baited with Honors and
Wealthy Accommodations, it became the more dangerous thereby; and tho some good
Men foresaw the Temptation, and declined the Charge, yet others, we find, could
not be so perfectly consecrated as to apprehend it. And as Riches increased so
did Men's Affections too; till (as Platina himself tells us) The Church was
defaced with riotous Pomp, and sordid Luxury; it looked more like a dissolute
Wanton than the holy Spouse of Christ: Nay, to so prodigious a height was the
Ecclesiastical Grandeur advanced toward the latter end of the 4 th. Century,
that it gave occasion to this Sarcastical Saying of a heathen Consul, Make me
but Bishop of Rome, and I will strait turn Christian.

And now the days of darkness were at hand, when the Roman Clergy, however
illiterate (according to the mode and genius of the Times) wanted not subtilty
to advance their secular Designs: Several gainful Articles were invented,
Canons were forged, and Donations pretended, to promote the Royal Splendour of
the Church, and abett the Pope's unlimited Jurisdiction.

But do our English Clergy hold any mere pecuniary Doctrines, honorary
Articles, or chargeable Propositions? If our Author will be so hardy to assert
this, and so acute to prove his Assertion, I do solemnly promise, That (by way
of Penance and Mortification for my Mistake,) I will get all Mr. P -- n's and
Mr. B -- r's Books by heart; a task not to be performed standing upon one leg,
and when it is done, cannot much improve the Christian or the Scholar.

Therefore, whatever degeneracy of this kind may be found among some few (which
ought not certainly to reflect upon the whole Order) must be ascribed to an
unhappy particularity of Temper, to the weaknesses of Old Age, or some other
such like Infirmity; when the Intellectual Fire begins to grow weak and
languishing, and the Divine Particle is almost overwhelmed. For (to speak in
the style of the Learned Annotator upon Lux Orient.) The Constitution of Youth,
in those that have not an unhappy Nativity, is far more Heavenly and Angelical,
than that of more grown Age, in which the Spirit of the world is more usually
awakened; men then begin to be wholly intent to get Wealth and Riches, to
enlarge their Interests by the friendship of great Persons, and to hunt after
Dignities and Preferments, Honors and Employments in Church and State: And so
those more heavenly and divine Sentiments through difuse, and the presence of
more filling Impressions are laid asleep, and their Spirits thickened and
clouded with the gross Fumes and Steams that arise from the desire of earthly
things; and it may so fall out, if there be not special care taken, that this
mud which they have drawn in by their coarse Desires, may come to that opaque
hardness and incrustation, that their Terrestrial Body may prove a real
Dungeon, and cast 'em into an utter oblivion of their chiefest concerns in
another State.

If that sacred Character, which adorns and distinguishes the Profession of the
Clergy, weigh little with our Prefacer; yet, methinks, that Knowledge which (as
will appear anon) does a little distinguish 'em from the generality of Canting
Travelers, should awe him into some degree of deference and respect: If he
were actually as deep a Padder in Politics as he would seem, he would fear to
affront an Order of Men, the meanest of which could give him just occasion to
hang down the head, to blush, and to look sillily. But we find by daily
experience, that as there is a Superiority of Education and Wit, as well as of
Authority; so it is as natural to sordid and illiterate Wretches to run a-tilt
against their Betters in Understanding, as it is to others to despise Dominion,
and speak evil of Dignities.

Here let the generous Reader give me leave to make a stand a while, and
complain a little of the hard Fate of Learning in this Age: Suppose a Man has
entertained and polisht his Mind and rational Faculties with the Works of those
Ancients, that rescued and preserved their natural Reason and Religion, amidst
all the wildnesses of Pagan Darkness and Coufusion (such as Orpheus, Homer,
Euripides, AEschylus, Menander, Xenophon, Socrates, Aristotle, Pythagoras,
Hierocles, and others,) together with all the Divine and Perfective Discourses
of Cicero, Seneca, Virgil, Horace, and the rest of the Grecian and Roman Poets
and Philosophers; let him add to all these the Pious and Seraphical Discourses
of the Fathers; be able to recite and confute all Heresies from Nicholas and
Cerinthus, Carpocrates and Valentinus, successively down to the times of John a
Leyden, and all the rest of our Modern Innovators: Nay, though he comprehend
all the Rarities and Treasures of the Vatican, the Escurial, the Ambrosian,
Florentine, and Bodleian Libraries; yet that very wretch, whose Politics and
Reading never raised him higher than the D^or of Hope, Poor Man's Cup, God's
loud Call, A Token for Children, The Morning Seeker, Nonesuch Charles, The
Assemblie's Works, Scotch Psams, and the Account of DENMARK; shall start up as
Grand a Resolver of Cases, expounder of dark Texts, confounder of Heresies, and
modeller of States, as the most celebrated Oracle of Divinity or Law: Nay, a
confident Traveller, by virtue of a hard Forehead, a set of Stories and
Legerdemain of the Pen, shall on a sudden transform the most Excellent Body of
Men, into a loose pack of Worldlings, and silly graceless Professors.

Pref. Had these Countries, whilst they were free, committed the Government of
their Youth to Philosophers instead of Priests, they had, etc.

This Passage, if considered in it is just and proper connection and dependence,
seems only to relate to the ill management of the Jesuitical Priesthood: But I
am fully persuaded by Reasons obvious enough, that he designs here to stab the
Canonical Priesthood in general; and that he would be thus understood by
common and injudicious Readers. It Is hard and ill fencing with an Enemy that
looks a-squint; and such a Character is truly applicable to a great part of
this rambling Preface. This sort of doubtful or double meaning has done far
worse execution than the double Sword of the Bishops, which this tender
Gentleman seems so much afraid of; and while some white eyed Jugglers have been
railing and making faces against Antichrist, and the Man of Sin; The Church of
England has fallen a designed, as well as unlamented Sacrifice. And here I
shall observe, That our Prefacer is not only affectedly Vain and Romantic in
his Projections, but commits unhappy Blunders in the management of 'em too: The
two choice things which he chiefly seems to adore, and exalt above the King and
every thing that is sacred, are the Commonalty and Old Philosophers; yet the
former, even of these, he exposes upon the Stage, acting like Madmen out of a
Principle of punctilious Baseness: and to render 'em the more contemptible and
ridiculous, he shuffles them and the Clergy into one foolish and revengeful
Plot, A Plot! to undo themselves and their Posterity. Account, page 49. 50.
The latter, while he pretends to celebrate their Virtues, he represents as a
vile Rout of Libertines and Atheists; For, says he, speaking of the
Philosophers,

Pref. Sometimes they made use of pious Cheats, as Elizian Fields, and an
assurance of future Happiness, if they dyed in the cause of their Country; and
even deceived their Hearers into greatness.

Here again the Poet seems more ingenuous, and a better Religioso of the Two:
For

In Pious Times e're Priestcraft did begin.

Supposes some Golden Age of Innocence, antecedent to all grave and oracular
Impostures of this kind: But our Politician, I fear, has been dealing with Mr.
Hobbs.

Such pretty and quaint Sayings are neither better nor worse than a dull
insipid Reflection upon the Ancients; for the belief of a future State and
Rewards is universally imprinted on the minds of all mankind, the Multitude as
well as Philosophers: The Descriptitions of 'em are indeed fanciful and
various; we read of the Isles of the blessed Souls in Plato, of the Fields of
Elysium in H^mer; but an assurance of future Happiness to those that died well,
was no pious Cheat of the Pagan Mystae, but the natural and universal suffrage
of all Ages.

Zamol^^s was a famous Lawgiver among the Thracians; He had been a Traveller
indeed; but was likewise a Philosopher, bred up under Pythagoras: Upon his
return home, he made many good and agreeable Laws and Sanctions for the better
regulation and conduct of human Life; adding withal, That if the people
industriously adhered to 'em, they should pass out of this into the other
invisible World, in which they should enjoy all manner of intellectual Joy and
Satisfaction. This has ever been the Vote of Nations, and the common bent of
the rational Frame of Man; and we need not fly to Confutius, and the polish't
Philosophers of China for discovery of that, of which the Historys of Japan and
Mexico, of the most rude and unciviliz'd Nations may sufficiently inform us.

It Is surely ominous, in a more than ordinary sense, to play with Names and
Persons that are sacred; The Heathen could observe, That they, who can do such
things, intimate, if it were in their power, they would pull Jupiter out of his
Throne: And it is eminently conspicuous, that to vilify the Priesthood, and
depreciate Majesty, is but a lesser kind of Profaneness, and a suspicious
Forerunner of downright Blasphemy and Atheism.

Indeed it is a matter of Experimental Observation, that the mind of every
Sinner at first is very delicate, soft, and impressive; and consequently sin
must sit very burdensome and uneasy upon him, in that he contradicts his natural
No^mata, and the distinguishing taste of good and evil, which he brought with
him into the World: It Is no pleasant Harmony to hear the loud voice of Infamy
and Reproach resounding and hallowing in his Ears; it is no easy thing to
suppress the clamours of a guilty Conscience, which are a constant Herald
proclaiming an avenging God unto his Soul: In this desperate Juncture, some
method must be found out, either to mince the Evil, or to mitigate the pain
some other way; for he cannot live at ease upon this Rack, he cannot lie down
with this Vulture at his Bosom: The modish Entertainments of Music and Jovial
Airs, are no everlasting Diversions; he must sometimes converse with Darkness
and lonely Shades; and then a sharp and severe recollection is the sad
Entertainment of his solitude and retirement: To tell him of Repentance and a
penetrating sorrow for sin past, were but to wound him more; this austere
Remedy of Evangelical Mortification is more unsupportable to him than the
Disease: Having therefore resolved to gratify the beloved Herodias of his
Breast, some Charm or Stratagem must be attempted to bring the sinner to a
reconcilement with himself: And having heard of a certain Philosopher that can
stifle the Murmurs and Complaints of Conscience with wonderful Reasons and
infallible Demonstrations; I say, having his mind thus tinctured with this
pleasant conceit, he swallows down readily the Arcanums and Nostrums of this
profound Oracle, and commences at once both his Proselyte and his Slave.

And now he is arrived with infinite satisfaction at the School of Atheism,
where he looks back with contempt upon the former Pedantry of his Gospel
Education; he has shook hands with his Bible (that holy Wheedle of Reverend
Impostors) it may perhaps entertain his vacant and his sportive Intervals, but
the L^viathan wholly engrosses his Devotion. Next, he is prepared to solve the
Phenomenon of the Heavens above, as well as the Government of the World here
below, without the help of a superintendent Deity; he laughs at the Pious
Cheats and Eutopian Stories of a new Heaven and a new Earth, and the fantastic
Geography of a World to come; Tales as absurd as the Relations of a Pliny, or
the Poetical Dreams of Elysium, and as impossible to Reason as the infinite
Extramundane space of Epicurus, or the whimsical Discoveries of the Cartesian
world. And what is Heaven, but a mere airy Figment and visionary Scene? To what
end was it made, since we shall all be as tho we had never been, and our Souls
vanish into soft Air? Thus does the Libertine change all his Notions into the
malignity of his Temper, the pravity of his Disposition. This is the true
Account of his most exalted Faith, and a Summary of his Political Creed.

So desperate is the Case of Religion and Reason, when Pride has crept into the
Chair, or Affections sway the Scepter; when a Man devotes himself to the
Service of the World, no inbred Remonstrances of Conscience can affect, no
Schools of Piety or Learning can reclaim him: he takes not up his Profession,
upon any wise or good consideration, but upon some Principle of Interest, or
false Punctilio of Honor, and so turns his Oratory into a Court or Exchange.
His Religion is not properly an Act of his Soul, but the Exercise of his Body,
the mere work and labor of his Nerves and Muscles: And as a late Critic has
observed of a Poet among the Latins, that he seemed to side with all Sects,
but was really of none: So will this trim Gallantill^e still close with that
side which is most agreeably adapted to his design, and be of that Party that
can ^id highest for his Soul.

He frames his whole Life, as the Astronomer does his C^^lestial Schemes,
according to his Hypothesis and Humor; while Conscience perhaps, like some
goodly Intelligence, is placed as superintendent over all the Turnings and
Revolutions of his Fancy: And when Interest is backed with this sacred Name, it
becomes a thing of wondrous Vogue and Authority: It can say to this man, Go,
and he goes; to another, Come, and he comes; and to another Servant, Do this,
and he does it. He that considers things round about him, and observes a little
these contracted Enormities of the Christian State, will be apt to
compassionate the blind Devotions of those deluded Heathens, that gave Fortune
an Apotheosis, that built Temples to Honor, and made Proteus a God.

Our Prefacer takes a special and industrious care, while he exalts the
venerable Name of Philosopher above that of Priest, to tell us, That the
Ancients recommended ab^ve all things the duty to our Country, the preservation
of the Laws, and the public Liberty; but invidiously conceals those honorable
Titles, and Prerogatives given to Kings by Homer, Plato, and other famous
Philosophers among the Greeks: To talk of the Honor, Duty, and Allegiance
which we owe to Crowned Heads, is the business of slavish and mercenary
Priests, and below the consideration of brave Republican Spirits, whose Talent
is, to despise the smiles of Princes as well as their frowns, if they stand
between them and their duty to their Country. Methinks he might have done
well, if he had put among the Ancients (whose Opinions and Lectures he so
highly magnisies) some of the Learned Fathers of the Church: Quem Deus elegit
-- and Dominus Dei Vice of Tertullian; and (...), of Athenagoras, sounds well
and musically to true Christian Ears, and would have helped to allay the
harsher Notes of the great Rights of the People, (Pref.) and Voices of the
Boors in Denmark. ( Acc. p. 39.)

But since the Example and Authority of the Philosophers is owned to be so
Canonical and Sacred, I could heartily wish our Politician and his Admirers,
would consider a little their Noble Sentiments about the danger of Ambitious
Enterprises, and Vanity of secular Greatness: This would help, perhaps, to lay
some restraint upon the busy and mercurial Tempers of the Age, and check the
pert Sallies, or impetus of their Blood and Spirits: Now, a consideration or
prospect of the mutability and imperfection of secular Grandeur, induc't the
Philosophers to be grave and sententious, as well as the Poets to be satirical,
upon this Subject: They looked upon the public business of the World, as too
coarse and material for the abstracted Purity of their Thoughts, and likewise
repugnant to that true serenity of Mind, wherein the height of Felicity does
consist; and tho some of 'em were willing to accept of the Goods of Fortune, if
they chanced to fall in their way, yet they would not creep and fawn, or
Adorare Vulgus, and projicere oscula (as Tacitus observes of Salvius Otho) in
order to their advancement: They thought necessity might subject a man to these
lower Offices of life, but never esteemed 'em as matter of choice, or any
anxious pursuit. Accordingly we find 'em insisting copiously upon the dispraise
of those little and fine things, which the world calls greatness; and some of
the Platonists thought the whole Corporeal or visible World, by reason of its
poor and diminutive Entity, beneath the search of elevated Understandings.

There are many that account a glittering Title little less than an Apotheosis,
and a long Train of Vassals, a kind of Glorification: And on the other side,
there are those who think, that all this pomp and noise is but a glorious clog
and burden to the Mind; that a multitude of Servants are rather Spies than
Attendants, and not so properly Guards as Executioners; I think the latter is
at least the more plausible Folly of the two; methinks there is a pleasant and
delightful Harmony, beyond all the charming prettinesses of State, in this one
Saying of Horace: -- Nunc mihi curto
Ire licet mulo vel, si li^et, usque Tarentum.


For suppose a man exalted and fixed in a shining Orb, and, as he sancies
himself, giving Light to others with his borrowed Glory; Behold the Man
surrounded with all the State and Grandeur, which his hopes could propound or
his ambition could desire: May we now salute him by the Name of Fortunate, call
him Happy, or pronounce him great? No: The more he commands the more he is a
Slave; he is a fettered Vassel to the Tyranny of his Lusts, and he is to be
looked upon as a Malefactor bound in Chains: He feels a pain amidst all his
gaudy Diversions, and wants that quiet and repose of Mind, which may be found
in a shady and obscure Retirement; and that generous Poverty, those magnificent
Rags, wherein true Honor and Honesty are enthroned, can supply the possessor
with more durable Joys, and enravishing Satisfactions. For, beside the
inconveniences and loss of time which attend this Station, his fears of
futurity must dash his Enjoyments with some sharp allay; he has doubtless heard
of the sad instability of humane Affairs, of their various Turns, and hasty
Revolutions: Every slight proverbial Talk about the Inconstancy of Fortune,
puts him into an Agony, and makes him tremble with foreboding Apprehensions:
For how can he tell, but one day may put an end to his Consulship, and blast
his Expectations with an inglorious Defeat?

Plato had but three Servants, Epictetus but one, and Zeno lived without any:
It Is recorded, to the Glory of Terentius Varro, That he refused the Dictorship;
and 'twas thought an excellent Example in Horace, that he could industriously
decline Honors in the days of Augustus. He that has got the Command of his own
time, and the happy liberty of thinking, enjoys a more valuable Empire than
Antony fought for, or Caesar himself enjoyed. As he is not confined by Time, so
he is not not circumscribed by place; and nothing bounds his soaring thoughts,
but Eternity. Certainly, Tranquillity is the only true Settlement attainable in
this life; the Furniture of the Mind is the brightest Wealth and Magnificence;
and He has gained the most honorable Employment, that has enrich't his
Understanding with glorious Ideas, and useful Notices of Things.

I had rather contemplate Aristotle in the Lyceum with the Scepter of
Philosophy in his hand, and the Crown of Wisdom on his head, than see him
shining in the Court of Macedon. Anacharsis, Emp^docles, and the Milesi^n
Thales, were known indeed to have an illustrious Descent; but they are famous
among Posterity only for their Wisdom, Ovid was born to an ample Inheritance
and Fortune, but commenc't Immortal only by his Wit. The Poet Pindar was more
highly reverenc't than all the Families of Thebes; and amidst the devastation
that twice befell that City, his house alone (as if it had been a sacred
Temple) was inviolably preserved; and the divine Plato is more justly
celebrated for the sweetness of his Philosophy, than for being descended of the
Race of S^lon, and the Family of the Codri. Demetrius Phalerius had more
Statues erected to him (for his Eloquence) than any great Captain or Hero of
his Age; and we have another illustrious instance of this kind in Georgias
Lcontinus, Father of the Sophists; who (as Philostratus notes) at any Grand
Assembly of the Greeks, was used to offer to discourse, with an extemporary
facility upon any Subject given: And this he could perform with equal
pertinency too, to the surprise and astonishment of all that heard him. And for
this he had a Golden Statue erected in the Temple of Apollo; a Dignity which no
Man arrived to before his time.

And as the Philosophers acquired an Immortality to themselves, so they gave a
kind of Reputation and Luster to their Kindred and Acquaintance too: 'Twas an
Honor heretofore to a Gentleman to have been at Athens, and convers't with the
Grecian Sages: Olorus had not been remembered by Posterity, but for his Son
Thucidides; and Seneca observes, That the name of Sophronischus had been buried
in oblivion, but for his Son Socrates. Nor had Aristo and Gryllus been known to
after Ages, if it had not been for Xenophon and Plato.

Pref. Germany was freer than any other part of Europe, till at length 'twas
Lorded by Captains, which (in process of time grew Princes and Electors) and by
Bishops with Temporal Authority, who may thank Charles the Great (a very
bigoted Prince) for their double Sword of Flesh and Spirit. And again, They (
speaking of the Clergy) have cast off the Opinions of Rome, in the Supremacy of
the Pope and other Points; but they would retain the Grandeur belonging to that
Church, and applaud us for doing both so dext^rously. Account, cap. 16. p. 230.

This is all over the exact Genius and Spirit, and almost the very style of a
brokenhearted Covenanting Brother; as will appear to any that shall peruse the
Sayings of the great Lights o'th Church, or new Reformation, 1641. etc. Nay, if
I well remember, the Sweet-singers of Billingsgate canted in this Tune, and
much after the same manner: The Oyster-women locked their Fish-up,
And trudged away to cry no Bishop.


Here is a strong mixture of Ignorance, and Ill-manners; nor is it easy to
determine, which is the most predominant Ingredient. Every Prince, it seems,
that is zealous for the Honor of the Church and Clergy, is with him an
half-witted Bigot (and consequently not fit to Govern,) and every Modern
Prelate and Usurper. Nothing does more dazie envious and weak Eyes than
Ecclesiastic Splendour, and a peaceable flourishing Condition of the Church: He
could make, no question, as bold a stroke at the Picture of Constantine
himself, upon occasion; and I shall venture to tell him, That he has already
libelled most of the Courts and Governments of Europe: For the European
Princes, upon the the first entertainment of the Evangelical Codes, admitted
the Episcopal Order into their Courts of Judicature; so does Adam Bremensis
particularly speak in Relation to the State of Denmark; Starovolscius of
Poland; Loccenius of Sweden; Hin^m^r and Bignonius of France; The Toletane
Councils of Spain; and Arumaeus a German (a much better Lawer and Protestant
than our Prefacer) speaking of Bishops sitting in the Diets, both as Prelates
and Princes, commends the Wisdom and Justice of that Constitution, in relation
to true Polity, and safety of Religion: Indeed, the imperial Constitutions,
before the Papacy began, give allowance to Bishops to be Judges in Civil
Causes, as well as Ecclesiastical; which, I presume, laid the Foundation of
this sort of Episcopal Rights and Jurisdiction; and all Donations and Favors
of this kind from Princes in After-Ages, were only a glorious Transcript of
this Original.

The Prefacer seems to have espoused the Doctrine of the Leviathan ( part 3.
cap. 47.) where Mr. Hobbs endeavoring to overthrow Christ's Kingdom in this
world, represents that Notion as a design or artifice of the Roman Clergy, to
support their secular Greatness: But how Christ's Kingdom upon Earth should be
a Popish Imposture to advance ambitious Ends, when this Doctrine was first
preached by our Savior himself, afterward by his immediate Disciples, and
propagated by succeeding Apostolical Men in the Ages of Persecution; is a
mysterious Riddle which I cannot comprehend. But this State of Affliction was
not to be perpetual and unalterable; for when Kings should become Nursing
Fathers of the Church, the Evangelical Priesthood was to make a more Glorious
Figure in the World: St. Peter mentions a Royal Priesthood; and this is so far
from carrying a new and surprising sound to the more rational part of Mankind,
that it has been ever owned by the more polish't and civilized Nations. Among
the Romans, the Pontifices were carried in a Chariot of State to the Capitol,
and were allowed to interpose in matters of Polity, and civil Concernment, as
well as of Religion; as Cicero speaks at large in his Oration for his Horse.

Among the B^^ylonians and Egyptians (as Josephus writes in his Tract against
Appion; and which I would have the Author of the Account of Denmark
particularly observe,) there were none thought worthy to be honored and
entrusted with the Office of an Historian, but the those of the S^cerdo^al
Character: Every pedling Observator was not then thought fit to communicate the
Actions of Princes and brave Men, or recommend the Examples of Hero's to
Posterity: To give an Account of t^^ vast Affairs of State, the Revolutions of
Governments, the various turns of Providence in the advancement, declination
and fall of Empires, and of great Personages; to discern the more hidden
Springs, the private Walks, and all the Masks of Villainy; to trace fallen
Virtue through the Cloud and Veil, to distinguish nicely betwixt the Prosperous
and Brave, the Bad and the Unfortunate, was thought a task that required a
great and unwearied industry, a penetrating Judgment, a sublime Learning, an
impartial Reason, and other extraordinary Accomplishments in the Undertaker.
But now each Youthful or Grey-headed Pedant aspires to the Historical Faculty;
it is but rambling a little about the Globe, casting his eyes around, and
traveling till he is tired; and then he shall lie down, fall into Dreams and
Visions, and rise up an illuminated Historian in a moment: and not contented to
take the Office out of the Rightful Hands, he fancies it to be his peculiar
Province to expose the Sacred Office to contempt, and ridicule the Priesthood;
like the Evil Spirit that perpetually haunts him; he seeks, but can find no
rest: And that worm of impertinence that is got into his Brain, can never lie
still, till the whole Nation's disturbed by it is wrigling.

Secondly, Another preparatory Step toward the carrying on an Antimonarchial
Project, is making a senseless pother and noise about Tyranny and Arbitrary
Power: For the people are governed by Names, and the power of Words, and seldom
see beyond the surface of things; and any little J^ggling Poli^itian, can, in
the view of the people, make an unfortunate Sally, an involuntary Tax, or some
other trivial Digression, appear ^ terrible advance toward Tyranny, and
absolute Dominion. This was heretofore the Logic of the Saints as well as of
Gottam) to uplift the Good Cause in the days of Regeneration; and to show, how
good Wits can jump upon occasion, I shall set down the very words, nay, the
Heart and Soul of the Prefacer^

Pref. Good Learning, as well as Travel is a great Antidote against the Plague
of Tyranny. -- The Hero's celebrated in the Books of the Ancients are for the
most part such, as had destroyed or expelled Tyrants. --

Good Learning indeed (which the Prefacer wants) is an Antidote against all
Immorality; against Hypocrasy, Impudence, Calumny, and Treason, as well as
Tyrannical Dominion; and I wish, that Travel had always proved a Preservative
against Scisme, and (which now walks in darkness) the Pestilence of Rebellion.
I know not what Notion of Tyranny he entertains, nor what use he intends to
make of his own Maxims: With some a King and Tyrant are equivalent Names; but
at present it is not his proper business to distinguish or define. When a kinder
season or opportunity shall give the Alarm, he may, if he pleases, draw
Daggers, Pistols, Swords, Guns, and all the Artillery of Death, out of such
licentious Suggestions. As for my own part, I am much more afraid of the smug
and plausible Names of a Free People, and the precious Jewel Li^erty, than at
all his clutter and noise about a Double Sword, a Bigoted Prince, Tyranny and
slavish Opinions. Our puissant Prince has yet given no Reason for such
ungenteel and sordid suggestions; and it is a crooked piece of intolerable
Insolence to be perpetually playing thus with hard Names, to hover aloof in
Amusements and Generalities, because he dares not yet come to particulars; to
lie shrugging, spawling, and making mouths (in the very face of Majesty) for
want of a little more courage to speak plain. A little more of this artificial
Thunder, may make the people believe, that they shall not carry a whole skin to
their Graves, nor be permitted to walk uncrop'd along the Streets.

Were his Majesty as truly absolute and despo^ical as an ^astern Monarch, or
were his mere Sovereign unaccountable Will, the Standard of all his Actions (a
Province to which his Genius seems not to incline him,) yet I should rather
choose to live under his protection, than under the imaginary Freedom of the
purest popular State.

Fallitur^ Egregio quisquis sub Principe credit
Servitium; nunquam libertas Gratior extat
Quam sub Rege pio. --
All Kings are intrinsecally limited and bounded by the eternal laws of Right
Reason; and are under a more immediate influence and direction of the Deity
they represent: They must be wilfully and unaccountably wicked indeed, before
they can quite forfeit the oversight and care of those Tutelary Angels that
attend 'em from their Birth; and when they have done so, no wonder if there is
nothing so unlovely or impious, which they canno readily commit. This was the
case of Nero, and other persecuting Emperors; who in the hands of God, were
the Real Whips and Scourges of Mankind; and yet, as bad they were, I Believe,
they have been overcharged by some Historians, who, under pretense of Liberty,
and to please a Party, have written perhaps as licentiously, as the other
liv'd^ Under Titus and Aurelius and other Emperors of the same Stamp and
Complexion, there was more security and freedom among the Romans, than in the
cried up Popular State; and even at this day, some of the Eastern Kings (if
Travelers oth' better Strain may be Believed) demean themselves with true
Political decorum toward their Subjects, whose prerogative it is, as well as
Duty, to Obey.

But when the People bear Sway, and the multitude decree justice; what true
settlement can be hoped for under Governors so wild and uncertain? what
lasting security even in the midst of ease? what Liberty or freedom in the
midst of Fears, and distracting apprehensions of Things? The People, while they
move in their proper Sphere, and are instructed how to obey, may perform their
office regularly and well enough, like other ordinary parts of the Creation;
and it is principally^ the fault of designing Politicians, if they are debauched
from their due Allegiance, which is their undoubted Privilege and Glory: But
if once they are drawn up into the Element of authority and power, what
Confusions, Storms, and Earthquakes must they raise? Nature is quite untuned by
the discords which they create, and the intellectual World groans under their
Government and Fury.

What precious and Brave times should we see again, if a John of Leyden should
start out of his grave and set up for a King? or Kett a Tanner should Lord it
dapperly among us? ^^^ a Bedlam should ^^ h^ve ^^^ (^^^^s a Learned and good
Historian) if the inferior Ru^^icks of Kent, Essex, etc. under Wat Tyler a
Tailor, Jack Straw, and other such low born Chieftains, h^d pr^^^^ against King
Richard the ^^^, who endeavored to destroy the King, No^ility and Clergy;
extirpate all Learning, and overthrow all Government, by their l^velling
Humors? for which purpose, they murdered all Persons of Quality, which fell
into their Clutches, if not of their Society; burnt and destroyed the best
Houses in London, and had so little respect of Persons, that every Slave
amongst them, would sport themselves upon the King's Bed, and impudently invite
the Kings Mother to kiss with them, whose He^d they also broke in a Tyrannizing
Frolic: And that their villainy might be complete by a Bloody Sacrilege, they
took Simon Tibald, Archbishop of Canterbury, and in their Devilish Fury, by
eight Mangling Strokes, cut off his Head; and for more Infamy, set it upon
London Bridge.

The Rebellious Mobb in Valentia heretofore, designed to destroy all the
Gentry; which made a poor Woman in the same City, seeing some Gentleman go by,
show 'em to her Children; Telling them withal, when you come to be Men, you may
say you have seen Gentlemen.

The worst and rankest Effluvium's do not strike more ungratefully upon the
Organs of Sense, than Moral good upon the highest and Noblest Faculties of the
People: Madness is their Character upon sacred and inviolable Record^ Their
Minds are so Tinctured with false Ideas, corrupt Hypotheses, undue
apprehensions, and fantastical Images of things, that they scarce retain (when
bewildred with Dreams and Visions of Original Power) the common rudimental
Principles of Humane Nature: The (...), or notices of Moral Beauty and
Deformity, are perfect strangers to their Beings; tell them, if equals be
subtracted from Equals, what remains must be equal, and you may be in danger
of being arraigned for a dealer in Art-magick: what the eyes of Batts and Owls
are with respect to the Light, such are their minds in reference to Justice,
Gentility, and good Manners; and whosoever pretends to entitle 'em to Grand
Rights, Immunities, and Superiority; must do it by that Figure, by which Idiots
and Madmen are under the actual Sanction of no Law.

Pref. In Russia and Muscovy the Government is as Tyrannical, as in any of the
more Eastern Monarchies; the Priests there have very much contributed to make
it so. To the end, that the People may be kept in the requisite temper of
Obedience, none are permitted to Travel upon pain of Death, except such as have
special License, least such Travelers should see the Liberty of other Nations,
etc.

Gravely! and Goodly! I find our Prefacer loves Perseverance as well as the
best Covenanting Saint among'em all. I warrant, he could hold forth against
Priests and Tyrants a whole week together for the Edification of a Free People;
and before he has time to cool (if his power ^^^ equal to his opinion) he would
find in his heart to finish 'em all at a Blow.

But the ca^e of Russia and M^sc^vy, is not the case of England; nor is the
State of Denmark the condition of our Nation: And why either of 'em should be
so industriously touched upon at this time, seems to carry more with it of
Design than Curiosity: O! but the grand Duke of Muscovy is such a cruel and
unnatural Father of his Country, that he will not give License to all his
Children to Travel! This is a lamentable story in good earnest, and touches in
a tender and sensible part, when a Child has a mind to play the Truant abroad,
or a rambling Fancy shakes him by the Crown. But may it not be worth our while
to make a short Enquiry, before we pronounce rash^y in this matter, whether
this hard Treatment be the mere effect of a sullen and crabbed Humor in the
Father, or occasioned by the undutiful Deportment of his Sons, which may have
forced the Old Gentleman to this seemingly undecent severity. Now it is plain to
any man, that has made some inspection into the Affairs of Muscocovy, that the
people of that Country are as great affectors of new Schemes and Innovations,
as some half-witted Zealots in other parts of the World: And therefore to give
leave, without the least exception, to travel to all parts (but especially to
Denmark) might be a matter of fatal importance to the Public; tho I could name
an Author that has Forehead enough to deny it. This various and unquiet Temper
of the Muscovitish people, has obliged the Great Duke to put a restraint on
Preaching as well as Traveling, and to correct the Follies and Exorbitances of
the Pulpit. For when it grew manifest, that by a free and popular use of
Sermons, men's Hearts were enflamed, Errors were advanced, and the Government
began to suffer by such Disorders; he obliged all Priests to a set number of
Homilies of the Greek and Latin Fathers, translated faithfully into the Russian
Language; which are to be read without the least diminution or addition of
their own; and this course I find applauded by some as an eminent instance of
his Wisdom and good Policy.

Our Prefacer makes a mighty wonderment and noise about the rare effects of
Traveling into Foreign Countries; as if the main Excellence and Qualification
of a Gentleman consisted in viewing the Imperfections or Extravagancies of some
Governments, and the agreeableness of others, and telling Romantic Stories
upon a return home. No Pilgrim that ever footed it to Loretto, or zealously
trudged to Jerusalem, was ever half so proud of his Performances and hard
Labors: I own, that men of a good Bottom and Education, or of fixed or solid
Brains, such as may be bred and qualified in our Universities, ( where, as he
notes, Traveling Fellowships are established,) may possibly make good
Discoveries abroad, and happily reap much cultivation and improvement: Nay,
many of our Gentry, after spending their time and some Wealth abroad, have
made, I believe, a bright and considerable Figure in our Senate.

But every man at thirty or forty years of Age is not fit to be trusted abroad
without a Governor: For the Generality that make a sally through the World,
run into Pedantick, or ingenious whimseys at best; rather gratify their
fancies, than improve their understandings; they go out blockheads, and returns
Fops; the Ignorance of the one is homebred and plain, in the other it is a
little Embroidered; and I know no great material difference (in point of
Eminency) betwixt the one and the other: And though it may seem a necessary
provision, that some Select Persons should be Devoted to this employment, yet
our main felicity and Consolation consists in this, that we have Schools of
Learning and Polite Education at home, equal to the best in Europe: and here
let the Prefacer tell me (if he dare) upon what account our Nobility and braver
part of ^ur Gentry, whose Education is domestic and yet universal, who have
lived always at home, yet have seen all the World in Books and the best
Conversation, are inferior to the most accomplished Travelers or Courtiers?
let him tell me, if he can, wherein they may not vye with the most Celebrated
Personages of Athens and Old Rome; in Learning, Bravery, and an exact decorum,
or true Politeness of manners? Among these we meet with a gay freedom, a
generous Charity, a Triumphant Compassion, Sweetness, and Affability; Noble
Friendships, and a Victorious Constancy; a true Philosophical greatness of
mind, and yet a cheerful Subjection to their Prince: And what more can be
desired to make up the real Ornaments and accomplishment of Humane Nature? such
Illustrious Personages as these appear like Beings of some Superior Order among
the vulgar magni^ied part of mankind: Such were some of the Ancient and Brave
Romans, who were most Lovely and Pleasant in their Lives, and at last sedate
and composed in Death it self: Such were many of the Platonic Order, whose
affable Deportment, Justice and Benignity, rendered 'em the delight and
admiration of all about 'em: Such was Plato himself, who had all the Charms and
Delicacies of a pleasant Wit, the sweet uncommon Graces of Conversation,
excelling all in the Court of Dionysius; and after a long life elegantly acted
(as the Roman Orator words it) breathed out his quiet and pacifical Soul in a
steady Contemplation.

The Prefacer owns, That Traveling has hitherto been so mischievous, that it is
well it has been so little in fashion. (What he affirms, I shall prove by and
by, tho in a different way from his meaning and intention.) The most common
return is an affected foppishness, or a filthy Disease, for which they
sometimes exchange their Religion. (I shall tell him presently which way
Religion has been principally endangered by Traveling; and shall plainly show,
That some Religious Affectations, and Diseases of the Brain, and Mind
(introduc't this way) have been of more dangerous and pernicious importance to
us, than all the French Fashions and modish rottenness of the Bones) Traveling
seems as necessary to one who desires to be useful to his Country, as, etc.
Enter Reason; Such worthy men as are employed abroad, may bring home generous
Notions of Liberty, and make admirable Remarks on the contrary State; which
being inculcated from the Pulpit, and enforced by the Learned Arguments of Able
Divines, must needs overthrow those servile Opinions, which of late have been
too much backed by God's Authority, almost to the Ruin of a Free People. Good
Sir^ Circumstantio, I beseech you, hold a little: My head has ak't almost an
hour with the noise and rattle of such Jargon and Impertinence: Therefore now
to get a little breathing space, I shall put an end to this Dispute about
Traveling. Here we have before us a true Platform of our Author's Grand
Design; together with an exact delineation of the manner and conduct of the
Villainy, through all it is steps and gradations. This was the darling method which
the Rabbi's of the Separation used heretofore, to new plant the Gospel, and to
pull down the High Places of the Church and Monarchy together. The Project was
first set on foot by English and Sc^t^h Travelers; who having unhappily
sojourned a while at Franckfort, and in the strange Land of Geneva; became
bewitch't at length with the Charms of a New Discipline: Upon a return home,
they made such a pother with Fantastical Notions of Liberty, and such pert
Remarks upon the Admirable Constitutions of the English Church, that the whole
Nation soon rang with the Jingle of Reformation: Innovations, Grievances, and
disobedience to Rulers, were inculcated from the Pulpit, and the multitude
rendered uneasy both to their Governors and themselves, by calumnies,
scruples, and such like Arguments of good and able Divines. The Authority of
Magistrates was blasted and run down, by the fair and specious pretensions of a
Free People; and Christian Loyalty, patience, and submission, were quiet dash't
out of Countenance by the horrible outcry of dangerous and Slavish Opinions.
Never was any black and infamous project so graduated along with good names;
nor the power of Godliness so stifled with inward suggestions of the Spirit.

The Ring Leaders of the Faction drew the Rabble after them with the Hallowed
Whistle of Conscience and Inspiration; with prayers unmerciful, elevation of
hands and voice, and eyes lifted up to Heaven; while their hearts were fixed on
Sacrilege and Rapine (that Inheritance of the Saints) and other Creature
Comforts here below. The tickling of wanton and itching Ears, was called
touching the Conscience; and he was thought the fittest Champion to Sacrifice
Antichrist to the Beasts of the Field and Fowls of the Air, that could boldly
and fluently utter the most edifying Nonsense. They caught the simple, even all
the Sons and Daughters of the Separation, with the Witchcraft of Rebellion at
last; as once a Pied Piper drew Children after him, with the unaccountable
strains of Magic and enchantments: And after they had run through the various
Stages of Heterodoxy and Schism, Liberty and Insurrection, Profaneness and
Blasphemy, Plunder and Devastation; they Completed their Reformation in the
ruin of the Church and State; the depression of the Nobility, Selling the
Gentry for Slaves, the exaltation of Sovereign Mob, and the Murder of the best
of Princes.

I do verily Believe, (and surely the Black Annals of those unhappy times have
put it beyond all question) that if all the Religious Barbarities and
Executions, which were Acted by those, who are now Sainted up to Everlasting
Rest, and, as it were, conjured to Heaven by the Republican Chaplains of those
times; if all the Consequences too, under which the whole Reformation groans at
this very day, could be represented at once unto the view; 'twould be the most
sad and astonishing sight, the most Tremendous Object of Horror and
Compassion, that ever Eyes beheld; and would easily convince us, that our
Travelers and Reformers did not Copy the Example of him who was meek and
lowly; and who came not to destroy Men's lives but to save 'em.

Thirdly, Another bold step toward pulling down Monarchy, is venting strange
Oracles, and a great deal of Hallowed Gibberish about the vast Rights, Power
and Privileges of the People, public Liberty, King Killing Doctrine, etc. for
instance, When Majestrates cease to do their Duties, God gives the Sword into
the Peoples Hands; for a Portion of the Sword of Justice belongs to the
multitude. Dang^ Posit. Parliaments are the Peoples Servants, the King and all
other Magistrates are so too -- if they break their trust, they may punish 'em
according to desert, and turn 'em out of Service; Mean Tekel. What had we got
if the Prelatical Party had been set up? -- Bondage of our Estates, Liberty and
Consciences. Buroughs, 164^. Draw this Arrow, as Jehu did against Jehoram:
Green. 1644. Let us be active against the Kings and Princes of the Earth, those
Claws of the Cruel Beast. Feak. 1653.

I hope, my Prefacer and Author of the Account will not fail me here, in this
Grand Point, out of a Formal and affected Modesty: No, we are told, that once
upon a Time, Denmark was Governed by a King chosen by the People of all sorts,
nay, even the Boors had their voices, Acc. p. 39.

He might have added out of Saxo Grammaticus's Account (Dan. Hist. lib. 10.) A
certain Story of a Bear that fell in Love with a Female, got her into his Den,
enjoyed her, and begot a Son, from whom descended many Northern Kings; if he
had also vouchsaft to mention the Favorable neighing of a Horse, which led the
way to the Royal so^emn inauguration of Darius; it had been almost as
applicable and pertinent in this Case. All which I mention, because we are told
in Pref. Every one ought to know how great the Rights of the People were very
lately in the Elective Kingdoms of Sweden and Danmark. As if, in order to carry
on the Grand Intrigue, the lowest of the People amongst us ought to assume the
same Rights: But he goes on.

Pref. The Estates of the Realm being convened to that intent, were to Elect
for their Prince such a Person, etc. p. 1.

This looks like a Lucid Interval in our Author; and I would trust him alone,
if I knew he could stop here: But I find that good humor is as short and
vanishing with him, as Phrenzy is with more Sweet and happy Complexions. Nay
he is grown more furious and implacable than he was before; as if he had
retreated to rally with the greater force; for see how he raves and hectors on
a sudden.

If after such a choice they found themselves mistaken, and that they had
advanced, a cruel, vicious, Tyrannical, Covetous, or wastful Person; they
frequently deposed him, oftentimes banished, sometimes destroyed him -- (nay)
if grown too powerful to be Legally contended with, they dispatched him without
any more Ceremony, the best way they could, Acc. p. 41.

Now add to his the precedent Remark, viz. Every one ought to know etc. And the
whole carries with it a pretty stabbing Emphasis; a brave Heroical Suggestion,
becoming the Dignity and Grandeur of a Freeborn Subject, that owes small
manners and Allegiance to his Prince.

It Is certainly a very bitter ill natured cur, that growls while he is fed; and
it is more than common insolence and ingratitude, and less than Irish civility
in our Author; to give such spiteful and encouraging Innuendo's: What Prince or
Person (especially if he be stamped with a sacred Character) can we suppose to
have such a commanding Aspect, but some will brand him with the name of Cruel,
Vicious, Wastful, Covetous, or Tyrannical? We have Men among us, whom a Moses
would exasperate; a David would disoblige; and who are too wise in their own
conceits, to be Governed by a Solomon: Nay, should our Savior descend again,
and bless the World with his presence; we want not those who would revile his
person, despise his Office, and applaud his Crucifixion.

Pref. The Books that are left us of the Ancients are full of Doctrines,
Sentences, and Examples, exhorting to the conservation or recovery of the
public Liberty.

Here he would fain shelter himself again under the authority of the Ancients;
who (as I have shown before) have already turned him out of their Society, for
his Insufficiency and false Accusations. The Ancients never dreamed of such a
Liberty as he would inculcate; since't was the main design of their Philosophy,
to curb all irregular sallies of our Nature, and bound our Appetites with a
prudential restraint. Public Liberty in the mouth of a Flaming Enthusiastic
Zealot, is, like a naked Sword in the hands of a Lunatic Brother, dangerous
and destructive; and the one should no more be trusted alone without a
limitation, than the other without a Scabbard. It Is a License to Kick, Bite,
Swear, and play the Libertine through all the various Scenes of carnality and
lust; to be Covetous, and (what is worse) to Rebel for Consciencesake, Write
Treason Directly or Indirectly, and cheat our neighbor with a zealous
twinkling of the Eye, or in saying of a Prayer. He that is Freeborn, is
likewise born in a State of Subjection to Laws; and though by his Birthright
he is Entitled to certain Privileges and Civil Rights, yet he is also Entitled
to some certain measures of obedience, as he is a Subject: And whosoever talks
so loftily of the one, and industriously conceals the other; does but abuse
the Multitude into dangerous Sentiments, with a nonsensical jingle of Words;
and is so far from being a True English Politician, that he is a downright
shuffling Impostor.

Again, tho the Conservation of Public Liberty (which he so feelingly talks
of) may admit a soft and easy Interpretation; yet to talk of the Recovery of it
at this time (as if it were totally lost) seems to carry with it an ill-natured
Republican Sound, such as can strike musically upon none but the Long^ear'd
Rout, as the Comic Poet describes 'em. But to proceed:

Pref. Hero's there celebrated are for the most part such, as had destroyed or
expelled Tyrants; and though Brutus be generally declaimed against by Modern
Schoolboys, he was then esteemed the true Pattern and Model of exact Virtue.

I am so far from favoring the name of Tyrant, that I am almost sick and
nau^eated with the Repetition: I had rather He had told us some prodigious Tale
of Sir Guy, Bevis, Garagantua, or Tom Thumb; such Romantic Raveries would have
suited much better with the prerogative of a little Traveller; they had also
done as much good to the public: But then (as he is cunning enough to discern)
it seems, He had done less harm and execution. As to the Hero's which he doats
on, and seems to admire, They were, some of 'em (like the celebrated Gods among
the Heathens, or the Modern Saints in our New Martyrology,) the vilest and
basest of Mortals; and fit only to be extolled by such a fulsome Orator as
himself. I know but one Modern Hero that comes near him for blustering and
proud Language; and that is the Great Almanzor in the Play, who in a vaunting
style describes himself after this manner: I am as free as Nature first made
Man;
E're the base Laws of Servitude began,
When wild in Woods the Noble Savage ran.


Seneca advises us, always to bear in our Minds the Idea of some Great Man, for
whom we have a singular Veneration: And his Authority will help to fix and
purify our Thoughts, and be a good Conductor of our Lives. Now some perhaps
upon perusing this Direction, would have thought of the Divine Plato; others of
Socrates, who (as Solinus, AElian, and Maximus Tyrius report,) was of a sweet
and even Temper all his Life: But our Prefacer scorns to be confined within
such narrow and ordinary Rules; or to soar so mean pitch. No less than Brutus,
his beloved, magnanimous, the Brave and King-killing Brutus, must be his Guide
and Director; He Is the true Pattern and model of exact Virtue.

Apulejus heretofore wrote in favor of an Ass, Sextus Empiricus in
commendation of a Dog, Erasmus of Folly, Scaliger of a Goose, and Heinsius of a
Louse, all which may pass for ingenious Extravagances, and Innocent Trials of
an Exuberant Wit and Fancy: But to commend the action of Brutus, touching the
Death of Caesar, is a Sally of a different Nature, Character and Consequence;
and appears a flight beyond the Vanity of Cardan himself, who wrote a
Panegyric upon Nero. We meet with but few, even among the Orators and Poets,
Euthusiastical enough to justify this Act of Brutus; and they that have done
so, had better eternally been silent; for it has left a Stain and Blot upon
their Memories: Tho Milton (who durst say any thing in the perilous Times of
Darkness and Usurpation) has made use of this instance to grace his Insolent
Triumphs; yet R. F. (no great pretender to Modesty, or Assertor of Kingly
Government) has not confidence enough to make the least Apology for the Fact,
but exposes Cicero for his Justification of the Villainy: Adding withal, Had we
nothing but the Sentiments of Philosophers to conduct us in our Loyalty, no
Prince could be secure. Of Moral Virtue and Grace, p. 229.

I must freely own, That I could never contemplate the Fate of Caesar, without
a mixture of compassion, horror and detestation; I consider, that Men of the
most bright and eminent Station and Character, have their Faults and
Deviations; and then it is customary with mean and obnoxious persons, to make
their invidious Remarks and Observations: If the lesser Lights digress, the
world is little concerned; but should the Sun make a false step, the generality
of Mankind would immediately fear a bad Omen and Desolation. But whatever
faults lay mingled with Caesar's Virtues, Brutus must still be his equal; If
Caesar was ambitious, Brutus was too aspiring: If Caesar was Tyrannical, Brutus
was ungrateful; and therefore we have in him an Abridgment of all Iniquity.
This celebrated Action was not the effect of Piety to his Country (the
everlasting pretense of Villains in such cases) but of a wretched Pride,
Popularity, and Affectation: In the Death of Caesar, at least, we may behold
all the Lineaments of a Gallant and Brave Soul, while in the Action of Brutus
we see nothing but cowardly Insult, and all the lamentable Marks of a grovelling
and abject Spirit.

Now, there is nothing gives a more deadly wound to a great and ingenuous Mind,
than Desertion in time of Extremity, and a secret treacherous Blow, from the
Party whom we love. They that have courted Danger in all its Images and Forms,
and have been glad to meet an open generous Enemy in the Field; have grown
pale, and trembled at the sight of a sneaking Adversary, under the false
Colors of a Friend: This was the Case of Caesar at his last hour; when
surrounded with Assassines of meaner Note, he struggled with 'em like a Lion in
the Toil, and looked Great, as when he Thundered in the Field: But when Brutus
at length, his unkind Brutus, joined with the Conspirators; when that Arm which
ought to have been weilded in his Defense, was stretched forth against his
life; The Great Man grew tame and feeble in a moment, and Ingratitude piere't
deeper than all the Instruments of Death.

But no wonder that he should espouse this Villainous Cause, who can sport
himself with the names of Christian Kings, and trample upon the Ashes of our
own Deceased Monarchs: For he tells us, It Is a true, though but a Melancholy
reflection, that our late Kings half undid us, and bred us up as narrow
Spirited as they could -- etc. Which piece of disingenious cant, sounds like
the Famous Raree Show, in which, one King is charged with, Fleecing England's
Flocks,
Long fed with bits and knocks, etc.


Nor do I wonder that a man of his stern temper and complexion, should make so
bold with the dead, since it is his Talent and Principle to bid defiance to
living Princes, to despise their smiles and frowns, nay reproach and death it
self, if they stand between him and what he shall call his Duty. All which is
precisely Almanzor the Second part; for thus that extravagant and Tempestuous
Bravo Vaunts it to a King's face: No man has more contempt than I of breath,
But whence have thou the power to give me Death?
Obeyed as Sovereign by thy Subjects be,
But know that I alone am King of me.


There is certainly some Civil deference and submission due to Crowned Heads,
though Kings should look angry and frown with a cause: It Is thought an excess
even of Poetical License in Homer, that he represents Achilles saucy to his
Superior, and dispising the Smiles and Frowns of Agamemnon. The world must
needs be growing to a fine pass, when a man, that is made up of Burlesque,
Romance, Gallimaufry and Raree Show, shall set up for a Critic and Tutor to a
whole Nation. As for my part, I am so far from thinking him fit or capable to
Read Lectures of Policy for the improvement of the Community, that I cannot
find he has made any tolierable Improvement of himself. I will as soon believe,
that the whole Corporeal World in a wise Animal (as some of the Ancients
conceived) as think him qualified to be Governor to a Prince. I see nothing in
him like clear Intellectual preception; Imagination is the Noblest and Supreme
faculty about him; his Wisdom is the mere effect of distemper, and his Solidity
lies no deeper than his Scull. His Heroical flights are nothing but the Spleen;
and the Height of his Puissance, like the courage of a Rat, consists in a
depraved and irregular ferment of his Blood and Spirits; and I dare be bold to
prophecy, if his Maxims succeed, that we must shortly make enquiry into
Newgate and Bride-well for FreeSpirited Gentlemen, and ransack Bedlam for
Hero's.

Pref. It Is none of the smallest advantages which his Majesty has procured us
by his accession to the Crown, that we now make a greater figure in the World
than formerly.

This look like a Wonderful change indeed; a conversion in an Instant: Yet all
that I can gather from it is this, That Judas can still Kiss, dispisers of
Magistracy can still Address, the Jesuit can Fawn, and Whores and Pick-Pockets
Embrace. It Is plain from what we have already said, that all this is Pageantry
and Scorn, and not spoken out of a Loyal intention to his Majesty, but mere
service to himself: For can he be a Friend to his present Majesty, that insists
so studiously (and scurvily at this time) upon the peoples Prerogative of
dispatching Kings; and tells us Emphatically we ought to take notice of it? Can
he be a Friend to his present Majesty, that by aspersing the Memories of wise
and good natured Princes, libells even Monarchy it self? Can he be a good
Subject, or Friend to Monarchy, that gilds over the memory of A. Sydney (that
rare Arcadian Hero) that Died a Martyr for the Good Old Cause, by his own Dying
confession; and urged a Fanatical Argument in i'ts Defense? No: the
Antimonarchical ears peep through the borrowed Skin; such a cloak as this is too
trite and thin to hide the Republican Brother. So long as such loose Diabolical
Principles are asserted with a magisterial air and haughtiness, and pressed with
stabbing hints and innuendo's; the intermixtures, of a softer and finer dialect
and phrase, will appear but Insignificant and Artificial nothings, like Faith
and Grace in the days of Sequestration; and are no more to be valued than some
treacherous Addresses to the late King, which were as truly base and infamous
(if possible) as the Ancient vote of non Addresses to his Father.

And here I might justly enough take occasion to lament the Fate, as well as
admire the Glory of puissant and great Princes; whom a Symnel, or Jack-straw, a
Prefacer, or dawbing Historian may expose to infinite Hazards and Disturbances:
Though they Govern their People with the mildness and clemency of Guardian
Angels, yet they must not partake of their Divine Tranquillity; their Character
is not always their Security, nor their Bravery their Protection. For suppose
'em adorned with all Royal Qualifications; with the Laws of Generosity,
Punctilio's of true Honor, and all the Niceties of Justice; grant that they
ascend the Royal Throne with the gladsome Shouts and Acclamations of the
People, and gain a Diadem by Inheritance or Desert: Yet they can only hold
Intelligence with the Faces of Men, but cannot spell out Intrigues, and
converse with Inclinations. Due Allegiance and Honor is all the Tribute that
Subjects can defray, or they themselves can exact; and how shall they know, but
the most seemingly regular and plausible forms of Speech, may be nothing but a
neat well acted Hypocracy, and a mere studied Disguise? Unnecessary Offers, and
over^hasty Officiousness smell strong of Interest and dark Design; how then can
they tell, Whether the most grave and submissive Application, be the free
result of a good Intention, or mere solemn Flattery, and Artificial Address?
Nay, how can they be assured, but their greatest enemies may be those of their
own Household? Whether they that are adopted into the Secrecy of their Bosoms,
that depend on their Smiles, and sport themselves for a while in their warm
Beams, will help to guard the Throne, or to shake it?

Fourthly, Another way to advance the darling Antimonarchical Design, is by
bringing the Public Schools and Universities into disgrace: These are the
dangerous strong holds of Antichrist, where Principles of Loyalty, and Passive
Doctrines are sucked in with greediness; and therefore it is held convenient, to
throw some dust in these eyes of the Nation, that the Freeborn Projectors may
more commodiously come at the Head. And this was the great Pride and Luxury of
the Brotherhood in the former Days of Tyranny and Civil Combustion: When the
Sweating Teachers, after a few Winks and Groans, began to thunder against vain
Philosophy, and Wet their Handkerchiefs, in running down the necessity of
Humane Learning: This was not only inculcated from the Tub, but from the Press
also in solemn formidable manner; as may be seen in the Authors of Light out of
Darkness, and the White Stone: But here, we find, the Republican Doctors
differed among themselves: For some were not absolutely for pulling down, but
only Regulating the Constitution of our Academies, and proposing Expedients for
Reforming of Schools, and promoting of all kinds of Science: Thus speaks the
Author of Academiarum Examen, Dedicated to M. General Lambert, viz. Seeing
Divine Providence has made you (with the rest of those Faithful and Gallant
Men of the Army) signally Instrumental, both in Redeeming the English Liberty,
almost drowned in the deluge of Tyranny, and Self-interest, etc. I hope the
same Providence will also direct you to be assistant to continue the same, etc.
And m^reover, guide you to set your hand, and endeavor for the Purging and
Reformation of Academies, and the Advancement of Learning, which hitherto has
been little promoted or looked into.

It Is not my intention to heap Reflections upon the Memory of the Right
Honorable Major General Lambert (as the Dedicator styles him) Though our
Prefacer has offered a fair occasion by insulting over the Tomb of our Deceased
Martyr: My Province at present is to speak of a Gentleman of a meanner Figure;
and to show how well the Dedicator's Project is followed, and Ap'd by the
Prefacer. Therefore to proceed.

Pref. The Constitution of our Universites, as to Learning, seems as
Unfortunately Regulated, as it is to Politics.

Here is a plain Transcript of the Old Reforming Humor; but without the
reason, genius, and abilities of the more Learned Dedicator: For the Author of
the Examen did not merely find fault, censure and talk magisterially; but, with
a seeming modesty (a Quality unknown to our new Regulator,) he confesses it is
far more easy to demolish, than to erect a complete Structure; especially for
a single person of a mean Talent: And after he had offered some plausible
Expedients for a rectification of Logic, Metaphysics, Grammar, Mathematics
and Natural Philophy; he owns himself obnoxious to many Errors; and hopes that
better and more Able Pens will help to supply his Defects.

But the Prefacer's Talent lies wholly in Spanish downright Positivo; and if he
can but cast a mist before Vulgar Eyes, he takes no care to understand what he
affirms, nor can he move his Pen the breadth of one Letter toward the Proof of
what he asserts.

I heartily wish (for a perfect cure of his Distempered Imagination,) he would
once take heart, and visit our Universities, at some time of public Festivity;
when Juglers, Mountebanks, Jack-puddings, and Punchianello, divert the whole
Town with their wonders; and try what a stately Figure he could make.

The spruce and finical Gallant, whose Curiosity led him to visit Athens,
expected to have received little less than Divine Honors for his outside
Qualifications; he went pompously attended, was wonderfully dress't and
garnish't, and took especial care to bow in the right place; least by ducking
the head a little immethodically, and moving the hand or leg maladroitly, he
should seem to spoil the Honor of his Family. But he was soon convinced of his
genteel and conceited Folly by the facetious^ Remarks of the ingenious
Platonists; who, though they were well skilled in all the Arts of Behavior and
Conversation, yet never prostituted these Inferior Morals to empty Noise and
Formality; but made use of 'em to adorn and set off Essential Goodness: They
thought a decent simplicity of manners to be the best and purest gentility; and
a generous bent and inclination to do good, the truest Grandeur and
Magnificence.

I am almost persuaded, That our New Regulator would meet with the same Fate,
at least the same means of Conversion, if he would but deseend to Travel, and
show himself amongst our Academical Sages. What a woeful and sorry wight must he
appear (with his new Models, Foreign Experiments, and Idea's of Government,
with other Chimerical Bawbles) amongst a Learned and Venerable Assembly? Nay,
how would each Junior Sophister (lately dismiss't from School) give him cause
to sneak, beg Pardon, and Repent, in the strength of Hesiod and Homer? The
former of these (as Borrichiu^ notes) has written with so much Wisdom and
Acumen, that he may, even now, be read with singular Advantage, by those that
apply themselves to Politics, and Moral Philosophy. The latter (as Rapin
thinks) had the vastest, sublimest, and most universal Genius that ever was:
'Twas by his Poems that all the Worthies of Antiquity were formed: From hence
the Lawgivers took the first Platform of the Laws they gave to Mankind. The
Founders of Monarchies and Commonwealths from hence took the Model of their
Polities. Hence the Philosophers found the first Principles of Morality, which
they have taught the People: Hence King's and Princes have learned the Art to
govern, and Captains to form a Battle, to encamp an Army, to besiege Towns, to
fight and to gain Victories, etc.

I have read of one Argentine, a Scholar of Oxford, who about A.D. 1407. had
the confidence to go to Cambridge, upon no other Errand, but to challenge the
whole University to Dispute; and he is justly branded with the Character of
impudence to succeeding Generations: And yet, as blustering and impudent as he
was, he was tender-fronted and bashful in comparison; for we have now met with
one, that has the face and assurance to defy both Universities; nay, condemn
'em too without a Trial or Dispute. I have no tickling itch or desire, to make
the defense of our English Academies my Province; nor is it highly necessary,
to expose the folly of this unciviliz'd Barbarian, since it is sufficiently
transparent at first view to discreet and rational Judges; Yet something I
shall think fit to return to his invidious Charge (as it occurs) for the sake
of some fanciful weak-headed Gentlemen among us; who may be apt to admire him
(as they do Tumblers and Rope-dancers) for uncommon Performances; and doing
those things without concern and reluctance, which others are afraid, even
cautiously, to attempt.

Pref. We receive the Directions of our Studies there, from Statutes made by
those, who understood nothing of the matter, who had a quite different notion
and taste of Learning from what the World has at present.

The Compilers of those Statutes, which he ignorantly explodes, knew very well
what they did; and tho they had a different taste or notion of Learning from
what he entertains, yet it follows not, but they may have been in the right. As
they could not then understand (as he over-wisely intimates) the present state
of Learning in the World; so they never designed, that Students should be
limited and tied all their Lives to a particular System, when the Empire of
Knowledge or Philosophy should be enlarged. I know no greater Assertors of
Philosophical Liberty, than the Gentlemen that have had their Education in our
Universities: And if some are particularly (though not exclusively) directed to
study Aristotle, and his Works, it is no more than what is proper, just, nay
necessary, upon the account of extrinsical Motives and Inducements. For the
Peripatetick Terms, and Modes of Expression, are new interwoven, throughout a
great part of the Roman Catholic Theology, which is better defended by
Arguments drawn from a Metaphysical System, than by Reasons, Texts, and
Deductions from Holy Writ; and if we cannot confront our Enemies with their own
Weapons; and define, divide, distinguish artificially, unravel cryptical
Syllogisms, and subtle Arguments, with equal facility and readiness, we may
betray the Cause which we would willingly maintain, and give them occasion to
Triumph.

The Greek and Latin Fathers encountered the Pagans, Jews, and Heretics, with
such Philosophical Weapons, as the necessity of those Times required; and it
may look at this time like a kind of defection, a betraying the Protestant
Cause, to slight the Logical and Metaphysical Learning taught in the
Universities: But this is no part of the Prefacer's main care, nor does it (I
believe) in the least concern his Conscience. No: a King or no King, is now the
Grand Question, and important Controversy among us; and a few generous
Republican Notions about Liberty, outweigh with him, all the Learning and
Divinity of Europe.

Pref. 'Twas not to learn Foreign Languages, that the Grecian and Roman Youths
went for so long together to the Academies and Lectures of their Philosophers.
'Twas not then, as now with us, when the Character of a Scholar is to be
skilled in words; when one who is well versed in the dark Terms and Subtilties
of the Schools, passes for a profound Philosopher, etc.

What profound Notion of Learning our Prefacer has found out, for the
Instruction of Mankind, I am not worthy to know; for I am no Interpreter of
Dreams. He may value, for ought I know, the Language of Gypsies above Greek and
Hebrew: He may extol, if he pleases, the Inspection of Urine above all parts of
Physical Knowledge: He may fancy, perhaps, that the Dissection of a Flea, or
the Tail of a Fish, or such like curious employment, is a most admirable and
useful part of Natural Philosophy: That calculating the Nativity of a
Commonwealth, and the fall of a Monarchy, is an excellent and profitable part
of Modern Astrology: This he may call speaking pertinently, and acting like a
Man; and the extinguishing all remorse, compassion and good nature, may pass
for a subduing the Passions in his Philosophy.

I find, the Author of Acad. Examen, was a great Admirer of the Feats of
Physiognomy, which he calls a laudable and profitable Science: And this (says
he) so necessary a Knowledge both in the Genus and Species of it, is altogether
omitted by the Schools. They teach nothing of the subcaelestial Physiognomy,
whether Elementary, Met^orological or Mineralogical, but are utterly ignorant
in all these, contenting themselves with a few frivolous, false, and formal
Desinitions and Notions, Exam. p. 76.

But I know no reason why these Notions and Definitions, or dark Terms and
Subtilties (as the Prefacer calls 'em) should give place to such Fooleries, and
Fascinations of a decrepit Fancy; or be eternally banished, because men of weak
and creeping Intellectuals, are not able to comprehend the use of 'em. The
Church and Civil Government may subsist well enough, tho Mechanics,
Travelers, and Men of ordinary Talents should not understand the heights and
depths, and usefulness of School Divinity; nor is it material or requisite,
that men, whose proper business should be to learn, and practice Obedience,
should be qualified to set up for Moderators in the Schools: If they complain
that School-Terms are too dark and mysterious, there are some that will answer,
That the fault lies not in the obscurity of the Terms, but in the incapacity of
the Noddle: And no Man ought to be offended at the Sun's Meridian Luster, tho
blind men cannot discern it.

It Is true, in some few cases the Schoolmen appear too definitive and nice, in
determining the Modus, where the Scripture is silent, or only asserts the
Thing: But, generally speaking, they are of excellent use in the managery of
Controversies; They teach us to avoid Absurdities, help at once both to detect
and confute the Errors of our Adversaries, and conduct our minds into an exact
notion, and true apprehension of things, by a methodical Brevity, and regular
Disputations.

One great reason, I suppose, that induc't the Prefacer to undervalue the Old
Philosophy, and Aristotelian Doctrines, is this: Aristotle, it seems, both in
his Ethics and Politics, affirms in plain terms, that of all Forms of
Government the Monarchial is the best: He Asserts, That Wise Men are fitted by
nature to command, and that others of strong Bodies but weak Intellectuals, are
chiefly designed for Subjection and Obedience; than which nothing can be more
grating and disobliging to Men of a Republican Temper and Inclination. It Is
likewise to be remembered, That his constant Friend and Tutor Mr. Hobbs (in
several Chapters of his famous Leviathan) complains of the barbarous Terms, and
obscure style of the Schoolmen; their insignificant Language, and frivolous
Distinctions; That Aristotle's Metaphysics are absurd, his Politics
repugnant to Government, his AEthicks ignorant, his Natural Philosophy a Dream.
Yet after all, I find, that Men of the brightest Wit, and comprehensive Genius
speak reverently of his Name. Scaliger and Casaubon count him the great
Incomparable Hero of the Intellectual World; and esteem those people to be no
better than Batts, Owls, and Dunces, that pedantickly talk against him: Cardan
admires him, Zanchy applauds him, and Melancthon adds, That it is necessary he
should be Studied and Read in the Universities, since without him no exact
Learning or Method can be attained.

Indeed the Old Philosophy (as we vulgarly call it) as well as School Divinity,
has its Imperfections; and I know none among all my Philosophical Acquaintance,
that are zealous Sticklers for the Ingenerability and Incorruptibility of the
Celestial Bodies, the Existence of solid Orbs, or the Element of Fire under the
supposed sphere of the Moon: And it is ignorantly or maliciously done by the
Prefacer, when he endeavors to extol the Grecian and Roman Education of
Youth, above that of the present Age; since we retain what is good of the
Ancient Learning, and have the advantage of Modern Improvements. I consider,
that Philosophy, properly speaking, is neither Pythaegorean, nor Socratical,
nor Peripatetical, nor Epicurean, but rather a comprehension of those Truths
and Dictates, which Humane Understanding, freed from the mixtures of Partiality
and Prepossessions, and assisted by Reading, application of Thought,
Experiments and long Observation, can clearly discern, or make out by necessary
consequence and deductions. It Is not a little System of Doctrines, or the
Opinions of a Sect, but whatsoever among all Parties is fit to be approved.
There is something sure, besides Dark Terms and Subtilties, in Aristotle's
Rhetoric, Ethics, and History of Animals. I will, when he thinks fit to call
me to an Account, tell him somewhat of the Diviner Philosophy of Plato, of
Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus too (as it is illustrated and refined by
Petrus Gassendus) which may be learned in the Universities. I will give him
some Account of the Excellency of the sublime Science of Pyrotechny, and its
various State, Alterations and Refinements from the Times of Hermes, Geber and
Lullius, down to Valentinus, Paracelsus, and the acute Helmont. I will acquaint
him, if he please, with the condition and state of Anatomical Learning, from
the Times of Herophilus, Galen, and the Alexandrian School, down to the days of
Cesalpinus, Harvey, Riolanus, and the young Esculapius of O^on.

Qui genus Humanum ingenio superavit, and Omnes
Praestrinxit stellas, exortus ut AEthereus Sol.
I will also tell him some of the wonderful Feats of Polygraphy and
Steganography, so much talked of by Claramuel, Cornelius Agrippa, Silenus and
Friar Bacon; and for fear of hurting his Head with dark Terms and Subtilties
and Old Philosophical Quirks, which breed Stiffness, and Positiveness in
Opinion, we'll talk of the stupendous effects of the Magnetical Philosophy,
improved by Cabaeus, Athanasius Kercherus, and the Learned Gilbertus; as also
of the great importance of Emblems, Hieroglyphics, and the Universal Character
of great Vogue and Repute (if we may believe the Author of the Examen,) in some
of the Oriental Nations. I could here tell some of the strange Performances of
the Thermometer, Barometer (or Aerometer, as some call it,) the discoveries of
the Telescope; and, without the help of the Torricellian Experiment, or
Air-pump, undertake to prove even a coacervate Vacuity in Nature: And, because
he is offended with the Greek and Latin Tongues; I think I could oblige his
squeamish and diseased Fancy with a luscius and wonderful Secret, (approved of
by his Old Friend the Author of the Examen, as well as by the divinely inspired
Teutonick, and Rosicrusian Fraternity) called the Language of Nature, or the
Paradisical Language of the outflown Word, which Adam understood while he was
in the state of Innocence. This is that Angelical Language, which speaks and
breaths forth those Central Mysteries, that lay hid in the heavenly Magic, and
wrapped up in the Bosom of the eternal Essence, wherein were hidden and
involved all the Treasury of those Ideal Signatures, which were brought to
light by the Peripherical Expansion, and Evolution of the Outflowing Fiat, and
so became existent in the Womb of that generative and faetiferous Word, from
whence sprung up the wonderful and various Seminal Natures, bearing the true
Signatures of the divine and characteristical Impressions; like so many
Harmoniacal and Symphoniacal Voices, sounding forth in an heavenly Consort, the
Wisdom, Power, Glory, and Might of the transcendent central Abyss of Unity,
from whence they did arise; and all speaking one Language, expressing in that
mystical Idiom, the hidden Virtues, Nature and Properties of those various
Sounds, which though one in the Center, become infinitely numerous in the
Existence and Circumference. Exam. p. 27.

The Prefacer, if he please, may consider gravely of this, and improve it at
his leisure: At present I shall only beg of him (and it is a very reasonable
request,) that he would be so civil and good natured for the future, as to give
God leave to Govern the Kingdoms of the Earth in his own way; that he would
acknowledge all power is from God, that by him Kings Reign, and Princes decree
Justice. That he would have so just and favorable Opinion of the Wisdom of the
Parliament, as to think 'em sufficiently qualified (without his help) to
contrive good and wholesome Laws for the benefit of the Public: That he would
know, to despise and vilify the Clergy, is to dishonor that Being that sent
'em to instruct him: That, if he cannot curb his busy and impetuous fancy, he
would at least direct and bend it some other way; and betake himself either to
Microscopical Curiosities, the solving of Problems, or catching of Flies (as
Dometian used to do) and dissecting 'em, if he will, for the advancement of his
Knowledge; or, if that be too minute and fine a performance, that he would,
with Galen, Anatomize Apes and Monkeys for the improvement of himself. That
instead of too curiously meddling with the Body Politic, he would with
Democtitus, enquire into the Nature and Situation of that Thing, which has
given us this disturbance: That, instead of employing his talent and thoughts
about the Mysteries of Government, he would look into the Wonders of the little
World; and lastly, that instead of bewildring his fancy in the Doctrines of
Machiavel and Hobbs, he would seriously read, and endeavor to understand the
Creed, Lord's Prayer, and Ten Commandments in the Vulgar Tongue, and be further
instructed in the Church Catechism, set forth for that purpose.

Fifthly, Another bold stride to push on the Republican Plot, is to amuse the
Multitude with much Talk about a Contract betwixt King and People and drawing
wild Inferences from it: If the King fail in his Promise, the People are exempt
from their Obedience; The Contract is made void, and the Right of Obligation is
of no force. Vindic. Cont. Tyran. This is the Old Style, and heretofore did
great Execution; God send us a good Deliverance. For the Prefacer rally's upon
us with this Engine too, and makes it a part of the Duty we owe to our Country,
to preserve our Constitution upon it is true and natural Basis, the Original
Contract. All other Foundations being false, nonsensical, and rotten,
derogatory to the present Government, etc.

He triumphs and shows his mettle in talking proudly of the Rights of the
People, and the Duty we owe to our Country; all this he can shrewdly inculcate
twice in one page: But instead of meeting with the Rights of Sovereignty, and
Allegiance due to their Majesty's, we hear nothing but the rough and blustering
Sounds of the Plague of Tyranny, and dispatching Kings without Ceremony. This I
take to be a strong Symtom of an Antimonarchical Distemper in him. Nay, he does
in effect undermine the Present Government, by making it depend upon an
imaginary Basis, or Foundation that can no where be found, but in such Heads as
are stuffed with Dreams and Visions, and perfect airy Imaginations.

The most Learned in the Law, with whom it has been my good-Fortune to
converse, know nothing of this Original Contract; and tho some have made as
much declamation and as horrible din about it, as others do about Original Sin;
yet I challenge the Prefacer to afford me half so plain and pregnant proof of
the one, as he has given of the other. Let him not think to trifle, or put us
off with fanciful Conjectures, random Inferences, ipse dixit's, and wild
conclusions from fantastical Premises (which I value no more than a Jest of
Poor Robin's, or a Prophecy of B -- y's) the Grand Enquiry is about a Contract
upon Record, at the first Erection of the English Monarchy: If he knows where
to find it, let him place it in open view, and erit mihi Magnus Apollo.

But methinks I see him stand like a man enchanted, and fumbling about the
matter: The man of Confidence becomes mealy-mouthed and bashful on a sudden; the
highmettled Hero will not jog on this way: No, it is too choice a Nostrum to be
publicly exposed; it is too precious a commodity to be laid upon the Stall;
profane and unsanctified eyes must not behold it.

In Magna Charta (which is the great Record of our Liberties) the People's
Rights and Privileges are fetched purely from the Kings Grants and Donations,
viz. Of our free and mere Will, we have given and granted to our Bishops, and
to all free men of our Realm, these Liberties following: And the higher we
ascend in the Scale of Monarchy, we find the King's more unlimited and free;
There were no restrictions or reserves under the first and most Ancient
Governments; no Laws, but what lay in the Prince's Bosom; as any Beardless Boy,
that has read Justin and Virgil, can sufficiently inform him.

And 'twill bring but little Glory to his Cause, if I tell him, that the first
notorious Encroachment upon the Rights of Majesty in England, were made by
Popish Aggressors: This was first attempted in the time of King William the
First, whom we commonly (though perhaps not properly) call the Conqueror: But he
was too wise and puissant to admit the least diminution of his Regality, and
though he was very generous and candid in his Concessions, yet he dismiss't the
Pope's Legate with an Alterum non Admisi. In the Reign of Henry the Second,
Monarchical Power was at a low ebb indeed, when the imperious and barbarous
Monks of those times dealt with their Prince, as some rude Heathens do by their
Gods, viz. chastise and whip 'em, if they do not answer their insolent
Expectations. The Case of King John is too derogatory, and sad, for a true
Loyal Englishman to think on, or to repeat: And the Condition of Poor England
in the time of Henry the Third, is a fair indication of what pernicious
importance it may prove to the Public, when Princes shall admit a Superior,
and controlling Power, even in the softest acceptance of the Word.

Sir W. T. tells of an ingenious Spaniard he met at Brussels, who would needs
have it, That the History of Don Quixot had ruined the Spanish Monarchy; for
when all the Love and Valor of the Spaniards was turned into Ridicule, they
began by degrees to grow ashamed of both, and to laugh at Fighting and Loving:
What ill influence and impression, this Fabulous and Romantic Account, may
leave behind it, by representing persons and things sacred in a Ridiculous Garb
and Colors, I cannot yet determine: However, it is good to make Provision
against the worst; and since an Apologue has had its good as well as evil
effects, I shall here confront one Fable with another.

It happened, that a great sedition was in Rome, and the common people were so
incensed against the Senate, Nobles, and Rich Men, that all things seemed now
to be a running into confusion: Whereupon the Senate sent one Menenius Agrippa,
an eloquent and wise person, to the multitude, to persuade 'em: Who being
admitted amongst 'em, and finding 'em all in a hurry, is said, to have
Addressed himself to 'em after this manner: Upon a time there arose a great
Sedition among the Members of the Body against the Belly; the eyes, ears,
hands, and feet said, That they all of 'em performed their several Offices to
the Body; but the Belly doing nothing at all, as a lazy King, enjoyed their
Labors, and idly consumed all those things which were purchased with the sweat
of the rest. The Belly replied, That indeed these things were true, and
therefore, if it pleased them, from henceforth they should allow it nothing;
The Members all agreed, That nothing should be given to it for the time to
come: But when this had been observed for some little time, the Hands and Feet
lost their strength, and all other Members began to fail; so that at length
they perceived, That the Food which was given to the Belly, was also
advantageous to all the rest, and upon this consideration they returned to
their Obedience.

Upon the hearing of this Fable, the People understood, That the Wealth which
was in the hands of Great Men, was also in some sort beneficial to themselves:
And upon some kind promises of the Senate, they were reconciled to their
Superiors.

It has not been my main business of late, nor is it worth a thinking man's
while, to read over the Licentious Histories that peep abroad, or the Popular
Accounts of things: I knew nothing of the inside of the Account of Denmark,
till the Third Edition appeared upon the Stage; about which time I was desired
to make some Remarks upon it, and give it a just Answer and Castigation: Had I
had more time and leisure for the performance, I should, perhaps, have been
more copious in my Animadversions; but I hope I have said enough to tame a
little the impertinence of that Man, who had insulted over the Nobility,
Clergy, and both Universities, and made the Names of Princes his Sport. I have
bound him to some method, and I hope to better Behavior for the future; and
though I find little of Argument throughout the whole, yet I have proceeded
fairly and argumentatively against him. I have plainly shown, That all the
choice means and expedients used heretofore, to destroy the Monarchy and
Church, are exactly transscrib'd by him, and crowded into a Preface: And
certainly, That man has a greater share of kind Nature, than good Apprehension,
that can think he has singled out the same Antichristian Methods, without the
same black Intention and Design.

I know his Admirers have one Infallible way of answering all opposers, and
that is by Ill Names: They have not Wit enough to discern the Reason of things;
nor know they when to laugh, or be severe in the Right place: If the Prefacer,
without Reason, roll in hard words and Names (such as Ide^t, Ass, Tyrant,
Nonsensical Blunders, and the like) it passes with 'em for the Mettle of a
Pree-orn Subject: But if we upon just provocation, prove the same upon them, O
it is sad scurrility and Railing: They are meek, lowly, and poor in Spirit,
while they are saucy to their Superiors, and despise Dominion: But it is pride,
and crying presumption in us, if we offer to correct a little snarling
Republican: If they trample upon Bishops and Blaspheme Kings; They are only
Zealous and concerned for God and his Glory: but if we expose the Scismatical
Licentiousness of the disobedient Brotherhood, O it is rank Malice, and a
degree of persecution. The World has ever been full of such precious Judges and
Arbitrators as these: And we know the Pharisees were even (this way) with the
Savior of the World, for telling 'em in plain Words, They were of their Father
the Devil.

If Children will be perpetually playing in the dirt, they are deservedly
corrected for it: And if men will be always sporting themselves with foul and
unclean Invectives against their Betters; they ought not to take it amiss, if
they are sometimes snub'd for their Sawciness and ill Manners. This is the true
State of the matter here before us. If any man can show, that I have
transgress't the limits of Justice or true Decorum; none can be more forward to
make a generous Recantation, than my self: In the mean time, I submit what I
have written, to the impartial Censure and Correction of my Superiors, in the
Church and Parliament of England.

The end of the First Part.
THE Consolations of the CROSS: OR THE Two Grand PILLARS OF MAN'S SECURITY In
this WORLD. Containing a Second Part of REBUKE TO THE Author of the Account of
Denmark.

London Printed, and sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1694.

THE Consolations of the CROSS: OR THE Two Grand PILLARS OF MAN'S SECURITY In
this WORLD, etc.
THE Reader will easily discern from what has been said, that some Men who
enjoy the Benefit of the Sun, as well as those that are pent up in Dark Rooms,
can Fancy themselves to be as great as Popes and Emperors: And I can further
assure him, that this unhappy Brother and Traveller here before us, who seems
to swell, and look big among the living, has been a long time Dead in a True
Philosophical Sense, although he may still make a mighty Figure in the Mundus
Plebejorum.

Now 'twas eagerly maintained by some of the Philosophical Sages heretofore,
That the Animal Life, which is still drawing down the Soul to unlovely Objects,
did more properly deserve the Name and Character of Death; which seems to be
the result of wise deliberation, as well as fine thought and Fancy: For
certainly Life, in a moral acceptance, does not consist in breathing common
Air, and having a flowing plenty of worldly Accomodations; but in knowledge and
contemplation, in Divine and Rational exercises It Is certainly a great
Disparagement to the Dignity of Humane Nature (which is framed so near a kin to
the Angelical) to place the Essence of Life in the Enjoyment of Outward Things;
and the Pleasure resulting from it is rather a Lethargy, than true Tranquillity
of Mind: He that has vital powers, and faculties, is potentially alive; but he
alone is actually so who does Nobly and agreeably exert 'em.

Pref. Health and Liberty are without dispute, the greatest natural Blessings
Mankind is capable of enjoying.

The Health of the Rational Frame consists in acting^ conformably to the
Dictates of right Reason: This the Philosophers called the (...), the
Intellectual Harmony, Health and good disposition of the Soul of Man.

The Liberty of Man consists principally, in his being Free from Perturbations,
or the Dominion of irregular and tumultuary Passions, and vicious Habits, that
usurp the place of right Reason: In which sense of Liberty, The Turks
themselves, who are Lords and Masters, and live well and pleasantly (as he
notes, Account page 241.) are no better than Vassals: And some of their
Conquered Slaves (as he calls 'em) do at present enjoy a comfortable degree of
Liberty. And the Popish Religion is not the only one, of all the Christian
Sects, proper to introduce and establish Slavery in a Nation, as he tells us,
Account, page 235.

The Gentleman, under my present care and inspection, talks, as if the
condition of Men here below, were a kind of Epicurean State of Carnal Ease and
Complacency: Christianity with its dark Train of Passive Doctrines, is a
slavish and unintelligible Thing in his Esteem. Never was any fond man so blind
an Admirer of his Mistress's Charms and Perfections, as he is a lover of his
Countrey's Legal Liberties, without any regard to the safety of Religion: Never
did good St. Augustine declaim with more vehemence against the salvability of
the Heathens; than he has done against these Slavish Opinions sucked in at the
Schools; and which some have been so unfortunate, to carry to their Graves; and
(he might have added) to Heaven.

He would fain make the wondering World believe, That Passive Obedience and
Legal Liberties, are inconsistent things; and that one is fatally destructive
of the other: But that is his want of Judgment, and sound Understanding. St.
Paul (who was undoubtedly as great an Assertor of Passive Obedience, as ever
was in the World) pleaded such Liberties as these under Nero, and before the
Magistrates of Philippi: But he likewise knew, that Civil Rights can have only
a Civil Defense; and if that fail, there is no higher Appeal, or Remedy to be
expected, but the Divine Protection.

My business at present shall be to show, That these Passive Doctrines (which
he in an insulting and histrionical manner calls Slavish and Unintelligible)
are a very Reasonable Service; and this I shall make out,

First, With respect to God's Sovereignty or Dominion over us: And,

Secondly, With respect to the pure Essential Goodness of his Nature, as it
particularly exerts it self in our Afflictions. And,

First, With respect to his Sovereignty.

Now by God's Sovereignty, or Dominion over us, the Learned usually understand
a Fundamental Right to dispose of all his Creatures, so far as it is consistent
with the Rules of Justice, Goodness and Truth; for it is He that has made us,
and not we our selves; and in Him we live, move, and have our Being. His
overruling Providence was awake from all Eternity; before the World began, he
neither slumber'd nor slept: But by his incomparable Wisdom, he contrived the
Ranks and Order of every Being, and had before him the exact Idea, and
Lineaments of all his Creatures: And when they afterward commenc't in time by
virtue of his Power; he gave them their limits and agreeable Stations; he
adorned them with Usefulness, Elegancy, and due Proportion, and saw they were
very good: Indeed the whole World was but one Sacred Temple, till Man by his
Sin and Sacrilege profaned it: 'Twas founded by God's own immediate Arm,
dedicated to his Great Name, are raised to his Glory; and tho a ridiculous
Affectation has tempted some to derive the management, as well as Original of
it, from no higher Principle than that of Chance; yet God saw, in the boundless
Circuits of his Wisdom, That even in the proper Functions of its Nature, it was
dependent on him, and therefore he resolved to preside over it; to supply it
with a proportionable Concurrence of his Might, and render his Name more
venerable and glorious in the conservation and guidance of it. Hence he assumes
the Character of the Great King, by the Mouth of his Holy Prophet; and
illustrates his own Greatness to Job in the wonderful and astonishing Prospect
of his Creatures. Hence Abraham calls him the Judge of all the Earth; and David
summons the Sun, Moon, and Stars, nay the whole Creation, to sing his Praises:
Nay, the very Heathens themselves had such an awful Impression of his Majesty
upon their hearts, that they durst scarce approach him without a trembling
Veneration; they acknowledged him to be the Supreme Lord and Governor of all
the World, and accosted him with all the high-strain'd Epithites of Honor and
Jurisdiction.

And certainly, though Christianity has enrich't our Natures with many Noble
Privileges, yet it cannot cancel the Obligation of a Creature: Though it has
entitled us to a brighter participation of the Divine Image, yet it has not
brought us to a looser dependence on him; and tho 'twas designed to draw us
nearer to God, yet it does not invite us to so bold an intimacy and freedom
with him, as to dispute his Authority, or the Wisdom of his Dispensations. The
very Angels above are subject to his Will, though with this glorious Advantage,
that they cannot Disobey: And it is a Law interwoven in the constitution of
Rational Beings, that, since they are capable of Moral Government, they should
be governed by one that is infinitely more wise and powerful than themselves:
But who can challenge this great Prerogative, but the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords? It Is he that is the immediate Donor of our Beings; the great
Proprietor of Heaven and Earth, and all Right is fundamentally vested in
himself: In his Hand is the Soul of every living thing, and the Breath of all
Mankind: He disappointeth the devices of the Crafty, so that their Hands cannot
perform their Enterprise: He leads Counselors away spoiled, and makes the
Judges fools. He leads Princes away spoiled, and overthrows the mighty.
When Alexander is designed to be God's Vicegerent over the Nations of the
Earth, Darius shall not be saved by the multitude of an Host, nor delivered by
his strength: And when Caesar is appointed and ordained by God, to be Lord and
Master of the Roman World, the Gallant Pompey, that never shrank at the sight
of Danger before, shall soon falter and tremble at the Head of his Army, and at
length steal away in a poor disguise, like a mean and infamous Coward.

What is the just Latitude or Extent of God's Dominion in reference to mankind,
has been variously asserted by Men of bold and Speculative Inclinations; and
some have been so officiously impertinent, as to fly to the hidden
determinations of Heaven, to make out this Mystery and amazing Riddle: But what
proud Dust and Ashes are we, that we should thus grasp at Mysteries beyond our
reach, and pry into those things, which none can see but he who is Invisible,
which none can comprehend but he who is Incomprehensible? When we soar aloft
into these Regions that are above us, we are bewildred and lost amidst Clouds
and Darkness; we exceed the just bounds and Limits of our Creation, and gain
nothing else but the Reproach of our own Folly: I shall therefore Industriously
wave this kind of procedure, and confine my self to those clearer Dispensations
mentioned in Holy Writ; and which chiefly concern the condition of this present
Life.

Now that God does not Limit his Beneficence and Rewards to any Personal
Performances, but sometimes Blesses one Relative for another's sake, is
abundantly Evident from the Benefits which he confered upon Abraham's
Posterity, as also from his willingness to save Sinful Sodom for the sake of
Ten Righteous Persons: And by equality of Reason he may punish one Relative
upon the account of another's failance, the one being as consistent with the
Rights of his Dominion, as the other with his Goodness. Thus David's Sin in
numbering Israel and Judah, (or, as some would have it, in neglecting to pay
the Shekel) was severely punished by three Days Pestilence, upon the chosen Men
of Israel; and the Iniquity of Ahab, tho pardoned in himself, was to be
punished in his Children, as God himself pronounces to the Prophet in these
words; See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? Because he humbles
himself before me, I will not bring the Evil in his days, but in his Sons days
will I bring the Evil upon his House. Now in such singular Incidencies, God
does not so directly visit as a Judge, but makes use of his Sovereignty to
advance the unquestionable Designs of his good Providence; and we are bound to
be cheerfully Passive and Resigned, whether he is pleased to take away our
Lives by Pestilence, Famine, the Iron-hands of a Tyrant, or Sword of the
Destroying Angel.

And hence I might proceed to make out the Justice of that Original Visitation,
that defaced and sullied the whole Scene of Nature, and overwhelmed all
Mankind with Anxiety and Sadness. God made Man happy and upright at first, and
endowed his Nature with all agreeable perfection; but he by his Non-attendance
and Disobedience, did soon plunge himself in an Estate of Sin and Misery; and
thus proud Man who was so Nobly Descended fell at Odds with his Maker,
dis-rob'd himself of all his Original Glories, and shook the whole Universe by
his Fall.

We read that the Wisemen of the Eastern World were sadly concerned at this
unaccountable State of Things: You may hear the Platonist pouring out his Soul
in Complaints and mournful strains; and telling strange Stories of some sins
committed in a Former State. to make out the Mysterious Vanity of this Life:
You may see Aristotle sitting down and weeping by the Water of Euripus
lamenting the shortness of his Intellectual Sight, the disorder and dimness of
his understanding: Nay, Solomon himself the very Boast of Nature and Great
Secretary of Heaven) after he had seen and enjoyed all the satisfactions of
this life, in the little narrow compass of himself, concludes at length with
this pathetical Exclamation, All is Vanity.

This is now the condition of our Natures; this is our present Case: The Body
has lost its Beauty and Gloss, and the brightness of those Lineaments, which
were at first drawn by the finger of God; the Soul is driven out of her former
Paradise into a Region of Diseases, of Tempests and thick Darkness, and exposed
a Prey to all the wretched Calamities of a Mortal Life: And yet, far be it from
Fallen Man, to renew the Old Apostasy, and Quarrel with those Alotments which are
plainly consistent with the mildest Justice: God might have made Man the
subject of many Temporal Inflictions, without respect to an Antecedent Fall,
and recompenc't all this with the blessed Assurances of a Future State; and
certainly, the Light of Nature may inform us, That since we are wholly
subordinate to another, we ought also to be accountable for every
transgression, accordingly as our Superior shall determine or think fit; who
because he is holy, just, and good, neither can nor will inflict more upon us
than what our Sins and Iniquities shall exact.

Secondly, That the Practice of these Passive Doctrines is a very reasonable
Service, will yet more eminently appear, if we consider 'em with respect to the
Divine Goodness, as it particularly exerts it is self in our Afflictions.

But here we meet with some, that have formed very dark and dangerous Notions
of the Deity which they adore; and, as if they meant to cut-vye even Lucifer
himself, have accused their Maker of Pride and Moroseness, and an evil
Inclination toward his Creatures. What Satan only suggested out of design, men
have solemnly aavow'd, and ratified for sound Doctrine: And this was the first
Engine which the Devil played against the Happiness of Mankind: 'T was the
Argument he used to our first Parents, to make 'em forfeit their Estate of
Primitive Perfection: He endeavored to tincture their Minds with an Opinion,
that God was of an envious, unlovely Disposition, and that which was no where
to be found but in himself, he fastened upon that Being, from whom all Goodness
in the World is derived: For God does know (says he) that in the day you eat
thereof, ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil.

From this fatal Intercourse and subsequent Fall, there were many Heathens (who
had some Fragments of Scripture communicated to 'em, or else understood
somewhat of the matter by the less faithful conveyance of Oral Tradition) that
began to entertain ill Notions of God, thinking he had forbid 'em the Tree of
Life, out of Pure malignity or ill intention: Hence they proceeded to tell very
sad and ominous Tales of the envious Temper of the Deity above them; his
industrious care to dash all Prosperity with some sharp allay, and overwhelm
all Greatness with a swift Destruction. And indeed, it had been happy for the
Christian World, if such barbarous Notions had kept their due distance on the
other-side the Partition Wall, if they had been confined for ever to the
Outer-Court of Gentilism. Men have been so forward to advance God's Sovereignty
above his other Attributes, to oppose his Protestation to his Design, and make
his Revealed Will such a Mystery to his Creatures, that they seem solemnly to
imply, That all the Divine Expostulations and Promises, tho seconded with full
Solemnity of Attestation, are intended only to promote the Credit of the
Imposture, and advance the ends of Tyranny and Deceit: An Opinion so Romantic,
and big with Absurdity! that it represents the Almighty a Bugbear in a worse
sense, than the Atheist ever intended; and looks as if 'twere designed to
justify the Rebellion even of Lucifer himself; and proclaim to the World, that
he fell in a good Old Cause.

In short, Love is the Gospel-Definition of the Divine Essence; and it is very
plain, without any affected Jingle, or Ambiguity; and infallible true as any
demonstration. If we take away his power, he would be but a kind of Epicurean
Deity; but take away his Goodness, and he would be no Deity at all: The
Apostate Angels may partake of his Power, but they cannot of his Goodness; and
if it were lawful to reduce our Conceptions of the Divine Essence to Figures
and Proportions; we may justly presume (by a little altering the Philosopher's
Notion) that he would assume Light for his Vehicle, and Love for his very Soul.
Every Act of God is a Communication of his Beneficence; his most rigorous
Justice is nothing else but a certain disposition, a peculiar mode of his
goodness; he corrects us only out of Love; he does not willingly afflict the
Children of Men.

Now that Afflictions are a sign and Character of Adoption, will readily and
evidently appear; if we do but consider, that this has been the constant
Portion of the greatest Favorites of Heaven: The Holy Patriarchs spent all
their days in sorrow, and in Travel; the Schools of the Prophets were so many
Seminaries of Affliction: And it has pleased God, by an uncontrollable display
throughout all Periods and Ages, to render the Sufferings of our Blessed
Savior more illustrious than his Miracles, or all the Monuments of his Power:
The Crusified Jesus has been prefigur'd by a longer Catalogue of Worthies, than
the Triumphant Redeemer; and he has had more Types of his Passion than of his
Glory. The Greatness of man was too imaginary and frail to represent the
Majesty of our Savior, and our degeneracy had rendered our Miseries so justly
real, as to be weak and imperfect Emblems of his Sorrow.

Besides, it seemed a necessary Provision, that some unfortunate Worthies
should rise up to his Character, as near as Humanity could aspire, to reconcile
his Tribulation to his Integrity, and recommend his Person to the acceptance of
the World; and yet, alas! so great was the darkness of benighted Mankind at the
Brightness of his rising, that they shut their Eyes against this Sun of Glory;
among all the Prophesies which he punctually fullfill'd; this one was too soon,
and too fatally verified, He is despised and rejected of Men, a Man of sorrows,
and acquainted with grief.

His Birthday was observed with no other Solemnity, than that of a Massacre;
and his coming into the world was congratulated with a Conspiracy; and though
Abrabam afar off rejoiced to see his day, yet his degenerate Offspring did
even scorn and deride it. Never was Majesty so rudely treated, nor Virtue
exercised with such contumelious disgraces; his unspotted Innocence did not so
much endear, as exasperate the World against him; his Poverty of Spirit was
improved into Ambition; and his Miracles courted their Incredulity in vain: And
after all the base and inhumane Affronts that were levelled against his person;
after he had run through all the afflicting Stages of Poverty, Sorrow and
Disgrace; He stoop't to the dreadful formality of a Trial, expected the fatal
pleasure of his Enemies, and submitted at length to the most Illegal Sentence
that ever came from the mouth of Blasphemy.

And next behold him hanging upon a Cross; behold a dying and a bleeding
Savior embalming corruption with the effusions of his dearest Blood! Behold
the brightest Order and Immortality Prefac't with the wrack of Universal
Nature, the Crucifixion of the Whole World! Those glorious Bodies whom David
calls upon to praise the Lord, did then sympathize with his Agony and Passion.
The Heaven's were darkened, the Earth gave up her Dead, and all things see^d
shuffled into another Chaos to prepare the way for a new Creation. Thus did
Christ suffer, and leave us an Example, that we should follow his steps: Thus
did he adorn the Cross with his own Practice, and bequeath it to us as the
distinguishing Character of a True Disciple. This was his lot, and it is our
Predestined portion, for hereunto are we called; and whosoever will list
himself a true follower of him, must resolve to partake of that bitter Cup,
whenever Providence shall give him an Alarm.

And that this is no slavish or unaccountable Doctrine, will yet more abundantly
appear, if we consider,

Secondly, The Natural Power and Influence of Affliction upon the Soul.

Health, Liberty, Prosperity and much Ease, are dangerous and bewitching
things; and though they are lent us as a gentle Remedy against anxiety and care,
yet through our own ill management they often become a Charm, and the Antidote
it self turns to a Disease: For since the World cannot so easily fubdue us by
Threats and Hostility, by Assaults, and open Force, it immediately flies to all
the Arts of Policy, to Stratagem and Retreat; like a subtle Magitian, it
presently turns its Rod into a Serpent; it dazzles our Senses with a delicious
prospect of its Counterfeit Glories, and so leads us in Golden Fetters to
Destruction: For the World, like the Old Enemy of Mankind, does first deceive
the Female Parties within us; it caresses each Lust and tender Passion with
fair and specious Allurements, and when these have embraced and swallowed the
Golden Delusion, our Masculine Faculties are too soft and flexible to resist
the pleasing Temptation, and proselyted Reason begins to hearken to the
Dictates of our Senses.

And thus having at length enslaved our Understandings, it begins to play the
Tyrant over us, to engross our Time, our Thoughts, and all our Actions. If we
chance to be in a religious or thoughtful mood, the World soon turns it into
Hippocrisy and Disguise; if we enter into Discourse about sacred Mysteries, it
soon perverts it into Burlesque and wanton Talk; and when we would draw forth
our honest intentions by the Rules of strict Morality, it brings 'em out in the
Dialect of Friends, in Crusings and bitter Calumny; when we are busy and
employed about our necessary Callings, it instructs us in the quaint, and
artificial Methods of Knavery and Deceit; and when we retire from them for a
sober Indulgence and Refreshment of our Natures, the World is ready at hand to
overwhelm us with Luxury and Excess: Nay, if we enter into our Closets for the
Exercise of our Devotion, the World does there likewise pursue us; it imprints
its Image upon our very Hearts and Minds, challenges all our Thoughts and
Attention, and so turns our lawful Prayers into Idolatry.

These Dangers of Prosperity have struck such an awe upon the Spirits of Great
Men in former Ages, that they never considered 'em without trembling and
astonishment. Hence it is Recorded of many Ancient Hero's, that after some
Signal Victories and Atchievments, they have grown pensive and melancholy, and
changed their August and sprightly Countenances, into a sad dejection and
captivity of Spirit: And though some late Vertuosi have ascribed these effects to
the Effluviums and Darts of some envious Eyes about 'em, yet I question not,
but this will ever pass, among the thinking part of Mankind, for a very
derogatory and ungrounded Fancy. It was not the Envy or the Frowns of Men, but
fear of the just Anger of the Gods that made the Renowned Cato cry out in Livy,
That the more he prosper'd, the more he grew afraid: And for the same reason
Augustus Caesar once every year laid aside his Regalities, and receive'd Alms
with all the humble Ceremony of a Beggar; he feared his long uninterrupted
Prosperity, suspected the Anger of the Overruling Deity, and therefore
endeavored to divert his wrath by a Voluntary Humiliation.

And if we look into the Annals of the Christian Church, we shall meet with
some, in the hot Interval of the Heathen Persecution, bewailing themselves that
God not yet called them to the Glories of Tribulation, the Illustrious Toils of
Martyrdom; and after this Pagan Storm was blown over, and the Church of God was
adorned with honorable Endowments, we shall find many wise and venerable
Bishops climbing very heavily into the Episcopal Chair, and, when they were
there placed, as sadly lamenting the Danger of their Station; they looked upon
such heights as a Temptation rather than a Duty, and more a Punishment than
Promotion.

And if we cast our eyes forward, and observe the succeeding Centuries of the
Church, we shall be tempted to think, that this noted suspicion was no Panick
Dread, but a very just and necessary circumspection; for as Tacitus has
observed of the Roman Empire, that after its martial Humor was abated by Peace
and a gentle Discipline, it became dispirited by Riots and intestine Factions;
so may we plainly discern a most deplorable alteration in the State of
Christianity, so soon as the Heathen Tyranny was overpast.

While the First Christians were treated with Severities, their Lives were a
genuine Transcript of their Profession; they convinced the world with the best
Argument of a Religious Conversation, insomuch that the Heathens submitted at
length to a tame and a gentle Discipline; and Christianity appeared a True
Mystery of Godliness: But when, through the favor of a milder Providence, it
became the Imperial Profession; when it is Votaries were dismissed from the
Lectures of the Cross, and the Prevailing Council of Afflictions; they quickly
closed with the treacherous Solicitations of Flesh and Blood, and flattering
Vanities of the World.

And this was the immediate Doom of Christianity, so soon as the Pagan Tyranny
was over-past; for then Christians themselves renounced all Obligations of
Meekness and Humility, and turned the former Glories of the Cross into the
Scandal of Persecution; Their former Unity became broken and subdivided by the
Pride of Arrians, Donatists, and Novatians; and those latter Ages were almost
as remarkable for Ambition, Luxury, and a Tyrannical Zeal, as the former had
been for an incomparable Piety, and victorious Martyrdoms.

So natural is it for Men to turn their Liberty into Vanity, by too high an
Admiration of it; and to corrupt their Food by the Poison of their own Natures:
And when Men are become such Vassals to the World, such Votaries of Sense and
Pleasure; they must also languish in their Duty toward God, and fall off
proportionably from the divine Assistance: For how can they listen to the call
of Heaven, amidst all this Pomp and Secular Distraction, or bestow one Thought
upon Futurity and Judgment?

But when at length some signal Calamity shall give the daring Sinner an Alarm,
when Afflictions, the Welcome Harbinger of God's Love, fall like a Dew upon
him; This shows him the Vanity of his Carnal Ease and Security, and opens a
prospect into the Land of the Living: For the apprehensions of a God, and of
our Duty to him, are so essential to our Souls, and inseparable from our
Natures; that though Men may seem to drown 'em for a while, they lie dissolved in
delicacy and pleasure; yet the least touch of anguish will sometimes awaken us
into severe Reflections, and dash all the Harmony of our Blood and Spirits.
It Is is very pious Remark of that Great Philosopher, whom wise Antiquity has
justly honored with the Title of Divine; That when a Man perceives, that he is
just drawing toward his latter End, (...), etc. He is then seized with a
doubtful Trembling, and an Enquiry into those things, which before he would
scarce vouchsafe to think upon: And though he might once laugh at the Pious and
grave Cheats of Immaterial Beings, and Immortal Spirits; yet now the very Tales
of Ghosts and Fayries will affright him; he will be ready to shrink at the
least Shadow of Danger, and be terrified with the Visions of his own
Imagination. Indeed it is an easy thing for a Man, in the lustful Pride of his
Nature, to seem Witty and Eloquent against Heaven, and to outface the Ferrors
of the Invisible World; but when Providence shall cast him out of his Beloved
State of Bodily Health and Security, into a Bed of Sickness, or the
confinements of a Prison; when the cold Damps shall appale and allay the gaety
of his Temper, and all his worldly Oracles stand mute, and cannot help him;
Then he will think of his former Gallantry with reluctance and vexation; he
will then experiment the Folly of his own choice; and no longer adore the
glittering Frailties of humane Wisdom, but Reason will be fwallow'd up in
Revelation; he will then confess that every Creature is fearfully and
wonderfully made; that every little Insect is a System of Divinity; and his
eyes will be opened to spell out a Soveveraign Disposer of all Events in the
Works of his own Creation.

Such Considerations as these will be our Entertainment, when we lie under the
Discipline of a severer Providence; when God in Mercy has befriended us with
Afflictions, and covered us with Misery as with a Garment: For the Soul of Man
is active and restless, and must have some Object, whereupon to fix its
Desires; and when it has nothing from without to employ it, it will no longer
look abroad, but draw its Activity inwards; and then the Appeals of Reason will
be heard, and the Cries of Wisdom will not be rejected.

Thirdly, That this Passive State is not a State of Slavery, but of Adoption
and Glorious Liberty, will be further evinc't, by considering the divine
Supports and Succors that attend it. For since God has^ promised, That we
shall not be tempted beyond what we are able to bear, he stands engaged, when
the ordinary means of comfort do forsake us, to furnish out an extraordinary
Supply. And though this may seem an uncouth Paradox to the Animal Man, a very
harsh incongruity to Flesh and Blood; yet it has been unquestionably made out
by the Practice of the Apostles, and many illustrious Examples in the Primitive
Church. For there have been some, whose minds have been so fortified by
Assistances of the Divine Spirit, that they could even smile in the Grim Face
of Persecution; look down without concern upon all the frightful Judicatories
of the World, and like the Leviathan in Job, could laugh at the shaking of a
Spear: Nay, there have been some, who when Persecution has rode in Triumph,
have carried the Bible as a Monument to their Graves; when walled about with
fire, they have hugged it in their Arms, while their pains grew rapture, and
their burnings extacy: And when their Tongues were no longer able to form faint
Sounds into Vocal Hymns, with lifted up Eyes, they have continued their
Devotion, and offered Dumb Praises to the Savior of the World.

And certainly it is a Sufficient Ground of Consolation to any generous
Believer, when he considers that Afflictions are not the Blind Product of a
Random destiny, but founded on the Basis of God's Decree or Permission: And
when we are once fortified with this puissant consideration, that must needs be
best for us, that is commissioned by the hand of a good and Gracious God; that
he is the Sole Disposer of all Events, and that he does not stand by as an
unconcerned Spectator of the Mournful Scene of our sufferings; that the
miseries we undergo are the reproach of Christ, and that they are far more
Honorable before God, than they can be ignominious before the World; this must
needs cause our Souls to bear up bravely against all the Scorn and Terrors of
the World, against Natural Contradictions.

Lastly, if we can entertain a strong hope and assurance, that what we sow in
sufferings we shall reap in Glory; that a violent Death does but conduct us a
little sooner to Heaven, that a glorious Martyrdom does but Antedate
Immortality; this is ravishment enough, to tempt us, like Cato, to be our own
Executioners, did not God restrain us by his word, as an Angel did the Father
of the Faithful: This is enough to make us cling to the Cross, to take Heaven
by a more than Ordinnry violence; to breath out our Souls in Eucharistical
Strains, and return a Psalm of Thanksgiving for every Wound.

He that can thus consider things well about him, will be all peace and calm
within himself, when circled around with Wars and Destruction: A Prison or a
Dungeon will be no confinement to him; his Soul is still free to converse with
his Redeemer, while a good Conscience becomes his Security: Tho he hear the
Voice of his Maker in the Clouds, yet he flies not the Adam behind a Tree; nor
like the guilty Emperor, beneath a Bed for Protection. He torments not himself
with Jealousies and Tears, and superstitious forebodings of Evils to come, but
is industriously thankful for those blessings and mercies which at present he
enjoys: He knows, that by the assistance of the Divine Spirit he can turn a
Dungeon into a House of Prayer; that Christ's presence will Consecrate the
horrors of a Prison, and make Darkness it self Glorious: And if the Light of
his Countenance do but shine in upon him, he shall be Happy, though in the midst
of a Roman Furnace, or a Scottish Inquisition.

The Close.
THat perfect Happiness or Assimulation with God is the ultimate end of every
Rational Being, is a Truth so obvious, that even the Light of Nature could
discover it; and as it is the ultimate end of our Beings, and consequently our
Duty; so is it likewise the insatiate desire of every Man, the common Thirst of
our Natures: Hence it was, that the Renowned Plato did banish all absurd and
licentious Notions of the Immortal Gods out of his famous Republic, and admit
no other Descriptions of the Deity, but such as were consonant and agreeable to
his nature, which he concludes to be pure and unalterable Goodness.

Now since it is the natural Ambition of every Man to rise up to a Conformity
with what he adores; such lovely and amiable Representations of God, must needs
kindle a sweetness and benignity in our Tempers, and naturally tend to advance
the Peace and Stability of the World: Especially, when we consider, that 'twas
the great business of our Blessed Savior's coming into the World, to
consummate Peace betwixt Heaven and Earth; to reconcile all Mankind to an
incensed God, and by sweetning our Tempers by the infusions of Grace, to make
us love one another The Law indeed, like a Typical Canaan, might seem to shadow
out the brighter Discoveries of this new Dispensation, but it did not enjoin
'em in that universality of Extent, and eminency of Degree, which our blessed
Savior has advanced 'em: for what more astonishing than that dreadful
frequency of cursing their Enemies under the Law, in the most rigorous and
solemn Forms of Execration? Whereas the Christian Religion allows no such
Precedure against the most Capital Enemy: If he be a Celsus, a Porphyry, or a
Julian, we must do good good unto him; but we seem to forget that we are
Christians, if we go about to pray for his Destruction.

Bless and Curse not is the Motto of Christianity, the great and conquering
Precept of the Gospel: 'Twas this that was the inoffensive Armor of a
Primitive Christian; that gave a luster even to Martyrdom it self; that kindled
a Veneration, and an awful Dread in the Breast of the persecuting Heathen:
'Twas this that softened the rudenesses of Tyrants, that captivated Rome's
flying and triumphant Eagles, and made Arms and Empire truckle to Religion.

Again, this will help to guard us against the dangerous Rocks of Presumption
and Despair; for even God's Goodness is mostly to be feared in a state of
Impenitency, tho it is the only Refuge for the humble and repenting Sinner. His
Wisdom (by which he comprehends the Ideas and mutual Referencies of all things)
if separated from this Attribute, might degenerate into the extremest Tyranny
and Imposture. His Holiness speaks little comfort to our Souls, for he is of
purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity. His Justice alone must needs terrify and
affright us, for if he should be extreme to mark what we do amiss, there is no
Man can abide it. His Power without Goodness is the very Emphasis of
Condemnation; for he is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell: But when we
have his Love interceding for us, all other Attributes, as they partake of
this, will close in perfect Harmony for our Salvation; his Justice will reward
our mean Services and Endeavors for the sake of Christ's Merit, and his
Sovereign Power for ever will protect us.

This will also secure us against all worldly Accidents and foreign
Contingencies; render us undaunted in the midst of Dangers, steady and
immovable, tho all the world should be in an uproar against us: For when we
are once environed with this gallant Consideration, That that is best which now
is, since it comes from the hands of a wise and indulgent God; our Inclinations
and Desires will all be wrapped up in the divine Will, and we shall act with full
freedom and approbation of Mind, whenever the fiercest Calamities shall
assault us; like some departed Spirits caught up to Paradise, we shall stand
above the reach of Fortune, and the malice of the World; and our Souls will
shine bright, unsullied and unmoved above Clouds and Storms, like the Lamps of
Heaven.

Thus much I have thought fit to Discourse, for the sake of the Author of the
Account of DENMARK; for I know no Man that has more need of a Sermon or Solemn
Lecture than himself. If I have contributed any thing toward a better
Settlement of his Head and Fancy, I have an abundant Recompense. However, at
least, I hope he will not take it unkindly at my hands, that I suppose him not
quite hardened against Conviction.

I have ever thought, and do persevere in my Opinion, That the Pride of the
Animal Life, a too ardent Love of Riches and Worldly Honors (which are pretty
glittering Bawbles indeed to please Children in Understanding) and a want of
contemplating the glories of another Life, are the main Fundamental Objection
and Argument against the Passive Doctrines, maintained by the genuine Sons of
the Church of England: This fills Men's Hearts with coarse and sordid desires;
and makes their Heads swell with the Wind of Fantastical Doctrines about
Liberty, without a just restriction; Till at length the Distemper or Malignancy
breaks out into a vain Outcry against Tyranny and Slavish Opinions. This makes
Men play pragmatically with the Names of Princes and great Personages; and
think it a fine thing to find out, and correct the Errors of their Superiors:
It Is this has occasioned the Heats and darling Contentions of the Age; which
have almost changed the state of Christianity into a state of War, and turned
the World into a dreadful Theater of Bloodshed and Confusion.

And now, since I have just mentioned the Church of England, which is so much
Carpt and Railed at, I will add thus much, that it is the purest Church
throughout the whole Compass of Christendom, that I know of; That she maintains
the nearest resemblance and conformity to true Primitive Christianity; and
notwithstanding all the little Braveries, and vain contradictions of her
despairing Enemies, does still retain her Ancient Motto, I mean, Her unshaken
Allegiance to her Prince: And therefore if God, out of a just and anger and
Indignation for our Offenses, should suffer his Beloved to be carried into
Captivity, or laid waste by a Foreign or Domestic Power; Yet this shall be her
Triumph in the midst of her Tribulations, That She was never guilty of Idolatry
or Superstition, Sacrilege or Rebellion; and that nothing else but those
crying Abominations, which her Principles disclaim, have ruined and destroyed
Her. I desire to embrace her with an Apostolical warmth, and a Primitive
Resolution, and may say unto Her, as our Savior does to his Beloved in the
Canticles, O my Dove that art in the Clefts of the Rock, in the secret places
of the Stairs, let me see thy Countenance; let me hear thy Voice, for sweet is
thy Voice, and thy Countenance Comely. O thou Lilly among Thorns! O Fairest
among the Daughters! Let me enjoy thee Living; and when Death shall come, may I
dye in thy Embraces, and breath out my Soul in Amorous fits of Devotion: That
Phaenix-like, being resin'd by Corruption, and kindling anew in the very Act of
Extinction, I may mount aloft into the Bridegrooms Palace, and fly out of thy
Arms into Abraham's Bosom.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
TIT. page pr. Caedis r. Caedes. Pr. Philip. 3. r. Philip. 13. Page 23. l. 11.
f. (...), r. (...). Page 27. l. 24. f. Dictorship r. Dictatorship. page 73. l.
7. f. in r. is. Page 99. f. Democtitus, r. Democritus. Page E. r. AE. Page a.
r. 1. etc.


